Howard
Gardner
Author of Multiple Intelligences
The Theory of 
Multiple Intelligences
“Timely, wide-reaching and in many ways brilliant. . . . [Gardner’s] effort to bring together 
the data of neurology, exceptionality, development, and symbolic-cultural skills is not only 
heroic but makes extremely evocative reading.”—The New York Review of Books
Frames
of Mind
With a New Introduction by the Author

Frames 
of Mind

OTHER BOOKS BY
HOWARD GARDNER
The Quest for Mind (1973; second edition, 1981)
The Arts and Human Development (1973)
The Shattered Mind (1975)
Developmental Psychology (1978; second edition, 1982)
Artful Scribbles (1980)
Art, Mind, and Brain (1982)
The Mind’s New Science (1985)
To Open Minds (1989)
The Unschooled Mind (1991, 2011)
Multiple Intelligences (1993)
Creating Minds (1993)
Leading Minds (1995)
Extraordinary Minds (1997)
Intelligence Reframed (1999)
Good Work (2001)
Changing Minds (2004)
Five Minds for the Future (2007)

Frames 
of Mind
The Theory of 
Multiple Intelligences
HOWARD GARDNER
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New York

Copyright © 1983, 2004, 2011 by Howard Gardner. Introduction to second
paper edition (tenth-anniversary edition) copyright © 1993 by Howard
Gardner.
Published by Basic Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this
book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books, 387 Park
Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk
purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other
organizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets
Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200,
Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail
special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Typeset in 10.75 point New Caledonia
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gardner, Howard. Frames of mind.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Intellect. I. Title.
BF431.G244 1983 153 83-70765
ISBN-13 978-0-465-02508-4 (cloth)
ISBN-10 0-465-02508-0 (cloth)
ISBN-13 978-0-465-02509-1 (paper)
ISBN-10 0-465-02509-9 (paper)
ISBN-13 978-0-465-02510-7 (second edition paper)
ISBN-10 0-465-02510-2 (second edition paper)
2011 paperback edition ISBN: 978-0-465-02433-9
2011 e-book ISBN: 978-0-465-02434-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Ellen


vii
CONTENTS
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years  
ix
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition, 1993
xxvii
Preface, 1983
xlvii
Note on the Project on Human Potential, 1983
li
PART I 
BACKGROUND
1 The Idea of Multiple Intelligences  
3
2 Intelligence: Earlier Views  
13
3 Biological Foundations of Intelligence  
33
4 What Is an Intelligence?  
63
PART II 
THE THEORY
5 Linguistic Intelligence  
77
6 Musical Intelligence  
105

Contents
viii
7 Logical-Mathematical Intelligence  
135
8 Spatial Intelligence  
179
9 Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence  
217
10 The Personal Intelligences  
251
11 A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences  
293
12 The Socialization of Human Intelligences 
315
Through Symbols
PART III 
IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
13 The Education of Intelligences  
347
14 The Application of Intelligences  
385
Notes
413
Name Index
453
Subject Index
459

ix
MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES
The First Thirty Years
In the years since I published Frames of Mind, I have often been asked
how I ﬁrst got the idea of—or for—the theory of multiple intelligences.
Probably the most truthful answer is “I don’t know.” However, such an
answer satisﬁes neither the questioner nor, to be frank, me. With the ben-
eﬁt of hindsight, I would mention several factors, some remote, some di-
rectly feeding into my discoveries:
As a young person I was a serious pianist and enthusiastically involved
with other arts as well. When I began to study developmental and cogni-
tive psychology in the middle 1960s, I was struck by the virtual absence of
any mention of the arts in the key textbooks—in the face of numerous
discussions of scientiﬁc thinking. An early professional goal was to ﬁnd a
place for the arts within academic psychology. I am still trying! In 1967 my
continuing interest in the arts prompted me to become a founding mem-
ber of Project Zero, a basic research group at the Harvard Graduate School
of Education begun by a noted philosopher of art, Nelson Goodman. For
twenty-eight years (1972–2000), I was the codirector of Project Zero, and
I am happy to say that the organization has continued to thrive under new
leadership.
As my doctoral studies were drawing to a close, I ﬁrst encountered the
writings of Norman Geschwind,1 a notable behavioral neurologist. I was
fascinated by Geschwind’s descriptions of what happens to once-normal
or -gifted individuals who have the misfortune of suffering from a stroke,
This introduction replaces a previous introduction that appeared in earlier editions of
this book.

Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years
x
tumor, wound, or some other form of traumatic brain damage. Often the
symptoms run counter to intuition: for example, a patient who is alexic but
not agraphic loses the ability to read words but can still decipher numbers,
name objects, and write normally. Without having planned it that way, I
ended up working for twenty years on a neuropsychological unit, trying to
understand the organization of human abilities in the brain: how they de-
velop, how they (sometimes) work together, and how they break down
under pathological conditions.
I have always enjoyed writing, and by the time I began my postdoctoral
work with Geschwind and his colleagues in 1971, I had already completed
three books. My fourth book, The Shattered Mind,2 published in 1975,
chronicled what happens to individuals who suffer from different forms of
brain damage. I documented how different parts of the brain are domi-
nant for different cognitive functions. After I completed The Shattered
Mind, I thought that I might write a book that describes the psychology of
different human faculties—a modern (and hopefully more scientiﬁcally
grounded) reformulation of phrenology. In 1976 I actually wrote an outline
for a book with the tentative title Kinds of Minds. One could say that this
book was never written—and indeed I had totally forgotten about it for
many years. But one could also say that it eventually emerged silently from
the ﬁle cabinet and transmogriﬁed into Frames of Mind.
So much for the more remote causes of the theory.
In 1979, a group of researchers afﬁliated with the Harvard Graduate
School of Education received a sizeable grant from a Dutch foundation,
the Bernard van Leer Foundation. This grant was designed for a grandiose
purpose, one proposed by the foundation. Members of the Project on
Human Potential (as it came to be called) were commissioned to carry out
scholarly work on the nature of human potential and how it could best be
realized. (Thinking of the United States, I’ve sometimes quipped that the
Project on Human Potential is more of a “West Coast” topic than an “East
Coast” topic.) When the project’s principal investigators carved out our
respective projects, I received an inviting assignment: to write a book
chronicling what had been established about human cognition through dis-
coveries in the biological and behavioral sciences. And so was born the re-
search program that ultimately led to the theory of multiple intelligences.
Support from the van Leer Foundation allowed me, with the aid of
many valued colleagues, to carry out an extensive research program. I saw
this grant as providing a once-in-a-lifetime gift: we had the opportunity to

collate and synthesize what I and others had learned about the develop-
ment of cognitive capacities in normal and gifted children as well as the
breakdown of such capacities in individuals who suffered some form of
pathology. To put it in terms of my daily calendar, I was seeking to syn-
thesize what I had been learning in the mornings from my study of brain
damage with what I was learning in the afternoons from my study of cog-
nitive development. These latter studies actually investigated how young
children mastered symbol use in seven different areas ranging from singing
to drawing to story-telling.3 My colleagues and I also combed the litera-
ture from brain study, genetics, anthropology, psychology, and other rel-
evant ﬁelds in an effort to ascertain the optimal taxonomy of human
intellectual capacities.
I can identify a number of crucial turning points in this investigation. I
don’t remember when it happened but at a certain moment, I decided to
call these faculties “multiple intelligences” rather than “assorted abilities”
or “sundry gifts.” This seemingly minor lexical substitution proved very im-
portant; I am quite conﬁdent that if I had written a book called Seven Tal-
ents it would not have received the attention that Frames of Mind received.
As my colleague David Feldman has pointed out,4 the selection of the
word intelligence propelled me into direct confrontation with the psycho-
logical establishment that has long cherished and continues to cherish IQ
tests. However, I disagree with Feldman’s claim that I was motivated by a
desire to “slay IQ”; neither the documentary nor the mnemonic evidence
indicates that I had much interest in such a confrontation.
A second crucial point was the creation of a deﬁnition of an intelligence
and the identiﬁcation of a set of criteria that deﬁne what is, and what is
not, an intelligence. I can’t pretend that the criteria were all established a
priori; rather, there was a constant ﬁtting and reﬁtting of what I was learn-
ing about human abilities with how best to delineate and then apply what
ultimately became eight discrete criteria. I feel that the definition and
the criteria—as laid out in the opening chapters of this book—are among
the most original parts of the work. Interestingly, neither has received
much discussion in the literature, on the part of supporters or critics.
When drafting Frames of Mind I was writing as a psychologist, and
to this day that remains my primary scholarly identification. Yet, given
the mission of the van Leer Foundation and my affiliation with the Har-
vard Graduate School of Education, it was clear to me that I needed to
say something about the educational implications of MI theory. And so, I
xi
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

conducted background research about schools and about education, more
broadly deﬁned; in the concluding chapters I speculated about some ed-
ucational implications of the theory. This nod toward education turned out
to be another crucial point because it was educators, rather than psychol-
ogists, who found the theory of most interest.
By 1981 I had drafted the book that you are now reading (hence the
thirty years of the title); thereafter I revised. The main lines of the argu-
ment had become clear. I was claiming that all human beings possess not
just a single intelligence (often called by psychologists “g” for general in-
telligence). Rather, as a species, we human beings are better described as
having a set of relatively autonomous intelligences. Most lay and scholarly
writings about intelligence focus on a combination of linguistic and logical
intelligences—the particular intellectual strengths, I often maintain, of a
law professor, and the territory spanned by most intelligence tests. How-
ever, a fuller appreciation of human cognitive capacities emerges if we take
into account spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal, and intra -
 personal intelligences (the list as of 1983). We all have these intelligences—
that’s what makes us human beings, cognitively speaking. Yet at any
particular moment, individuals differ for both genetic and experiential rea-
sons in their respective proﬁles of intellectual strengths and weaknesses.
And so, drawing on the analogy of our era, I contend that we have not one
general-purpose computer but rather a set of discrete computers—the
multiple intelligences—that operate somewhat independently of one an-
other. No intelligence is in and of itself artistic or nonartistic; rather, sev-
eral intelligences can be put to aesthetic ends, if individuals so desire. (I am
using my linguistic intelligence here, but scarcely in the manner of a nov-
elist or poet.) No educational implications follow directly from this psy-
chological theory. But if individuals differ in their intellectual proﬁles, it
makes sense to take this fact into account in devising an educational sys-
tem for individuals, groups, or even nations.
By the time that Frames of Mind appeared I had already published half
a dozen books. Each had had a modestly positive reception and a reason-
able sale. I did not expect anything different from Frames of Mind, a
lengthy and (for a trade audience) somewhat technical book, ﬁlled with
hundreds of references and devoid of illustrations. But within a few months
after its publication, I realized that this book was different. Not that the re-
views were that exuberant or the sales that monumental. Rather, there was
genuine “buzz” about the book. I was invited to give many talks, and when
xii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

I showed up at a site, people had at least heard about the theory and were
eager to learn more about it. I even received invitations from abroad to
talk about the book. Echoing artist Andy Warhol, I sometimes quip that
MI theory gave me my ﬁfteen minutes of fame. While I have done a num-
ber of things in my professional life and written about a broad range of
topics, I realize that I am likely always to be known as the “father of mul-
tiple intelligences” or, less palatably, as the “MI guru.”
For the ﬁrst decade following the publication of Frames of Mind, I had
two primary connections to the theory. The ﬁrst relation was that of a be-
mused observer. I was amazed at how many individuals claimed that they
wanted to revise their educational practices in the light of MI theory.
Within a year or so, I had already met with eight public school teachers
from Indianapolis who would shortly begin the Key School (now the Key
Learning Community), the ﬁrst school in the world organized explicitly
around MI theory. I began to receive a steady stream of communications
asking or telling me how to use MI theory in various kinds of schools or for
various populations, from gifted young people to those with severe learn-
ing difﬁculties. While I tried to be responsive to these communications (a
somewhat more demanding exercise in the pre–e-mail era), I always main-
tained that I was a psychologist and not an educator. I did not presume to
know how best to teach a class of young persons or run an elementary or
secondary school or, for that matter, design a program in a children’s mu-
seum or a science museum, let alone a method of selection or promotion
for a corporation.
My second relation was as a director of research projects that grew out
of MI theory. The most ambitious effort was Project Spectrum, a collabo-
ration with Jie-Qi Chen, David Feldman, Mara Krechevsky, Janet Stork,
Julie Viens, and others.5 The goal of Project Spectrum was to create a set
of measures whereby one could ascertain the intellectual proﬁle of young
children—preschoolers and those in the primary grades. We ended up de-
vising ﬁfteen separate tasks that were designed to assess the several intel-
ligences in as natural a manner as possible. The team had a great deal of
fun devising the Spectrum battery and using it with different populations.
We also learned that creating assessments is a difﬁcult task and one that re-
quires an enormous investment of time, thought, and money. I decided,
without saying so in so many words, that I did not want myself to be in the
assessment business, though I was very pleased if others chose to create in-
struments in an effort to assess the various intelligences.6
xiii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

In this context, I should add that instruments that purpose to assess in-
telligences need to focus on what subjects can actually accomplish, puta-
tively given a speciﬁc intelligence or intelligences. Many “MI tests” actually
assess preferences and are dependent on self-reports, neither of which is
necessarily a reliable index of the strength of the intelligence(s) in question.
But I don’t mean to dismiss such MI assessments: much can be learned
about how people conceive of themselves, and through comparisons of re-
sponse patterns found among and across different groups of subjects.7
Let me mention two other research projects that grew out of the ﬁrst
wave of interest in MI theory. Working with Robert Sternberg, another 
psychologist-critic of standard views of intelligence, my colleagues and I
created a middle school curriculum called Practical Intelligences for
School.8 Working with colleagues from the Educational Testing Service, my
colleagues and I developed a set of curriculum-and-assessment instruments
designed to document learning in three art forms—graphic arts, music,
and literary expression.9
To my surprise and pleasure, interest in multiple intelligences survived
the transition to the 1990s. By that time I was prepared to undertake sev-
eral new activities, variously related to MI theory. The ﬁrst was purely
scholarly. Building on the notion of different kinds of intelligences, I car-
ried out case studies of individuals who stood out, putatively, as remarkable
in terms of their particular proﬁle of intelligences. This line of work led to
my books on creativity (Creating Minds),10 leadership (Leading Minds),11
and extraordinary achievement, more broadly (Extraordinary Minds).12
You can see that I was getting a lot of mileage by injecting book titles with
the term mind!
The second was an extension of the theory. In 1994–1995 I took a
sabbatical and used part of that time to consider whether, as some had
proposed, there was convincing evidence for the existence of new intel-
ligences. I concluded that there was ample evidence for a naturalist in-
telligence (the ability to make consequential distinctions among organisms
and entities in the natural world); and suggestive evidence as well for a
possible existential intelligence (“the intelligence of big questions”).13 I
also explored the relation between intelligences—which I construe as
biopsychological potentials—and the various domains and disciplines that
exist in various cultures. While intelligences may possess the same names
as cultural activities, they are not the same thing: as one example, the per-
formance of music entails several intelligences (among them bodily and
xiv
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

interpersonal); as another example, individuals strong in spatial intelli-
gences can pursue a range of careers and avocations (running the gamut
from sculpture to surgery). What we know and how we parse the world
may well reflect in part the intelligences with which our species has
been endowed.
I also proposed three distinct uses of the term intelligence14:
• A property of all human beings (All of us possess these 8 or 9 intel-
ligences)
• A dimension on which human beings differ (No two people—not even
identical twins—possess exactly the same proﬁle of intelligences)
• The way in which one carries out a task in virtue of one’s goals (“Joe
may have a lot of musical skill, but his interpretation of that Bach
partita reﬂects little intelligence”)
A third activity featured a more proactive relationship to the uses and
interpretations of my theory. For the ﬁrst decade after publication, I had
been content simply to observe what others were doing and saying in the
name of MI theory. But by the middle 1990s, I had noticed a number of
misinterpretations of the theory. As one example, the concept of intelli-
gences was often conﬂated with that of learning styles; in fact, an intelligence
(the computing power of an individual’s musical or spatial or interpersonal
capacity) is not at all the same as a style (the way in which one allegedly ap-
proaches a range of tasks). As another example, I noted the frequent con-
founding of a human intelligence with a societal domain (e.g., musical
intelligence being misleadingly equated with mastery of a certain musi-
cal genre or role). I had also learned of practices that I found offensive—
for example, describing different racial or ethnic group in terms of their
characteristic intellectual strengths and deﬁciencies. And so, for the ﬁrst time,
I began publicly to differentiate my “take” on MI from that of others who
had learned about and tried to make use of the theory.15 And I acquired
considerable concern about the responsibilities that attend to individuals
who put forth ideas that become well known. This heightened concern ul-
timately led me, and other colleagues, to an ambitious study of professional
responsibility, which came to be known as the GoodWork Project.16
A ﬁnal feature of this second 1990s phase entailed a more active in-
volvement with educational reform. This involvement took both a practi-
cal and a scholarly form. On the practical level, my colleagues and I at
xv
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

Harvard Project Zero began working with schools as they attempted to im-
plement MI practices and other educational programs that we had devel-
oped, such as one focused on teaching for understanding and, more
recently, applications emerging from the GoodWork Project. In 1995 we
also launched a summer institute, which continues until today and attracts
practitioners and scholars from around the world.17
On the scholarly side, I began to articulate my own educational phil -
osophy. In particular, I focused on the importance in the precollegiate
years of achieving understanding in the major disciplines—science, math-
ematics, history, and the arts. For a host of reasons, achieving such un-
derstanding proves quite challenging. Efforts to cover too much material
lead to superﬁcial recall and doom the achievement of genuine under-
standing. As has been documented in countries with effective educational
systems, learners are more likely to achieve enhanced understanding if
they (or we) probe deeply into a relatively small number of topics. And
once the decision is made to “uncover” rather than “cover,” it is possible
to take advantage of our multiple intelligences. Put concretely, we can ap-
proach topics in a number of ways (often termed different “entry points”
to the same topic), we can make use of analogies and comparisons drawn
from a range of domains, and we can express the key notions or concepts
in a number of different symbolic forms.18
In light of three decades of research and reﬂection, I can summarize
the educational implications of MI theory quite crisply—the so-called 
elevator speech. An educator convinced of the relevance of MI theory
should individualize and pluralize. By individualizing, I mean that the ed-
ucator should know as much as possible about the intelligences proﬁle of
each student for whom he has responsibility; and, to the extent possible,
the educator should teach and assess in ways that bring out that child’s ca-
pacities. By pluralizing, I mean that the educator should decide on which
topics, concepts, or ideas are of greatest importance, and should then pres-
ent them in a variety of ways. Pluralization achieves two important goals:
when a topic is taught in multiple ways, one reaches more students. Addi-
tionally, the multiple modes of delivery convey what it means to under-
stand something well. When one has a thorough understanding of a topic,
one can typically think of it in several ways, thereby making use of one’s
multiple intelligences. Conversely, if one is restricted to a single mode of
conceptualization and presentation, one’s own understanding (whether
teacher or student) is likely to be tenuous.
xvi
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

This line of analysis has led to a perhaps surprising conclusion. Multi-
ple intelligences should not—in and of itself—be an educational goal. Ed-
ucational goals need to reﬂect one’s own (individual or societal) values, and
these values can never come simply or directly from a scientiﬁc theory.
Once one reﬂects on one’s educational values and states one’s educational
goals, however, the putative existence of our multiple intelligences can
prove very helpful. And, in particular, if one’s educational goals encompass
disciplinary understanding, then it is possible to mobilize our several in-
telligences to help achieve that lofty goal—for example, by employing mul-
tiple modes of presentation and diverse forms of assessment.
Since the turn of the millennium, my relationship to MI theory has
been less intimate. The infant and child that was MI theory is now a young
adult: as a parent and grandparent, I know that it is best for the theory to
make its own way, without excessive managing from its forbears. Nonethe-
less, I have continued to be involved in several ways.
First of all, when possible, I have continued to help out institutions that
want to apply the idea of multiple intelligences. (And when not able to do
so myself, I am fortunate enough to have a small cohort of MI colleagues
to whom I can turn.) In addition to the Key Learning Community, I’ve had
a long-standing relationship with the New City School in St. Louis, Mis-
souri, an impressive middle school that has pioneered many MI applica-
tions and also featured the ﬁrst MI library. In 2005 I was excited to learn
of the Explorama at the Danfoss Universe Theme Park in southwestern
Denmark. This facility, consisting of dozens of games and exercises, repre-
sents an optimal instantiation of MI ideas. Each of the displays mobilizes a
distinct set of intelligences, and by predicting one’s own performance pro-
ﬁle, one can even assess one’s own intrapersonal intelligence. I’ve also lent
a hand, upon request, to any number of schools, libraries, museums, and
workplaces that seek to base practices on MI ideas or materials.19
While MI interest ﬁrst occurred in the United States, it soon spread to
the corners of the globe. The ideas have been particularly pursued in Latin
America, Scandinavia, Southern Europe, Australia, the Philippines, Korea,
and China. Interest in England, France, Germany, Russia, and Japan has
been less salient—though I have had a wonderful alliance for over a decade
with the dedicated band that constitutes the MI Society of Japan. Taking
note of these international trends, and energized by a symposium organ-
ized in 2006 by Branton Shearer, my colleagues Jie-Qi Chen, Mindy Korn-
 haber, Seana Moran, and I decided to sponsor a conference and edit a book
xvii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

on the theme “Multiple Intelligences Around the World.” Published in
2009, the book features forty-two authors from ﬁfteen countries, on ﬁve
continents, each detailing experiences with MI ideas and practices. Of
course, I take pride in the numerous ingenious ways in which these ideas
have been used and adapted. As an inveterate social scientist, I’ve also been
intrigued by the many (and not always consistent) ways in which the ideas
have been understood, and have sought, when possible, to relate these ap-
plications to conditions in the particular country or region of the world.
As just one example, let me mention the case of China. Though I had
visited China several times in the 1980s and even written a book about my
experiences there, I was unprepared for the overwhelming interest in MI
ideas in China. In 2004 a conference on MI featured 2,500 papers, and I
learned that there were at least a hundred books on multiple intelligences
in Chinese. Naturally, I was curious to understand the reasons. From a
journalist I met in Shanghai, I received a wonderful answer. She said to
me, “In America, when people hear about MI, they think of their child.
She may not be good in math, or in music, but she has wonderful inter-
personal intelligence, they declare. In China,” she went on, “these are sim-
ply eight areas in which we want all our children to excel.” When I
returned to China six years later, I learned that a great many schools, par-
ticularly for young children, claim to be based on MI ideas. Again, I
queried widely why this was the case. I received a surprising reply from
one informant, who said, “If we had a psychologist in China who was push-
ing for progressive ideas in education, we would not need to quote the
words or ideas of Howard Gardner. We don’t. In the absence of such a per-
son, mentioning you and your ideas is a good way to open up our rather
rigid educational system.”
A third activity in which I’ve been involved entails efforts to answer the
most frequent critiques of MI theory. In 2006 anthologist Jeffrey Schaler
put together a book called Howard Gardner Under Fire20 and invited thir-
teen scholars to critique my work. By prior arrangement, only four of them
wrote directly about MI theory, but several others criticized it in passing.
In 2009, psychologist and assessment expert Branton Shearer published a
collection called MI at 25.21 Here a wide range of scholars—including lin-
guist Noam Chomsky, psychologists Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Michael
Posner, educators Deborah Meier and Linda Darling-Hammond, and po-
litical analyst Charles Murray—put forth their own assessments and criti-
cisms of the theory. With respect both to the Schaler and Shearer volumes,
xviii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

I composed detailed responses to each of the critics. While few scholars—
or, for that matter, nonscholars—cherish criticism, there is no doubt that I
learned a good deal from having to grapple with this wide range of discus-
sion. In recent years I have also authored and coauthored several direct re-
sponses to criticisms of the theory in psychological and educational journals.22
While it is not possible to detail these discussions—which encompass
hundreds of pages—it may be useful to mention the kinds of criticisms
that I take seriously, as opposed to those that are of little interest to me. I
am very interested in discussions of the particular criteria that I’ve put
forth, and the extent to which particular candidate intelligences do, or do
not, meet these criteria. Analysis of the possible cultural biases in the list
also interest me. Empirical evidence on the relationship, or lack of rela-
tionship, among different candidate intelligences is central to my concerns.
And of course, I’d like to know how constant or changing are an individ-
ual’s conﬁguration of intelligences over the course of a lifetime.
However, I am not engaged by quarrels about the term intelligence, or
the way that I deﬁne it; by efforts to restrict intelligence only to academic
problem-solving skills; or by performances on instruments that do not sam-
ple intellectual abilities in an “intelligence-fair” way. Put concretely, I’m
much more interested in measures of interpersonal intelligence that ex-
amine directly how a person works with a group of peers than in paper-
and-pencil measures that involve selecting the correct answer out of a
multiple-choice array.
In speaking of measurement, I touch on the issue about which psy-
chologists interested in intelligence have spilled the most liquid or elec-
tronic ink. Having put forth the theory, they maintain, I should be required
to test it and, on the basis of the results of those tests, either revise or scut-
tle the theory. In their view the fact that I’ve elected not to become a psy-
chometrician is no defense! I can well understand their loyalty to their
instrumentation and to their way of thinking. Moreover, as a scholar, I do
monitor efforts by others to test the theory—taking particular pleasure, of
course, in those empirical studies that support the general enterprise. I
was also gratiﬁed that a team of researchers, led by Mindy Kornhaber, doc-
umented the positive experiences of forty-one American schools that were
inspired by MI ideas.23 At the same time, however, I must stress that I’ve
never felt that MI theory was one that could be subjected to an “up and
down” kind of test, or even series of tests. Rather, it is and has always been
fundamentally a work of synthesis; and its overall fate will be determined
xix
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

by the comprehensiveness of the synthesis, on the one hand, and its util-
ity to both scholars and practitioners, on the other.
The reader may have noted that I’ve not mentioned changes in the
theory itself, along the lines that occurred in the ﬁrst ten or ﬁfteen years
after the publication of Frames of Mind. In fact, the theory has remained
relatively constant in the past decade. I’ve considered the possibility of an
additional intelligence—pedagogical intelligence, or the ability to teach
others—but have not done the systematic study needed before its addi-
tion to The List. I’ve collaborated on various reviews and updates of the
theory, including a deﬁnitive up-to-date summary of the theory, with Katie
Davis, Scott Seider, and Joanna Christodoulou.24 But my own scholarly in-
terests have moved in new directions. It is probably the case that signiﬁ-
cant revisions of the theory will need to be undertaken by persons other
than myself.
As already noted, my major scholarly work since the middle 1990s, the
GoodWork Project, has focused on how professionals act responsibly.
Though the work was stimulated in part by misapplications of MI theory,
it has had a relatively independent life. On a trip to Manila in 2005, I was
quite moved to learn that Mary Joy Abaquin, founder of an MI school, had
succeeded in wedding my two interests. Since that time, Mary Joy has pre-
sented awards each year to individuals who are outstanding in one or more
of the intelligences, while at the same time putting those intelligences to
use in the service of the wider community. Few things could make a
scholar more pleased than the discovery that someone has been able to 
effect a powerful relationship—and for that matter, a practical one—
between two major lines of work, each of which he has pursued for decades.
This, then, is how the ﬁrst decades of multiple intelligences look to me.
I am grateful to the many individuals who have taken an interest in the 
theory—both within my research group and across the country and the
globe. I have tried to be responsive to their inquiries and to build on what
they have taught me. And I have come to realize that once one releases an
idea—a “meme”—into the world, one cannot completely control its be-
havior, anymore than one can control those products of our genes called
children. Put succinctly, MI has and will have a life of its own, over and
above what I might wish for it, my most widely known intellectual offspring.
I’ve already indicated that the future of MI theory lies primarily in the
minds—and the hands—of individuals other than myself. Still, it may be
xx
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

appropriate for me to step back, for a moment, and consider what lines of
work might be undertaken by interested parties.
To begin with, there will be efforts to propose new intelligences. In re-
cent years, in addition to the explosion of interest in emotional intelli-
gences, there have been serious efforts to describe a spiritual intelligence
and a sexual intelligence. My colleague Antonio Battro25 has proposed
the existence of a digital intelligence and has indicated how it may fulﬁll
the criteria that I have set forth. The noted cognitive neuroscientist
Michael Posner has challenged me to consider “attention” as a kind of in-
telligence.26 I’ve also mentioned my own recent interest in the possibility
of a pedagogical intelligence.
I have always conceded that in the end, the decision about what counts
as an intelligence is a judgment call—not an unambiguous determination
following the rigorous application of an algorithm. So far, I am sticking to
my 8l⁄2 intelligences, but I can readily foresee a time when the list could
grow, or when the boundaries among the intelligences might be reconﬁg-
ured. For example, to the extent that the so-called Mozart effect gains
credibility, one might want to rethink the relation between musical and spa-
tial intelligences. Other hot spots might include whether logical and math-
ematical intelligences should be split up into separate intelligences, or
whether other candidate intelligences—for example, dealing with healing
or with spiritual matters—might be proposed in cultural groups with which
I am not familiar.
Much work needs to be done on the question of how the intelligences
can best be mobilized to achieve speciﬁc pedagogical goals. I do not be-
lieve that educational programs created under the aegis of MI theory lend
themselves to the kinds of randomized control studies that the U.S. gov-
ernment is now calling for in education. But I do believe that well chor -
eographed “design experiments” can reveal the kinds of educational
endeavors where an MI perspective is appropriate and where it is not. To
state just one example, I think that MI approaches are particularly useful
when a student is trying to master a challenging new concept—say, grav-
ity in physics, or the Zeitgeist in history. For a long time I was skeptical
that MI ideas can be useful in mastering a foreign language—but I’ve
been impressed by the numerous teachers of foreign languages who claim
success using MI approaches for both motivational and conceptual pur-
poses. Also, I think that the potential of MI ways of thinking for dealing
xxi
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

with various kinds of learning problems has hardly been scratched. I am
enormously enthusiastic about the efforts of David Rose, my valued col-
league, and others at his organization cast.org, to create curricula that can
address the full range of learners. As Rose puts it, we should not think of
students as disabled; we should instead consider whether our curricula may
be disabled.
Were I personally granted more time and energy to explore the rami-
ﬁcations of MI theory, I would devote those precious gifts to two endeav-
ors. First of all, as indicated above, I have become increasingly fascinated
by the ways in which societal activities and domains of knowledge emerge
and become periodically reconﬁgured. Any complex society has 100–200
distinct occupations at the least; and any university of size offers at least
ﬁfty different areas of study. Surely these domains and disciplines are not
accidents, nor are the ways that they evolve and combine simply random
events. The culturally constructed spheres of knowledge must bear some
kind of relation to the kinds of brains and minds that human beings have,
and the ways that those brains and minds grow and develop in different
cultural settings. Put concretely, how does human logical-mathematical in-
telligence relate to the various sciences, mathematics, and computing soft-
ware and hardware that have emerged in the past few thousand years, and
those that may emerge one year or a hundred years from now? Which
makes which, or, more probably, how does each shape the other? Will
computers augment or even substitute for particular intelligences or com-
binations of intelligences? How does the human mind deal with interdis-
ciplinary studies—are they natural or unnatural cognitive activities? Or to
be a bit wild, what would MI perspectives reveal about dogs or birds or
other primates? Or, for that matter, robots or smart machines? I would
love to be able to think about these issues in a systematic way.
Second, from the start, one of the appealing aspects of MI theory was
its reliance on biological evidence. In the early 1980s there was little rele-
vant evidence from genetics or evolutionary psychology; such speculations
were mere handwaving. There was, however, powerful evidence from the
study of neuropsychology for the existence of different mental faculties;
and—whatever new details may emerge—that evidence constituted the
strongest leg on which to justify MI theory.
Of course, knowledge has accumulated at a phenomenal rate in both
brain science and genetics. At the risk of seeming hyperbolic, I am pre-
pared to defend the proposition that we have learned as much from 1981
xxii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

to 2011 as we did in the previous 500 years. As an amateur geneticist and
neuroscientist, I have tried as best I can to keep up with the cascade of
new ﬁndings from these areas. I can say with some conﬁdence that no ﬁnd-
ings have radically called into question the major lines of MI theory. But I
can say with equal conﬁdence that, in light of the ﬁndings of the past three
decades, the biological basis of MI theory needs urgently to be brought up
to date.
At the time that MI theory was introduced, it was very important to
make the case that human brains and human minds are highly differenti-
ated entities. It is fundamentally misleading to think about a single mind,
a single intelligence, a single problem-solving capacity. As an acquaintance
recently remarked, exposure to the idea of multiple intelligences made
her see in Technicolor what had previously appeared to be only in black
and white! And so, along with many others, I tried to make the argument
that the mind/brain consists of many modules/organs/intelligences, each
of which operates according to its own rules in relative autonomy from
the others.
Happily, nowadays the argument for modularity is largely established.
Even those who believe strongly in general intelligence and across-the-board
skills feel the need to defend their position, in a way that was unnecessary
in decades past. But it is time to revisit the issue of the relationship be-
tween general and particular intelligences. This revisiting can and is being
done in various intriguing ways. Psychologist Robbie Case proposed the
notion of central conceptual structures—broader than speciﬁc intelligences
but not as all-encompassing as Piagetian general intelligence.27 Philoso-
pher Jerry Fodor contrasts impenetrable dedicated modules with a per-
meable central system.28 The team of Marc Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and
Tecumseh Fitch suggests that the unique quality of human cognition is its
capacity for recursive thinking; perhaps it is recursion that characterizes
advanced thinking in language, number, music, social relations, and other
realms.29 Electrophysiological and radiological studies indicate that various
brain modules may already be activated in newborns. Neural imaging stud-
ies of individuals solving IQ-style problems suggest that certain areas of
the brain are most likely to be drawn on for these kinds of problems; and
there may be evidence for genes that contribute to unusually high IQ, as
there clearly are genes that cause retardation. Indeed, our own case stud-
ies of unusually high performances suggests a distinction between those
who (like musicians or mathematicians) are outstanding in one area, as op-
xxiii
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

posed to those generalists (politicians or business leaders) who display a
relatively ﬂat proﬁle of cognitive strengths. I think it would be worthwhile
to study in detail the differences between those who deploy a focused laser
intelligence and those who display an ever-vigilant and shifting searchlight
intelligence.
Were I granted another lifetime or two, I would like to rethink the na-
ture of intelligence with respect to our new biological knowledge, on the
one hand, and our most sophisticated understanding of the terrain of
knowledge and societal practice, on the other—another Project on Human
Potential, perhaps! I don’t expect this wish to be granted. But I am glad 
to have had the chance to make an opening move some thirty years ago, to
have been able to revisit the gameboard periodically, to get to know and 
to work with wonderful colleagues in many corners of the globe, and to lay
out this problematic so that other interested players can have their chance
to engage.
Note: For their useful comments on earlier drafts of this introduction,
I thank Jie-Qi Chen, Katie Davis, Mindy Kornhaber, Scott Seider, and
Ellen Winner.
Howard Gardner
November 2010
Notes
1. N. Geschwind, selected papers on language and the brain. New York: Springer, 1974. 
2. New York: Knopf, 1975.
3. H. Gardner and D. Wolf, “Waves and Streams of Symbolization.” In D. R. Rogers and
J. A. Sloboda (eds.), The Acquisition of Symbolic Skills (London: Plenum Press,
1983).
4. D. Feldman, “The Creation of Multiple Intelligences Theory: A Study in High-Level
Thinking.” In K. Sawyer (ed.), Creativity and Development (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2003).
5. See the three Project Spectrum books: H. Gardner, D. H. Feldman, and M.
Krechevsky (general eds.), Project Spectrum Frameworks for Early Childhood
Education (New York: Teachers College Press, 1998).
6. See J. Chen and H. Gardner, “Assessment of Intellectual Proﬁles: A Perspective from
Multiple Intelligences Theory.” In D. Flanagan (ed.), Contemporary Intellectual
Assessment, 3rd ed. (New York: The Guildford Press, 2011) and references con-
tained therein.
7. See, for example, C. Branton Shearer, The Midas Professional Manual, rev. ed. (Kent,
Ohio: 2007).
8. See W. Williams, T. Blythe, N. White, J. Li, R. J. Sternberg, and H. Gardner, Practi-
cal Intelligence for Children (New York: Harper Collins, 1996).
xxiv
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years

9. E. Winner (ed.), Arts PROPEL Handbooks (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Project Zero,
1992).
10. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
11. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
12. New York: Basic Books, 1997.
13. H. Gardner, Intelligence Reframed (New York: Basic Books, 1999), ch. 4.
14. H. Gardner, “Three Distinct Meanings of Intelligence.” In R. J. Sternberg, J. Lautrey,
and T. Lubart (eds.), Models of Intelligence for the New Millennium (Washing-
ton, D.C.: American Psychological Association, 2003), pp. 43–54.
15. See H. Gardner, “Reﬂections on Multiple Intelligences,” Phi Delta Kappan 77, 3
(1995): 200–209.
16. See H. Gardner, M. Csikszentmihalyi, and W. Damon, Good Work: When Excellence
and Ethics Meet (New York: Basic Books, 2002). For an update on the project,
see the websites goodworkproject.org and goodworktoolkit.org and the refer-
ences cited therein.
17. For information on forthcoming summer institutes, visit http://pzweb.harvard.edu.
18. See H. Gardner, The Disciplined Mind (New York: Penguin Putnam, 2000).
19. For a survey of these and other applications of MI theory, see J. Chen, S. Moran, and
H. Gardner (eds.), Multiple Intelligences Around the World (San Francisco:
Jossey Bass, 2009).
20. J. Schaler (ed.), Howard Gardner under Fire (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court Publishing,
2006).
21. B. Shearer (ed.), MI at 25 (New York: Teachers College Press, 2009).
22. See, for example, H. Gardner and S. Moran, “The science in multiple intelligences
theory: A response to Lynn Waterhouse,” Educational Psychologist (2006); H.
Gardner and M. Connell, “Response to Nicholas Allix,” Australian Journal of Ed-
ucation (2000): 288–293; and H. Gardner, “On failing to grasp the core of MI
theory: A response to Visser et al.,” Intelligence 34, 5 (2006): 503–505.
23. M. Kornhaber, E. Fierros, and S. Veenema, Multiple Intelligences: Best Ideas from
Theory and Practice (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2003).
24. K. Davis, S. Seider, J. Christodoulou, and H. Gardner, “Multiple Intelligences The-
ory.” In R. Sternberg and S. Kaufman (eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Intelli-
gence (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
25. See M. H. Clark and A. Battro, Digital Intelligence: La educacion digital (Emecé
Publishers: Buenos Aires, 1997),
26. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association, April 21, 2003,
Chicago, Ill.
27. R. Case, The Mind’s Staircase (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991).
28. J. A. Fodor, The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000).
29. M. Hauser, N. Chomsky, and T. Fitch, “The Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who
Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science 298 (2002): 1569–1579.
xxv
Multiple Intelligences: The First Thirty Years


xxvii
INTRODUCTION TO THE 
TENTH-ANNIVERSARY EDITION, 1993
In his dreams, every author envisions a wonderful career for the book on
which he is working. Still, while writing Frames of Mind, I did not antici-
pate that the book would ﬁnd a receptive audience in so many circles
across so many lands. And I certainly did not expect to have the privilege
of introducing a tenth-anniversary edition of the book.
While working on Frames of Mind, I viewed it principally as a contri-
bution to my own discipline of developmental psychology and, more
broadly, to the behavioral and cognitive sciences. I wanted to broaden con-
ceptions of intelligence to include not only the results of paper-and-pencil
tests but also knowledge of the human brain and sensitivity to the diver-
sity of human cultures. Although I discussed the educational implications
of the theory in the closing chapters, my eyes were not beamed toward
the classroom. In fact, however, the book has exerted considerable inﬂu-
ence in educational quarters: my colleagues and I at Harvard Project Zero
have undertaken several educational experiments inspired by “MI theory,”
and there have been numerous other attempts to apply the theory to par-
ticular educational environments. In the companion volume to this book—
Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice (Gardner 1993)—I review
the principal ways in which the theory has entered into contemporary ed-
ucational discourse.
Here, in this new introduction to Frames of Mind (which incorporates
portions of the introduction to its ﬁrst paperback edition in 1985), I have ﬁve
aims: to summarize the principal themes of Frames of Mind; to situate MI
theory within the history of studies of intelligence; to relate Frames of Mind

Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition
xxviii
to my more recent work; to respond to some of the principal criticisms lev-
eled at MI theory; and to forecast possible future work. At the end of this
introduction are bibliographical references for materials that are not
treated further in the book itself.
The Principal Themes of Frames of Mind
At the time I wrote Frames of Mind, I had not fully anticipated the extent
to which most people continued to adhere to two assumptions about in-
telligence: ﬁrst, that it is a single, general capacity that every human being
possesses to a greater or lesser extent; and that, however deﬁned, it can be
measured by standardized verbal instruments, such as short-answer, paper-
and-pencil tests. In an effort to help new readers to enter the work, and to
forestall these widely held but ultimately untenable conceptions, I ask you
to perform two thought experiments.
First of all, try to forget that you have ever heard of the concept of in-
telligence as a single property of the human mind, or of that instrument
called the intelligence test, which purports to measure intelligence once
and for all. Second of all, cast your mind widely about the world and think
of all the roles or “end states”—vocational and avocational—that have been
prized by cultures during various eras. Consider, for example, hunters, ﬁsh-
ermen, farmers, shamans, religious leaders, psychiatrists, military leaders,
civil leaders, athletes, artists, musicians, poets, parents, and scientists. Hon-
ing in closer, then, consider the three end states with which I begin Frames
of Mind: the Puluwat sailor, the Koranic student, and the Parisian com-
poser at her microcomputer.
In my view, if we are to encompass adequately the realm of human cog-
nition, it is necessary to include a far wider and more universal set of com-
petences than we have ordinarily considered. And it is necessary to remain
open to the possibility that many—if not most—of these competences do
not lend themselves to measurement by standard verbal methods, which
rely heavily on a blend of logical and linguistic abilities.
With such considerations in mind, I have formulated a deﬁnition of
what I call an “intelligence.” An intelligence is the ability to solve prob-
lems, or to create products, that are valued within one or more cultural
settings—a deﬁnition that says nothing about either the sources of these
abilities or the proper means of “testing” them.

Building upon this deﬁnition, and drawing especially on biological and
anthropological evidence, I then introduce eight distinct criteria for an in-
telligence. As set forth in Chapter 4, these criteria range from the isola-
tion of a capacity as a result of brain damage to the susceptibility of a
capacity to encoding in a symbolic system. Then, in Part II of the book, I
describe in detail each of the seven candidate intelligences: the linguistic
and logical-mathematical intelligences that are at such a premium in
schools today; musical intelligence; spatial intelligence; bodily-kinesthetic
intelligence; and two forms of personal intelligence, one directed toward
other persons, one directed toward oneself.
Following the introduction of the intelligences and a description of
their respective modes of operations, I present a critique of the theory in
terms of those deﬁciencies most evident to me at the time of writing. I
conclude with some considerations of how intelligences do—and can—
develop within a culture, and of how they can be mobilized in various ed-
ucational settings.
When one puts forth a new theory, it is sometimes helpful to indicate
the perspectives to which it is most radically opposed. This tack seems es-
pecially important in light of the critics who have been unable—or 
unwilling—to abandon these traditional perspectives. I introduce two ex-
hibits in this regard. First, an advertisement for an intelligence test begins:
Need an individual test which quickly provides a stable and reliable es-
timate of intelligence in 4 or 5 minutes per form? Has three forms? Does
not depend on verbal production or subjective scoring? Can be used with
the severely physically handicapped (even paralyzed) if they can signal
yes–no? Handles two-year-olds and superior adults within the same short
series of times and the same format?
and continues in this vein. Whatever might be the value of this test, I can
state unequivocally that the description of it implies an illusory wonder-
land of testing. Furthermore, I am equally suspicious of claims to test in-
telligence (whatever it might be) by means of reaction-time measures or
brain waves. That these measures may well correlate with IQs is, from my
perspective, all the more reason for calling IQs into question.
My second exhibit comes from a more venerable source—a well-known
quotation from Samuel Johnson. The redoubtable doctor once deﬁned
“true genius” as “a mind of large general powers, accidentally determined
xxix
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

to some particular direction.” While I do not question that some people
may have the potential to excel in more than one sphere, I strongly chal-
lenge the notion of large general powers. To my way of thinking, the mind
has the potential to deal with several different kinds of content, but a per-
son’s facility with one content has little predictive power over his or her fa-
cility with other kinds. In other words, genius (and, a fortiori, ordinary
performance) is likely to be speciﬁc to particular contents: human beings
have evolved to exhibit several intelligences and not to draw variously on
one ﬂexible intelligence.
Studies of Intelligence
As I attempt to situate my own work within the broader history of efforts
to conceptualize intelligence, I ﬁnd it useful to divide the historical con-
tinuum into loosely sequential phases: lay theories, the standard psycho-
metric approach, and pluralization and hierarchization.
Lay Theories. For most of human history, there was no scientiﬁc deﬁni-
tion of intelligence. No doubt people spoke often enough about the con-
cept of intelligence and labeled others as more or less “bright,” “dull,”
“clever,” or “intelligent.” Outstanding ﬁgures as diverse as Thomas Jeffer-
son, Jane Austen, Frederick Douglass, and Mahatma Gandhi could all be
called “smart.” Such informal discussion sufﬁced in ordinary parlance, but
chieﬂy because people rarely challenged one another on just what was
meant by intelligent.
The Standard Psychometric Approach. Just about a century ago, psychol-
ogists made the ﬁrst efforts to deﬁne intelligence technically and to devise
tests that would measure it (see the opening pages of Chapter 2). In many
ways, these efforts represented an advance and a singular success for sci-
entiﬁc psychology. Nonetheless, in light of factors for which the pioneers
cannot be blamed, there has been considerable abuse of “IQ testing” on
the streets and surprisingly little theoretical advance within the psycho-
metric community proper (Gould 1981).
Pluralization and Hierarchization. The ﬁrst generation of psychologists of
intelligence, such as Charles Spearman (1927) and Lewis Terman (1975),
xxx
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

tended to believe that intelligence was best conceptualized as a single gen-
eral capacity for conceptualization and problem solving. They sought to
demonstrate that a group of scores on tests reﬂected a single underlying
factor of “general intelligence.” It was probably inevitable that this con-
tention would be challenged; and, over the years, such psychologists as 
L. L. Thurstone (1960) and J. P. Guilford (1967) argued for the existence
of a number of factors, or components, of intelligence. In the broadest
sense, Frames of Mind is a contribution to this tradition, although it differs
principally in the sources of evidence on which it relies. Whereas most plu-
ralists defend their position by stressing the low correlations among groups
of tests, I have based MI theory on neurological, evolutionary, and cross-
cultural evidence. 
Having posited several components of intelligence, one must then
question how and whether they relate to one another. Some scholars, such
as Raymond Cattell (1971) and Philip Vernon (1971), argue for a hierar-
chical relationship among factors, seeing general, verbal, or numerical in-
telligence as presiding over more speciﬁc components. Other scholars,
such as Thurstone, however, resist the urge to create a hierarchy of fac-
tors, and claim that each should be considered as an equivalent member
of a heterarchical structure. These three phases take us up to the publica-
tion of Frames of Mind in 1983. In the subsequent decade, I discern at
least two new trends: contextualization and distribution.
Contextualization. Reflecting a general trend within the behavioral sci-
ences, researchers have become increasingly critical of psychological
theories that ignore crucial differences among the contexts within which
human beings live and develop. Being a human being in a contemporary
postindustrial society is an entirely different matter from being a human
being during the Neolithic or the Homeric eras, or, for that matter, from
being one who lives in a preliterate or a Third World setting today. Rather
than assuming that one would possess a certain “intelligence” independent
of the culture in which one happens to live, many scientists now see intel-
ligence as an interaction between, on the one hand, certain proclivities and
potentials and, on the other, the opportunities and constraints that char-
acterize a particular cultural setting. According to the inﬂuential theory of
Robert Sternberg (1985), part of intelligence is one’s sensitivity to the vary-
ing contents around one. In more radical formulations inspired by the work
of the Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky (1978), some researchers investigate
xxxi
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition
xxxii
differences among cultures and their practices, rather than differences
among individuals (Lave 1988). 
Distribution. Although the idea of distribution echoes that of contextual-
ization, a “distributed view” focuses on the relation of the person to the
things/objects in the immediate environment, rather than on the strictures
and values of the larger culture or context. On the traditional “individual-
centered” view adhered to in the ﬁrst three phases of intelligence theory,
one’s intelligence is carried within one’s head; in principle, that intelligence
could be measured in isolation. According to the distributed view, however,
one’s intelligence inheres as much in the artifacts and individuals that sur-
round one as in one’s own skull. My intelligence does not stop at my skin;
rather, it encompasses my tools (paper, pencil, computer), my notational
memory (contained in ﬁles, notebooks, journals), and my network of asso-
ciates (ofﬁce mates, professional colleagues, others whom I can phone or to
whom I can dispatch electronic messages). A forthcoming book, entitled
Distributed Cognition, sets forth the principal principles of a distributed
view (Salomon, in press); see also the useful book Perspectives on Socially
Shared Cognition, authored by Lauren Resnick and her colleagues (1991). 
With the beneﬁt of hindsight, I can point to hints of contextualization
and distribution in the ﬁrst edition of Frames of Mind. In presenting spa-
tial intelligence, for example, I emphasized the extent to which the ex-
pression of that intelligence is determined by the opportunities afforded in
various cultures (ranging from sailing to architecture to geometry to chess),
and also the value of various tools and notations in enhancing the intelli-
gences of the growing child. Yet, I think it fair to say that in 1983 I centered
the multiple intelligences far more within the skull of the single individual
in 1983 than I would one decade later.
Will intelligence continue to move beyond the brain of the individual
into the realm of the artifacts and contexts of the wider culture? A large
part of the research community, and particularly that inﬂuenced by trends
on the European continent or in Asia, would respond “yes.” From that per-
spective, the exclusive focus of intelligence on the skills and ﬂexibility of
the single individual reﬂects a peculiarly Anglo-American bias. But those
who favor the standard psychometric approach to cognition or intelligence
have by no means laid down their disputational weapons.
Indeed, in the past decade, there have been renewed efforts to sup-
port the traditional views of intelligence and its operation in intelligence

Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition
xxxiii
tests. Scholars such as Arthur Jensen (1980) and Hans Eysenck (1981) have
not only maintained their belief in the singularity of intelligence but also
have supplemented their long-term loyalty to psychometric instruments
with fresh enthusiasm about the brain-basis of intelligence. They now con-
tend that intelligence reﬂects a basic property of the nervous system and
can be assessed electrophysiologically, without recourse to paper-and-
pencil instruments. A younger colleague, Michael Anderson (1988), has
amassed evidence to suggest that such indices of intelligence can be as-
certained even among infants. And perhaps most dramatically, Thomas
Bouchard and his colleagues (1990) at the University of Minnesota have
demonstrated a surprisingly high heritability of psychometric intelligence
among a population uniquely situated to provide evidence on this topic:
identical twins reared apart. To the extent that the Bouchard-Jensen-
Eysenck position is correct, there is really no need to pay attention to cul-
tures, contexts, or distributions of intelligence.
What is one to make of this situation, where one part of the “intelli-
gence community” is moving further and further toward social and cul-
tural accounts of intelligence while another part is amassing evidence of
the neurological and genetic basis of intelligence? Can they both be right?
I do not see these two research traditions as necessarily on a collision
course. It could well be that a certain property of the nervous system—
say, speed and ﬂexibility of nerve conduction—is largely inborn and ac-
counts in signiﬁcant measure for eventual success on certain kinds of
paper-and-pencil measures. So far as this is so, the “tough-minded” wing
of intelligence studies will continue to be tenable. At the same time, it could
well be that the forms in which intelligence is expressed outside a test sit-
uation, and that the ways in which human beings carry out roles in their
culture, remain indeﬁnitely and illuminatingly varied: here the “tender-
minded” approach to intelligence studies will remain an important en-
deavor. A division of explanatory labor is also conceivable: in a recently
published volume, Anderson (1992) stresses the power of the traditional
view for illuminating infant cognition while invoking a multiple intelli-
gences perspective for later development.
I anticipate, however, that the “tough” and the “tender” will continue
to ﬁght it out rather than merely agree to divide the intelligence terrain.
For example, meeting psychometricians on their own ground, Stephen Ceci
(1990) has shown the many ways in which even performance on the sim-
plest kinds of reaction-time measures are subject to training and cultural

effects. And, under the label of the “new environmentalism,” my colleague
Robert LeVine (1991) has challenged the inferences drawn from studies of
twins reared apart but within the same American ambience. In his view,
human environments can differ in a multitude of ways, leading to differ-
ences in performance far greater than those observed in twins raised in
what are basically variations of a modern Western middle-class environment.
Frames of Mind and My Recent Work
As I have indicated, much of the work my colleagues and I have under-
taken in the past decade has examined educational implications of MI the-
ory (see Gardner 1993). In particular, we have sought to take into account
the various differences in individual proﬁles of intelligences within an ed-
ucational setting. Describing an “individual-centered school,” we have ad-
dressed the ways in which each child’s proﬁle of intelligences can be
assessed; the ways in which each child can be aligned with curriculum, par-
ticularly with reference to the way in which that curriculum is presented
to the child; and the ways in which youngsters with particular proﬁles of
intelligence can be matched up appropriately with educational opportuni-
ties outside the conﬁnes of school.
A great deal of our recent effort has been expended on the develop-
ment of means of assessment that are “intelligence-fair”: that allow a meas-
urement of intellectual strengths without going through the “lenses” of
language and logic, as is required in standard paper-and-pencil measures.
At ﬁrst, we thought it would be possible and desirable to try to measure an
individual’s intelligence in “pure form,” yielding something akin to a seven-
pronged intelligence proﬁle. Increasingly, however, as we came to accept
the contextualization and distribution perspectives, it seemed ill advised,
and perhaps impossible, to attempt to measure “raw” intelligence.
As we now see it, intelligences are always expressed in the context of
speciﬁc tasks, domains, and disciplines. There is no “pure” spatial intelli-
gence: instead, there is spatial intelligence as expressed in a child’s puzzle
solutions, route ﬁnding, block building, or basketball passing. By the same
token, adults do not exhibit their spatial intelligence directly but are more or
less proﬁcient chess players or artists or geometricians. Thus, we are well
advised to assess intelligences by watching people who already are famil-
iar with and have some skills in these pursuits, or by introducing individ-
xxxiv
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

uals to such domains and observing how well one can move beyond the
novice stage, with or without speciﬁc supports or scaffolding.
This shift in philosophy of assessment reﬂects what is probably the most
important conceptual advance in MI theory: the distinction among intel-
ligences, domains, and ﬁelds. In the original formulation, these distinctions
were not properly drawn, leading to confusion among readers and, not in-
frequently, within my own thinking. But collaborative work with David
Feldman (1980, 1986) and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1988) has provided
me with a well-founded taxonomy.
At the level of the individual, it is proper to speak about one or more
human intelligences, or human intellectual proclivities, that are part of
our birthright. These intelligences may be thought of in neurobiological
terms. Human beings are born into cultures that house a large number of
domains—disciplines, crafts, and other pursuits in which one can become
enculturated and then be assessed in terms of the level of competence one
has attained. While domains, of course, involve human beings, they can
be thought of in an impersonal way—because the expertise in a domain
can in principle be captured in a book, a computer program, or some other
kind of artifact.
There is a relation between intelligences and domains, but it is cru-
cial not to confound these two realms. A person with musical intelligence
is likely to be attracted to, and to be successful in, the domain of music.
But the domain of musical performance requires intelligences beyond the
musical (for example, bodily-kinesthetic intelligence and the personal 
intelligences), just as musical intelligence can be mobilized for domains
beyond music in the strict sense (as in dance or in advertising). More gen-
erally, nearly all domains require proﬁciency in a set of intelligences; and
any intelligence can be mobilized for use in a wide array of culturally avail-
able domains.
During socialization, intercourse occurs principally between the indi-
vidual and the domains of the culture. But once one achieves a certain
competence, the ﬁeld becomes very important. The ﬁeld—a sociological
construct—includes the people, institutions, award mechanisms, and so
forth that render judgments about the qualities of individual performances.
To the extent that one is judged competent by the ﬁeld, one is likely to be-
come a successful practitioner; on the other hand, should the ﬁeld prove
incapable of judging work, or should it judge the work as being deﬁcient,
then one’s opportunity for achievement will be radically curtailed.
xxxv
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

The trio of intelligence, domain, and ﬁeld has proved not only useful
for unraveling a host of issues raised by MI theory but also particularly
fruitful for studies of creativity. As formulated originally by Csikszentmi-
halyi (1988), the felicitous question is: Where is creativity? The answer is
that creativity should not be thought of as inhering principally in the brain,
the mind, or the personality of a single individual. Rather, creativity should
be thought of as emerging from the interactions of three nodes: the indi-
vidual with his or her own proﬁle of competences and values; the domains
available for study and mastery within a culture; and the judgments ren-
dered by the ﬁeld that is deemed competent within a culture. To the ex-
tent that the ﬁeld accepts innovation, one (or one’s work) can be seen as
creative; but to the extent that an innovation is rejected, or not understood,
or considered not innovative, it is simply invalid to continue to maintain
that a product is creative. Of course, in the future, the ﬁeld may choose to
alter its early judgments.
Each of the scholars who has worked on this formulation has put it to
work distinctively. In my own case, I have deﬁned the creative individual
in ways paralleling my deﬁnition of intelligence. Speciﬁcally, the creative
individual is one who regularly solves problems or fashions products in a
domain, and whose work is considered both novel and acceptable by
knowledgeable members of a ﬁeld. On the basis of this deﬁnition, I have
studied six men and one woman who early in this century were instru-
mental in formulating modern consciousness in the West. Each—Sigmund
Freud, Albert Einstein, Igor Stravinsky, Pablo Picasso, T. S. Eliot, Martha
Graham, and Mahatma Gandhi—exempliﬁes one of the seven intelligences
(Gardner, in press).
Those interested in the evolution of the theory of multiple intelligences
since 1983 often ask whether additional intelligences have been added—
or original candidates deleted. The answer is that I have elected not to
tamper for now with the original list, though I continue to think that some
form of “spiritual intelligence” may well exist. It is pertinent to point out
that my notions of “intrapersonal intelligence” have shifted somewhat in
the past decade. In Frames of Mind, I stressed the extent to which intra -
personal intelligence grew out of, and was organized around, the “feeling
life” of the individual. If I were to rework the relevant parts of Chapter 10
today, I would stress instead the importance of having a viable model of
oneself and of being able to draw effectively upon that model in making
decisions about one’s life.
xxxvi
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

In addition to work on the educational implications of MI theory, and
the extension of that work to the realm of creativity, I have been involved
in one other line of study that grows out of MI theory. The positing of dif-
ferent intelligences implies two further considerations: Why do human be-
ings possess particular intelligences, and what are the factors that lead
intelligences to develop as they do?
Both of these issues lie near the heart of developmental psychology,
the discipline in which I was trained. And, as it happens, my own work on
intelligence can be seen as part of a general trend in that discipline to con-
sider the different domains or “modules of the mind” (Carey and Gelman
1991; Fodor 1983; Keil 1989). One result of this ongoing research has been
the effort to delineate the different constraints at work in the realms of
the mind: for example, to indicate the kinds of assumption infants make
about the realm of number or causality, the strategies toddlers naturally
invoke in learning natural language, the sorts of concepts children easily
form as opposed to those that are almost impossible to form.
“Constraints” research has revealed that by the end of early childhood,
youngsters have developed powerful and already entrenched theories
about their immediate worlds: the world of physical objects and forces; the
world of living entities; the world of human beings, including their minds.
Surprisingly, and in contradiction to the claims of the great developmen-
talist Jean Piaget (Mussen and Kessen 1983), these naïve “conceptions”
and “theories” prove difﬁcult to alter, despite years of schooling. And so it
often happens that the “mind of the ﬁve-year-old” ends up unaffected by
the experiences of school. In The Unschooled Mind (1991), I illustrate the
power of these constraints by showing that in every area of the curricu-
lum, the mind of the ﬁve-year-old continues to hold sway.
Taken together, the work on multiple intelligences and the work on the
constraints of the mind yield a view of the human being signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from the one generally subscribed to a generation ago. In the hey-
day of the psychometric and behaviorist eras, it was generally believed that
intelligence was a single entity that was inherited, and that human beings—
initially a blank slate—could be trained to learn anything, provided that it
was presented in an appropriate way. Nowadays an increasing number of
researchers believe precisely the opposite: that there exists a multitude 
of intelligences, quite independent of each other; that each intelligence
has its own strengths and constraints; that the mind is far from unencum-
bered at birth; and that it is unexpectedly difﬁcult to teach things that go
xxxvii
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

against early “naïve” theories or that challenge the natural lines of force
within an intelligence and its matching domains.
At ﬁrst blush, this diagnosis would appear to sound a death knell for
formal education. It is hard enough to teach to one intelligence; what about
seven? It is hard enough to teach even when anything can be taught; what
to do if there are distinct limits and strong constraints on human cognition
and learning?
In truth, however, psychology does not directly dictate education
(Egan 1983); it merely helps one to understand the conditions within
which education takes place. One person’s limitation can be another per-
son’s opportunity. Seven kinds of intelligence would allow seven ways to
teach, rather than one. And any powerful constraints that exist in the
mind can be mobilized to introduce a particular concept (or a whole sys-
tem of thinking) in a way that children are most likely to learn it and least
likely to distort it. Paradoxically, constraints can be suggestive and ulti-
mately freeing.
Criticisms of MI Theory
In the course of a decade of discussion, there have been numerous criti-
cisms of MI theory and numerous opportunities for me to attempt to re-
spond to them. Because some of these criticisms and responses are
anticipated in Chapter 11 and discussed in Multiple Intelligences: The The-
ory in Practice, I shall here focus on what I believe to be the most impor-
tant issues: terminology, correlation among intelligences, intelligences and
styles, the processes of intelligences, and the risks of repeating the sins of
intelligence testing.
Terminology. Many individuals, though happy to recognize the existence of
different abilities and faculties, balk at the use of the word intelligence.
“Talents are ﬁne,” they say, “but intelligence should be reserved for more
general kinds of capacities.” One can, of course, deﬁne words in any way
one likes. In delineating a narrow deﬁnition of intelligence, however, one
usually devalues those capacities that are not within that deﬁnition’s
purview: thus, dancers or chess players may be talented but they are not
smart. In my view, it is ﬁne to call music or spatial ability a talent, so long
as one calls language or logic a talent as well. But I balk at the unwarranted
xxxviii
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

assumption that certain human abilities can be arbitrarily singled out as
qualifying as intelligence while others cannot. 
Correlation Among Intelligences. Several critics have reminded me that
there are generally positive correlations (the so-called positive manifold)
among tests for different faculties (for example, space and language). More
generally, within psychology, almost every test of abilities correlates at least
a little bit with other tests of ability. This state of affairs gives comfort to
those who would posit the existence of “general intelligence.” 
I cannot accept these correlations at face value. Nearly all current tests
are so devised as to call principally on linguistic and logical faculties. Often
the very wording of the question can tip off the test takers. Accordingly, a
person with the skills important for success on such instruments is likely
to do relatively well even in tests of musical or spatial abilities, while one
who is not especially facile linguistically or logically is likely to be impaired
on such standard tests, even if one has skills in the areas that are allegedly
being tested.
The truth is that we do not yet know how far various intelligences (or,
as I would now say, instantiations of various intelligences) actually corre-
late. We do not know whether someone who has the intelligences to be a
good chess player or architect also has the intelligences to succeed in music
or mathematics or rhetoric. And we will not know until we have devised
means of assessment that are intelligence-fair. At such a time, we may well
ﬁnd certain correlations among intelligences, and such ﬁndings would nat-
urally result in a redrawing of the map of human cognition. I would be very
surprised, however, if most of the intelligences I have deﬁned in this book
were to disappear in the new cartography—but far less so at the emer-
gence of new intelligences or sub-intelligences.
Intelligences and Styles. Many individuals have pointed out that my list of
intelligences resembles lists put out by researchers interested in learning
styles, working styles, personality styles, human archetypes, and the like;
and asked what is new in my formulation. Without question, there will be
overlap between these lists, and I may well be trying to get at some of the
same dimensions as those in the “styles” world. Still, three aspects of my
theory are indeed distinctive. 
First of all, I arrived at the seven intelligences by a method I believe to
be unique: the synthesis of signiﬁcant bodies of scientiﬁc evidence about
xxxix
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

development, breakdown, brain organization, evolution, and other kindred
concepts (see Chapter 4). Most other lists are a consequence either of the
correlations among test scores or of empirical observations—for example,
of students in school.
Second, my intelligences are speciﬁcally linked to content. I claim that
human beings have particular intelligences because of informational con-
tents that exist in the world—numerical information, spatial information,
information about other people. Most stylistic accounts are assumed to cut
across content: thus, one is said to be impulsive or analytic or emotive
“across the board.”
Third, rather than being analogous to (or even redundant with) styles,
intelligences may well need to cross-cut other kinds of analytic categories.
Perhaps styles are intelligence-speciﬁc, or intelligences are style-speciﬁc.
There is, in fact, empirical evidence on this issue. In our educational effort
with young children called Project Spectrum (Gardner and Viens 1990),
we have found that certain “working styles” prove to be quite content-
speciﬁc. The same child who is reﬂective or engaged with one content can
turn out to be impulsive or inattentive with another content. Just why this
occurs we do not know; but it cautions against an easy assumption that
styles are independent of content, or that intelligences can be collapsed
with styles.
The Processes of Intelligences. Several sympathetic critics did not question
the existence of several intelligences but criticized me for being purely de-
scriptive. From their vantage point, it is the job of the psychologist to lay
out the processes whereby mental activity is carried out. 
I concede that the work in Frames of Mind is largely descriptive. I be-
lieve that such description is an appropriate place to begin—to make the
case for a plurality of intelligences. Certainly nothing in the work in any
way blocks the path toward an exploration of the processes whereby the
intelligences operate; and indeed, at various points in this volume, I offer
suggestions about what processes and operations might be entailed in spa-
tial, musical, and other intelligences.
It is perhaps worth mentioning that, at the time Frames was published,
most psychologists believed that human information processing was best
explained by the serial von Neumann computer. Within a few years, that
allegiance had completely changed, and the so-called parallel-distributed
processing approach was thought to be a superior way of explicating human
xl
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

(and artiﬁcial) cognition (see Gardner 1987). Perhaps it was just as well
that, in 1983, I inadvertently refrained from offering a detailed processing
characterization of each intelligence since, by 1990, such an account would
have been considered deeply ﬂawed. Still, because advances in science can
come about only through the positing of detailed models that can be
tested, reﬁned, and refuted, I welcome efforts to “model” the different in-
telligences and to ﬁgure out how they work together.
Repeating the Sins of Intelligence Testing. Many critics of intelligence and
intelligence testing believe that far from slaying the dragon, I have equipped
it with additional horns or sharpened teeth. In their pessimistic view, seven
intelligences are even worse than one: people can now feel inadequate
across a whole ensemble of realms; and this taxonomy can be used further
to stigmatize individuals and groups (“Johnny is bodily-kinesthetic”; “Sally
is only linguistic”; “All girls are better in X than in Y”; “This ethnic group
excels in M intelligence, while this racial group is better in N intelligence”). 
To these critics, let me say at once that MI theory was devised as a sci-
entiﬁc theory and not as an instrument of social policy. Like any other the-
ory, it can be put to different uses by different people; it is not possible, and
may not be appropriate, for the originator of a theory to attempt to control
the ways in which it is used. Nonetheless, I am personally opposed to the
misuses implied in these criticisms. I do not think that the abuses of in-
telligence testing ought in any sense to be imported to multiple intelligences
theory. Indeed, I do not believe that it is possible to assess intelligences in
pure form, and the kinds of assessment I favor are entirely different from
those associated with IQ testing. I discourage efforts to characterize indi-
viduals or groups as exhibiting one or another proﬁle of intelligences.
While at any moment a person or a group might exhibit certain intelli-
gences, this picture is ﬂuid and changing.
Indeed, the very lack of a developed intelligence of one sort can serve
as a motivation for the development of that intelligence. In focusing in
Chapter 14 on the Suzuki method of musical education, I wanted to
demonstrate that a society’s decision to invest signiﬁcant resources into the
development of a particular intelligence can make the entire society quite
intelligent in that respect. Far from believing that intelligences are set in
stone, I believe that they are subject to being considerably modiﬁed by
changes in available resources and, for that matter, in one’s perceptions of
one’s own abilities and potentials (Dweck and Licht 1980). The more one
xli
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

believes in the contextual and distributed views of intelligence, the less
sense it makes to posit inherent limits on intellectual achievement.
I am sometimes asked whether I feel upset or betrayed by people who
put my theory or concepts to uses I do not personally favor. Of course, such
practices make me uneasy—but I cannot take responsibility for the uses or
misuses to which my ideas are put by anyone who encounters them in 
the marketplace. Still, if someone who has worked with me were to apply
the ideas in a way I could not endorse, I would ask him or her to develop
a separate terminology and to desist from relating the work to my own.
Future Work
I assume that there will be continued give-and-take on the controversial
aspects of MI theory; I hope for continued theoretical progress as well.
For that progress I look chieﬂy to my students, who have already carried
the work forward in ways that I admire (for example, Granott and Gard-
ner, in press; Hatch and Gardner, in press; Kornhaber, Krechevsky, and
Gardner 1990).
There is little question that educational work will continue to be carried
out in the tradition of MI theory. Indeed, that work appears to be ex-
panding with every month. I can no longer keep track of what is being
done, let alone evaluate its quality. In Multiple Intelligences: The Theory
in Practice, I have attempted to assess the state of the art at the present
time. I expect to add to the set of educationally oriented writings assem-
bled there; and I will also continue to serve as a clearinghouse for infor-
mation about experiments and projects being carried out in an MI vein.
Any future work that I may do, building on the work described here, is
likely to take on four forms:
1. Studies of the diverse contexts in which intelligences develop and of
the ways in which they develop in those contexts. I have already
carried out a detailed case study of intellectual options in another
culture, the People’s Republic of China (Gardner 1989); and, with
several other colleagues, I am carrying out research on intelligence
in the particular context of school (Gardner et al., in press).
2. Studies of the phenomena of human creativity and how best to en-
hance it. In my current project on creators of the modern era, I am
xlii
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

developing a method whereby it should be possible to study the na-
ture of creative work across domains. In so doing, I am investigating
the role played by different intelligences, and by different combina-
tions of intelligences, in human creative achievement of the highest
order. While building on MI theory, this focus on creativity expands
the theory in several respects. Creativity depends upon more than
intelligence: it involves personality factors in respect to the individ-
ual and domain and ﬁeld factors at work in the larger society.
3. An examination of the ethical dimensions of human intelligences. In-
telligences by themselves are neither prosocial nor antisocial. Goethe
used his linguistic intelligence for positive ends, Goebbels, his for
destructive ones; Stalin and Gandhi both understood other individ-
uals but put their interpersonal intelligences to diverse uses. I am
interested in two ethical dimensions of human intelligence. First,
how can we ensure that every human being develops to the fullest
his or her intellectual potentials? Second, how can we help to en-
sure the use of those intelligences for positive ends rather than for
destructive ones? Both of these issues involve questions of policy
and of “social engineering”—domains as new to me as they are
treacherous. Yet, well into middle age, I feel a responsibility at least
to consider these issues.
4. A consideration of leadership for our times. It has become a truism
that ours is an era devoid of heroes and bereft of leadership. My own
view is that we have a plentiful supply of leaders within domains:
men and women who can, by dint of their achievements, supply
leadership for scholarly disciplines, for the arts, for business, or for
other technical areas. But we desperately lack leadership for the
wider society: people who are able to speak (and to be heard) across
interest groups and distinct areas of technical expertise and to ad-
dress the broad concerns of society, and even of humanity as a whole.
I may have identiﬁed one reason for this apparent asynchrony. To pro-
vide leadership in a domain that highlights a certain intelligence, the prin-
cipal requirement is that one excel in that intelligence: other people in that
domain will come readily to follow this leader’s example and to listen to
what he or she has to say (or to watch what he or she does). We might say
workers within a domain already share a common discourse. In the wider
society, however, that person has no automatic, built-in way of attracting
xliii
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

followers. Rather, a would-be leader must be able to create a story about
that society—a persuasive narrative that accounts for his or her place
within it and one that can link individuals of different intelligences, do-
mains, and allegiances in a more incorporative enterprise.
Just where successful leadership lies is a subject for another day—
though one, I hope, not too far in the future. It is clear to me that the issue
of leadership will—indeed, must—go beyond multiple intelligences. It will
involve capacities not dealt with in the present book—capacities that cut
across intelligences and affect other people in ways that may be as emo-
tional and social as they are cognitive. While from my present vantage
point the best way to start to understand the human mind is to examine
its different frames, its separate intelligences, in the end we must also learn
how to yoke those intelligences together and mobilize them for construc-
tive ends.
Cambridge, Massachusetts
November 1992
References
Anderson, M. “Inspection Time, Information Processing, and the Development of In-
telligence.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 6 (1988): 43–57.
———. Intelligence and Development: A Cognitive Theory. New York: Blackwell Pub-
lishers, 1992.
Bouchard, T. et al. “Sources of Human Psychological Differences: The Minnesota Study
of Twins Reared Apart.” Science 250 (1990): 223–228.
Carey, S., and R. Gelman, The Epigenesis of Mind. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum,
1991.
Cattell, R. Abilities: Their Structure, Growth, and Action. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin,
1971.
Ceci, S. On Intelligence . . . More or Less. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1990.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. “Society, Culture, and Person: A Systems View of Creativity.” In 
R. J. Sternberg, ed., The Nature of Creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1988.
Dweck, C., and B. G. Licht. “Learned Helplessness and Intellectual Achievement.” In
J. Garber and M. E. P. Seligman, eds., Human Helplessness: Theory and Applications.
New York: Academic Press, 1980.
Egan, K. Education and Psychology: Plato, Piaget, and Scientiﬁc Psychology. New York:
Teachers College Press, 1983.
Eysenck, H. J. The Intelligence Controversy. New York: John Wiley, 1981.
Feldman, D. Beyond Universals in Cognitive Development. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1980.
Feldman, D., with L. Goldsmith. Nature’s Gambit. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Fodor, J. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.
Gardner, H. The Creators of the Modern Era. New York: Basic Books, in press.
xliv
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition

———. Introduction to the paperback edition of The Mind’s New Science. New York:
Basic Books, 1987.
———. Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
———. To Open Minds: Chinese Clues to the Dilemma of Contemporary Education.
New York: Basic Books, 1989.
———. The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How Schools Should Teach.
New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Gardner, H., R. Sternberg, M. Krechevsky, and L. Okagaki. “Intelligence in Context: En-
hancing Students’ Practical Intelligence for School.” In K. McGilly, ed., Classroom
Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom Practice. Cambridge, Mass.:
Bradford Books/MIT Press, in press..
Gardner, H., and J. Viens. “Multiple Intelligences and Styles: Partners in Effective Ed-
ucation.” The Clearinghouse Bulletin: Learning/Teaching Styles and Brain Behavior 4,
2 (1990): 4–5.
Gould, S. J. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton, 1981.
Granott, N., and H. Gardner. “When Minds Meet: Interactions, Coincidence, and De-
velopment in Domains of Ability.” In R. J. Sternberg and R. K. Wagner, eds., Mind in
Context: Interactionist Perspectives on Human Intelligence. New York: Cambridge
University Press, in press.
Guilford, J. P. The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
Hatch, T., and H. Gardner. “Finding Cognition in the Classroom: An Expanded View of
Human Intelligence.” In G. Salomon, ed., Distributed Cognition. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, in press.
Jensen, Arthur. Bias in Mental Testing. New York: Free Press, 1980.
Keil, F. Concepts, Kinds, and Cognitive Development. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford
Books/MIT Press, 1989.
Kornhaber, M., K. Krechevsky, and H. Gardner. “Engaging Intelligence.” Educational
Psychologist 25, 3–4 (1990): 177–199.
Krechevsky, M., and H. Gardner. “The Emergence and Nurturance of Multiple Intelli-
gences.” In M. J. A. Howe, ed., Encouraging the Development of Exceptional Abilities
and Talents. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society, 1990.
Lave, J. Cognition in Practice. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
LeVine, R. “Social and Cultural Inﬂuences on Child Development.” Paper delivered at
the Centennial of Education at Harvard. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Graduate School
of Education, 1991.
Mussen, P., and W. Kessen, eds. Handbook of Child Psychology, vol. 1. New York: John
Wiley, 1983.
Resnick, L., J. Levine, and S. D. Teasley, eds. Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, 1991.
Salomon, G. Distributed Cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press, in press.
Spearman, C. The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurements. New York: Macmil-
lan, 1927.
Sternberg, R. Beyond IQ. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Terman, L. M. The Measurement of Intelligence. New York: Arno Press, 1975 [1916].
Thurstone, L. L. The Nature of Intelligence. Littleﬁeld: Adams, 1960.
Vernon, P. The Structure of Human Abilities. London: Methuen, 1971.
Vygotsky, L. Mind in Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978.
xlv
Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition


xlvii
PREFACE, 1983
As indicated in the following note about the Project on Human Potential,
this book had an unusual genesis. It came to be written because of the
foresight and generosity of a foundation that sought clariﬁcation of a con-
cept in its charter—“human potential.” The executive director of the foun-
dation, Willem Welling, and the chairman of the board of directors, Oscar
van Leer, conceived of a project to investigate human potential and asked
several of us at the Graduate School of Education at Harvard to respond
to their daunting challenge. The project drew together a group of col-
leagues from diverse backgrounds who have had the chance to collaborate
over the past four years. The story of that collaboration will be related else-
where, but it is germane to record that it has enabled me to range more
broadly and to reﬂect more probingly about a gamut of issues than I could
have done without the ﬂexible support of the van Leer Foundation. My
ﬁrst and greatest debt is to Willem Welling, Oscar van Leer, and their as-
sociates at the Bernard van Leer Foundation.
I wish to thank my senior colleagues on the Project on Human 
Potential—Gerald Lesser, Robert LeVine, Israel Schefﬂer, and Merry
White—for their continuous and continuing stimulation, constructive criti-
cism, and support. Our interactions have genuinely changed the way in
which I think about many issues and have helped materially with the writ-
ing and rewriting of this book. From the ﬁrst, I have been blessed with in-
credibly talented, insightful, and hard-working research assistants, and I want
to thank them individually and mention their area of contribution to this
study: Lisa Brooks (genetics), Linda Levine (psychology), Susan McConnell
(neurobiology), Susan Pollak (history and philosophy), William Skryzniarz
(international development), and Claudia Strauss (anthropology). In a day

when scholarship is little esteemed among talented young persons, they have
shown exemplary independence and dedication: I am pleased that they are
all pursuing careers in the world of scholarship. Other members of the pro j-
ect to whom I am indebted in various ways include Leonie Gordon, Margaret
Herzig, Francis Keppel, Harry Lasker, and Lois Taniuchi. For their gener-
ous administrative support, I wish to thank deans Paul Ylvisaker and Blenda
Wilson and, more recently, deans Patricia Graham and Jerome Murphy.
While, in the ﬁrst instance, this book is a report on human potentials
as viewed from a psychological perspective, it also represents an effort to
pull together ﬁndings from two lines of research that I have been pursu-
ing over the past dozen years. One line is the development, in normal and
gifted children, of symbol-using capacities, particularly in the arts—a line
I have been carrying out at Harvard Project Zero. The other has been the
breakdown of cognitive capacities in individuals suffering from brain dam-
age, which I have been pursuing at the Boston Veterans Administration
Medical Center and the Boston University School of Medicine. A con-
ception of different intelligences—the “frames of mind” of my title—has
emerged as the most appropriate and comprehensive way of conceptual-
izing the human cognitive capacities whose development and breakdown
I have been studying. I am grateful to have the opportunity to present in
this volume the theoretical framework that has emerged from these efforts
at synthesis, and to offer some tentative suggestions about the educational
implications of the framework. And I want to take this opportunity to thank
the various agencies that have generously supported my research over ten
years: the Veterans Administration, which granted me a sabbatical so that
I could concentrate on this synthesis; the Department of Neurology of
Boston University School of Medicine; the Medical Research Division
of the Veterans Administration; and the National Institute of Neurological
Diseases, Communication Disorders, and Stroke, all of which have sup-
ported my work in neuropsychology; and, for their support of the work
of my colleagues and me at Harvard Project Zero on normal and gifted
children, the Spencer Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, the Markle
Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the National Insti-
tute of Education. A large debt is owed to that innovative institution the
MacArthur Foundation, which furnished me much-needed security dur-
ing a perilous period for researchers in the social sciences.
I want ﬁnally to express my appreciation to those individuals who have
made particular contributions to this book. A number of my colleagues
xlviii
Preface

read the entire manuscript, or large sections of it, and offered extremely
helpful comments. I wish to record my appreciation to Tom Carothers,
Michael Cole, Yadin Dudai, David Feldman, Norman Geschwind, Linda
Levine, David Olson, Susan McConnell, Sidney Strauss, William Wall, and
Ellen Winner. Dolly Appel served as principal word processor and super-
visor of the preparation of the physical manuscript and did so in a skillful,
helpful, and cheerful manner that I greatly admired. Jasmine Hall gener-
ously offered to prepare the index. Linda Levine aided me with numerous
aspects of the physical and conceptual manuscript and undertook with
great ingenuity and energy the preparation of the extensive reference
notes. I don’t know what I would have done without her intelligences! And
as with my two most recent books, my colleagues at Basic Books were an
unfailing source of support: I especially thank my editor, Jane Isay, and her
assistant, Mary Kennedy, as well as Judith Griessman, Janet Halverson,
Phoebe Hoss, Lois Shapiro, and Vincent Torre—and the proofreader,
Pamela Dailey.
I wish to thank the following individuals and publishers for permitting me
to reproduce copyrighted materials:
To Dr. Roger N. Shepard for permission to reproduce the spatial ro-
tation ﬁgure from R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, “Mental Rotation of
Three-Dimensional Objects,” Science, Vol. 171, pp. 701–703, ﬁg. 1, 19
February 1971.
To Academic Press for permission to reproduce a drawing by Nadia
from L. Selfe, Nadia: A Case of Extraordinary Drawing Ability in an Autis-
tic Child, 1977.
To the American Association for the Advancement of Science for per-
mission to reproduce the spatial rotation ﬁgure from R. N. Shepard and 
J. Metzler, “Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects,” Science, Vol.
171, pp. 701–703, ﬁg. 1, 19 February 1971.
To Harper & Row for permission to quote material from Kenneth
Clark, Another Part of the Wood: A Self-Portrait, 1974.
To John Murray Publishers, Ltd., for permission to quote material from
Kenneth Clark, Another Part of the Wood: A Self-Portrait, 1974.
To A. D. Peters & Company for permission to quote passages from
Stephen Spender, The Making of a Poem, 1955.
Cambridge, Massachusetts
June 1983
xlix
Preface


li
NOTE ON THE PROJECT 
ON HUMAN POTENTIAL, 1983
The Bernard van Leer Foundation of The Hague, Netherlands, is an in-
ternational nonproﬁt institution dedicated to the cause of disadvantaged
children and youth. It supports innovative projects that develop commu-
nity approaches to early childhood education and child care, in order to
help disadvantaged children to realize their potential.
In 1979, the foundation asked the Harvard Graduate School of Edu-
cation to assess the state of scientiﬁc knowledge concerning human po-
tential and its realization. Proceeding from this general directive, a group
of scholars at Harvard has over the past several years been engaged in re-
search exploring the nature and realization of human potential. Activities
sponsored by the Project on Human Potential have included reviews of
relevant literature in history, philosophy, and the natural and social sci-
ences, a series of international workshops on conceptions of human de-
velopment in diverse cultural traditions, and the commissioning of papers
and books.
The principal investigators of the project represent a variety of ﬁelds
and interests. Gerald S. Lesser, who chaired the project’s steering commit-
tee, is an educator and developmental psychologist, a principal architect in
the creation of educational television programs for children. Howard Gard-
ner is a psychologist who has studied the development of symbolic skills
in normal and gifted children, and the impairment of such skills in brain-
damaged adults. Israel Scheffler is a philosopher who has worked in the
areas of philosophy of education, philosophy of science, and philosophy of
language. Robert LeVine, a social anthropologist, has worked in sub-
Saharan Africa and Mexico, studying family life, child care, and psychological

Note on the Project on Human Potential
lii
development. Merry White is a sociologist and Japan specialist who has
studied education, formal organizations, and the roles of women in the
Third World and Japan. This wide range of interests and disciplines enabled
the project to take a multifaceted approach to issues of human potential.
The ﬁrst volume published under the aegis of the Project on Human
Potential is Howard Gardner’s Frames of Mind, a study of human intel-
lectual potentials that draws not only on psychological research but also
on the biological sciences and on ﬁndings about the development and use
of knowledge in different cultures.
The second book of the project to appear is Israel Schefﬂer’s Of Human
Potential, which treats philosophical aspects of the concept of potential.
Sketching the background of the concept and placing it in the context of
a general theory of human nature, this treatment then proposes three an-
alytical reconstructions of the concept and offers systematic reﬂections on
policy and the education of policy makers.
The third volume is Human Conditions: The Cultural Basis of Educa-
tional Development, by Robert A. LeVine and Merry I. White. Emphasiz-
ing the crucial role of cultural factors in the progress of human development,
the book offers new models for development based on the social anthro-
pology of the lifespan and the social history of family and school.
To provide background for the study of diversity in development, the
project established teams of consultants in Egypt, India, Japan, Mexico, 
the People’s Republic of China, and West Africa. Selected papers presented
by these consultants in project workshops appear in The Cultural Transi-
tion: Human Experience and Social Transformations in the Third World
and Japan, edited by Merry I. White and Susan Pollak. Representatives of
international development agencies were also engaged as consultants and
correspondents over the ﬁve-year period of the project. Through such in-
ternational dialogue and research, the project has sought to create a new
multidisciplinary environment for understanding human potential.

Frames 
of Mind


PART I
BACKGROUND


1
The Idea of 
Multiple Intelligences
A
young girl spends an hour with an examiner. She is asked a number of
questions that probe her store of information (Who discovered Amer-
ica? What does the stomach do?), her vocabulary (What does nonsense
mean? What does belfry mean?), her arithmetic skills (At eight cents each,
how much will three candy bars cost?), her ability to remember a series of
numbers (5, 1, 7, 4, 2, 3, 8), her capacity to grasp the similarity between
two elements (elbow and knee, mountain and lake). She may also be asked
to carry out certain other tasks—for example, solving a maze or arranging
a group of pictures in such a way that they relate a complete story. Some
time afterward, the examiner scores the responses and comes up with a
single number—the girl’s intelligence quotient, or IQ. This number (which
the little girl may actually be told) is likely to exert appreciable effect upon
her future, inﬂuencing the way in which her teachers think of her and de-
termining her eligibility for certain privileges. The importance attached to
the number is not entirely inappropriate: after all, the score on an intelli-
gence test does predict one’s ability to handle school subjects, though it
foretells little of success in later life.
The preceding scenario is repeated thousands of times every day, all
over the world; and, typically, a good deal of signiﬁcance is attached to the
single score. Of course, different versions of the test are used for various
ages and in diverse cultural settings. At times, the test is administered with
paper and pencil rather than as an interchange with an examiner. But the
broad outlines—an hour’s worth of questions yielding one round number—
are pretty much the way of intelligence testing the world around.
3

Background
4
Many observers are not happy with this state of affairs. There must be
more to intelligence than short answers to short questions—answers that
predict academic success; and yet, in the absence of a better way of think-
ing about intelligence, and of better ways to assess an individual’s capa-
bilities, this scenario is destined to be repeated universally for the
foreseeable future.
But what if one were to let one’s imagination wander freely, to con-
sider the wider range of performances that are in fact valued throughout
the world? Consider, for example, the twelve-year-old male Puluwat in the
Caroline Islands, who has been selected by his elders to learn how to be-
come a master sailor. Under the tutelage of master navigators, he will learn
to combine knowledge of sailing, stars, and geography so as to ﬁnd his way
around hundreds of islands. Consider the ﬁfteen-year-old Iranian youth
who has committed to heart the entire Koran and mastered the Arabic lan-
guage. Now he is being sent to a holy city, to work closely for the next sev-
eral years with an ayatollah, who will prepare him to be a teacher and
religious leader. Or, consider the fourteen-year-old adolescent in Paris who
has learned how to program a computer and is beginning to compose
works of music with the aid of a synthesizer.
A moment’s reﬂection reveals that each of these individuals is attain-
ing a high level of competence in a challenging ﬁeld and should, by any
reasonable deﬁnition of the term, be viewed as exhibiting intelligent be-
havior. Yet it should be equally clear that current methods of assessing the
intellect are not sufﬁciently well honed to allow assessment of an individ-
ual’s potentials or achievements in navigating by the stars, mastering a for-
eign tongue, or composing with a computer. The problem lies less in the
technology of testing than in the ways in which we customarily think about
the intellect and in our ingrained views of intelligence. Only if we expand
and reformulate our view of what counts as human intellect will we be able
to devise more appropriate ways of assessing it and more effective ways of
educating it.
Around the world many individuals involved in education are reaching
similar conclusions. There is interest in new programs (some of them
grandiose) that seek to develop human intelligence for a whole culture, to
train individuals in such general skills as “anticipatory learning,” to help
individuals to realize their human potential. Intriguing experiments, rang-
ing from the Suzuki method of training violin to the LOGO method of in-
troducing the fundamentals of computer programming, seek to elicit

* The sources for all quotations, research findings, and allied factual information
will be found in the notes beginning on page 413.
** For ease of exposition the pronoun “he” will be used in its generic sense throughout
this book.
The Idea of Multiple Intelligences
5
accomplished performances from young children.* Some of these experi-
ments have had demonstrated success while others are still in the pilot
phase. Yet it is probably just to say that the successes as well as the failures
have occurred in the absence of an adequate framework for thinking about
intelligences. Certainly in no case does there exist a view of intelligence
that incorporates the range of abilities I have just surveyed. To arrive at
such a formulation is the purpose of the present book.
In the chapters that follow, I outline a new theory of human intellec-
tual competences. This theory challenges the classical view of intelligence
that most of us have absorbed explicitly (from psychology or education texts)
or implicitly (by living in a culture with a strong but possibly circumscribed
view of intelligence). So that the new features of this theory can be more
readily identiﬁed, I will in these introductory pages consider some facts of
the traditional view: where it came from, why it has become entrenched,
what are some of the outstanding issues that remain to be resolved. Only
then will I turn to the characteristics of the revisionist theory that I am
propounding here.
For well over two thousand years, at least since the rise of the Greek
city-state, a certain set of ideas has dominated discussions of the human
condition in our civilization. This collection of ideas stresses the existence
and the importance of mental powers—capacities that have been variously
termed rationality, intelligence, or the deployment of mind. The unending
search for an essence of humanity has led, with seeming ineluctability, to
a focus on our species’ quest for knowledge; and those capacities that ﬁgure
in knowing have been especially valued. Whether it be Plato’s philosopher-
king, the Hebrew prophet, the literate scribe in a medieval monastery, or
the scientist in a laboratory, the individual capable of using his** mental
powers has been singled out. Socrates’s “Know thyself,” Aristotle’s “All men
by Nature desire to know,” and Descartes’s “I think: therefore I am” pro-
vide epigraphs that frame an entire civilization.
Even in that dark millennium that intervened between Classical
times and the Renaissance, the ascendancy of intellectual factors was

rarely challenged. Early in the medieval period, St. Augustine, the very fa-
ther of faith, declared:
The prime author and mover of the universe is intelligence. Therefore,
the ﬁnal cause of the universe must be the good of the intelligence and
that is truth. . . . Of all human pursuits, the pursuit of wisdom is the
most perfect, the most sublime, the most useful, and the most agree-
able. The most perfect, because in so far as a man gives himself up to
the pursuit of wisdom, to that extent he enjoys already some portion of
true happiness.
At the height of the Middle Ages, Dante put forth his view that “the proper
function of the human race, taken in the aggregate, is to actualize contin-
ually the entire capacity possible to the intellect, primarily in speculation,
then through its extension and for its sake, secondarily in action.” And then,
at the dawn of the Renaissance, a century before Descartes’s time, Francis
Bacon described the English ship in New Atlantis that comes upon a
Utopian island whose chief institution is a great establishment devoted to
scientiﬁc research. The ruler of this realm declares to visiting travelers:
I will give the greatest jewel I have. For I will impart unto thee, for the
love of God and men, a relation of the true state of Solomon’s house. . . .
The end of our foundation is the knowledge of causes, and secret mo-
tions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of human empire, to the
effecting of all things possible.
Of course, esteem for knowledge—and for those who appear to pos-
sess it—is not the only theme that haunts what we have come to term
(somewhat inexactly) the Western world. The virtues of feeling, faith, and
courage have also been leitmotifs over the centuries and, in fact, have
sometimes (if not always justiﬁably) been contrasted with the quest for
knowledge. What is instructive is that even when faith or love is extolled
above all else, each is typically opposed to the powers of reason. In a par-
allel vein, when leaders of a totalitarian bent have sought to remake their
societies in the light of a new vision, they have typically “put away” those
rationalists or intellectuals whom they could not co-opt—once again pay-
ing a kind of perverse compliment to the powers of reason.
6
Background

Reason, intelligence, logic, knowledge are not synonymous; and much
of this book constitutes an effort to tease out the various skills and capac-
ities that have too easily been combined under the rubric of “the mental.”
But, ﬁrst, I must introduce a different kind of distinction—a contrast be-
tween two attitudes toward mind that have competed and alternated across
the centuries. Adopting the appealing distinction of the Greek poet
Archilochus, one can contrast those who view all intellect as a piece (let us
dub them the “hedgehogs”) with those who favor its fragmentation into
several components (the “foxes”). The hedgehogs not only believe in a sin-
gular, inviolable capacity that is the special property of human beings:
often, as a corollary, they impose the conditions that each individual is
born with a certain amount of intelligence, and that we individuals can in
fact be rank-ordered in terms of our God-given intellect or IQ. So en-
trenched is this way of thinking—and talking—that most of us lapse read-
ily into rankings of individuals as more or less “smart,” “bright,” “clever,”
or “intelligent.”
An equally venerable tradition of the West gloriﬁes the numerous dis-
tinct functions or parts of the mind. In Classical times, it was common to
differentiate between reason, will, and feeling. Medieval thinkers had their
trivium of grammar, logic, and rhetoric, and their quadrivium of mathe-
matics, geometry, astronomy, and music. As the science of psychology
was launched, an even larger array of human mental abilities or faculties
was posited. (Franz Joseph Gall, whom I shall formally introduce later,
nominated 37 human faculties or powers of the mind; J. P. Guilford, a con-
temporary ﬁgure, favors 120 vectors of mind.) Some of the foxes also tend
to the innate and rank-ordering cast of thought, but one can ﬁnd many
among them who believe in the altering (and ameliorating) effects of en-
vironment and training.
Dating back many centuries, debate between the hedgehogs and the
foxes continues into our own time. In the area of brain study, there have
been the localizers, who believe that different portions of the nervous sys-
tem mediate diverse intellectual capacities; and these localizers have been
arrayed against the holists, who deem major intellectual functions to be
the property of the brain as a whole. In the area of intelligence testing, an
interminable debate has raged between those (following Charles Spear-
man) who believe in a general factor of intellect and those (following 
L. L. Thurstone) who posit a family of primary mental abilities, with none
7
The Idea of Multiple Intelligences

preeminent among them. In the area of child development, there has been
vigorous debate between those who postulate general structures of the
mind (like Jean Piaget) and those who believe in a large and relatively un-
connected set of mental skills (the environmental-learning school). Echoes
in other disciplines are quite audible.
Thus, against a shared belief, over the centuries, in the primacy of in-
tellectual powers, there is continuing debate about the propriety of parcel-
ing intellect into parts. As it happens, some long-standing issues in our
cultural tradition show no signs of resolution. I doubt that topics like free
will or the conﬂict between faith and reason will ever be resolved to every-
one’s satisfaction. But, in other cases, there may be hope for progress.
Sometimes progress occurs as a consequence of logical clariﬁcation, as, for
instance, when a fallacy is exposed. (No one continues in the mistaken be-
lief that the distorted faces in El Greco’s portraits were due to an astig-
matic condition, once it has been explained that astigmatism would not
lead to the painting of elongated faces. An astigmatic painter would per-
ceive the faces on his canvas—and in the everyday world—to be elongated;
but, in fact, these faces would appear completely normal to nonastigmatic
eyes.) Sometimes progress results from dramatic scientiﬁc ﬁndings (the
discoveries of Copernicus and Kepler radically changed our view about
the architecture of the universe). And sometimes progress comes about when
a large body of information is woven together in a convincing tapestry 
of argument (as happened when, in the course of introducing his theory of
evolution, Charles Darwin reviewed masses of evidence about the devel-
opment and differentiation of species).
The time may be at hand for some clariﬁcation about the structure of
human intellectual competence. In the present case, there is neither a sin-
gle scientiﬁc breakthrough nor the discovery of an egregious logical blun-
der, but rather the conﬂuence of a large body of evidence from a variety
of sources. Such a conﬂuence, which has been gathering with even greater
force over the past few decades, seems to be recognized (at least in peri -
pheral vision) by those concerned with human cognition. But the lines of
convergence have rarely, if ever, been focused on directly and systemati-
cally examined in one place; and they certainly have not been shared with
the wider public. Such confrontation and collation are the twin purposes
of this book.
In what follows, I argue that there is persuasive evidence for the exis-
tence of several relatively autonomous human intellectual competences,
8
Background

abbreviated hereafter as “human intelligences.” These are the “frames of
mind” of my title. The exact nature and breadth of each intellectual
“frame” has not so far been satisfactorily established, nor has the precise
number of intelligences been ﬁxed. But the conviction that there exist at
least some intelligences, that these are relatively independent of one an-
other, and that they can be fashioned and combined in a multiplicity of
adaptive ways by individuals and cultures, seems to me to be increasingly
difﬁcult to deny.
Previous efforts (and there have been many) to establish independent
intelligences have been unconvincing, chieﬂy because they rely on only
one or, at the most, two lines of evidence. Separate “minds” or “faculties”
have been posited solely on the basis of logical analysis, solely on the his-
tory of educational disciplines, solely on the results of intelligence testing,
or solely on the insights obtained from brain study. These solitary efforts
have rarely yielded the same list of competences and have thereby made
a claim for multiple intelligences seem that much less tenable.
My procedure is quite different. In formulating my brief on behalf of
multiple intelligences, I have reviewed evidence from a large and hitherto
unrelated group of sources: studies of prodigies, gifted individuals, brain-
damaged patients, idiots savants, normal children, normal adults, experts
in different lines of work, and individuals from diverse cultures. A prelim-
inary list of candidate intelligences has been bolstered (and, to my mind,
partially validated) by converging evidence from these diverse sources. I
have become convinced of the existence of an intelligence to the extent
that it can be found in relative isolation in special populations (or absent
in isolation in otherwise normal populations); to the extent that it may be-
come highly developed in speciﬁc individuals or in speciﬁc cultures; and to
the extent that psychometricians, experimental researchers, and/or experts
in particular disciplines can posit core abilities that, in effect, deﬁne the
intelligence. Absence of some or all of these indices of course eliminates
a candidate intelligence. In ordinary life, as I will show, these intelligences
typically work in harmony, and so their autonomy may be invisible. But
when the appropriate observational lenses are donned, the peculiar nature
of each intelligence emerges with sufﬁcient (and often surprising) clarity.
The major assignment in this book, then, is to make the case for the
existence of multiple intelligences (later abbreviated as MI). Whether or not
the case for speciﬁc intelligences proves persuasive, I shall at least have gath-
ered between two covers several bodies of knowledge that have hitherto
9
The Idea of Multiple Intelligences

lived in relative segregation. In addition, however, this volume has a num-
ber of other, and not wholly subsidiary, purposes—some primarily scien-
tiﬁc, others distinctly practical.
First of all, I seek to expand the purviews of cognitive and develop-
mental psychology (the two areas to which, as a researcher, I feel the
closest). The expansion that I favor looks, in one direction, toward the bi-
ological and evolutionary roots of cognition and, in the other direction,
toward cultural variations in cognitive competence. To my mind, visits
to the “lab” of the brain scientist and to the “ﬁeld” of an exotic culture
should become part of the training of individuals interested in cognition
and development.
Second, I wish to examine the educational implications of a theory of
multiple intelligences. In my view, it should be possible to identify an in-
dividual’s intellectual proﬁle (or proclivities) at an early age and then draw
upon this knowledge to enhance that person’s educational opportunities
and options. One could channel individuals with unusual talents into spe-
cial programs, even as one could devise prosthetics and special enrichment
programs for individuals presenting an atypical or a dysfunctional proﬁle
of intellectual competences.
Third, I hope that this inquiry will inspire educationally oriented an-
thropologists to develop a model of how intellectual competences may be
fostered in various cultural settings. Only through such efforts will it be pos-
sible to determine whether theories of learning and teaching travel read-
ily across national boundaries or must be continually refashioned in light
of the particularities of each culture.
Finally—this is the most important, but also the most difﬁcult, 
challenge—I hope that the point of view that I articulate here may prove
of genuine utility to those policy makers and practitioners charged with
“the development of other individuals.” Training and heightening of intel-
lect is certainly “in the international air”: the World Bank’s report on
Human Development, the Club of Rome’s essay on anticipatory learning,
and the Venezuelan Project on Human Intelligence are but three recent
visible examples. Too often, practitioners involved in efforts of this sort
have embraced ﬂawed theories of intelligence or cognition and have, in
the process, supported programs that have accomplished little or even
proved counterproductive. To aid such individuals, I have developed a
framework that, building on the theory of multiple intelligences, can be
applied to any educational situation. If the framework put forth here is
10
Background

adopted, it may at least discourage those interventions that seem doomed
to failure and encourage those that have a chance for success.
I regard the present effort as a contribution to the emerging science of
cognition. To a considerable extent, I am summarizing the work of other
scholars; but, to a certain extent (and I intend to make clear where), I am
proposing a new orientation. Some of the claims are controversial, and I ex-
pect that experts versed in cognitive science will eventually have their say
as well. Part II, the “heart” of the book, consists of a description of several
intellectual competences of whose existence I feel reasonably certain. But,
as beﬁts a potential contribution to science, I shall ﬁrst (in Chapter 2) re-
view other efforts to characterize intellectual proﬁles and then, after put-
ting forth the evidence in support of my theory, will (in Chapter 11) subject
that point of view to lines of criticism. As part of my mission to broaden the
study of cognition, I adopt a biological and cross-cultural perspective
throughout Part II and also devote a separate chapter each to the biolog-
ical bases of cognition (Chapter 3) and to cultural variations in education
(Chapter 13). Finally, given the “applied” agenda I have just sketched, I
shall in the concluding chapters of the book address more directly ques-
tions of education and policy.
A word, ﬁnally, about the title of this chapter. As I have indicated, the
idea of multiple intelligences is an old one, and I can scarcely claim any
great originality for attempting to revive it once more. Even so, by featur-
ing the word idea I want to underscore that the notion of multiple intelli-
gences is hardly a proven scientiﬁc fact: it is, at most, an idea that has
recently regained the right to be discussed seriously. Given the ambition
and scope of this book, it is inevitable that this idea will harbor many short-
comings. What I hope to establish is that “multiple intelligences” is an idea
whose time has come.
11
The Idea of Multiple Intelligences


13
2
Intelligence
Earlier Views
A
s a schoolboy growing up in the latter part of the eighteenth century,
Franz Joseph Gall observed a relationship between certain mental
characteristics of his schoolmates and the shapes of their heads. For in-
stance, he noted that those boys with prominent eyes tended to have good
memories. He clung to this idea as he became a physician and scientist
and, some years later, placed it at the center of a discipline called “phrenol-
ogy” that aspired to be a science.
The key idea of phrenology is simple. Human skulls differ from one
another, and their variations reﬂect differences in the size and the shape of
the brain. Different areas of the brain, in turn, subserve discrete functions;
and so, by carefully examining the skull conﬁgurations of an individual, an
expert should be able to determine the strengths, the weaknesses, and the
idiosyncrasies of his or her mental proﬁle.
Gall’s list of powers and “organs” of the mind, as modiﬁed by his 
colleague, Joseph Spurzheim, was a mixed bag. Featured were some thirty-
seven different powers that included affective faculties, such as ama-
tiveness, philoprogenitiveness, and secretiveness; sentiments like hope,
reverence, and self-esteem; reﬂective powers and perceptual capacities,
including language, tune (for music), as well as sensitivity to such visual
properties as shape and color.
It should come as no surprise (at least to observers of best-sellers over
the years) that the phrenology of Gall and Spurzheim achieved enormous
popularity in Europe and the United States during the early part of the
nineteenth century. The simple doctrine had intrinsic appeal, and every
individual could “play the game.” The popularity of the aspiring science

was strengthened by the fact that it was endorsed by many scientists of 
the day.
Of course, armed with hindsight, one can readily spot the flaws in
the phrenological doctrine. We know, for example, that the sheer size of
the brain has no clear-cut correlation with an individual’s intellect; in fact,
individuals with very small brains, such as Walt Whitman and Anatole
France, have achieved great success, even as individuals with massive
brains are sometimes idiots and all too often decidedly unremarkable.
Moreover, the size and conﬁguration of the skull itself proves an inexact
measure of the important conﬁgurations of the human cortex.
Nonetheless, even as it would be unpardonable to overlook the ﬂaws in
Gall’s claims, it would be equally fallacious to dismiss them entirely. Gall,
after all, was among the ﬁrst modern scientists to stress that different parts
of the brain mediate different functions; the fact that we are not yet able
to pinpoint speciﬁcally the relationship between size, shape, and function
should by no means be taken as proof that we will never be able to do so.
Moreover, Gall proposed other pregnant ideas, among them this fascinat-
ing claim: there do not exist general mental powers, such as perception,
memory, and attention; but, rather, there exist different forms of percep-
tion, memory, and the like for each of the several intellectual faculties, such
as language, music, or vision. Though seldom taken seriously throughout
most of the history of psychology, this idea proves to be highly suggestive
and may well be correct.
The century following Gall’s original claims has seen repeated oscilla-
tions between a belief in localization of function and a skepticism about
this entire line of brain-behavior correlations: in fact, this oscillation contin-
ues to plague us today. The ﬁrst dubious voices were raised in the decades
following Gall’s original publications in the early 1800s: scholars like Pierre
Flourens showed, by extirpating different parts of the brain of an animal
and then observing its new behavior, that some of Gall’s claims could not
be supported. But then a strong chorus of support came in the 1860s, when
the French surgeon and anthropologist Pierre-Paul Broca demonstrated,
for the ﬁrst time, an indisputable relationship between a speciﬁc brain le-
sion and a particular cognitive impairment. In particular, Broca amassed
evidence that a lesion in a certain area of the left anterior portion of the
human cortex caused aphasia, the breakdown of linguistic capacities. This
dramatic demonstration was followed in succeeding years by ample docu-
mentation that various lesions in the left hemisphere could impair partic-
14
Background

ular linguistic functions along speciﬁable lines. One lesion would reliably
impair reading, while another would compromise naming or repetition.
Localization of function, if not phrenology, once more carried the day.
Attempts to relate the brain to mental function or, for that matter, to
uncover the physical roots of mental functions antedated the nineteenth
century. The Egyptians had located thought in the heart, and judgment in
the head or kidneys. Pythagoras and Plato had held the mind to be in the
brain. Analogously, Aristotle thought that the seat of life is in the heart,
while Descartes placed the soul in the pineal gland. Scientists of the nine-
teenth century were not the ﬁrst to try to break down the range of human
intellectual abilities (though a list of thirty-seven was on the longish side).
Plato and Aristotle had certainly been interested in varieties of rational
thought and forms of knowledge. During the Middle Ages, scholars dwelled
upon the trivium and the quadrivium, those realms of knowledge that
every educated person mastered. The Hindu Upanishads actually de-
scribe seven kinds of knowledge. What the nineteenth century ushered
in were highly speciﬁc claims about the proﬁle of human mental capaci-
ties and, eventually, empirically based efforts in the clinic and the exper-
imental laboratory to relate speciﬁc areas of the brain to particular
cognitive functions.
Psychology Proper
Efforts to set up psychology as a science began in earnest in the latter half
of the nineteenth century, with scholars like Wilhelm Wundt in Germany
and William James in America providing a rationale and leading the way.
Because the history of prescientiﬁc psychology was entangled with philos-
ophy rather than with medicine, and because the ﬁrst psychologists them-
selves were eager to deﬁne their discipline as separate from physiology and
neurology, there was relatively little contact between the new breed of psy-
chologists and the individuals who were conducting experiments with the
human brain. Perhaps as a result, the categories of mentation that inter-
ested psychologists proved to be remote from those that had engaged stu-
dents of the brain. Rather than thinking (like Gall) in terms of particular
mental contents (like language, music, or various forms of visual percep-
tion), psychologists searched (and have continued to search) for the laws
of broad, “horizontal” mental faculties—abilities like memory, perception,
15
Intelligence: Earlier Views

Background
16
attention, association, and learning; these faculties were thought to oper-
ate equivalently—in fact, blindly—across diverse contents, independent
of the particular sensory modality or the type of ideational content involved
in the domain. In fact, such work continues to this day and makes re-
markably little contact with ﬁndings emanating from the brain sciences.
Thus, one strand of scientific psychology has searched for the most
general laws of human knowing—what might today be called the princi-
ples of human information processing. An equally energetic area of study
has searched for individual differences—the distinctive profiles of abili-
ties (and disabilities) in individuals. The British polymath Sir Francis Gal-
ton was instrumental in launching this field of inquiry a century ago.
Given his particular interest in genius, eminence, and other notable
forms of accomplishment, Galton developed statistical methods that
made it possible to rank human beings in terms of their physical and in-
tellectual powers and to correlate such measures with one another. These
tools enabled him to verify a suspected link between genealogical line-
age and professional accomplishment.
In fact, if one were going to measure individuals, one needed numer-
ous dimensions and tasks on which to measure and compare. It was only
a matter of time before psychologists devised various tests and began to
rank human beings by comparing performances on these measures. At
ﬁrst, the prevailing wisdom held that powers of intellect could be estimated
adequately by various tasks of sensory discrimination—for example, the
ability to distinguish among lights, among weights, or among tones. Galton,
in fact, believed that more reﬁned and learned individuals would be char-
acterized by especially keen sensory capacities. But gradually (for a variety
of reasons) the scientiﬁc community concluded that one would have to
look principally at more complex or “molar” capacities, such as those in-
volving language and abstraction, if one wished to gain a more accurate as-
sessment of human intellectual powers. The chief worker in this area was
the Frenchman Alfred Binet. At the beginning of the twentieth century,
with his colleague Theodore Simon, Binet devised the ﬁrst tests of intelli-
gence in order to sift out retarded children and to place other children at
their appropriate grade level.
Within the scientiﬁc community and the larger society, excitement over
intelligence testing was at least as pronounced and was much more pro-
longed than had been the enthusiasm about phrenology almost a century
earlier. The tasks and tests were soon available for widespread use: the

* Eysenck refers here to Thomas Kuhn, a contemporary philosopher who defines sci-
ences in terms of their central assumptions and procedures, or “paradigms.”
Intelligence: Earlier Views
17
mania for evaluating people for speciﬁc purposes—be it school, the mili-
tary, placement in industrial organizations, or even social companionship—
fueled the excitement over intelligence testing. At least until recent years,
most psychologists would agree with the assessment that intelligence test-
ing was psychology’s greatest achievement, its chief claim to social utility,
and an important scientiﬁc discovery in its own right. They might even ap-
plaud the British psychologist H. J. Eysenck’s conclusion that the concept
of intelligence “constitutes a true scientiﬁc paradigm in the Kuhnian* sense.”
The tale describing the rise of the IQ test, and the various debates that
have raged about it, has been retold so many times that I am relieved of
the necessity to relate the sound and fury once again. Most scholars within
psychology, and nearly all scholars outside the ﬁeld, are now convinced
that enthusiasm over intelligence tests has been excessive, and that there
are numerous limitations in the instruments themselves and in the uses to
which they can (and should) be put. Among other considerations, the tasks
are deﬁnitely skewed in favor of individuals in societies with schooling and
particularly in favor of individuals who are accustomed to taking paper-
and-pencil tests, featuring clearly delineated answers. As I have noted, the
tests have predictive power for success in schooling but relatively little pre-
dictive power outside the school context, especially when more potent fac-
tors like social and economic background have been taken into account.
Too much of a hullabaloo over the possible heritability of IQ has been sus-
tained over the past few decades; and while few authorities would go so
far as to claim that the IQ is in no degree inherited, extreme claims on her-
itability within and across races have been discredited.
Still, one long-standing debate within the area of intelligence testing
must be brieﬂy rehearsed here. On one side are arrayed those individuals
inﬂuenced by the British educational psychologist Charles Spearman—in
my terms, a “hedgehog”—who believe in the existence of “g”—a general
overriding factor of intelligence that is measured by every task in an intel-
ligence test. On the other side are supporters of the American psychome-
trician and “fox” L. L. Thurstone, who believe in the existence of a small
set of primary mental faculties that are relatively independent of one an-
other and are measured by different tasks. Thurstone, in fact, nominated

seven such factors—verbal comprehension, word ﬂuency, numerical ﬂu-
ency, spatial visualization, associative memory, perceptual speed, and rea-
soning. (Other less widely quoted scholars posit a far higher number of
independent factors.)
Most important to stress is that neither side has been able to gain an
upper hand. That is because the issues surrounding the interpretation of
intelligence scores turn out to be mathematical in nature and not suscep-
tible to empirical resolution. Thus, given the same set of data, it is possi-
ble, using one set of factor-analytic procedures, to come up with a picture
that supports the idea of a “g” factor; using another equally valid method
of statistical analysis, it is possible to support the notion of a family of rel-
atively discrete mental abilities. As Stephen Jay Gould has shown in his re-
cent book, The Mismeasure of Man, there is nothing intrinsically superior
about either of these mathematical measures. When it comes to the inter-
pretation of intelligence testing, we are faced with an issue of taste or pref-
erence rather than one on which scientiﬁc closure is likely to be reached.
Piaget
It is from an individual originally trained in the IQ tradition that we have
obtained a view of intellect that has, in many quarters, replaced the vogue
of intelligence testing. The Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget began his career
around 1920 as a researcher working in Simon’s laboratory and soon be-
came particularly interested in the errors children make when tackling
items on an intelligence test. Piaget came to believe that it is not the ac-
curacy of the child’s response that is important but rather the lines of rea-
soning the child invokes: these can be most clearly seen by focusing on the
assumptions and the chains of reasoning that spawn erroneous conclusions.
So, for example, it was not revealing in itself to discover that most four-
year-olds think that a hammer is more like a nail than like a screwdriver;
what was important is that children reach this conclusion because their
view of similarity reﬂects physical co-occurrence (hammers are found in
the vicinity of nails) rather than membership in the same hierarchical cat-
egory (tools).
Piaget himself never undertook a critique of the intelligence-testing
movement; but in looking at the scientiﬁc moves he made, one can gain a
feeling for some of the inadequacies of the Binet-Simon program. First of
18
Background

all, the IQ movement is blindly empirical. It is based simply on tests with
some predictive power about success in school and, only marginally, on a
theory of how the mind works. There is no view of process, of how one
goes about solving a problem: there is simply the issue of whether one ar-
rives at a correct answer. For another thing, the tasks featured in the IQ
test are decidedly microscopic, are often unrelated to one another, and
seemingly represent a “shotgun” approach to the assessment of human in-
tellect. The tasks are remote, in many cases, from everyday life. They rely
heavily upon language and upon a person’s skill in deﬁning words, in know-
ing facts about the world, and in ﬁnding connections (and differences)
among verbal concepts.
Much of the information probed for in intelligence tests reﬂects knowl-
edge gained from living in a speciﬁc social and educational milieu. For in-
stance, the ability to deﬁne tort or to identify the author of the Iliad is
highly reﬂective of the kind of school one attends or the tastes of one’s fam-
ily. In contrast, intelligence tests rarely assess skill in assimilating new in-
formation or in solving new problems. This bias toward “crystallized” rather
than “ﬂuid” knowledge can have astounding consequences. An individual
can lose his entire frontal lobes, in the process becoming a radically dif-
ferent person, unable to display any initiative or to solve new problems—
and yet may continue to exhibit an IQ close to genius level. Moreover, the
intelligence test reveals little about an individual’s potential for further
growth. Two individuals can receive the same IQ score, yet one may turn
out to be capable of a tremendous spurt in intellectual attainment while an-
other may be displaying the very height of his intellectual powers. To put
it in the terms of the Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky, intelligence tests fail
to yield any indication of an individual’s “zone of potential [or “proximal”]
development.”
With such critical considerations at least implicitly in mind, Piaget de-
veloped over several decades a radically different and extremely powerful
view of human cognition. In his view, all study of human thought must
begin by positing an individual who is attempting to make sense of the
world. The individual is continually constructing hypotheses and thereby
attempting to generate knowledge: he is trying to ﬁgure out the nature of
material objects in the world, how they interact with one another, as well
as the nature of persons in the world, their motivations, and their behav-
ior. Ultimately he must piece them all together into a sensible story, a co-
herent account of the nature of the physical and the social worlds.
19
Intelligence: Earlier Views

Initially, the baby makes sense of the world, primarily through his re-
ﬂexes, his sensory perceptions, and his physical actions upon the world.
After a year or two, he arrives at a “practical” or “sensori-motor” knowl-
edge of the world of objects, as they exist in time and space. Equipped
with this knowledge, he can make his way satisfactorily in his environment
and can appreciate that an object continues to exist in space and time even
when it is out of view. Next the toddler goes on to develop interiorized ac-
tions or mental operations. These are actions that can potentially be per-
formed upon the world of objects; but, owing to a newly emerging capacity,
these actions need only be performed cerebrally, within the head, perhaps
through imagery. So, for example, to proceed from his destination to a fa-
miliar starting point, the child does not have to try out various routes: he
can simply calculate that by reversing his steps, he will return to his origin.
At the same time, the child also becomes capable of symbol use: now he
can use various images or elements—such as words, gestures, or pictures—
to stand for real life objects in the world, and can become skilled in de-
ploying various symbol systems, like language or drawing.
These evolving capacities of interiorization and symbolization reach a
high point around the age of seven or eight, when the child becomes ca-
pable of concrete operations. Armed with this new set of capacities, the
child is now able to reason systematically about the world of objects, num-
ber, time, space, causality, and the like. No longer conﬁned simply to act-
ing in a physically appropriate manner with objects, the child can now
appreciate the relations that obtain among a series of actions upon objects.
So he understands that objects can be rearranged and still remain the same
quantity; that a material can be changed in shape without the mass being
thereby affected; that a scene can be viewed from a different perspective
and still contain the same elements.
According to Piaget, a ﬁnal stage of development comes into being dur-
ing early adolescence. Now capable of formal operations, the youth is able
to reason about the world not only through actions or single symbols but
rather by ﬁguring out the implications that obtain among a set of related
propositions. The adolescent becomes able to think in a completely logical
fashion: now resembling a working scientist, he can express hypotheses in
propositions, test them, and revise the propositions in light of the results
of such experimentation. These abilities in hand (or in head), the youth
has achieved the end-state of adult human cognition. He is now capable of
that form of logical-rational thought that is prized in the West and epito-
20
Background

mized by mathematicians and scientists. Of course, the individual can go
on to make further discoveries, but he will no longer undergo any further
qualitative changes in his thinking.
This sprint through Piaget’s principal precepts highlights some of the
strengths and the weaknesses of his formulation. On the positive side, Pi-
aget has taken children seriously; he has posed to them problems of im-
portance (particularly ones drawn from the scientiﬁc realm) and has
adduced evidence that, at each stage, the same underlying organized struc-
ture can be discerned across a wide range of mental operations. For in-
stance, in Piaget’s view, the “concrete-operational” child is capable of
handling a gamut of tasks having to do with conservation of number,
causality, quantity, volume, and the like, because they all draw upon the
same core mental structures. Similarly, equipped with formal operations,
the adolescent displays a structured whole of operations so that he can now
reason logically about any set of propositions posed to him. Unlike the ar-
chitects of intelligence testing, Piaget has also taken seriously the list of is-
sues that philosophers, and most especially Immanuel Kant, deemed
central to human intellect, including the basic categories of time, space,
number, and causality. At the same time, Piaget has avoided forms of
knowledge that are simply memorized (like word deﬁnitions) or restricted
to certain cultural groups (such as those that favor “high” art). Wittingly or
not, Piaget has limned a brilliant portrait of that form of human intellec-
tual growth that is valued most highly by the Western scientiﬁc and philo-
sophical traditions.
But these undeniable strengths, which have made Piaget the theorist of
cognitive development, cohabit with certain weaknesses that have become
increasingly clear over the past two decades. First of all, while Piaget has
painted a redoubtable picture of development, it is still only one sort of
development. Centered on the intellectual agenda addressed by the young
scientist, Piaget’s model of development assumes relatively less importance
in non-Western and preliterate contexts and may, in fact, be applicable
only to a minority of individuals, even in the West. The steps entailed in
achieving other forms of competence—those of an artist, a lawyer, an ath-
lete, or a political leader—are ignored in Piaget’s monolithic emphasis
upon a certain form of thinking.
Of course, Piaget’s perspective might be limited, yet totally accurate
within its own restricted domain. Alas, a generation of empirical re-
searchers who have looked closely at Piaget’s claims have found otherwise.
21
Intelligence: Earlier Views

While the broad outlines of development as sketched by Piaget remain of
interest, many of the speciﬁc details are simply not correct. Individual
stages are achieved in a far more continuous and gradual fashion than Pi-
aget indicated; in fact, one ﬁnds little of the discontinuity that he claimed
(and that made his theoretical claims particularly riveting). Thus, most
tasks claimed to entail concrete operations can be solved by children in
the pre-operational years, once various adjustments have been introduced
into the experimental paradigm. For example, there is now evidence that
children can conserve number, classify consistently, and abandon egocen-
trism as early as the age of three—ﬁndings in no way predicted (or even
allowed) by Piaget’s theory.
Another claim central to Piaget’s theory has also fallen on hard times.
He contended that the various operations that he had uncovered could be
applied to any manner of content. (In this, he resembled the proponents
of “horizontal faculties” who believe in all-encompassing processes like
perception or memory.) In reality, however, Piaget’s operations emerge in
a much more piecemeal fashion, proving effective with certain materials or
contents while failing to be invoked (or being invoked improperly) with
other materials. Thus, for example, a child who exhibits the operation of
conservation with some materials will fail to conserve with other materials.
Piaget was aware that operations would not crystallize instantaneously: he
even invented a “fudge factor”—called décalage—which allowed the same
underlying operation to emerge at somewhat different times with differ-
ent materials. But what has happened is that décalage has, in fact, become
the rule in studies of cognitive development. Rather than a whole series of
abilities coalescing at about the same time (as Piaget would have it), the-
oretically related abilities turn out to emerge at disparate points in time.
One confronts other limitations as well. Despite his skepticism about
IQ items couched in language, Piaget’s tasks themselves are usually con-
veyed verbally. And when they have been posed nonlinguistically, the re-
sults are often different from those obtained in Genevan laboratories.
While Piaget’s tasks are more molar and complex than those favored in in-
telligence tests, many still end up fairly remote from the kind of thinking
in which most individuals engage during their normal daily lives. Piaget’s
tasks continue to be drawn from the benches and blackboards of a labora-
tory scientist. Finally, somewhat surprisingly, although his picture of the
active, exploring child strikes a responsive chord, Piaget tells us little about
creativity at the forefront of the sciences, let alone about the originality
22
Background

that is most prized in the arts or other realms of human creativity. Over
and above its failure to convey the universal pattern of cognitive growth
that all normal children are alleged to traverse, Piaget’s scheme—restricted
at its mature end to the classroom exercises of a high-school science class—
emerges as even less relevant to that discovery of new phenomena or that
positing of new problems that many consider central in the life of the mind.
Piaget’s scheme may well be the best that we have, but its deﬁciencies are
becoming all too evident.
The Information-Processing Approach
If intelligence testing was the vogue forty years ago, and Piagetian theory
the rage twenty years ago, a new form of study, often called “information-
processing psychology” or “cognitive science,” is currently enjoying hege-
mony among students of the mind. The information-processing psychologist
uses the methods devised by experimental psychologists over the past cen-
tury in order to investigate tasks of the sort that Piaget and other more
molar cognitive theorists have been employing. As an example, a researcher
working in the information-processing paradigm seeks to provide a second-
by-second (or even a millisecond by millisecond) “microgenetic” picture
of the mental steps involved as a child solves (or fails to solve) a conserva-
tion problem. The process begins with information delivered to eye or ear
and only concludes when an answer has been issued by mouth or hand.
Rather than simply describing two or three basic stages found at differ-
ent ages, and the strategies favored at each point, as Piaget would do, the
information-processing psychologist attempts to describe in the ﬁnest de-
tail all steps used by a given child. In fact, an ultimate goal of information-
processing psychology is to describe the steps so exhaustively and
scrupulously that an individual’s performance can be simulated on a com-
puter. Such a descriptive tour de force involves detailed analysis of the task
itself, as well as painstaking analysis of the subject’s thoughts and behavior.
In its focus on the details of processing, and in its illumination of the
microstructure of a task, information-processing intelligence theory is an
advance over earlier lines of study. We now have available a much more dy-
namic view of what happens in the course of problem solving: included is
a picture of the informational “intake” or access mechanisms; the forms of
immediate and short-term retention that hold onto information until it can
23
Intelligence: Earlier Views

be encoded in memory; various recoding and transforming operations that
can be imposed upon the newly acquired information. Moreover, there is
the suggestive notion of executive functions, “meta-components” or other
higher-order control mechanisms, whose mission it is to determine which
problems ought to be tackled, which goals sought, which operations ap-
plied, and in which order. Throughout, one encounters the healthy, if
somewhat unexamined, American emphasis on mechanics: on what is
done, in what order, and by what mechanism, in order to yield a particu-
lar effect or result.
Information-processing psychology, then, represents progress along
certain—but not, in my view, all—lines. In opposition to the Piagetian par-
adigm, for example, information-processing psychology lacks an articulated
theory within which different forms of cognition can be convincingly re-
lated to (or distinguished from) one another. Oftentimes, a survey of the
literature suggests the existence of a thousand expert information proces-
sors carrying out one or another operation without any particular connec-
tion to the others. But, like Piaget, information-processing psychologies
sometimes commit the opposite sin as well: one encounters the blithe no-
tion that a single highly general problem-solving mechanism can be
brought to bear willy-nilly on the full range of human problems. While in
theory the idea of a single “horizontal” problem-solving apparatus is attrac-
tive, in fact the carefully selected problems to which it is said to apply turn
out to be disturbingly similar to one another. Thus, the claim that we use
the same problem-solving apparatus across the board becomes vacuous.
In fact, in common with Piagetian psychology, nearly all the problems ex-
amined by information-processing psychologists prove to be of the logical-
mathematical sort. The prototypical problems—solving logical theorems,
carrying out geometric proofs, playing a game of chess—might well have
been borrowed directly from Piaget’s archive of pivotal intellectual tasks.
As information-processing psychology is still in its infancy, it is perhaps
unfair to criticize it for not having solved major outstanding issues in the
area of intelligence. Moreover, recent ﬂirtation with the “intelligence-testing”
industry has infused with new life this somewhat discredited branch, as re-
searchers like Robert Sternberg have attempted to identify the operations
involved in the solution of standard intelligence test items. Yet, to my mind,
the excessively mechanistic computer-driven model for thinking and the
penchant for scientiﬁcally oriented test problems foreshadow certain long-
term problems with this approach. For one thing, like most previous ap-
24
Background

proaches to intelligence, the information-processing tack is studiously non-
(if not anti-) biological, making little contact with what is known about the
operation of the nervous system. For another, there is as yet relatively little
interest in the open-ended creativity that is crucial at the highest levels of
human intellectual achievement. The problems posed characteristically
feature a single solution or small set of solutions, and there is scant atten-
tion to problems with an indeﬁnite range of solutions, let alone the gen-
eration of new problems.
Finally, a more serious objection. At present, there seems to be no pro-
cedure by which to adjudicate among the principal debates within the area
of information-processing psychology. Is there a central executive or not?
Are there general problem-solving skills or just skills speciﬁc to particular
domains? What elements change with development—the number and size
of storage areas, the kinds of strategy available, or the efﬁciency with which
operations are carried out? The information-processing psychologists could
retort, “This criticism is true at present but will become less true as we ac-
crue more data. When we succeed in producing a sufﬁciently rich set of
computer simulations, we will determine which simulation most closely
mimics the thoughts and behavior of human beings.”
But as I see it, it is far too easy to spin out simulations that can support
rival lines of argument, or to counter an apparent refutation of a model
simply by effecting minor adjustments in a task. Should one psychologist
claim that short-term memory may contain more than the reported “magic
number” of seven chunks, a defender of the classic position can simply
count the chunks differently or claim that what had been four chunks have
been “re-chunked” into two. More generally, unless one can envision a de-
cisive test between one information-processing approach and another, one
is faced with the likelihood that there will be as many convincing infor-
mation-ﬂow box diagrams as there are ingenious researchers.
The “Symbol Systems” Approach
Investigations that accentuate one view of human intellect naturally breed
a counter movement. As we have seen, the IQ, the Piagetian, and the 
information-processing approaches all focus on a certain kind of logical or
linguistic problem solving; all ignore biology; all fail to come to grips with
the higher levels of creativity; and all are insensitive to the range of roles
25
Intelligence: Earlier Views

highlighted in human society. Consequently, these facts have engendered
an alternative point of view that focuses precisely on these neglected areas.
I cannot write about this ﬂedgling movement in a disinterested way be-
cause it is closest to my own work and my own beliefs. It is perhaps best
to regard this ﬁnal section as an introduction to the argument being de-
veloped throughout the remainder of the book, rather than as a mere con-
clusion to the survey undertaken in this chapter. As a symbol of this move,
I shall adopt the collaborative “we” in describing the principal features of
this approach.
For much of the twentieth century, philosophers have displayed a par-
ticular interest in human symbolic capacities. According to such inﬂuential
thinkers as Ernst Cassirer, Susanne Langer, and Alfred North Whitehead,
the ability of human beings to use various symbolic vehicles in expressing
and communicating meanings distinguishes human beings sharply from
other organisms. Symbol use has been key in the evolution of human na-
ture, giving rise to myth, language, art, and science; it has also been cen-
tral in the highest creative achievements of human beings, all of which
exploit the human symbolic faculty.
We may speak of two “paradigm” shifts in philosophy. Initially, the
philosophical interest of Classical times in objects of the physical world
was replaced by that preoccupation with the mind and its objects that
we associate with Hume, Kant, and other Enlightenment thinkers. In the
twentieth century, however, the focus shifted once again, this time to the ac-
tual symbolic vehicles of thought. Thus, much of contemporary work in
philosophy is directed toward an understanding of language, mathemat-
ics, visual arts, gestures, and other human symbols.
We can observe the same trends at work in psychology. There, too, we
discern a shift from external behavior to the activities and products of
human minds and, speciﬁcally, to the various symbolic vehicles in which
human individuals trafﬁc. Rather than considering symbolic vehicles (or
the media by which they are transmitted) as transparent means by which
the same contents are presented, a number of researchers—including
David Feldman, David Olson, Gavriel Salomon, and myself—have elected
to take human symbol systems as a primary focus of attention. In our view,
much of what is distinctive about human cognition and information pro-
cessing involves the deployment of these various symbol systems. It is at
least an open question, an empirical issue, whether operation of one sym-
bol system such as language involves the same abilities and processes as
26
Background

such cognate systems as music, gesture, mathematics, or pictures. It is
equally open whether information encountered in one medium (say, ﬁlm)
is the “same” information when transmitted by another medium (say, books).
In adopting this symbolic perspective, my colleagues and I do not pro-
pose to throw away the Piagetian baby with the bath water. Rather, we seek
to use the methods and the overall schemes fashioned by Piaget and to
focus them not merely on the linguistic, logical, and numerical symbols of
classic Piagetian theory but rather upon a full range of symbol systems en-
compassing musical, bodily, spatial, and even personal symbol systems. The
challenge, as we see it, is to compose a developmental portrait of each of
these forms of symbolic competence and to determine empirically which
connections or distinctions might obtain across them.
The problem of reconciling a pluralistic approach to cognition with Pi-
aget’s unilineal developmental scheme has been well addressed by David
Feldman. According to this educationally oriented developmental psy-
chologist, cognitive accomplishments may occur in a range of domains.
Certain domains, such as the logical-mathematical one studied by Piaget,
are universal. They must be (and are) confronted and mastered by indi-
viduals all over the world, simply by virtue of their membership in the same
species and the resultant need to cope with that species’ physical and so-
cial environment. Other domains are restricted to certain cultures. For ex-
ample, the capacity to read is important in many cultures but unknown (or
minimally valued) in others. Unless one lives in a culture where this do-
main is featured, one will make little or no progress in it. Still other domains
are restricted to pockets within a culture. For example, map making is im-
portant in some literate subcultures but not in others. One also encounters
domains that are highly idiosyncratic. Chess playing, the mastery of the
Japanese game of go, and expertise in crossword puzzles are not essential
in any division of society, and yet some individuals realize tremendous
achievements in those domains, within a particular culture.
Finally, arrayed at the opposite extreme from universal domains are
unique domains, areas of skill in which initially only one or a tiny handful
of individuals make progress. One might think of the innovative scientist
or artist as working in a unique domain, a domain of which he is currently
the only denizen. What is particularly fascinating is that, eventually, unique
domains may become so well explored and articulated by an individual or
a small group that they become accessible to other individuals. Many sci-
entiﬁc or artistic breakthroughs, such as calculus or the theory of evolution,
27
Intelligence: Earlier Views

initially began as unique domains but now can be mastered by large seg-
ments of a culture. And perhaps the same thing occurred in the remote
past in such cultural domains as map making or reading.
A focus on the mastery of domains entails certain assumptions. One
belief is that within each domain there exists a series of steps or stages,
ranging from the level of rank novice, through apprentice or journeyman’s
status, to the status of expert or master. Irrespective of domains, there
should (in proper Piagetian fashion) be a stagelike sequence through which
any individual must pass. However, individuals differ greatly from one an-
other in the speed with which they pass through these domains; and, contra
Piaget, success at negotiating one domain entails no necessary correlation
with speed or success in negotiating other domains. Domains may be cor-
doned off from one another in this sense. Moreover, progress in a domain
does not depend entirely on the solitary individual’s actions within his
world. Rather, much of the information about the domain is better thought
of as contained within the culture itself, for it is the culture that deﬁnes
the stages and ﬁxes the limits of individual achievement. One must con-
ceive of the individual and his culture as embodying a certain stage se-
quence, with much of the information essential for development inhering
in the culture itself rather than simply inside the individual’s skull.
This focus on an individual’s progress through a domain has stimulated
Feldman to confront the phenomenon of the child prodigy. The prodigy
may be thought of as an individual who passes through one or more do-
mains with tremendous rapidity, exhibiting a speed that seems to render
him qualitatively different from other individuals. In Feldman’s view, the
mere existence of a prodigy represents a remarkable “co-incidence” of a
number of factors—among them an initial, possibly inborn proclivity, con-
siderable pressure from parents and family, excellent teachers, high moti-
vation, and, perhaps most important, a culture in which that proclivity will
have a chance to ﬂower. In monitoring the prodigy as he advances, one
glimpses a “fast-forward” picture of what is involved in all educational
processes. Unlike the Piagetian individual advancing chieﬂy by himself
along a path available to humans the world over, the prodigy is a fascinat-
ing amalgam of the highest amounts of natural proclivity with the greatest
amounts of stimulation and structure as provided by his own society.
A concern with prodigies well illustrates certain central features of this
new approach to intellectual development. First of all, the very existence
of prodigies poses a problem that cannot be handled by Piagetian theory:
28
Background

how an individual can be precocious in just one area of development. (I
might note parenthetically that none of the other approaches reviewed
here can deal adequately with prodigious behavior either.) Second, a sur-
vey of prodigies provides support for the notion of particular symbolic do-
mains, since prodigious behavior is characteristically found in certain
domains (mathematics, chess playing) while rarely if ever in other ones (lit-
erary skill). Study of prodigious achievement also provides support for the
Piagetian belief in speciﬁc stage sequences, since the progress of prodi-
gies can be well described in terms of negotiation of a set of steps or stages.
And, because prodigious accomplishment is not possible without extensive
environmental support, focus on the prodigy also highlights the contribu-
tions of the society. Finally, through attention to unusual populations like
prodigies, investigators of various forms of intelligence have the opportu-
nity to probe the nature and the operation of certain intellectual compe-
tences in pristine form.
Not surprisingly, each of the aforementioned researchers working in
the symbol systems tradition exhibits a somewhat different focus. For in-
stance, Gavriel Salomon, an educational psychologist working in Israel, has
focused particularly on the media of transmission: he studies the modus
operandi of television, books, and ﬁlm and the ways in which the various
symbol systems of the cultures are picked up and transmitted by these
media. Moreover, he has tackled the question of which “prostheses” might
enable individuals to acquire information more readily from the various
media. David Olson, a cognitive developmental psychologist at the Ontario
Institute for Studies on Education, pioneered in this area by showing that
even in a task as simple as constructing a diagonal, the medium of pres-
entation exerts a profound inﬂuence on a child’s performance. Recently,
Olson has focused more on the role of the symbol systems of literacy. He
has accrued evidence that individuals reared in a society where literacy is
highlighted learn (and reason) differently from those who employ other
kinds of symbol systems in nonschooled settings.
In work at Harvard Project Zero, my colleagues and I have sought to
uncover the ﬁne structure of development within each particular symbol
system. We have sought to ascertain whether certain common processes
may cut across diverse symbol systems, or whether, alternatively, each sym-
bol system is better described as having its own developmental course.
Then, in complementary research at the Boston Veterans Administration
Medical Center, my colleagues and I posed the opposite question. In which
29
Intelligence: Earlier Views

ways do the various human symbolic capacities break down under spe-
ciﬁc conditions of brain damage? Drawing on information from the de-
velopmental and the neuropsychological perspectives, we have striven to
arrive at a more satisfactory notion of the structure and organization of
human symbolic functioning. Our goal has been to arrive at the “natural
kinds” of symbol systems: the families of symbol systems that hang to-
gether (or fall apart), and the ways they might be represented in the
human nervous system.
To my mind (and here I do not presume to speak for others in the sym-
bol systems movement), a pivotal issue concerns the deﬁnition and delin-
eation of particular symbolic domains. Proceeding in terms of logical
considerations, one can effect discriminations among speciﬁc symbol sys-
tems. This is what Nelson Goodman and other philosophers have elected
to do. One can also adopt a historical or a cultural view, simply taking as
given the list of particular symbol systems or domains that a culture has
chosen to exploit for educational or communicational purposes. Following
this line of argument, one refers to map making or chess playing, history
or geography, as domains, just because they have been so designated by
the culture as a whole. One can also adopt the empirically ordered ap-
proach of intelligence testers: here one simply ascertains which symbolic
tasks correlate statistically, and assumes that these reﬂect the same un-
derlying competence. In following this path, one is restricted by the na-
ture of the tasks used. Hence, one may well come up with a misleading
correlation, particularly if one happens to have used an idiosyncratic col-
lection of tasks.
Finally, one can assume the approach of the neuropsychologist, who
looks at which symbolic capacities break down together under conditions
of brain damage, and hypothesizes that these reﬂect the same natural kind.
Even this approach (to which I am personally wedded) has its pitfalls, how-
ever. For one thing, physical proximity in the nervous system may not re-
ﬂect similar neural mechanisms. Highly different functions might be
carried out in neighboring regions of the cortex. For another, the way in
which cultures “mold” or “exploit” raw computational capacities may in-
ﬂuence the organization of capacities; and it may be the case that across
different cultures, one encounters different patterns of breakdown—as
happens, for example, when cultures have evolved radically different forms
of reading, one involving pictographs, another based upon character-sound
correspondence. The lesion that causes reading disturbance in one culture
30
Background

(say, Italy) produces no disturbance in a culture where reading proceeds
by a different mechanism (say, Japan).
There are other difﬁculties with a neuropsychological approach. Even
though breakdowns provide valuable insight into organization of intact 
capacities, one cannot blithely assume that breakdown directly unmasks
organization. The ways a radio breaks down (for example, through de-
struction of a plug) do not necessarily tell you how best to describe the or-
dinary operation of the radio. After all, while you can stop the radio by
pulling out the plug, this information is irrelevant for understanding the
actual mechanical and electrical workings of the apparatus.
In view of these and other limitations in each “window” upon symbolic
functioning, I have taken a determinedly catholic approach in what follows.
I have surveyed information from a wide range of sources—including de-
velopmental data, psychometric ﬁndings, descriptions of special popula-
tions, such as idiots savants and prodigies—all in an effort to arrive at an
optimal description of each domain of cognition and symbolization.
Nonetheless, every researcher has a bias; and in my own case, I believe
that the most valuable (and least misleading) information is likely to come
from a deep knowledge of the nervous system: how it is organized, how it
develops, how it breaks down. Findings from the brain, in my view, serve
as the court of last resort, the ultimate arbiter among competing accounts
of cognition. Therefore, before embarking upon my study of different in-
telligences, I shall survey some relevant highlights of recent work in the
biological sciences.
31
Intelligence: Earlier Views


3
Biological Foundations 
of Intelligence
The Phenomena to Be Explained
A comprehensive science of life must account for the nature, as well as the
variety, of human intellectual competences. In view of the spectacular
progress of recent decades in such areas as biochemistry, genetics, and
neurophysiology, there is every reason to believe that the biological sci-
ences will eventually be able to offer a cogent account of these intellectual
phenomena. Indeed, it is high time that our understanding of human in-
tellect be informed by the ﬁndings that have accrued in the biological sci-
ences since the time of Franz Joseph Gall. And yet, because psychologists
and biologists inhabit different environments, the task of marshaling biol-
ogy to explain human intelligence has barely begun.
As I read current ﬁndings in the brain and biological sciences, they
bear with particular force on two issues that concern us here. The ﬁrst
issue involves the ﬂexibility of human development. The principal tension
here centers on the extent to which the intellectual potentials or capaci-
ties of an individual or a group can be altered by various interventions.
From one point of view, development may be viewed as relatively locked-in,
preordained, alterable only in particulars. From an opposing perspective,
there is far more malleability or plasticity in development, with appro-
priate interventions at crucial times yielding an organism with a far dif-
ferent range and depth of capacities (and limitations). Also pertinent to
the issue of ﬂexibility are the related questions of the kinds of interven-
tion that are most effective, their timing, and the role of critical periods
during which pivotal alterations can be brought about. Only if such issues
are resolved will it be possible to determine which educational interventions
33

are most effective in allowing individuals to achieve their full intellec-
tual potentials.
The second issue is the identity, or nature, of the intellectual capaci-
ties that human beings can develop. From one point of view, which I as-
sociated earlier with the hedgehog, human beings possess extremely
general powers, all-purpose information-processing mechanisms that can
be put to a large, or perhaps even an inﬁnite, number of uses. From an
opposite perspective, that more reminiscent of the fox, human beings (like
other species) have a proclivity to execute certain speciﬁable intellectual
operations while proving incapable of performing other intellectual oper-
ations. An allied issue concerns the extent to which different portions of the
nervous system are, in fact, committed to carrying out particular intellec-
tual functions, as opposed to being available for a wide range of operations.
It proves possible to analyze this issue of identity at various levels, ranging
from the functions of speciﬁc cells, at one extreme, to the functions of each
half of the brain, on the other. Finally, as part of this concern with identity,
the biologist needs to account for those capacities (like language) that seem
to evolve to a high degree in all normal individuals, as against other ca-
pacities (like music) where striking differences in individual achievement
are far more prevalent.
Taken together, these sets of questions add up to a search for general
principles that govern the nature and the development of human intellec-
tual capacities, and that determine how these are organized, tapped, and
transformed over a lifetime. Much current work in the biological sciences
strikes me as relevant to these issues, though often it has not been con-
ceived along these lines. Here I attempt to mine those lodes of research
that seem most relevant to a student of the human mind.
In my view, the preponderance of evidence points to the following con-
clusions. There is considerable plasticity and ﬂexibility in human growth,
especially during the early months of life. Still, even that plasticity is mod-
ulated by strong genetic constraints that operate from the beginning and
that guide development along some paths rather than along others. As for
the issue of identity, evidence is accumulating that human beings are pre-
disposed to carry out certain speciﬁc intellectual operations whose nature
can be inferred from careful observation and experimentation. Educational
efforts must build upon a knowledge of these intellectual proclivities and
their points of maximum ﬂexibility and adaptability.
34
Background

These, then, are some conclusions at which one may arrive after weigh-
ing the relevant biological evidence. For individuals already familiar with
the ﬁndings of the biological sciences, as well as for those who have little
tolerance for reports from the “harder” sciences, it is possible at this point
in the narrative to move directly to Chapter 4, where I introduce the cri-
teria for an intelligence. Those with an interest in the details that under-
gird the foregoing conclusions are invited to enter the realm of genetics.
Lessons from Genetics
Once one has elected to peer through the biologist’s lens, an initial con-
cern with genetics is virtually inevitable (and certainly proper). Moreover,
given the incredible strides made in genetics, since the “code was cracked”
by James Watson and Francis Crick some thirty years ago, it is not sur-
prising that psychologists have searched—in the composition of DNA,
RNA, and their fascinating interaction—for the answer to puzzles about
intellect. Unfortunately, however, lessons from this line of study are far
from direct.
To be sure, the geneticists’ discoveries must form the point of depar-
ture for any biological study. After all, we are living organisms; and, in one
sense, everything that we will ever achieve has been coded in our genetic
material. Moreover, the distinction between the genotype—the organism’s
makeup as determined by the genetic contributions of each parent—and
the phenotype—the organism’s observable characteristics as expressed
within a given environment—is fundamental to consideration of any indi-
vidual’s behavioral and intellectual proﬁle. Equally fundamental is the 
notion of variation: because of the huge number of genes contributed by
each parent and the innumerable ways in which they can be combined, we
need not worry that any two individuals (except identical twins) will un-
duly resemble one another, or that any two individuals will exhibit identi-
cal proﬁles.
Genetics has made its greatest progress in accounting for simple traits
in simple organisms. We know a great deal about the genetic basis for
structures and behaviors in the fruit ﬂy; and through studies of inheritance
patterns, we have gained insight into the transmission of speciﬁc human
pathologies like sickle cell anemia, hemophilia, and colorblindness. But
35
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

when it comes to more complex human abilities—the capacities to solve
equations, to appreciate or create music, to master languages—we are still
woefully ignorant about the genetic component and its phenotypical ex-
pression. First of all, these abilities cannot be studied experimentally in
the laboratory. Furthermore, rather than being related to a speciﬁc gene
or a small set of genes, any complex trait reﬂects many genes, a fair num-
ber of which will be polymorphic (allowing a number of different realiza-
tions across a range of environments). Indeed, when it comes to capacities
as broad (and vague) as human intelligences, it is questionable whether
one ought to speak of “traits” at all.
Those scholars of a geneticist bent have, of course, speculated about
what a talent might be. According to one such account certain combina-
tions of genes may be correlated with one another, and these in turn may
cause the production of enzymes that affect speciﬁc structures in one re-
gion of the brain. As a result of enzyme action, these structures might be-
come larger, feature more connections, or promote more inhibition, any
one of which possibilities might culminate in a greater potential for high
achievement. But the very fact that these speculations involve so many hy-
pothetical steps indicates how far they are from being established facts.
We do not even know whether those individuals who have a talent (or, for
that matter, a glaring defect) reﬂect an inherited tendency to form certain
neural connections (which would then be found in others who are closely
related) or whether they simply represent one tail of a randomly gener-
ated distribution (in which case they could equally well arise in any two
unrelated individuals).
Probably the most reliable clues to the genetics of human talents come
from studies of twins. By comparing identical twins with fraternal twins, or
identical twins reared apart with those reared together, we can gain some
purchase on which traits are most subject to hereditary inﬂuences. Still,
scientists eyeing the same set of data—and not even disputing the data—
can reach widely divergent conclusions about heritability. Simply on the
basis of certain mathematical and scientiﬁc assumptions, some scientists
would place the heritability of intelligence (as measured by IQ tests) as
high as 80 percent. In other words, these authorities would claim that up
to 80 percent of the variability in intelligence scores in that population
can be ascribed to one’s genetic background. Other scientists pondering
the same data but operating on different assumptions would estimate her-
itability as less than 20 percent or even zero. Naturally, most estimates
36
Background

run somewhere in between, with 30 percent to 50 percent being com-
monly cited. There is considerable agreement that physical traits are most
straightforwardly genetic, that aspects of temperament are also largely ge-
netic; but that when one comes to aspects of cognitive style or personality,
the case for high heritability is far less convincing.
The genetic literature provides few unequivocal answers to questions
that preoccupy a student of intelligence. Nonetheless, there are useful
concepts that might inform our investigation. Let’s begin with the well-
documented fact that, as a result of their genetic makeup, certain individ-
uals are “at risk” for a given disease (like hemophilia) or neurological
condition (like severe retardation). This fact does not in itself certify that
they will get the disease; factors of probability as well as accidents of en-
vironment or special treatment also play their role. This fact suggests only
that, other things being equal, these individuals are more likely to contract
the disease than is someone without this hereditary disposition.
By analogy, it may be useful to consider certain individuals as “at prom-
ise” for the ﬂowering of a certain talent. Again, this diagnosis does not en-
sure that they will develop the talent: one will not become a great chess
player, or even a “patzer,” in the absence of a chess board. But given an
environment where chess is played, and some stimulation, individuals of
promise have a special proclivity for acquiring the skill rapidly and reach-
ing a high level of competence. Being at promise is a sine qua non for be-
coming a prodigy; even so, thanks to certain “hot house” training methods,
such as the Suzuki Violin Talent Education Program, even an individual
with apparently modest genetic promise may make remarkable strides in
a short time.
Another suggestive line of speculation concerns the variety of traits and
behavior of which human beings are capable. In a large and heterogeneous
population like ours, with considerable intermarriage, one encounters a
wide variety of traits; but over time, extreme traits tend to become invisi-
ble or to disappear altogether. In contrast, certain populations (for example,
those in isolated South Sea islands) have lived as a single group for thou-
sands of years and have avoided any kind of intermingling with other groups.
These latter populations will exhibit genetic drift: through processes of nat-
ural selection, they will come to possess a genetic pool that may be dis-
tinctly different from that of other populations.
It is not always possible to separate out the purely genetic factors from
those reﬂecting an unusual natural environment or an exotic cultural sys-
37
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

tem. Yet, according to the virologist Carleton Gajdusek, who has studied
many primitive societies, populations subjected to genetic drift often ex-
hibit a remarkable set of characteristics, including unusual diseases, im-
munities, physical traits, behavioral patterns, and customs. It becomes
crucial to record these factors before they disappear, or become invisible,
owing to the demise of the group or to its extensive intermingling with
other populations. Only by careful documentation of these groups will it
become possible to determine the full range of human abilities. Indeed,
once these groups have disappeared, we may not even be able to envision
that they could have been capable of the actions, skills, or traits that they
in fact exhibited. But once we have established that some group—in fact,
that any human being—has exhibited a certain competence, we can look
for—and attempt to foster—that capacity in other members of the species—
our species. (An opposite course can be pursued in the case of undesirable
traits or competences.) To be sure, we can never deﬁnitely establish that
a given trait has a genetic component, but that determination actually
proves irrelevant to our present concern: documentation of the varieties
of human nature.
Consider this perspective in another way. Our genetic heritage is so
variegated that one can postulate all kinds of abilities and skills (as well
as maladies and infirmities) that have not yet emerged, or that we have
not yet come to know about. Given genetic engineering, countless other
possibilities arise as well. An individual with a clever imagination might
well be able to anticipate some of these possibilities. However, it is a far
more prudent research strategy to sample widely among human beings
of diverse stock and to determine which competences they have in fact
achieved. Studies of remote and isolated groups—the prize for the 
geneticist—prove extremely valuable for psychologists as well. The broader
the sampling of human beings, the more likely that any list of the range
of human intelligences will be comprehensive and accurate.
The Neurobiological Perspective
While genetics still proves to be of limited utility for the student of intel-
ligence, a review of neurobiology—including the specialties of neuro -
anatomy, neurophysiology, and neuropsychology—promises to bear much
richer fruit. Knowledge of the nervous system is accumulating as rapidly
38
Background

as knowledge of genetics, and the ﬁndings are much closer, so to speak, to
phenomena of cognition and the mind.
Canalization Versus Plasticity
A study of neurobiology bears critically on the two central issues with
which I am concerned in this chapter. We can ferret out general princi-
ples, as well as speciﬁc nuances, concerning the ﬂexibility of development
and the identity of human competences. In this survey, I shall begin by
considering the issue of ﬂexibility, and particularly those ﬁndings that doc-
ument the relative plasticity of the nervous system during the early phases
of development. Following the review of ﬂexibility, I shall turn to those
lines of research that help illuminate the abilities and operations of which
human beings are capable. Though my concern throughout this volume
will fall on the capacities of human beings, and the extent to which they can
be developed and educated through appropriate interventions, most of the
ﬁndings that I review will, in fact, be drawn from research with animals—
invertebrates as well as vertebrates. And in this effort, I have been helped
in particular by two lines of work that have deepened our understanding
of the principles of development: the work of David Hubel, Torsten Wiesel,
and their co-workers on the development of the visual system in mammals;
and the works of Fernando Notebohm, Peter Marler, Mark Konishi, and
their co-workers on the development of singing capacities in birds. While
the transfer from animal to human populations must be made cautiously,
particularly in the intellectual realm, ﬁndings in these areas are far too sug-
gestive to be ignored.
A key concept for the understanding of neural growth and develop-
ment is canalization. First posited by C. H. Waddington, a geneticist at
Edinburgh University, canalization refers to the tendency of any organic
system (like the nervous system) to follow certain developmental paths
rather than others. Indeed, the nervous system grows in an exquisitely
timed and elegantly programmed fashion. The origins of cells in the ﬂedg-
ling neural tube, and their migration to regions where they will eventually
constitute the brain and spinal chord, can be observed with predictable
regularity within and, to some extent, even across species. Far from rep-
resenting a random or accidental collection, the neural connections that
39
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

are actually effected reﬂect the highest degree of biochemical control. One
beholds a stunning epigenetic sequence where each step in the process
lays the groundwork for, and facilitates the unfolding of, the next.
To be sure, the development of any system also reﬂects environmental
inﬂuences: if, through experimental intervention, one alters the chemical
balance, one can affect the migration of particular cells or even cause one
cell to carry out the function ordinarily assumed by another. Yet according
to Waddington, it proves surprisingly difﬁcult to divert such patterns from
what appears to be their prescribed developmental goals—in the present
case, an adequately functioning nervous system. As Waddington put it, “it
is quite difﬁcult to persuade the developing system not to ﬁnish up by pro-
ducing its normal end result.” Even if one seeks to block or otherwise to
divert the expected patterns, the organism will tend to ﬁnd a way to ﬁnish
up in its “normal” status; if thwarted, it will not return to its point of origin
but will rather make its peace at a later point in the developmental course.
So far my description of the development of the nervous system has
stressed strict, genetically programmed mechanisms. This is appropriate.
And yet an equally amazing facet of biological development is its ﬂexibil-
ity, or, to adopt the more technical epithet, its plasticity. An organism ex-
hibits plasticity in a number of ways. To begin with, there are certain
developmental periods where a relatively wide range of environments can
each bring about the proper effects. (For example, if a human infant is
swaddled for most of the ﬁrst year of life, it will still walk normally during
the second year.) Moreover, in the event that the young organism is de-
prived or damaged in a signiﬁcant way, it may often exhibit great recuper-
ative powers. Indeed, in general, this plasticity proves greater at the earliest
points in development. For example, even if a human infant loses the dom-
inant of its two cerebral hemispheres, it will still learn to speak. But there
is a point at which the Rubicon is crossed, and plasticity is permanently on
the wane. The adolescent or the adult who loses a hemisphere will be se-
verely impaired.
Yet even these generalizations about plasticity must be qualiﬁed. First
of all, sometimes early injury or deprivation can have extremely severe re-
sults (e.g., failure to use one eye during the ﬁrst months of life inﬁrms the
possibility of binocular vision). Second, certain abilities or skills prove ro-
bust, even in the face of an adult injury, thus suggesting a residual plastic-
ity that endures throughout much of the life cycle. Some adults recover
the ability to talk despite massive injury to the left (or dominant) hemi-
40
Background

sphere of the brain, and many recover the use of paralyzed limbs. Overall,
the notion of plasticity cannot be considered apart from the timing of a
particular manipulation or intervention and from the nature of the behav-
ioral competence involved.
Plasticity is limited in other ways as well. Reﬂecting their behaviorist
heritage, some psychologists have been prone to assume that most any or-
ganism can, given proper training, learn to do most anything. Searches for
“horizontal” “Laws of Learning” have often reﬂected this faith. Similar
claims have been made about human beings, such as the suggestion that
anything can be learned at any age, in some useful form. More recent stud-
ies have come down, however, in harsh opposition to this optimistic cast of
mind. An emerging consensus insists that each species—including ours—
is specially “prepared” to acquire certain kinds of information, even as it
proves extremely difﬁcult, if not impossible, for that organism to master
other kinds of information.
A few examples of this preparedness and counter preparedness will be
helpful. We know that many birds are capable of learning songs, and some
can eventually produce a great variety of songs. And yet female sparrows
may be so carefully “pretuned” that they are sensitive only to the particu-
lar dialect sung by males in their own region. Rats can learn very quickly
to run or jump to escape shock but only with greatest difﬁculty to press a
lever in order to effect the same escape. Moreover, there are even limita-
tions to the jumping mechanism. While jumping to avoid a shock seems
to be a natural or “prepared” response, if the rat must jump in a box with
a closed lid, learning will be extremely slow. The ease with which all nor-
mal (and many subnormal) individuals master natural language (despite
its apparent complexity) suggests that the species as a whole is specially
prepared to acquire facility in this realm. By the same token, the difﬁcul-
ties most humans exhibit in learning to reason logically—particularly when
propositions are presented in an abstract form—suggests no special pre-
paredness in this area and perhaps even a predisposition to attend to the
concrete speciﬁcs of a situation rather than to its purely logical implica-
tions. While no one understands the reasons for selective preparedness, it
may be that certain neural centers can be readily triggered, stimulated,
programmed, and/or inhibited while others prove far more difﬁcult to ac-
tivate or inhibit.
In the light of these general remarks about plasticity in behavior, we are
now in a position to look more closely at evidence pertaining to the degree
41
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

of determinedness (or ﬂexibility) that characterizes the developing organ-
ism. Our survey will consider the particulars of plasticity around the time
of birth, the effects of various early experiences on subsequent develop-
ment, and the possibility that various kinds of learning can be understood
at the neurological or the biochemical level.
Principles of Plasticity During Early Life. While the particulars concern-
ing each species differ, research on plasticity in early life has yielded a
number of principles that seem reasonably robust. A ﬁrst principle enun-
ciates the maximum ﬂexibility encountered early in life. Consider one ex-
ample, which can stand for many others in the literature. As explained by
W. Maxwell Cowan, neurobiologist at the Salk Institute, both the forebrain
and the neural part of the eye develop out of the head end of the neural
plate. If, at an early stage in development, one removes a small piece of
ectodermal tissue, neighboring cells proliferate, and the development 
of both the brain and the eye should proceed normally. But if the same
operation is performed a little later, there is a permanent defect either in
the forebrain or in the eye; the actual damage depends on the particular
piece of tissue that has been removed. Such progressive “blocking out”
leads to the determination of increasingly precise regions of the brain.
Studies by other neurobiologists, such as Patricia Goldman, conﬁrm that
during the earliest period of life, the nervous system can adapt ﬂexibly to
severe injury or experimental alteration. For some time thereafter, the
nervous system may devise an alternative route or connection that may
prove adequate; but if the injury or alteration occurs too late during the
developmental process, the relevant cells will either connect randomly or
atrophy altogether.
A second related principle underscores the importance of so-called
critical periods during the process of development. For example, in the cat,
there is a critical period in visual development from the third to the ﬁfth
postnatal week. If, during this time, one eye is deprived of form or light,
then the central connections of the eye change and the ill-seeing eye will
be suppressed from functioning. Such interference seems to be perma-
nent. As a general point, it seems that the most vulnerable time for an or-
ganism occurs during these sensitive periods. Irreversible damage to the
central nervous system seems particularly likely to occur in the wake of
even mild restrictions during such a critical period. Conversely, rapid de-
42
Background

velopment will occur if the proper conditions are obtained during the crit-
ical period.
According to a third principle, the degree of ﬂexibility differs across
the region of the nervous system with which one is concerned. Regions
that develop later in childhood, such as the frontal lobes or the corpus cal-
losum, turn out to be more malleable than those that have developed in the
ﬁrst days and weeks of life, such as a primary sensory cortex. The surpris-
ing degree of uncommittedness that characterizes regions like the corpus
callosum seems to reﬂect both the need for a high degree of modiﬁability
for certain cortical connections and the importance of speciﬁc postnatal
experiences in determining the kinds of connection that will ultimately be
made. Indeed, when it comes to the most complex of human capacities,
such as language, the individual can withstand even massive damage, in-
cluding the removal of an entire hemisphere, during the ﬁrst few years of
life and still acquire the ability to speak in a reasonably normal fashion:
this recovery suggests that large portions of the cortex remain uncommit-
ted (and thus available for diverse uses) during early childhood.
A fourth principle concerns those factors that mediate or modulate
development. An organism will fail to develop normally unless it under-
goes certain experiences. Thus, the cat’s visual system will not develop
normally—and parts of it will actually atrophy—if the animal is not ex-
posed to patterned light after birth. Moreover, the cat must be exposed to
a variegated environment, permitted to use both eyes, and move about its
environment. If exposed to horizontal patterns only, the cells destined to
carry out vertical processing will either atrophy or be taken over for other
functions. If the cat is allowed to use only one eye, those cells dedicated
to binocular vision will degenerate. And if the cat does not move actively
in its environment—for example, if it is passively transported through a
patterned environment—it will also fail to develop a normal visual system.
It seems that the neural system that mediates vision exhibits a scheduled
plan for development that “expects” visual inputs of certain sorts during
sensitive periods. If proper stimulation is lacking, or if inappropriate stim-
ulation is supplied, the usual developmental goals will not be achieved, and
the animal will fail to function properly in its environment.
A ﬁnal principle treats the long-term effects of injury to the nervous
system. While some injuries exert immediate and evident effects, others
may be invisible at ﬁrst. Suppose, for example, that a region of the brain
43
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

that is destined later in development to assume an important function hap-
pens to be injured at an early point in life. It may well be that the conse-
quences of the injury will not be observed for some time. Thus, injuries to
the frontal lobes in primates may not be detected during the ﬁrst years of
life but may become all too manifest at a later time when the animal is ex-
pected to carry out those complex and organized forms of behavior that
are ordinarily mediated by the frontal lobes. Early brain injury may also
stimulate certain anatomical reorganizations that ultimately prove coun-
ter productive. For instance, connections may be formed that allow the an-
imal to carry out tasks crucial at the present time but that prove useless
for the emergence of needed skills at a later time. In such cases, the ten-
dency of the nervous system to canalize may actually have maladaptive
long-term consequences.
Consideration of these ﬁve principles should conﬁrm that any simple
verdict on the issue of determination versus ﬂexibility is impossible. Strong
pressures favor each factor, and both therefore exert considerable inﬂu-
ence on the development of the young organism. Determination (or canal-
ization) helps to ensure that most organisms will be able to carry out the
functions of the species in the normal way; ﬂexibility (or plasticity) allows
for adaptability to changing circumstances, including anomalous environ-
ments or early injuries. Clearly, if one must sustain an injury, it is better to
have it early; but probably every deviation from the normal developmen-
tal path exacts its cost.
Early Experience. Up to this point, I have considered chieﬂy the effects of
speciﬁc kinds of experience (such as exposure to certain kinds of stripes)
upon relatively circumscribed regions of the brain (most notably, the vi-
sual system). But psychologists and neurologists have also examined the
question of more general effects of stimulation, or deprivation, on the over-
all functioning of organisms.
Pioneering studies come from Mark Rosenzweig and his colleagues at
the University of California at Berkeley. Beginning in the early 1960s, the
Rosenzweig group raised animals (chieﬂy rats) in environments that were
enriched: these environments featured numerous other rats as well as var-
ious toys, such as ladders and wheels. A comparable set of rats were raised
in an “impoverished environment,” which contained enough food but no
special features. The “enriched rats” performed better on various behav-
ioral tasks and were also trimmer than their well-fed but duller peers. After
44
Background

eighty days in these contrasting environments, all the rats were sacriﬁced
and their brains subjected to analysis. The crucial ﬁndings: the cerebral
cortexes of the enriched rats weighed 4 percent more than the cortexes of
the impoverished (though fatter) rats. More crucially, the largest increase
in brain weight occurred in those portions of the brain that serve visual
perception, presumably the portions that had been particularly stimulated
in the enriched environment.
Numerous studies with rats and other species have conﬁrmed that an
enriched environment produces more elaborate behavior as well as pal-
pable changes in brain size. Effects can be surprisingly speciﬁc. The
Rosenzweig team has shown that if you provide a richer experience to only
one half of the brain, only that half exhibits changes in cell structure.
William Greenough has demonstrated that in animals raised in complex
environments, one ﬁnds larger nerve cells in some brain areas, as well as
more synapses, synaptic connections, and other dendritic connections. As
he summarizes it, “the gross regional size changes that accompany differ-
ences in experience are associated with changes at the neuronal level in
the number, pattern, and qualities of synaptic connections.”
Other intriguing and highly speciﬁc brain changes have been claimed.
As part of his studies of the songs of male canaries, Fernando Nottebohm
has correlated the size of two nuclei in the bird’s brain with the appear-
ance of singing. He ﬁnds that during the most productive vocal periods,
these two nuclei may become double the size they reach during the least
productive period, during the summer molt. Then, when the brain grows
larger in the fall, new nerve ﬁbers develop, fresh synapses are formed, and
accordingly, a larger song repertoire once again emerges. Apparently, in
birds, the learning (or relearning) of a motor activity translates directly into
the size of the relevant nuclei, the number of neurons, and the extent of
connections among them.
To my knowledge, scientists have hesitated to speculate in print about
similar changes in brain size accompanying (or causing) the diverse ability
proﬁles in human beings. In the absence of suitable experimental methods,
such prudence seems proper. But it is worth citing the observation of two
talented neuroanatomists, O. and A. Vogt. For many years, the Vogts con-
ducted neuroanatomical studies of the brains of many individuals, includ-
ing talented artists. One painter whose brain they observed turned out to
have a very large fourth layer of cells in his visual cortex; and a musician
with perfect pitch from early childhood had an analogously large region of
45
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

cells in his auditory cortex. As hypotheses of this sort become more re-
spectable, and as noninvasive methods for studying brain size, shape, and
processing routes become more widely utilized, I would not be surprised
to ﬁnd contemporary support for these ancient phrenological themes.
But bigger is not always better, and vast numbers of cells or ﬁbers are
not always virtues in themselves. Indeed, one of the most fascinating ﬁnd-
ings of recent years in neurobiology supports this cautionary note. Initially,
the nervous system produces a great excess of neuronal ﬁbers; a signiﬁcant
portion of the developmental process involves the pruning, or atrophying,
of excessive connections that do not appear to be necessary and may, in
fact, be injurious to normal function. The most critical interpretations
along these lines have been made by two French scientists, Jean-Pierre
Changeux and Antoine Danchin. These researchers have noted that in di-
verse regions of the brain, there are many more neurons initially than will
eventually survive. A period of “selective cell death” occurs, usually at
about the time when the population of neurons are forming synaptic con-
nections with their designated targets. The death may involve anywhere
from 15 percent to 85 percent of the initial neuronal population.
Why should there be a large excess of initial connections, and why
should certain connections endure while others atrophy? There is specu-
lation that early excessive “sprouting” reﬂects (or better, constitutes) the
ﬂexibility of the period of growth. This normal feature of development also
has adaptive advantages. If some damage occurs during a time when ex-
cessive connections are available, the chances are greater that the organ-
ism will survive despite injury. In support of this notion, a tremendous
growth in cell connections occurs immediately after a lesion, with some-
times as much as six weeks’ worth of growth occurring in seventy-two
hours. Analogously, if one eye is removed at birth, the death of retinal gan-
glion cells, which would ordinarily occur in the ﬁrst two postnatal weeks,
is markedly reduced.
There are other possible reasons for this proliferation of cell processes
and synapses. During this period of richness, there appears to be intense
competition among the cells, with those that are most effective in forming
connections of the appropriate strength and speciﬁcity proving most likely
to survive. Perhaps, in time-honored Darwinian fashion, this proliferation
may entail a kind of competition, allowing the most ﬁt or appropriate of
the organism’s nerve ﬁbers to prevail.
46
Background

An excess of nerve ﬁbers in early development may well lead to the
transient appearance of functional and behavioral properties associated
with the excess connections. And here one may encounter U-shaped
phenomena, where the behavior of the immature organism (the left arm
of the U) bears a striking resemblance to behavior ordinarily found only
among adult organisms (the right arm of the U). Quite possibly, certain
early reﬂexes in humans—like swimming or walking—reﬂect a prolifera-
tion of connections that temporarily allow certain precocious behavior. It
is also possible that the tremendously rapid learning of which young or-
ganisms are capable, particularly during certain critical periods, may be
related to an excess of connections, some of which will soon be pruned or
eliminated. For instance, in human beings, the density of synapses in-
creases sharply during the ﬁrst months of life, reaches a maximum at the
ages of one to two (roughly 50 percent above the adult mean density), de-
clines between the ages of two and sixteen, and then remains relatively
constant until the age of seventy-two. More than one scientist has specu-
lated that the extremely rapid learning of the young child (for example, in
the area of language) may reﬂect an exploitation of the large number of
synapses available at that time.
And after the pruning has occurred? We may have here a functional
deﬁnition of maturity—that time when excess cells have been eliminated
and the originally targeted connections have been effected. The ﬂexibility
of youth seems at an end. Through survival of the ﬁttest, the number of
neurons has now been adjusted to match the size of the ﬁeld that they are
designed to innervate. (If a new target like an extra limb is surgically added,
the number of neurons will not decline as precipitously; there is now ad-
ditional space in which the synapses can be formed.) The critical period
apparently ends when the process of synapse elimination has progressed to
the point where few, if any, synapses are still capable of competitive inter-
action. Most scientists feel that there are further neural changes later in
life. But, whether with aging there is a gradual decline in synaptic density,
progressive reduction in dendritic length and branching, or a more selec-
tive loss (being restricted to certain areas of the cortex) is an issue on which
scientists are not yet agreed.
Biological Bases of Learning. Understandably, most neurobiological research
with implications for human beings has been conducted with primates;
47
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

and there has been a focus on the principal sensory systems, which pre-
sumably work similarly across the biological order. But recently there have
been efforts to understand the basis of learning, using species quite re-
mote from man. Because of the suggestiveness of the ﬁndings, I quote two
samples here.
In my view, a veritable treasure trove of information that has stimu-
lated the thinking of cognitively oriented scholars has been obtained by
students of bird song. Although from a different order of animals, bird song
involves highly complex activities, which, as it happens, are lateralized to
the left portion of the bird’s brain and are all mastered in instructive ways
during the juvenile period.
In the face of many differences across bird species, a few generaliza-
tions seem warranted. Early in the ﬁrst year of life, the male bird produces
a subsong—a babbling output that continues for several weeks. This is fol-
lowed by the period of plastic song, a longer interval, where the bird re-
hearses a large number of the bits of those songs that it will eventually use
to communicate its territory to other birds and also to advertise for a mate.
This playful rehearsal resembles the exploratory activities exhibited by pri-
mates in many realms of activity.
Where avian species differ from one another is in the ﬂexibility and the
conditions of song learning. Some birds, like the ringdove, will come to
sing the song of their species eventually, even in the absence of exposure
to the correct model. Some birds, like canaries, require feedback from
their own singing, but not exposure to a model. (If such birds are deaf-
ened, they fail to master their species’ repertoire.) And other birds, like
the chafﬁnch, require exposure to the models supplied by conspeciﬁcs, in
order to sing an appropriate song. Some birds sing the same songs each
year, while others alter their repertoire on an annual basis. (It is clearly
vital to understand the biological underpinnings of these “cultural” differ-
ences.) But what is striking is that the bird emits during learning far more
songs and song bits than it will vocalize during its adult prime. Moreover,
birds are oriented to favor the songs from the environment that their
species is destined to learn, and (relatively speaking) to ignore songs from
other species or even other dialects of their own species.
As I have already noted, the production of song depends upon struc-
tures in the left portion of the bird’s nervous system. Lesions there prove
far more disruptive than lesions in matching areas of the right brain. One
can, in fact, produce an aphasia—or amusia—in birds. But the aphasic ca-
48
Background

nary can recover its prior songs because the homologous pathways of the
right hemisphere have the potential of being exploited. In this recovery of
function, birds are more fortunate than adult humans.
The learning of bird songs provides one intriguing model for how 
organisms come to master a highly particular kind of skill through the in-
terplay of environmental stimulation, exploratory practice, and a predis-
position to develop certain structures of the nervous system. In my view,
it may well prove possible some day to apply some of the principles in-
volved in the learning of bird song to the processes whereby higher or-
ganisms (including human beings) come to master the cognitive and
symbolic systems of their own cultural milieu. Another quite divergent set
of researches, using a simple mollusk called Aplysia Californica, promises
to cast additional light on the biological bases of learning.
With his colleagues, Eric Kandel of Columbia University has been ex-
amining the simplest forms of learning in Aplysia. He has been investi-
gating how this organism, with a relatively small number of neurons,
becomes able to habituate to a stimulus (so that it no longer responds
after a while), becomes sensitized to a stimulus (so that it can respond even
in the presence of diminished stimulation), and becomes classically con-
ditioned (so that it can respond to a learned, or conditioned, stimulus as
well as to an unconditioned, or reﬂexive, stimulus). And he has come up
with four major principles.
First of all, elementary aspects of learning are not diffusely distributed
in the brain but can rather be localized in the activity of speciﬁc nerve cells.
Some learned behavior may involve as few as ﬁfty neurons. Second, learn-
ing results from an alteration in the synaptic connections between cells:
rather than necessarily entailing new synaptic connections, learning and
memory customarily result from alteration in the strength of already ex-
isting contacts. Third, prolonged and profound changes in synaptic
strength can come about through an alteration in the amount of chemical
transmitter released at the terminals of neurones—the sites at which cells
communicate with other cells. And so, for example, in the course of ha-
bituation, each action potential produces progressively less inﬂux of cal-
cium and, hence, less transmitter release than does the preceding action
potential. Finally, these simple processes of altering synaptic strengths can
be combined to explain how progressively more complex mental processes
take place, and thus yield, in Kandel’s phrase, a “cellular grammar” un-
derlying various forms of learning. That is, the same processes that explain
49
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

the simplest form of habituation serve as a kind of alphabet from which
one can compose far more complex forms of learning, such as classical con-
ditioning. As Kandel summarizes his ﬁndings:
Basic forms of learning, habituation, sensitization, and classical condi-
tioning select among a large repertory of pre-existing connections and
alter the strength of a subset of this repertory. . . . An implication of this
view is that the potentialities for many behaviors of which an organism
is capable are built into the basic scaffolding of the brain and are to that
extent under genetic and developmental control. . . . Environmental fac-
tors and learning bring out these latent capabilities by altering the 
effectiveness of the pre-existing pathways, thereby leading to the ex-
pression of new patterns of behavior.
Thanks to Kandel and the lowly mollusk, some of the major forms of
learning investigated by psychologists can be described in terms of events
occurring at the cellular level, even including certain candidate chemical
transactions. The once seemingly unbridgeable gap between behavior and
biology seems to have been sealed. The work of Kandel and his associates
also casts tantalizing light on those issues of the speciﬁability of particular
competences, which will concern us in the following pages. It seems that
the same principles may characterize all neural cells, independent of
species membership or form of learning—apparent support for a “hori-
zontal” view of learning. And yet, as Kandel indicates, organisms them-
selves seem capable of only certain patterns of behavior and not others;
and this phenomenon will also have to be accounted for in any biological
approach to cognition.
In contrast to the state of affairs in genetics, where links between the
mainstream of the science and issues of human cognition were few and
speculative, the view from neurobiology has proved far more revealing for
our enterprise. Clear principles of plasticity and ﬂexibility, determination
and canalization have been uncovered. There is good reason to believe
that, with suitable modiﬁcations, these principles can apply to the ways in
which human beings develop certain cognitive systems, and learn to
achieve certain intellectual skills, in the process of following certain paths
rather than others. The clear and manifest effects of rich (or impoverished)
early experiences on the general functioning of the organism have also
been convincingly demonstrated. And we already know from studies of the
50
Background

effects of malnutrition in human beings that analogous effects can occur in
our own species, with deleterious consequences for both emotional and
cognitive functioning. Finally, through studies of such unlikely populations
as song birds and California mollusks, we have received promising insights
into the ways in which forms of learning are manifest at the nervous sys-
tem, cellular, and biochemical levels. While there is still an enormous dis-
tance between these simple forms of behavior and the varieties of learning
and development of greatest moment to human beings, at least some of
the insights gained from these lines of study should eventually prove ap-
plicable to the investigation of human learning and mastery.
Identifying the Elements of the Nervous System
Up to this point, I have at times tolerated a convenient ﬁction: the con-
tention that the nervous system is relatively undifferentiated, and that vari-
ation in size, density, and connectivity can be discussed with seeming
indifference to where these differences happen to be found. In fact, how-
ever, study of the nervous system has revealed an astonishingly highly or-
ganized architecture, with incredible speciﬁcity in appearance and in
organization. Moreover, differences in organization appear to be closely
linked to differences in the functions subserved by different portions of
the brain. For example, it is clear that the earlier maturing areas of the
cortex are involved in primary sensory functions (the perception of dis-
crete sights and sounds) while the later maturing association sensory cor-
texes mediate the meanings of the stimuli and effect connections between
sensory modalities (for example, associating seen objects with heard names).
For our purposes, the organizational structure of the nervous system
can be considered at two separate levels of detail: a ﬁne-grained or mo-
lecular structure, and a grosser or molar structure. While this is also a con-
venient ﬁction, it is not a frivolous one; it was in fact recognized in the
division of the 1981 Nobel Prize between Roger Sperry, in recent years a
student of the molar level, and David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, students
of the molecular structure. And it proves highly relevant to our search for
the identity of human intellectual functions.
The Molecular Level. According to Vernon Mountcastle, physiologist at
Johns Hopkins University, the human cerebral cortex can be viewed as
51
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

being organized into columns, or modules. These columns, which are
vertical to the surface of the cortex, are approximately 3 millimeters long
and between .5 and 1 millimeter across. They are increasingly recognized
as forming separate anatomical entities that give rise to different quasi-
independent functions. In fact, perception and memory may be distrib-
uted through the nervous system in the “person” of these special-purpose
“cognitive demons.”
These columns were ﬁrst established in the visual cortex. As Hubel and
Wiesel put it:
given what has been learned about the primary visual cortex, it is clear
that one can consider an elementary piece of cortex to be a block about
a millimeter square and two millimeters deep. To know the organization
of this chunk of tissue is to know the organization for all of the [visual
cortex]; the whole must be mainly an integrated version of this elemen-
tary unit.
In light of more recent ﬁndings, it seems probable that other sensory areas
also consist of such columns; and it has even been proposed that the frontal
lobe—the area deemed responsible for more abstract and less topograph-
ically mapped knowledge—has a columnar organization of this sort.
To what sorts of things do these columns—or their constituent cells—
respond? In the visual system, they respond to orientation—horizontal,
vertical, oblique—and to ocular dominance—different degrees of eye pref-
erence. Less thoroughly understood cortical cells in the visual system may
also respond to color, direction of movement, and depth. In the so-
matosensory system, the columns respond to the side of the ﬁeld that has
been stimulated and to the location of receptors in the skin layers. In the
frontal lobe, the columns respond to spatial and temporal information con-
cerning objects that have been present in the organism’s ﬁeld. Taken to-
gether, sensory and motor areas appear to contain two-dimensional maps
of the world they represent. As information on vision or touch or sound is
relayed from one cortical area to the next, the map becomes progressively
more blurred and the information carried becomes more abstract.
The columns may turn out to be the fundamental unit of organization
throughout evolution. Columns have similar size and shape not only within
but also across species. Thus, different species of monkeys may have cor-
texes of different sizes and different numbers of columns, but the actual
52
Background

dimensions of their columns are the same. Patricia Goldman and Martha
Constantine-Paton have speculated that when the number of axons di-
rected in a certain way exceeds a critical number, columns will form as a
time-tested and efﬁcient way of ﬁlling in the space. Indeed, if one plants
an extra eye into a frog during gestation, a column will promptly be set up.
But is the column or module the only way to think of the nervous sys-
tem? Vernon Mountcastle, whose work led to the discovery of the colum-
nar organization of the nervous system, himself distinguishes between
mini-columns (which may have as few as 100 cells and, thereby, constitute
the irreducibly small processing unit of the neocortex) and the macro column,
each packing several hundred mini-columns inside. Proceeding to a grosser
level of organization, Francis Crick suggests the existence of larger distinct
areas. The owl monkey, for example, has at least eight cortical areas that
are primarily visual: all are perceptually distinct with a fairly well-deﬁned
boundary. In his opinion, there are perhaps 50 to 100 discrete areas in the
human cortex. As he puts it somewhat wistfully, “if each area could be
clearly stained postmortem, so that we could see exactly how many there
are, how big each one is, and exactly how it is connected to other areas,
we would have made a big step forward.” It seems clear at this point that
one may divide the nervous system into units of widely different sizes.
What is important for our inquiry is that, through the appearance and lo-
cation of different neural units, nature provides important clues about the
identity of its valued processes and functions.
The Molar Level. In speculating about larger areas of the cerebral cortex,
we move to what has been called a molar level of brain analysis—a level
dealing with regions that can be readily inspected by the naked eye. While
molecular studies rely heavily on recordings from single cells, visible only
under high powers of magniﬁcation, the chief source of information about
molarity of mind comes from clinical work with brain-damaged patients.
As a result of stroke, trauma, or other accidents, individuals may suffer
damage to extensive but still limited regions of the brain. The frontal lobe
of the brain may be destroyed, wholly or partially (unilaterally); there may
be a lesion in the temporal lobe or at the temporoparietal juncture. The re-
sults of this injury can be seen through radiological measures (brain or CAT
scans) and can, of course, be examined with great precision in a post-
mortem. Here is where the scientiﬁc payoff inheres. It becomes possible
to correlate the loss of sizeable portions of brain tissue—sometimes ones
53
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

that are sharply delimited, sometimes ones dispersed across several regions
of the brain—with speciﬁc patterns of behavioral and cognitive breakdown.
By far the most excitement has been generated by the discovery that
the two halves of the brain do not subserve the same functions. While each
hemisphere controls motor and sensory capacities on the opposite side of
the body, one side of the brain is clearly dominant: such dominance de-
termines whether an individual is right-handed (in the case of left-brain
dominance) or left-handed (in the case of right-brain dominance). More
telling for our purposes than this relatively mechanical division of labor, it
has now been established beyond reasonable doubt that the left hemi-
sphere is dominant for language in most normal right-handed individuals
while the right hemisphere is dominant (though not to the same extent)
for visual-spatial functions.
This much is known to all followers of biological science. What is less
widely appreciated is that speciﬁcity of cognitive function can be tied much
more precisely to ﬁner regions of the human cerebral cortex. This state of
affairs has been best worked out in the case of language. We ﬁnd that dam-
age to the frontal lobe—particularly that area called Broca’s—results in se-
lective difﬁculty in producing grammatical speech, against a background of
relatively preserved comprehension. Conversely, damage to the temporal
lobe (in the area called Wernicke’s) allows relatively ﬂuent speech, replete
with appropriate grammatical inﬂections, in the face of distinct difﬁculty in
comprehension of language. Other even more speciﬁc linguistic disorders
turn out to be linked to particular regions in the brain: these include selec-
tive difﬁculties in repetition, naming, reading, and writing.
It seems clear, then, that in the normal adult, cognitive and intellective
functions of distinctiveness can be linked to particular areas of the brain
that, in many cases, are morphologically distinct. David Hubel provides
impressive testimony in favor of this point of view:
We are led to expect each region of the central nervous system has its
own special problems that require different solutions. In vision we are
concerned with contours and direction and depth. With the auditory sys-
tem, on the other hand, we can anticipate a galaxy of problems relating
to temporal interactions of sounds of different frequencies and it is 
difﬁcult to imagine the same neural apparatus dealing with all of these
phenomena. . . . For the major aspects of the brain’s operation, no mas-
ter solution is likely.
54
Background

Many of the issues raised earlier reemerge in the context of human cog-
nition. For example, the left hemisphere is “committed” to being the lan-
guage hemisphere; and yet, if that hemisphere must be removed early in
life, most individuals will still acquire relatively normal language. To be
sure, there are impairments in the language of a hemispherectomized
patient, but it takes fairly subtle testing to reveal them. In other words,
plasticity is evident in the acquisition of language, but such ﬂexibility di-
minishes rapidly after puberty. Even a relatively punctate lesion in the left
hemisphere of an adult male over the age of forty is likely to produce a
permanent and debilitating aphasia.
The language zones may have been designed over time to serve auditory-
oral language, and yet they do not fall into disuse if an individual is deaf.
Indeed, the zones that ordinarily subserve language can be mobilized, in
instructively different ways, to acquire sign languages or other ersatz com-
munication systems. For instance, deaf children who do not reside in “sign-
ing” households will on their own, or working in tandem, invent gestural
languages: careful analyses by linguists reveal clear-cut analogies between
such contrived gestural language and the natural language of hearing chil-
dren—for example, in the manner of construction of two-word utterances.
Thus, there seems to be canalization not only in the exploitation of certain
brain regions but also in the functional lines along which a communicative
system develops. Finally, if through severe abuse an individual should be
deprived of language until puberty and then given an opportunity to learn
to speak, there may be progress in some aspects of language. Yet, in the
one case that has been carefully studied, this advance in language appar-
ently occurred through exploitation of right-hemisphere regions. Quite pos-
sibly, some sort of critical period for the mobilization of left-hemisphere
structures has elapsed, and so the language of this individual turns out to
be most deﬁcient in such left-hemisphere aspects as grammar.
Views of Brain Organization
While the story about other higher cognitive functions is not nearly so well
understood—nor so clear—as that which obtains for language, there are
determinable cortical organizations for other higher mental functions; and
these functions, too, can break down along predictable lines. Adducing ev-
idence for these other human intelligences is a task for the succeeding
55
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

chapters of this book. At this point, however, it becomes germane to re-
view some contrasting opinions about the relationship between intellect
and brain organization, as well as certain efforts to relate human cognition
to the speciﬁc computational capacities represented by the neural columns
or regions.
Discussion of the relationship between intellect and the brain has re-
ﬂected prevailing scientiﬁc views about the general organization of the
brain. At times when a localizationist view has held sway, there has been a
correlative belief that different parts of the brain subserve different cog-
nitive functions. Sometimes, the discussion has focused on “horizontal”
faculties—perception is seen as residing in one region, memory in another;
though, more frequently, the discussion has centered on speciﬁc “vertical”
contents—visual processing in the occipital lobe, language in the left tem-
poral and frontal regions. During other scientiﬁc eras, the brain has been
regarded as a general information-processing mechanism and as an
“equipotential” organ, where functions can be performed and skills rep-
resented in any section of the nervous system. At such times intelligence
has tended to be regarded, in hedgehog fashion, as a unitary capacity, one
linked to the overall mass of usable brain tissue.
Fifty years ago, it appeared as if the holists or “equipotentialists” would
carry the day. The inﬂuential work of the neuropsychologist Karl Lashley
suggested that the amount of intact brain tissue, rather than its particular
identity (in terms of ﬁssures and commissures) would determine whether
an organism (like a rat) could perform a task. Lashley showed that one
could section regions from almost any area of the brain and the rat would
still be able to run a maze. While this ﬁnding seemed to sound a death
knell to localizationist positions, subsequent examination of this research
has revealed a basic ﬂaw. As the rat was relying on highly redundant cues
from several sensory areas in running the maze, it really did not make
much difference which areas of brain were removed, as long as at least
some were left. Once investigators began to attend to the speciﬁc kinds of
cues that were used, and to eliminate redundancies, even quite focal lesions
turned out to impair performance.
Parallel trends can be observed in studies of human cognitive processes
as well. The “bully” period for the holists, or generalists (like Henry Head
and Kurt Goldstein), was half a century ago. Again, intelligence was re-
lated to the amount of brain tissue that was spared, rather than to its par-
ticular locus. It does, indeed, seem that many human intellectual tasks can
56
Background

be carried out even in the wake of considerable brain damage; but, again,
once a task has been examined more carefully, its dependence upon cer-
tain key brain areas will ordinarily be demonstrated. Recent studies have
revealed that the posterior parietal regions, particularly in the left hemi-
sphere, prove of special importance in the solution of tasks thought to
measure “raw” intelligence, such as Raven’s progressive matrices. Even in
the miasma of intelligence testing, it seems that the nervous system is far
from equipotential.
We ﬁnd, then, an emerging consensus about brain localization. The
brain can be divided into speciﬁc regions, with each emerging as relatively
more important for certain tasks, relatively less important for others. Not
all or none, by any means: but with deﬁnite gradients of importance. In
the same vein, few tasks depend entirely on one region of the brain. Instead,
once one examines any reasonably complex task, one discovers inputs from
a number of cerebral regions, each making a characteristic contribution.
For example, in the case of freehand drawing, certain left-hemisphere
structures prove crucial for the providing of details, while right-hemisphere
structures are equally necessary for the mastery of the overall contour of
the depicted object. Compromise in either half of the brain will result in
some impairment, but the kind of impairment can only be anticipated once
one knows where the brain injury has occurred.
While this description of brain organization would be regarded as rea-
sonable by most workers in neuropsychology, it has yet to exert much im-
pact in cognitive psychology in this country. (Neuropsychology is more
widely accepted by cognitivists in Europe, possibly owing to the greater
involvement there of medically trained scientiﬁc investigators.) Indeed, as
we have seen before, most workers in the cognitive area do not yet con-
sider evidence about the organization of the brain relevant to their concerns
or feel that neural processes must be made consistent with cognitive ac-
counts, rather than vice versa. To use the jargon, “hardware” is considered
irrelevant to “software,” “wet” preparations to “dry” behavior. One en-
counters in American cognitive circles the continued belief in the existence
of extremely general problem-solving capacities, which cut across every
manner of content, and which presumably can be subserved by any area
of the nervous system. Now even if localization proves to be the most ac-
curate description of the nervous system, it remains possible that there
may still be very general problem-solving devices as well as considerable
horizontal structure—with perception, memory, learning, and the like
57
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

cutting across heterogeneous contents. Nonetheless, it would seem high
time for psychologists to take seriously the possibility that the molar—and
even the molecular—analyses of the nervous system may have deﬁnite im-
plications for cognitive processes.
Approaching cognition from widely divergent perspectives, the philoso-
pher Jerry Fodor, the physiological psychologist Paul Rozin, the neuro -
 psychologist Michael Gazzaniga, and the cognitive psychologist Alan
Allport have all endorsed the notion that human cognition consists of a
number of “special purpose” cognitive devices, presumably dependent
upon neural “hard wiring.” There are many differences in emphasis in their
accounts, some of which will be reviewed in Chapter 11; but for present
purposes, the points of consensus can be expressed as follows:
Over the course of evolution, human beings have come to possess a
number of special-purpose information-processing devices, often termed
“computational mechanisms.” Some we share with some animals (face per-
ception), while others prove peculiar to human beings (syntactic parsing).
Some of them are decidedly molecular (line detection), while others are far
more molar (control of voluntary action).
The operation of these mechanisms may be considered autonomous in
two senses. First of all, each mechanism operates according to its own prin-
ciples and is not “yoked” to any other module. Second, the information-
processing devices can operate without being directed to do so, simply in
the presence of certain forms of information to be analyzed. Indeed, their
operation may not be subject to conscious use and, hence, proves difﬁcult
or even impossible to thwart. They may simply be “triggered” by certain
events or information in the environment. (In the jargon, they are “cogni-
tively impenetrable” or “encapsulated.”) It is equally possible that some may
be accessible to conscious use or to voluntary exploitation; and, in fact, the
potential to become aware of the operation of one’s information-process-
ing system may be a special (and prized) feature of human beings. How-
ever, access to the “cognitive unconscious” is not always possible; and even
awareness of its operations may not be sufﬁcient to inﬂuence its enactment.
(Consider what happens when one knows one is looking at, or listening to,
an illusion and still remains unable to perceive the stimulus veridically.)
Though, again, there are differences, most exponents of a so-called
modular view are not friendly to the notion of a central information-
processing mechanism that decides which computer to invoke. Homun-
culi are not popular. Nor is there much sympathy for the notion of general
58
Background

working memory or storage space that can be equally well used (or bor-
rowed) by the different special-purpose computational mechanisms. In-
stead, the thrust of this biologically oriented position is that each
intellectual mechanism works pretty much under its own steam, using its
own peculiar perceptual and mnemonic capacities with little reason (or
need) to borrow space from another module. Over the course of evolu-
tion, there may well have been borrowing across systems, or even combi-
nations of systems; and many, if not most, mechanisms customarily work
together in the execution of complex behavior. But at any one historical
moment, one can specify the component processes of each computational
mechanism or, if you will, of each form of intelligence.
Readers of these pages will not be surprised to learn of my sympathy
for this “modularity” position. As I view the evidence, both the ﬁndings from
psychologists about the power of different symbol systems and the ﬁndings
from neuroscientists about the organization of the human nervous system
support the same picture of human mentation: a mind consists of a num-
ber of fairly speciﬁc and fairly independent computational mechanisms.
Common properties and common regions may well exist, but they are
surely not all of the story and may well not even be its most pertinent (and
educationally relevant) part.
Grafting this modular analysis onto the more general principles of plas-
ticity and early experience reviewed earlier is a task that has yet to be car-
ried out. It might well be that principles of plasticity pervade the nervous
system and can be evoked, independently of which computational mecha-
nism is at issue. Such an outcome would not in itself pose problems for the
point of view propounded here. Yet it seems far more likely that each of 
the intelligences has its own forms of plasticity and its own critical periods:
these need not occur at the same time or for the same interval of time or en-
tail the same costs and beneﬁts. Indeed, if I may adopt the perspective termed
“heterochrony,” different neural systems may develop at different rates or
in different ways, depending upon the period of primate evolution in which
they began to function and the purposes to which they have been put.
Conclusion
What picture emerges of the human nervous system, in the light of our
embarrassingly rapid trek through neurobiology? The plan for ultimate
59
Biological Foundations of Intelligence

growth is certainly there in the genome; and, even given fairly wide latitude
(or stressful circumstances), development is likely to proceed along well-
canalized avenues. We could hardly have survived as a species for many
thousands of years without a secure likelihood that we would all be able to
speak, perceive, and remember many forms of information in relatively
similar ways. To be sure, there is clear plasticity in the nervous system as
well; and, especially during the early periods of growth, with its sprouting
and pruning, there may well be tremendous resilience and adaptability in
the system. These, too, aid survival. But that growth by alternative routes
that plasticity permits is not always an advantage. Newly contrived con-
nections may well carry out certain processes adequately but prove inad-
equate for others or entail pernicious long-term effects. Programming,
speciﬁcity, considerable early ﬂexibility with some costs—such are the gen-
eral principles of the nervous system that have emerged from our analysis.
We can reasonably expect these same principles to apply when we con-
sider how normal human beings come to negotiate various intellectual
challenges and to advance in diverse symbolic domains.
We ﬁnd, from recent work in neurology, increasingly persuasive evi-
dence for functional units in the nervous systems. There are units sub-
serving microscopic abilities in the individual columns of the sensory or
frontal areas; and there are much larger units, visible to inspection, that
serve more complex and molar human functions, like linguistic or spatial
processing. These suggest a biological basis for specialized intelligences.
We have seen at the same time, however, that even the most informed
scholars of the nervous system differ about the level of modules that are
most useful for various scientiﬁc or practical purposes. Clearly, Nature can-
not hand us a complete answer to the “identities” or the “kinds of cogni-
tion” as a reward for our dispassionate investigation of the nervous system
sui generis.
But building upon the ﬁndings from neurobiology, studied in molar as
well as molecular terms, we receive a powerful hint about the possible
“natural kinds” of human intelligence. We cannot (even should we wish to)
neatly factor culture out of this equation, because culture inﬂuences every
individual (except possibly some freaks) and will, therefore, necessarily
color the way that intellectual potentials evolve from the ﬁrst. But the uni-
versal intrusion of culture also confers an advantage upon our analysis.
Culture makes it possible for us to examine the development and imple-
mentation of intellectual competences from a variety of perspectives: the
60
Background

roles the society values; the pursuits in which individuals achieve expert-
ise; the speciﬁcation of domains in which individual prodigiousness, retar-
dation, or learning disabilities may be found; and the kinds of transfer of
skills that we may expect in educational settings.
Here, then, is the burden of this book: to bring to bear the insights
culled from these various windows on cognition, cultural no less than bio-
logical; to see which families of intellectual competence, examined to-
gether, make the most sense. It remains only to state more explicitly the
criteria to be invoked in this synthesizing effort.
61
Biological Foundations of Intelligence


4
What Is an 
Intelligence?
I
have now set the stage for an introduction of the intelligences. My re-
view of earlier studies of intelligence and cognition has suggested the
existence of a number of different intellectual strengths, or competences,
each of which may have its own developmental history. The review of re-
cent work in neurobiology has again suggested the presence of areas in the
brain that correspond, at least roughly, to certain forms of cognition; and
these same studies imply a neural organization that proves hospitable to
the notion of different modes of information processing. At least in the ﬁelds
of psychology and neurobiology, the zeitgeist appears primed for the iden-
tiﬁcation of several human intellectual competences.
But science can never proceed completely inductively. We might con-
duct every conceivable psychological test and experiment, or ferret out
all the neuroanatomical wiring that we desired, and still not have identiﬁed
the sought-after human intelligences. We confront here a question not of
the certainty of knowledge but, rather, of how knowledge is attained at all.
It is necessary to advance a hypothesis, or a theory, and then to test it. Only
as the theory’s strengths—and limitations—become known will the plau-
sibility of the original postulation become evident.
Nor does science ever yield a completely correct and ﬁnal answer.
There is progress and regress, ﬁt and lack of ﬁt, but never the discovery of
the Rosetta Stone, the single key to a set of interlocking issues. This has
been true at the most sophisticated levels of physics and chemistry. It is all
the more true—one might say, it is all too true—in the social and behav-
ioral sciences.
63

And so it becomes necessary to say, once and for all, that there is not,
and there can never be, a single irrefutable and universally accepted list of
human intelligences. There will never be a master list of three, seven, or
three hundred intelligences that can be endorsed by all investigators. We
may come closer to this goal if we stick to only one level of analysis (say,
neurophysiology) or one goal (say, prediction of success at a technical uni-
versity); but if we are striving for a decisive theory of the range of human
intelligence, we can expect never to complete our search.
Why, then, proceed along this precarious path at all? Because there is
a need for a better classiﬁcation of human intellectual competences than
we have now; because there is much recent evidence emerging from sci-
entiﬁc research, cross-cultural observations, and educational study that
stands in need of review and organization; and perhaps above all, because
it seems within our grasp to come up with a list of intellectual strengths
that will prove useful for a wide range of researchers and practitioners and
will enable them (and us) to communicate more effectively about this cu-
riously seductive entity called the intellect. In other words, the synthesis
that we seek can never be all things for all people, but it holds promise of
providing some things for many interested parties.
Before moving on to the intellectual competences themselves, we must
consider two topics. First of all, what are the prerequisites for an intelli-
gence: that is, what are the general desiderata to which a set of intellectual
skills ought to conform before that set is worth consideration in the mas-
ter list of intellectual competences? Second, what are the actual criteria
by which we can judge whether a candidate competence, which has passed
the “ﬁrst cut,” ought to be invited to join our charmed circle of intelli-
gences? As part and parcel of the list of criteria, it is also important to in-
dicate those factors that suggest we are on the wrong track: that a skill that
had appeared as a possible intellectual competence does not qualify; or
that a skill that seems very important is being missed by our approach.
Prerequisites of an Intelligence
To my mind, a human intellectual competence must entail a set of skills of
problem solving—enabling the individual to resolve genuine problems or
difﬁculties that he encounters and, when appropriate, to create an effec-
tive product—and must also entail the potential for ﬁnding or creating
64
Background

problems—thereby laying the groundwork for the acquisition of new
knowledge. These prerequisites represent my effort to focus on those in-
tellectual strengths that prove of some importance within a cultural con-
text. At the same time, I recognize that the ideal of what is valued will
differ markedly, sometimes even radically, across human cultures, within
the creation of new products or posing of new questions being of relatively
little importance in some settings.
The prerequisites are a way of ensuring that a human intelligence must
be genuinely useful and important, at least in certain cultural settings. This
criterion alone may disqualify certain capacities that, on other grounds,
would meet the criteria that I am about to set. For instance, the ability to
recognize faces is a capacity that seems to be relatively autonomous and
to be represented in a speciﬁc area of the human nervous system. More-
over, it exhibits its own developmental history. And yet, to my knowledge,
while severe difﬁculties in recognizing faces might pose embarrassment
for some individuals, this ability does not seem highly valued by cultures.
Nor are there ready opportunities for problem ﬁnding in the domain of
face recognition. Acute use of sensory systems is another obvious candi-
date for a human intelligence. And when it comes to keen gustatory or ol-
factory senses, these abilities have little special value across cultures. (I
concede that people more involved than I in the culinary life might dis-
agree with this assessment!)
Other abilities that are certainly central in human intercourse also do
not qualify. For instance, the abilities used by a scientist, a religious leader,
or a politician are of great importance. Yet, because these cultural roles can
(by hypothesis) be broken down into collections of particular intellectual
competences, they do not themselves qualify as intelligences. From the op-
posite end of analysis, many skills tested for perennially by psychologists—
ranging from recall of nonsense syllables to production of unusual
associations—fail to qualify, for they emerge as the contrivances of an ex-
perimenter rather than as skills valued by a culture.
There have, of course, been many efforts to nominate and detail es-
sential intelligences, ranging from the medieval trivium and quadrivium
to the psychologist Larry Gross’s list of ﬁve modes of communication (lex-
ical, social-gestural, iconic, logico-mathematical, and musical) and to the
philosopher Paul Hirst’s list of seven forms of knowledge (mathematics,
physical sciences, interpersonal understanding, religion, literature and the
ﬁne arts, morals, and philosophy). On an a priori basis, there is nothing
65
What Is an Intelligence?

wrong with these classiﬁcations; and, indeed, they may prove critical for
certain purposes. The very difﬁculty with these lists, however, is that they
are a priori—an effort by a reﬂective individual (or a culture) to devise
meaningful distinctions among types of knowledge. What I am calling for
here are sets of intelligences that meet certain biological and psychologi-
cal speciﬁcations. In the end, the search for an empirically grounded set of
faculties may fail; and then we may have to rely once more on a priori
schemes such as Hirst’s. But the effort should be made to ﬁnd a ﬁrmer
foundation for our favorite faculties.
I do not insist that the list of intelligences presented here be exhaustive.
I would be astonished if it were. Yet, at the same time, there is something
awry about a list that leaves glaring and obvious gaps, or one that fails to
generate the vast majority of roles and skills valued by human cultures.
Thus, a prerequisite for a theory of multiple intelligences, as a whole, is
that it captures a reasonably complete gamut of the kinds of abilities val-
ued by human cultures. We must account for the skills of a shaman and a
psychoanalyst as well as of a yogi and a saint.
Criteria of an Intelligence
So much, then, for the prerequisites of this undertaking and onward to cri-
teria, or “signs.” Here, I outline those considerations that have weighed
most heavily in the present effort, those desiderata on which I have come
to rely in an effort to nominate a set of intelligences that seems general
and genuinely useful. The very use of the word signs signals that this un-
dertaking must be provisional: I do not include something merely because
it exhibits one or two of the signs, nor do I exclude a candidate intelligence
just because it fails to qualify on each and every account. Rather, the effort
is to sample as widely as possible among the various criteria and to include
within the ranks of the chosen intelligences those candidates that fare the
best. Following the suggestive model of the computer scientist Oliver Sel-
fridge, we might think of these signs as a group of demons, each of which
will holler when an intelligence resonates with that demon’s “demand char-
acteristics.” When enough demons holler, an intelligence is included; when
enough of them withhold approbation, the intelligence is, if regrettably,
banished from consideration.
66
Background

Ultimately, it would certainly be desirable to have an algorithm for the
selection of an intelligence, such that any trained researcher could deter-
mine whether a candidate intelligence met the appropriate criteria. At
present, however, it must be admitted that the selection (or rejection) of
a candidate intelligence is reminiscent more of an artistic judgment than
of a scientiﬁc assessment. Borrowing a concept from statistics, one might
think of the procedure as a kind of subjective factor analysis. Where my
procedure does take a scientiﬁc turn is in the making public of the grounds
for the judgment, so that other investigators can review the evidence and
draw their own conclusions.
Here then, in unordered fashion, are the eight “signs” of an intelligence:
Potential Isolation by Brain Damage
To the extent that a particular faculty can be destroyed, or spared in isola-
tion, as a result of brain damage, its relative autonomy from other human
faculties seems likely. In what follows I rely to a considerable degree on
evidence from neuropsychology and, in particular, on that highly reveal-
ing experiment in nature—a lesion to a specific area of the brain. The
consequences of such brain injury may well constitute the single most in-
structive line of evidence regarding those distinctive abilities or computa-
tions that lie at the core of a human intelligence.
The Existence of Idiots Savants, Prodigies, 
and Other Exceptional Individuals
Second only to brain damage in its persuasiveness is the discovery of an
individual who exhibits a highly uneven proﬁle of abilities and deﬁcits. In
the case of the prodigy, we encounter an individual who is extremely pre-
cocious in one (or, occasionally, more than one) area of human competence.
In the case of the idiot savant (and other retarded or exceptional individ-
uals, including autistic children), we behold the unique sparing of one par-
ticular human ability against a background of mediocre or highly retarded
human performances in other domains. Once again, the existence of these
populations allows us to observe the human intelligence in relative—even
67
What Is an Intelligence?

splendid—isolation. To the extent that the condition of the prodigy or the
idiot savant can be linked to genetic factors, or (through various kinds of
noninvasive investigative methods) to speciﬁc neural regions, the claim
upon a speciﬁc intelligence is enhanced. At the same time, the selective
absence of an intellectual skill—as may characterize autistic children or
youngsters with learning disabilities—provides a conﬁrmation-by-negation
of a certain intelligence.
An Identifiable Core Operation or Set of Operations
Central to my notion of an intelligence is the existence of one or more basic
information-processing operations or mechanisms, which can deal with
speciﬁc kinds of input. One might go so far as to deﬁne a human intelli-
gence as a neural mechanism or computational system that is genetically
programmed to be activated or “triggered” by certain kinds of internally or
externally presented information. Examples would include sensitivity to
pitch relations as one core of musical intelligence, or the ability to imitate
movement by others as one core of bodily intelligence.
Given this deﬁnition, it becomes crucial to be able to identify these
core operations, to locate their neural substrate, and to prove that these cores
are indeed separate. Simulation on a computer is one promising way of es-
tablishing that a core operation exists and can in fact give rise to various in-
tellectual performances. Identiﬁcation of core operations is at this point
still largely a matter of guesswork, but it is no less important on that ac-
count. Correlatively, resistance to the detection of core operations is a clue
that something is amiss: one may be encountering an amalgam that calls for
decomposition in terms of its own constituent intelligences.
A Distinctive Developmental History, Along with 
a Definable Set of Expert “End-State” Performances
An intelligence should have an identiﬁable developmental history, through
which normal as well as gifted individuals pass in the course of ontogeny.
To be sure, the intelligence will not develop in isolation, except in an un-
usual person; and so it becomes necessary to focus on those roles or situ-
ations where the intelligence occupies a central place. In addition, it should
68
Background

prove possible to identify disparate levels of expertise in the development
of an intelligence, ranging from the universal beginnings through which
every novice passes, to exceedingly high levels of competence, which may
be visible only in individuals with unusual talent and/or special forms of
training. There may well be distinct critical periods in the developmental
history, as well as identiﬁable milestones, linked either to training or to
physical maturation. Identiﬁcation of the developmental history of the in-
telligence, and analysis of its susceptibility to modiﬁcation and training, is
of the highest import for educational practitioners.
An Evolutionary History and Evolutionary Plausibility
All species display areas of intelligence (and ignorance), and human be-
ings are no exception. The roots of our current intelligences reach back
millions of years in the history of the species. A speciﬁc intelligence becomes
more plausible to the extent that one can locate its evolutionary an-
tecedents, including capacities (like bird song or primate social organiza-
tion) that are shared with other organisms; one must also be on the lookout
for speciﬁc computational abilities that appear to operate in isolation in
other species but have become yoked with one another in human beings.
(For example, discrete aspects of musical intelligence may well appear in
several species but are only joined in human beings.) Periods of rapid
growth in human prehistory, mutations that may have conferred special
advantages upon a given population, as well as evolutionary paths that did
not ﬂourish, are all grist for a student of multiple intelligences. Yet it must
be stressed that this is an area where sheer speculation is especially tempt-
ing, and ﬁrm facts especially elusive.
Support from Experimental Psychological Tasks
Many paradigms favored in experimental psychology illuminate the oper-
ation of candidate intelligences. Using the methods of the cognitive psy-
chologist, one can, for example, study details of linguistic or spatial
processing with exemplary speciﬁcity. The relative autonomy of an intelli-
gence can also be investigated. Especially suggestive are studies of tasks
that interfere (or fail to interfere) with one another; tasks that transfer (and
69
What Is an Intelligence?

those that do not) across different contexts; and the identiﬁcation of forms
of memory, attention, or perception that may be peculiar to one kind of
input. Such experimental tests can provide convincing support for the claim
that particular abilities are (or are not) manifestations of the same intelli-
gences. To the extent that various speciﬁc computational mechanisms—or
procedural systems—work together smoothly, experimental psychology can
also help demonstrate the ways in which modular or domain-speciﬁc abil-
ities may interact in the execution of complex tasks.
Support from Psychometric Findings
Outcomes of psychological experiments provide one source of information
relevant to intelligences; the outcomes of standard tests (like IQ tests) pro-
vide another clue. While the tradition of intelligence testing has not
emerged as the hero of my earlier discussion, it is clearly relevant to my
pursuit here. To the extent that the tasks that purportedly assess one in-
telligence correlate highly with one another, and less highly with those that
purportedly assess other intelligences, my formulation enhances its cred-
ibility. To the extent that psychometric results prove unfriendly to my pro-
posed constellation of intelligences, there is cause for concern. It must be
noted, however, that intelligence tests do not always test what they are
claimed to test. Thus many tasks actually involve the use of more than their
targeted ability, while many other tasks can be solved using a variety of
means (for example, certain analogies or matrices may be completed by
exploiting linguistic, logical, and/or spatial capacities). Also, the stress on
paper-and-pencil methods often precludes the proper test of certain abil-
ities, especially those involving active manipulation of the environment or
interaction with other individuals. Hence, interpretation of psychometric
ﬁndings is not always a straightforward matter.
Susceptibility to Encoding in a Symbol System
Much of human representation and communication of knowledge takes
place via symbol systems—culturally contrived systems of meaning that
capture important forms of information. Language, picturing, and mathe-
matics are but three of the symbol systems that have become important
70
Background

the world over for human survival and human productivity. In my view,
one of the features that makes a raw computational capacity useful (and ex-
ploitable) by human beings is its susceptibility to marshaling by a cultural
symbol system. Viewed from an opposite perspective, symbol systems may
have evolved just in those cases where there exists a computational capac-
ity ripe for harnessing by the culture. While it may be possible for an in-
telligence to proceed without its own special symbol system, or without
some other culturally devised arena, a primary characteristic of human in-
telligence may well be its “natural” gravitation toward embodiment in a
symbolic system.
These, then, are criteria by which a candidate intelligence can be
judged. They will be drawn on repeatedly, as appropriate, in each of the
substantive chapters that follows. It is germane here to remark on certain
considerations that might cause one to rule out an otherwise plausible can-
didate intelligence.
Delimiting the Concept of an Intelligence
One group of candidate intelligences includes those that are dictated by
common parlance. It may seem, for example, that the capacity to process
auditory sequences is a strong candidate for an intelligence; indeed, many
experimentalists and psychometrians have nominated this capacity. How-
ever, studies of the effects of brain damage have repeatedly documented
that musical and linguistic strings are processed in different ways and can
be compromised by different lesions. Thus, despite the surface appeal of
such a skill, it seems preferable not to regard it as a separate intelligence.
Other abilities frequently commented upon in speciﬁc individuals—for
example, remarkable common sense or intuition—might seem to exhibit
such signs as “prodigiousness.” In this case, however, the categorization
seems insufﬁciently examined. More careful analysis reveals discrete
forms of intuition, common sense, or shrewdness in various intellectual
domains; intuition in social matters predicts little about intuition in the
mechanical or musical realm. Again, a superﬁcially appealing candidate
does not qualify.
It is, of course, possible that our list of intelligences is adequate as a
baseline of core intellectual abilities, but that certain more general abili-
ties may override, or otherwise regulate, the core intelligences. Among
71
What Is an Intelligence?

candidates that have frequently been mentioned are a “sense of self,”
which derives from one’s peculiar blend of intelligences; an “executive ca-
pacity,” which deploys speciﬁc intelligences for speciﬁc ends; and a syn-
thesizing ability, which draws together conclusions residing in several
speciﬁc intellectual domains. Beyond challenge, these are important phe-
nomena that demand to be considered, if not explained. Such discussion,
however, is a task best left until later when, having introduced the speciﬁc
intelligences, I initiate a critique of my own in Chapter 11. On the other
hand, the question of how speciﬁc intelligences come to be linked, sup-
plemented, or balanced to carry out more complex, culturally relevant tasks
is one of the utmost importance, to which I shall devote attention at sev-
eral points in this book.
Once one has set forth the criteria or signs most crucial for the identi-
ﬁcation of an intelligence, it is important to state as well what intelligences
are not. To begin with, intelligences are not equivalent to sensory systems.
In no case is an intelligence completely dependent upon a single sensory
system, nor has any sensory system been immortalized as an intelligence.
The intelligences are by their very nature capable of realization (at least,
in part) through more than one sensory system.
Intelligences should be thought of as entities at a certain level of gen-
erality, broader than highly speciﬁc computational mechanisms (like line
detection) while narrower than the most general capacities, like analysis,
synthesis, or a sense of self (if any of these can be shown to exist apart from
combinations of speciﬁc intelligences). Yet it is in the very nature of intel-
ligences that each operates according to its own procedures and has its
own biological bases. It is thus a mistake to try to compare intelligences
on all particulars; each must be thought of as its own system with its own
rules. Here a biological analogy may be useful. Even though the eye, the
heart, and the kidneys are all bodily organs, it is a mistake to try to com-
pare these organs in every particular: the same restraint should be ob-
served in the case of intelligences.
Intelligences are not to be thought of in evaluative terms. While the
word intelligence has in our culture a positive connotation, there is no rea-
son to think that an intelligence must necessarily be put to good purposes.
In fact, one can use one’s logical-mathematical, linguistic, or personal in-
telligences for highly nefarious purposes.
Intelligences are best thought of apart from particular programs of ac-
tion. Of course, intelligences are most readily observed when they are
72
Background

being exploited to carry out one or another program of action. Yet the pos-
session of an intelligence is most accurately thought of as a potential: an 
individual in possession of an intelligence can be said to have no circum-
stance that prevents him from using that intelligence. Whether he chooses
to do so (and to what end he may put that intelligence) fall outside the
purview of this book. (See notes to page 73.)
In the study of skills and abilities, it is customary to honor a distinction
between know-how (tacit knowledge of how to execute something) and
know-that (prepositional knowledge about the actual set of procedures in-
volved in execution). Thus, many of us know how to ride a bicycle but lack
the prepositional knowledge of how that behavior is carried out. In contrast,
many of us have prepositional knowledge about how to make a soufﬂé
without knowing how to carry this task through to successful completion.
While I hesitate to glorify this rough-and-ready distinction, it is helpful to
think of the various intelligences chieﬂy as sets of know-how—procedures
for doing things. In fact, a concern with propositional knowledge about in-
telligences seems to be a particular option followed in some cultures, while
of little or no interest in many others.
Conclusion
These remarks and cautionary notes should help to place in proper per-
spective the various descriptions of speciﬁc intelligences that constitute
the next part of this book. Naturally, in a book reviewing a whole spectrum
of intelligences, it is not possible to devote sufﬁcient attention to any spe-
ciﬁc one. Indeed, even to treat a single intellectual competence—like
language—with sufﬁcient seriousness would require at least one lengthy
volume. The most that I can hope to accomplish here is to provide a feel-
ing for each speciﬁc intelligence; to convey something of its core opera-
tions, to suggest how it unfolds and proceeds at its highest levels, to touch
upon its developmental trajectory, and to suggest something of its neuro-
logical organization. I shall rely heavily on a few central examples and
knowledgeable “guides” in each area and can only offer my impression
(and my hope!) that most of the pivotal points could have been equally
well conveyed by many other examples or guides. Similarly, I will depend
on a few key cultural “roles,” each of which utilizes several intelligences
but can properly be said to highlight the particular intelligence under
73
What Is an Intelligence?

study. Some notion of the wider data base on which I am drawing, and of
the sources relevant for a fuller inquiry into each intelligence, can be
gained from a study of the references for each chapter. But I am painfully
aware that a convincing case for each of the candidate intelligences re-
mains the task for other days and other volumes.
A ﬁnal, crucial point before I turn to the intelligences themselves.
There is a universal human temptation to give credence to a word to which
we have become attached, perhaps because it has helped us to understand
a situation better. As noted at the beginning of this book, intelligence is
such a word; we use it so often that we have come to believe in its exis-
tence, as a genuine tangible, measurable entity, rather than as a convenient
way of labeling some phenomena that may (but may well not) exist.
This risk of reiﬁcation is grave in a work of exposition, especially in one
that attempts to introduce novel scientiﬁc concepts. I, and sympathetic
readers, will be likely to think—and to fall into the habit of saying—that we
here behold the “linguistic intelligence,” the “interpersonal intelligence,”
or the “spatial intelligence” at work, and that’s that. But it’s not. These in-
telligences are ﬁctions—at most, useful ﬁctions—for discussing processes
and abilities that (like all of life) are continuous with one another; Nature
brooks no sharp discontinuities of the sort proposed here. Our intelligences
are being separately deﬁned and described strictly in order to illuminate
scientiﬁc issues and to tackle pressing practical problems. It is permissible
to lapse into the sin of reifying so long as we remain aware that this is what
we are doing. And so, as we turn our attention to the speciﬁc intelligences,
I must repeat that they exist not as physically veriﬁable entities but only as
potentially useful scientiﬁc constructs. Since it is language, however, that
has led us to (and will continue to dip us into) this morass, it is perhaps ﬁt-
ting to begin the discussion of the particular intelligences by considering
the unique powers of the word.
74
Background

PART II
THE THEORY


5
Linguistic 
Intelligence
It is true the white man can ﬂy; he can speak across the
ocean; in works of the body he is indeed greater than we,
but he has no songs like ours, no poets to equal the island
singers.
A GILBERT ISLANDER
When . . . writing . . . all the natural instincts are at work
the way some people play a musical instrument without
a lesson and, others, even as children, understand 
an engine.
LILLIAN HELLMAN, AN UNFINISHED WOMAN
Poetry: Linguistic Intelligence Exemplified
In the early 1940s, Keith Douglas, a young British poet, initiated a corre-
spondence with T. S. Eliot, already the doyen of poets in England. Eliot’s
responses, invariably helpful, are revealing about the considerations at the
level of the word that enter into the penning, and the subsequent revision,
of a line of poetry. Warning against the use of “ineffective adjectives,” Eliot
criticizes the phrase “impermanent building”: “this impermanence should
have been clearly established earlier in the poem.” After the young poet
compares himself to a pillar in a glass house, Eliot asks, “Do you mean that
77

you are also glass?” Referring to a subsequent comparison of the poet to a
mouse, Eliot again detects the apparent inconsistency: “I don’t think you
should be a pillar and like a mouse in the same stanza.” Of the poem as a
whole, Eliot offers a more general critique:
I am not sure that its myth is wholly consistent. For instance, toward the
end you spoke of exorcising the dead lady in the upper room. One does
speak of exorcising ghosts from material houses, but in this case the lady
to be exorcised seems to be very much more substantial than the house
in which you have set her. That is what I mean by consistent. 
In offering such suggestions, Eliot was merely making public some of
the processes through which a poet may pass each time he writes a poem.
We learn from Eliot’s own notes of the care he took, and the frequent agony
he underwent, in selecting the correct word. For example, in the Four
Quartets, he tried out the phrases “at dawn,” “the ﬁrst faint light,” “after
lantern end,” “lantern-out,” “lantern-down,” “lantern-time,” “the antelucan
dusk,” “the antelucan hour,” and “antelucan dark” before accepting a
friend’s suggestion of “waning dusk.” Many of Eliot’s contemporaries in this
most introspective century have related similarly ﬁne weighings of alterna-
tive wording. For instance, Robert Graves reviewed his efforts to ﬁnd a sub-
stitute for the word pattern in the phrase “and ﬁx my mind in a close pattern
of doubt.” He considered “frame of doubt” (too formal) and “net” (too neg-
ative a connotation) before alighting, after a trip to the sea, on the phrase,
“and ﬁx my mind in a close caul of doubt.” Upon consulting the Oxford
English Dictionary, Graves found that caul bore all the senses he needed:
a new cap conﬁrming the glory of a woman; a gossamer web spun by spi-
ders; and a smooth caplike membrane in which a lucky child is sometimes
born. Juxtaposed with close, caul also furnished pleasing alliteration.
Along similar lines, Stephen Spender recounts how he built a poem
upon one of his notebook jottings:
There are some days when the sea lies like a harp stretched ﬂat beneath
the cliffs. The waves like wires burn with the sun’s copper glow.
He attempted at least twenty versions of these lines in an effort to clarify
this scene, to bring out its musical feeling, to realize his “inner image” of the
brief life of earth and the death of the sea. Among the efforts were these:
78
The Theory

The waves are wires
Burning as with the secret songs of ﬁres
The day burns in the trembling wires
With a vast music golden in the eyes
The day glows on its trembling wires
Singing a golden music in the eyes
The day glows on its burning wires
Like waves of music golden to the eyes
Afternoon burns upon the wires
Lines of music, dazzling the eyes
Afternoon gilds its tingling wires
To a visual silent music of the eyes
Each of these stabs presented problems. For instance, in the ﬁrst, the
direct statement “waves are wires” creates an image that is not quite ﬁtting,
because it is overstated; in Spender’s view, the poet must avoid stating his
vision too overtly. In the sixth attempt, “visual silent music of the eyes”
mixes too many ﬁgures of speech in a phrase that is itself somewhat awk-
ward. Spender’s ﬁnal version places the images within an appropriately ex-
pansive context:
There are some days the happy ocean lies
Like an unﬁngered harp, below the land.
Afternoon gilds all the silent wires
Into a burning music of the eyes.
While the overall effect, with its intimation of Homer and of Blake, is
perhaps not as strikingly original as that wrought by some of their earlier
attempts, the ﬁnal version does capture, with ﬁdelity and clarity, Spender’s
underlying impulse, his initial vision.
In the poet’s struggles over the wording of a line or a stanza, one sees
at work some central aspects of linguistic intelligence. The poet must be
79
Linguistic Intelligence

superlatively sensitive to the shades of meanings of a word; indeed, rather
than shaving off connotations, he must try to preserve as many of the
sought-after meanings as possible. This is why caul was the most desirable
of the choices considered by Graves. Moreover, the meanings of the words
cannot be considered in isolation. Because every word assesses its own
penumbras of meaning, the poet must make sure that the senses of a word
in one line of the poem do not clash with those aroused by the occurrence
of a second word in another line. This is why Eliot warns against the co-
occurrence of pillar and mouse in the same stanza and challenges the ex-
orcising of a lady, rather than a ghostly house. Finally, the words must
capture as faithfully as possible the emotions or images that have animated
the initial desire to compose. Spender’s alternative verses may be striking
or pleasurable, but if they do not convey the vision that he initially had,
they fail as poetry—or, to put it another way, they can become the basis of
a new poem, one that the poet had not initially intended to write.
In discussing the meanings or connotations of words, we ﬁnd ourselves
in the area of semantics, that examination of meaning that is universally
considered central to language. Eliot once observed that the logic of 
the poet is as severe, though differently placed, as the logic of a scientist.
He also noted that the arrangement of imagery requires “just as much fun-
damental brainwork as the arrangement of an argument.” Where the sci-
entist’s logic requires sensitivity to the implications of one proposition (or
law) for another, the poet’s logic centers around a sensitivity to shadings of
meaning, and what they imply (or preclude) for neighboring words. Even
as one could not hope to be a scientist without appreciating the laws of
logical deduction, one cannot aspire to be a poet without sensitivity to the
interaction among linguistic connotations.
But other domains of language, as laid out by linguists, are also of sin-
gular importance for the aspiring poet. The poet must have keen sensitiv-
ity to phonology: the sounds of words and their musical interactions upon
one another. The central metrical aspects of poetry clearly depend upon this
auditory sensitivity, and poets have often noted their reliance on aural
properties. W. H. Auden declared, “I like hanging around words, listening
to what they say.” Herbert Read, another poet of the Eliot generation, in-
dicates that “in the degree that they are poetic . . . words are automatic as-
sociations of an aural rather than a visual nature.” And Graves’s close caul
had to work as sound just as much as it had to work semantically.
80
The Theory

A mastery of syntax, the rules governing ordering of words and their
inﬂections, is another sine qua non of poetry. The poet must understand,
intuitively, the rules of constructing phrases as well as the occasions on
which it is permissible to ﬂaunt syntax, to juxtapose words that, according
to ordinary grammatical principles, should not occur together. And, ﬁnally,
the poet must appreciate the pragmatic functions, the uses to which lan-
guage can be put: he must be aware of the different poetic speech acts,
ranging from the lyric of love to the epic of description, from the direct-
ness of an order to the subtleties of a plea.
Because this mastery of language is so central, so deﬁning of the poet’s
calling, it is the love of language and the eagerness to explore its every vein
that most clearly mark the young poet. Fascination with language, techni-
cal facility with words, rather than the desire to express ideas, are hall-
marks of the future poet. Though it is probably not a strict requirement,
the ability readily to pick up and remember phrases, especially those fa-
vored by other poets, is an invaluable stock-in-trade for the poet. The critic
Helen Vendler recalls sitting in on the poetry writing classes of Robert
Lowell, where this leading American poet effortlessly recalled the verses
of the great poets of the past, occasionally (and always intentionally) im-
proving a line that he felt inadequate. Beholding this linguistic facility,
Vendler remarks, “made one feel like a rather backward evolutionary form
confronted by an unknown but superior species.” This species—the poet—
possesses a relation to words beyond our ordinary powers, a repository, as
it were, of all the uses to which particular words have been put in previ-
ous poems. That knowledge of the history of language use prepares—or
frees—the poet to attempt certain combinations of his own as he con-
structs an original poem. It is through such fresh combinations of words,
as Northrop Frye insists, that we have our only way of creating new worlds.
The Core Operations of Language
In the poet, then, one sees at work with special clarity the core operations
of language. A sensitivity to the meaning of words, whereby an individual
appreciates the subtle shades of difference between spilling ink “inten-
tionally,” “deliberately,” or “on purpose.” A sensitivity to the order among
words—the capacity to follow rules of grammar, and, on carefully selected
81
Linguistic Intelligence

occasions, to violate them. At a somewhat more sensory level—a sensitiv-
ity to the sounds, rhythms, inﬂections, and meters of words—that ability
which can make even poetry in a foreign tongue beautiful to hear. And a
sensitivity to the different functions of language—its potential to excite,
convince, stimulate, convey information, or simply to please.
But most of us are not poets—not even of amateur standing—and still
we possess these sensitivities in significant degrees. Indeed, one could
not appreciate poetry without at least a tacit command of these aspects of
language. Moreover, one could not hope to proceed with any efﬁcacy in
the world without considerable command of the linguistic tetrad of
phonology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Linguistic competence is,
in fact, the intelligence—the intellectual competence—that seems most
widely and most democratically shared across the human species. Whereas
the musician or the visual artist—not to mention the mathematician or
the gymnast—exhibit abilities that seem remote from, and even mysteri-
ous to, the average person, the poet seems simply to have developed to a
superlatively keen degree capacities that all normal—and perhaps even
many subnormal—individuals have within their grasp. Thus, the poet can
serve as a reliable guide, or as an apt introduction, to the domain of lin-
guistic intelligence.
But for those among us who are not practicing poets, what are some of
the other major uses to which language can be put? Of numerous candi-
dates, I would single out four aspects of linguistic knowledge that have
proved of striking importance in human society. First of all, there is the
rhetorical aspect of language—the ability to use language to convince other
individuals of a course of action. This is the ability that political leaders
and legal experts have developed to the highest degree, but that every
three-year-old desirous of a second helping of cake has already begun to
cultivate. Second, there is the mnemonic potential of language—the ca-
pacity to use this tool to help one remember information, ranging from
lists of possessions to rules of a game, from directions for ﬁnding one’s way
to procedures for operating a new machine.
A third aspect of language is its role in explanation. Much of teaching
and learning occurs through language—at one time, principally through
oral instructions, employing verse, collections of adages, or simple expla-
nations; and now, increasingly, through the word in its written form. A
compelling example of this aspect can be found in the sciences. Despite
the evident importance of logical-mathematical reasoning and symbol sys-
82
The Theory

tems, language remains the optimal means for conveying the basic con-
cepts in textbooks. In addition, language supplies the metaphors that are
crucial for launching and for explaining a new scientiﬁc development.
Finally, there is the potential of language to explain its own activities—
the ability to use language to reﬂect upon language, to engage in “meta -
 linguistic” analysis. We can see intimations of this capacity in the youngest
child who says, “Did you mean X or Y?”—thereby directing his addressor
to reﬂect upon a prior use of language. Far more striking instances of meta -
 linguistic sophistication have emerged in our own century—in fact, in the
past thirty years. Thanks to the revolution in the study of language sparked
by the linguist Noam Chomsky, we have gained a ﬁrmer understanding of
what language is and how it works, as well as some bold hypotheses about
the place of language in the sphere of human activities. While a concern
with this form of propositional knowledge (know-that) about language seems
more prevalent in our culture than in many others, interest in language-
as-a-system is by no means restricted to Western or other scientiﬁcally ori-
ented cultures.
To convey the ﬂavor of these different faces of language is the chief
burden of this chapter. We turn our attention ﬁrst to language because it
is a preeminent instance of human intelligence. It also has been the most
thoroughly studied intelligence, and so we ﬁnd ourselves on relatively
ﬁrmer ground in reviewing the development of linguistic intelligence and
in discoursing on the breakdown, under conditions of brain damage, of lin-
guistic capacities. Relevant information has also been secured on the evo-
lutionary course of human language, its cross-cultural manifestations, and
its relation to the other human intelligences. Accordingly, in reviewing the
current knowledge base about linguistic intelligence, I seek not only to
summarize the state of the art in this particular sphere of human compe-
tence but also to suggest the kinds of analysis that I hope will be available
in the future for each of the remaining intelligences.
The Development of Linguistic Skills
The roots of spoken language can be found in the child’s babbling dur-
ing the opening months of life. Indeed, even deaf youngsters begin to bab-
ble early in life; and during the ﬁrst months, all infants will issue those
sounds found in linguistic stocks remote from their home tongue. But by
83
Linguistic Intelligence

the beginning of the second year, linguistic activity is different: it involves
(in English-speaking lands) the punctate utterance of single words:
“Mommy,” “doggy,” “cookie,” and, before long, the concatenation of pairs
of words into meaningful phrases: “eat cookie,” “bye-bye Mommy,” “baby
cry.” Let another year pass, and the three-year-old is uttering strings of
considerably greater complexity, including questions, “When I get up?”;
negations, “I no want to go to sleep”; and sentences with clauses, “Have
milk before lunch, please?” And by the age of four or ﬁve, the child has
corrected the minor syntactic infelicities in these sentences and can speak
with considerable ﬂuency in ways that closely approximate adult syntax.
Moreover, sweetening this list of accomplishments, children at these
tender ages transcend mundane expression. Average four-year-olds are able
to come up with appealing ﬁgures of speech (e.g., comparing a foot falling
asleep to bubbling ginger ale); tell short stories about their own adventures
and those of characters whom they have invented; alter their speech reg-
ister depending upon whether they are addressing adults, peers, or tod-
dlers younger than themselves; and even engage in simple metalinguistic
banter: “What does X mean?” “Should I say X or Y?” “Why didn’t you say
X when you mentioned Y?” In short, the skills of the four- or ﬁve-year-old
put to shame any computer program for language. Not even the most
skilled linguists in the world have been able to write the rules that account
for the form (and the meanings) of the utterances of childhood.
This much on linguistic development is fact, not disputed (so far as I am
aware) by any scholar. Somewhat more controversial, but rather widely 
accepted, is the claim that linguistic mastery involves special processes of
acquisition, ones apart from those entailed in other intellectual spheres.
The most vigorous and most persuasive spokesman for this proposition is
Noam Chomsky, who claims that children must be born with considerable
“innate knowledge” about the rules and forms of language and must pos-
sess as part of their birthright speciﬁc hypotheses about how to decode and
speak their language or any “natural language.” Chomsky’s claims grow out
of the fact that it is difﬁcult to explain how language can be acquired so
rapidly and so accurately despite the impurity of speech samples that the
child hears, and at a time when children’s other problem-solving skills seem
relatively underdeveloped. Other scholars, such as Kenneth Wexler and
Peter Culicover, have made the further claim that children would not be
able to learn language at all if they did not make certain initial 
assumptions about how the code must—and must not—operate, such as-
sumptions presumably being built into the nervous system.
84
The Theory

All normal children, and a large proportion of retarded ones as well,
learn language according to the outlined scheme, usually within a few
years. This fact gives comfort to those scholars who want to argue that lan-
guage is a special process, operating according to its own rules, and at the
same time poses difﬁculties for those scholars who want to argue (as did Pi-
aget) that the acquisition of language simply invokes general psychological
processes. It may well be that both sides have a point. The syntactic and
phonological processes appear to be special, probably speciﬁc to human
beings, and unfolding with relatively scant need for support from envi-
ronmental factors. Other aspects of language, however, such as the se-
mantic and pragmatic domains, may well exploit more general human
information-processing mechanisms and are less strictly or exclusively tied
to a “language organ.” In terms of my criteria for an intelligence, we might
say that syntax and phonology lie close to the core of linguistic intelligence
while semantics and pragmatics include inputs from other intelligences
(such as logical-mathematical and personal intelligences).
Even though the processes described here pertain to all children, there
are clearly vast individual differences. These are found in the kinds of words
that children ﬁrst utter (some children ﬁrst issue names of things, while
other children, avoiding nouns, favor exclamations); the extent to which
children slavishly imitate the signals emitted by their elders (some do,
others hardly mimic at all); and, not least, the rapidity and skill with which
children master the central aspects of language.
Young Jean-Paul Sartre was extremely precocious in these regards. The
future author was so skilled at mimicking adults, including their style and
register of talk, that by age ﬁve he could enchant audiences with his lin-
guistic ﬂuency. Shortly thereafter, he began to write, soon completing whole
books. He found his fullest identity in writing, in expressing himself with
his pen, entirely apart from whether his words were even read by others.
By writing I was existing. . . . My pen raced away so fast that often my
wrist ached. I would throw the ﬁlled notebooks on the ﬂoor, I would
eventually forget about them, they would disappear. . . . I wrote in order
to write. I don’t regret it; had I been read, I would have tried to please
[as he did in his earlier oral performances]. I would have become a won-
der again. Being clandestine I was true [at age 9]. 
Here, then, was a child who discovered his considerable powers in the
relentless exercising of his linguistic intelligence.
85
Linguistic Intelligence

The Development of the Writer
By writing a great deal, and by realizing himself most fully as a young
writer, Sartre was forging the path common to those who end up as au-
thors, be they poets, essayists, or novelists. In this, as in every intellectual
realm, practice is the sine qua non of eventual success. Writers speak of
their skill as a muscle that demands daily exercise—no day without a line
is their byword, just as it was Sartre’s.
In recollecting their own development, many writers have been able
to illuminate the important positive factors as well as the pitfalls that
threaten to ensnare the aspiring young writer. Auden argues that in a young
writer, promise inheres neither in originality of ideas nor in the power of
emotions but rather in technical skill with language. He draws an instruc-
tive analogy to a lad courting:
In the ﬁrst stages of his development, before he had found his distinctive
style, the poet is, as it were, engaged to language, and like any other
young man who is courting, it is right and proper that he should play the
chivalrous servant, carry parcels, submit to tests and humiliations, wait
hours at street corners, and defer to his beloved’s slightest whims, but
once he has proved his love and has been accepted, then it is another
matter. Once he is married, he must be master in his own house and be
responsible for their relationship.
Another crucial early component of mastery, according to Spender, is
sheer memory for experiences:
Memory exercised in a particular way is the natural gift of poetic genius.
The poet, above all else, is a person who never forgets certain sense im-
pressions which he has experienced and which he can relive again and
again as though with all their original freshness. . . . It therefore is not
surprising that although I have no memory for telephone numbers, ad-
dresses, faces, and where I have put this morning’s correspondence, I
have a perfect memory for the sensation of certain experiences which
are crystallized for me around certain associations. I could demonstrate
this from my own life by the overwhelming nature of associations which,
suddenly aroused, have carried me back so completely into the past,
86
The Theory

particularly into my childhood, that I have lost all sense of the present
time and place.
The young poet generally begins his self-education by reading other
poets and by imitating their voices as best he can. Such an imitation of the
form and style of a master is proper, and perhaps even necessary, so long
as it does not ultimately stiﬂe the development of one’s own poetic voice.
But there are numerous signs of poetic immaturity at this time, including
an excessive imitation of the model; stating one’s emotion, tension, or idea
too often or too readily; rigid adherence to a given rhyme scheme or met-
ric pattern; too self-conscious an effort to play with sounds and meanings.
An effort to be pretty or aesthetically “proper” is also suspect; rather than
being presented overtly to the reader, these attributes of beauty and form
should emerge from the total experience of reading a work.
According to Auden, such an “undeveloped” poet may reveal himself
in at least three ways. He may come off as bored; he may be in a hurry and
therefore write poetry that is technically slipshod or carelessly expressed
(witness Keith Douglas’s youthful verses); or he may produce work that
seems deliberately false or tawdry. In Auden’s view, such “trash” results
when a person is trying to achieve through poetry what can be achieved
only by personal actions, by study, or by prayer. Adolescents prove partic-
ularly guilty of these ﬂaws: if they have talent, and have found that poetry
can indeed express something, they may fall prey to the mistaken infer-
ence that every idea can be expressed through the medium of verse.
On the road to poetic maturity, young poets often set for themselves a
number of poetic tasks, such as the writing of a poem for an occasion.
Fledgling poets can vary the degree of difﬁculty in assignments: for in-
stance, some assignments are carried out simply to master a certain form.
Auden indicates the point (and the limitation) of such exercises: “It would
take an immense effort . . . to write half a dozen rhopalic hexameters in
English but it is virtually certain that the result would have no poetic
merit.” Following such rugged drill, it is often desirable to set oneself a
somewhat simpler task. At such times, previously mastered skills can be
drawn on automatically, and the words may ﬂow. Thornton Wilder com-
ments, “I believe that the practice of writing consists in more and more
relegating all that schematic operation to the subconscious.” Walter Jack-
son Bate records what happened when Keats lowered his ambition tem-
porarily: “If he turned temporarily to a less ambitious poem in a different
87
Linguistic Intelligence

form, the gate would quickly open and he would ﬁnd himself not only writ-
ing with remarkable ﬂuency but also incorporating, with rapid and effort-
less abundance, features of idiom and versiﬁcation that had been part of
the conception of the earlier, more demanding work.” In fact, through
practice the poet ultimately attains such ﬂuency that, like Auden or the
“possessed poet” Sue Lenier, he may be able to write verse virtually on
command, with the same facility as others speak prose. At such time, the
danger, paradoxically, becomes excessively ready production, which may
keep one mired at the level of superﬁcial glibness rather than ever-
increasing profundity.
In the end, of course, the writer who would be a poetic master must
ﬁnd the right framework for expressing his words and ideas. As the poet
Karl Shapiro once declared,
Genius in poetry is probably only the intuitive knowledge of form. The
dictionary contains all words and a textbook on verse contains all meters,
but nothing can tell the poet which words to choose and in what rhythms
to let them fall, except his own intuitive knowledge of form.
The Brain and Language
Future writers are those individuals in whom the linguistic intelligence
has ﬂowered through work and, perhaps as well, through the luck of the
genetic draw. Other individuals, less happily, may exhibit peculiar difﬁcul-
ties with language. Sometimes the costs are not severe: Albert Einstein is
said to have begun to speak very late; but, if anything, his initial reticence
may have allowed him to view and conceptualize the world in a less con-
ventionalized way. Many children, otherwise normal or close to normal,
demonstrate selective difﬁculties in the learning of language. Sometimes
the difﬁculty seems to inhere chieﬂy in auditory discrimination: because
these children experience difﬁculty in decoding a rapid string of phonemes,
they not only have problems in comprehension but may also articulate im-
properly. The ability to process linguistic messages rapidly—a prerequisite
for the understanding of normal speech—seems to depend upon an intact
left temporal lobe; and so injuries to, or the abnormal development of, this
neural zone generally sufﬁce to produce language impairments.
88
The Theory

Even as many children exhibit selective difﬁculties in the phonological
aspects of language, one also encounters children impaired in other lin-
guistic components. Some children show insensitivity to syntactic factors:
given sentences to imitate, they are forced to effect simpliﬁcations of the
following sort:
Target Sentence
Impaired Imitation
They won’t play with me.
They no/not play with me.
I can’t sing.
I no can sing.
He doesn’t have money.
He no have money.
She isn’t very old.
She not very old.
It is striking that such children prove quite normal in solving all man-
ner of problems providing that the oral-aural channels of presentation can
be bypassed.
In contrast to those children who are relatively normal, except for se-
lective difﬁculty in language tasks, many otherwise disturbed children ex-
hibit language that has been selectively spared. I have already noted that
many retarded children display a surprising ability to master language—
particularly its core phonological and syntactic aspects—though they may
have relatively little of signiﬁcance to utter. Even more striking are those
rare children who, despite retardation or autism, prove able to read at an
astonishingly early age. While reading normally begins at the age of ﬁve or
six, these “hyperlexic” children are often able to decode texts as early as
two or three. In fact, the very children who have little meaningful conver-
sation (and are often restricted to echoing) will, when they enter a room,
seize any reading material and begin to read aloud in a ritualistic fashion.
The reading is so compulsive that it is hard to stop; it proceeds by the
child’s disregarding semantic information, indifferent to whether the ma-
terials are drawn from a primer, a technical journal, or a collection of
nonsense. At times, hyperlexia occurs with other symptoms of the idiot
savant or the autistic child. For example, one hyperlexic child studied by
Fritz Dreifuss and Charles Mehegan could immediately tell the day of the
week of remote historical dates, while another showed an excellent mem-
ory for numbers.
In normal right-handed individuals, as I have already noted, language
is intimately tied to the operation of certain areas in the left hemisphere
89
Linguistic Intelligence

of the brain. Accordingly, the question arises about the fate of language in
young individuals in whom major areas of the left hemisphere have had to
be excised for therapeutic reasons. Generally, if areas as large as an entire
hemisphere of the brain are removed during the ﬁrst year of life, a child
will be able to speak quite well. Apparently, early in life the brain is sufﬁ-
ciently plastic (or equipotential) and language sufﬁciently important that
language will develop in the right hemisphere, even at the cost of com-
promising those visual and spatial functions that would normally be local-
ized there.
It must be pointed out, however, that this assumption of language
functions by the right hemisphere is not without costs. Careful examina-
tion of such children reveals that they utilize linguistic strategies that are
different from those of individuals (normal or abnormal) who employ the
normal language areas in the left hemisphere. Speciﬁcally, individuals de-
pendent upon the analytic mechanisms of the right hemisphere proceed al-
most entirely from semantic information: they decode sentences in the
light of meanings of the principal lexical items, while proving unable to
utilize cues of syntax. Only those children whose language exploits left
hemisphere structures prove able to pay attention to syntactic cues such as
word order. Thus, both left and right hemidecorticates are able to under-
stand sentences whose meaning can be inferred simply from a knowledge
of the meaning of substantives:
The cat was struck by the truck.
The cheese was eaten by the mouse.
But only the individual with an intact left hemisphere can decode sen-
tences where the critical difference in meaning inheres wholly in syntac-
tic cues:
The truck was hit by the bus.
The bus was hit by the truck.
It also seems that children without a left hemisphere are inferior to
those lacking a right hemisphere in tasks of speech production and vocab-
ulary comprehension and, overall, may learn language more slowly.
As I observed in Chapter 3, the canalization that governs the process
of language acquisition is conﬁrmed by examinations of other unusual pop-
90
The Theory

ulations. Deaf children of hearing parents will, on their own, develop sim-
ple gesture languages that exhibit the most pivotal features of natural lan-
guage. In these spontaneously developing gesture languages, one ﬁnds
manifestations of the basic syntactic and semantic properties exhibited in
the earliest oral utterances of hearing children. From a less happy vantage
point, there is the recently documented case of Genie, a child who was
abused to such an extent during the opening decade of life that she never
learned to speak. Freed at last from her cruel imprisonment, Genie began
to speak during the second decade of her life. She acquired vocabulary
quite readily and was able to classify objects properly, but she showed
marked and continuing difﬁculty in using syntax and was reduced to com-
munication primarily through single words. Most tellingly, her linguistic
processing seemed to be mediated by the right cerebral hemisphere. In a
single case study, one can never be certain of the reasons for a particular
pattern of brain lateralization. But it seems reasonable to conjecture that
the tendency for lateralization of language to the left hemisphere may
weaken with age, possibly because of the passage of a critical period for
language acquisition. As a consequence, the individual who must learn lan-
guage after puberty may be limited to those mechanisms mediated by the
right hemisphere.
With young children, we confront a system still in the course of devel-
opment and, as a consequence, a system exhibiting considerable (though
by no means total) ﬂexibility in the manner of neural localization and the
mode of realization. With age, however, a far greater degree of localiza-
tion of language function becomes the rule. This trend means, ﬁrst, that in
normal right-handed individuals, speciﬁc forms of disability will prove con-
sequent upon speciﬁc lesions in critical areas of the left hemisphere; and,
second, that the possibilities for complete recovery (or takeover) of these
functions by other regions of the brain becomes much slighter.
A century of study of the linguistic consequences of unilateral injury to
the brain provides powerful lines of evidence in support of the analysis of
language functions I have put forth here. Speciﬁcally, one can specify le-
sions that cause particular difﬁculties in phonological discrimination and
production, in the pragmatic uses of speech, and, most critically, in the se-
mantic and syntactic aspects of language. Moreover, each of these aspects
of language can be destroyed in relative isolation: one can confront indi-
viduals whose syntax is impaired but whose pragmatic and semantic sys-
tems are relatively preserved, even as one can encounter individuals whose
91
Linguistic Intelligence

* For reasons that are not understood, language functions seem more strongly lo-
calized to the left hemisphere in males than in females.
The Theory
92
ordinary communicative language is largely vitiated in the face of selective
preservation of their syntactic powers.
Why this picture of astonishing speciﬁcity and localization? Part of the
answer lies, no doubt, in the histories (and mysteries) of the evolution of
the language faculty—an issue that has fascinated scholars for many cen-
turies, but whose full lines of explanation remain obscured forever, buried
as they are in fossils or prehistory, if not in the Tower of Babel. Some of the
mechanisms are shared with other organisms—for example, the detection
of phoneme boundaries occurs in similar fashion in other mammals, such
as the chinchilla: other processes, such as syntax, seem clearly restricted
to human beings. Some linguistic mechanisms are located in quite punc-
tate regions of the brain—for example, the syntactic processes mediated by
the so-called Broca’s area; others are much more widely dispersed in the
left hemisphere of the brain—for example, the semantic system; still oth-
ers seem crucially dependent upon right hemisphere structures, such as
the pragmatic functions of language. What does seem clear, however, is
that, with age, these functions become increasingly focalized in normal
right-handed individuals:* the more complex interactions that character-
ize our daily linguistic intercourse depend upon a seamless ﬂow of infor-
mation among these crucial linguistic regions.
Nowhere is this interaction more telling than in the decoding of writ-
ten language. It has been established convincingly that written language
“piggybacks” upon oral language, in the sense that it is not possible to con-
tinue reading normally if one’s oral-auditory language areas have been de-
stroyed. (This loss of reading skill occurs even in individuals who read
ﬂuently without subvocalization or lip movements.) Yet, while aphasia al-
most always entails reading difﬁculty, the extent of difﬁculty will depend on
the kind of literacy present. What proves instructive are the different ways
in which reading may be represented in the nervous system, depending
upon the code favored by a particular culture. In the phonologically based
systems of the West, reading relies particularly on those areas of the brain
that process linguistic sounds; but in those systems (in the Orient) where
ideographic reading is preferred, reading is more crucially dependent upon
those centers that interpret pictorial materials. (This dependence may also

Linguistic Intelligence
93
obtain for those deaf individuals who have learned to read.) Finally, in the
case of the Japanese, who have both a syllabary reading system (kana) and
an ideographic system (kanji), two mechanisms for reading are housed in
the same individual. Thus, one kind of lesion will cause relatively greater
injury to the decoding of kana symbols, while another will wreak its havoc
particularly on the decoding of kanji symbols.
As these mechanisms have become better understood, certain peda-
gogical implications have followed. We now have insights about how one
might go about teaching the reading of various codes to otherwise normal
children who, for one or another reason, have difﬁculty in mastering the
prevalent code of their culture. Given that it is possible to learn to read by
at least two alternative routes, children with a speciﬁc learning disability
ought to be able to exploit the “other route” and thus to master the prin-
ciple of written scripts, if not the particular written script that happens to
be favored by their culture. And, in fact, ideographically based systems
have proved effective with children who exhibit particular problems in
mastering a phonologically based system of literacy.
While evidence from brain damage confers a “face validity” upon the
analysis of the components of language faculty I have proposed, we must
still address its implications for the existence of language as a separate,
semi-autonomous faculty—in our terms, a separate intelligence. Here the
evidence is somewhat less decisive. It seems clear that in the face of a sig-
niﬁcant aphasia, there may be some impairment of more general intellec-
tual capacities, particularly the ability to form concepts, to classify properly,
and to solve abstraction problems, such as those featured in many tests of
nonverbal intelligence. In that sense, at least, it is difﬁcult to have a full-
ﬂedged compromise of one’s language area in the face of otherwise unim-
paired comprehension and reasoning skills.
Nonetheless, in my view, the preponderance of evidence does support
the notion of linguistic intelligence as being an intelligence apart. In fact,
it may be the intelligence for which evidence across the full range of cri-
teria sketched in Chapter 4 is most persuasive. For one thing, there are
clearly individuals who are highly, even grossly aphasic, who can perform
very well—within the normal range—on cognitive tasks that are not tied
speciﬁcally to language. Aphasic patients have lost their abilities to be au-
thors (alas, highly developed skills serve as no guarantor against the ravages
of brain disease); and yet severely aphasic patients have retained their
abilities to be musicians, visual artists, or engineers. Clearly, this selective

sparing of occupational skills would be impossible were language indissol-
ubly melded to other forms of intellect.
Thus, in its strictest sense, when one focuses on phonological, syntactic,
and certain semantic properties, language emerges as a relatively auto -
nomous intelligence. But once one encompasses broader aspects, such
as pragmatic functions, the picture of linguistic autonomy becomes less
convincing. Indeed, it appears that individuals with a severe aphasia often
have a preserved ability to appreciate and carry out various kinds of com-
municative acts, while individuals with preserved syntactic and semantic
capacities may, as a consequence of injury to their nondominant hemi-
spheres, exhibit gross abnormalities in communicating their intentions and
in understanding the intentions and motivations of others. Even as re-
search suggests the separability of pragmatics as a distinct aspect of lan-
guage, it conﬁrms its neurological dissociation from the “hard core” of
language abilities. Perhaps this state of affairs exists because “speech act”
or “communicative act” aspects of language are most clearly shared with
other primates and, accordingly, least tied to the evolution of a separate
language faculty housed in certain regions of the left hemispheres of
human beings. By the same token, and perhaps relatedly, sensitivity to nar-
rative, including the ability to communicate what has happened in a series
of episodes, seems more closely tied to the pragmatic functions of language
(and thus proves more fragile in cases of right-hemisphere disease) than to
the core syntactic, phonological, and semantic functions I have described.
As already noted, even a slight aphasia proves sufﬁcient to destroy an
individual’s literary talent. Yet a study of the way in which language breaks
down under conditions of brain damage proves surprisingly suggestive for
a student of the literary imagination. It turns out that the linguistic signal
can be impoverished in characteristic ways, dependent upon the particu-
lar nature of brain injury. In the form of aphasia associated with a Broca’s
area lesion, the language signal is heavy in substantives and simple propo-
sitions, while displaying little inﬂection or modiﬁcation—a kind of cari-
cature of the style of Ernest Hemingway. In the case of that aphasia
associated with a Wernicke’s area lesion, the language signal is replete with
complex syntactic forms and a variety of inﬂections, but often the sub-
stantive message is difﬁcult to extract—a kind of caricature of the style of
William Faulkner. (Other linguistic aberrations, like idioglossa, where one
invents one’s own patois, and schizophrenic language are also syntactically
wild.) Finally, in anomic aphasia, following a lesion in the angular gyrus, the
94
The Theory

speech signal is devoid of names but ﬁlled with “things,” “stuff,” “kind of,”
and other circumlocutions—the kind of circumstantial speech frequent in
a character out of Damon Runyan, but completely remote from the poet
who cherishes le mot juste. It would be ludicrous to trace the sources of
these distinctive styles to particular regions of the brain; and yet the fact
that brain injury can consign an individual to certain stylistic traits that
the creative writer deliberately selects provides a perverse conﬁrmation 
of the neurological reality of different modes of expression.
Until only a few years ago, it was generally believed that the two halves of
the brain were anatomically indistinguishable from one another. This fact
gave comfort to those who wanted to believe in the nonlocalization posi-
tion, with its corollary assumption that the human brain is equipotential
for language. Recent ﬁndings have not supported this point of view. It has
now been amply documented that the two hemispheres are not anatomi-
cally identical, and that, in the large majority of individuals, the language
areas in the left temporal lobes are larger than the homologous areas in
the right temporal lobes. Other important asymmetries between the hemi-
spheres became evident once people started to look for them. Armed with
this unexpected information, evolutionarily oriented scholars have begun
to investigate cranial endocasts and have demonstrated that such asym-
metry, which is not evident in monkeys, can be traced back at least as far
as Neanderthal man (thirty thousand to one hundred thousand years ago)
and may be present as well in the great apes. It seems reasonable to infer,
then, that the intellectual capacities for language go back quite a way be-
fore history began to be recorded. Notations have been found from thirty
thousand years ago, suggesting at least the beginnings of writing systems,
though the actual invention of a phonetic script goes back only a few thou-
sand years.
In deﬁance of “gradual evolution,” some eminent scholars, such as the
linguist Noam Chomsky and the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, be-
lieve that all of language had to be acquired at a single moment in time. To
my mind, it seems more likely that human linguistic competence results
from a coming together of a number of discrete systems, whose evolution-
ary history dates back many thousands of years. Quite possibly, various
pragmatic features of human language evolved from those emotional ex-
pressions and gestural capacities (pointing, beckoning) that we share with
apes. There may also be certain formal or structural features that reﬂect or
95
Linguistic Intelligence

build upon musical capacities of the sort evinced by far more remote
species, such as birds. Such cognitive abilities as classiﬁcation of objects
and the capacity to associate a name or sign with an object also seem of
ancient origin: these may facilitate that provocative mastery of language-
like systems recently reported in a number of chimpanzees.
Where humans seem unique is in the presence of a supralaryngeal
vocal tract that is capable of distinct articulation, and in the evolution of
neural mechanisms that make use of the pre-adapted properties of this
vocal tract for rapidly induced speech. When sound distinctions can be
made and understood rapidly enough, it proves possible to squash indi-
vidual sounds together into syllable-sized units: the use of speech for rapid
communication follows. According to Philip Lieberman, chief proponent
of this view of the evolution of language, all of the components for lan-
guage were present in Neanderthal man, and possibly even in Australop-
ithecus, except for the appropriate vocal tract. It is this latest evolution that
has made possible the emergence of rapid linguistic communication, with
its profound cultural consequences.
Cross-Cultural Linguistic Variations
Once language took off, it exhibited numerous functions. Something of the
variety can be seen by considering just a few of the ways in which individ-
uals from diverse cultures have used language and some of the ways in
which cultures have rewarded those individuals who have excelled at such
uses. Perhaps most astounding are the abilities displayed by certain bards
to sing huge bodies of verse, often nightly, to appreciative audiences. As
demonstrated by the folklorist Millman Parry and his student A. B. Lord,
these singers of tales, these contemporary Homers, can create thousands
of verses, in part because they have mastered certain frames, or schemes,
into which they can place varying speciﬁc contents and which they have
learned to combine in diverse ways to fashion ever novel epics.
The fact that, like all complex human creations, oral verses can be ana-
lyzed into component parts should in no way detract from this achievement.
First of all, the sheer mnemonic demands for learning these formulas, and
the rules for their concatenation, are formidable: they are in no way infe-
rior to the prowess of the chess master, who knows ﬁfty thousand or more
basic patterns, or of the mathematician, who can carry in his head hun-
96
The Theory

dreds or even thousands of proofs. In each case, these patterns or schemas
are sensible, not meaningless, and this meaningfulness certainly aids in
recall; and yet the ability to have so many of them at one’s cerebral ﬁnger -
tips is no mean accomplishment. Moreover, these abilities may be partic-
ularly elaborated in individuals who are illiterate. In this regard, one may
note E. F. Dube’s recent ﬁnding that illiterate Africans were more suc-
cessful at remembering stories than either schooled Africans or schooled
New Yorkers.
The ability to retain information like lengthy verbal lists, long a favorite
testing area for Western psychologists, is another form of linguistic intel-
ligence that has been especially valued in traditional preliterate societies.
In his book Naven, Gregory Bateson reports that an erudite Iatmul male
will know between ten thousand and twenty thousand clan names. While
techniques are used to recall these names (for example, arrangement in
pairs that sound alike), and each name has at least a “leaven of meaning,”
the actual accomplishment remains staggering. We see intimations of this
ability in earlier epochs in our own civilization: during Classical and me-
dieval times, elaborate systems for aiding memory were devised, includ-
ing number lists, intricate images, spatial codes, zodiac systems, and
astrological schemes.
While the person who could remember well was once at a tremendous
premium, the advent of literacy, and the possibility of writing down infor-
mation in books available for ready consultation, made the possession of a
powerful verbal memory less vital. Later, printing rendered this aspect of
linguistic intelligence even less valuable. And yet these abilities continue
to be cultivated in some circles. K. Anders Ericcson and William Chase
have recently demonstrated that memory for a string of digits can be
lengthened from the canonical seven to eighty or even more by a regimen
of drill in which the chunks to be recalled become ever larger. After all,
we all know it is easier to remember the list
1 4 9 2 1 0 6 6 1 7 7 6 2 0 0 1 1 9 8 4
once it is seen as a collection of memorable dates in the Anglo-American
experience. Memory books and mnemonists remain popular. Finally, in a
few ﬁelds, a keen verbal memory sets one apart. The philosopher Susanne
Langer introspects:
My verbal memory is like ﬂypaper. That is both good and bad because
one’s mind becomes ﬁlled with irrelevant as well as useful things For
97
Linguistic Intelligence

instance, I still remember any number of rhymes from advertisements
that I saw in my childhood and these pop into my head at the most un-
expected and ridiculous moments. At the same time, however, I re-
member reams of the ﬁne poetry that I’ve read over the years and that
is a delight to recall. Though my verbal memory may be exceptional, my
visual memory is unfortunately far from good. . . . A poor visual memory
is a particular handicap in handling source materials in research. That’s
why I have to keep the elaborately cross-indexed system of ﬁle cards.
The recollection of large amounts of information is a tremendously im-
portant gift in preliterate cultures. Individuals are often singled out be-
cause they have this ability, and rites of passage are sometimes so devised
as to identify the individuals with this treasured power. Naturally these
powers can be developed and cultivated, but it is obviously a great help if
one can remember such lists with seeming effortlessness, as was the case
with the mnemonist studied by Alexander Luria and, to a lesser extent,
with humanistic scholars like Susanne Langer.
Sometimes this recall ability is valued for its own sake, but oftentimes
it is coupled with the ability to relate words to other kinds of symbols, such
as numbers or pictures. We encounter here the rise of certain arcane
codes, verbal in the ﬁrst instance, that individuals can use in games re-
quiring high skills. The abilities that allow a Westerner to solve a cross-
word or an acrostic puzzle may be akin to the abilities, in other cultures,
to pun readily or to invent and master nonsensical or recondite lan-
guages. Verbal dueling is often valued. For instance, among the Chamula
of Chiapas, Mexico, a player will initiate a phrase that has an apparent as
well as a hidden meaning (usually sexual); his opponent has to reply with
a phrase that features a minimal sound shift from the ﬁrst and also has a
hidden meaning. If he cannot come up with a suitable response, he loses.
For example:
Boy I (challenging) ak’bun avis
Give me your sister.
Boy II (responding) ak’bo avis
Give it to your sister.
Oratorical contests in which individuals compete by choosing appropriate
items from a traditional repertoire of sayings or songs has been described
98
The Theory

for a number of societies. In a way that would have delighted William
James (who was always searching for a “moral equivalent” to war), com-
petitive speech making has replaced warfare among the Maori as a way of
demonstrating the superiority of one’s group. And as if to underscore the
importance of ways of speaking, Tzeltal (a Mayan language) features over
four hundred terms referring to language use.
Over and above these relatively casual uses of language, the peaks of
political power have often been reserved for those individuals who exhibit
unusual rhetorical powers. It is surely no accident that a number of the
most outstanding leaders in contemporary Africa and Asia have been in-
dividuals who have won wide acclaim in rhetoric and whose poetry is often
recited. Such poetry, like proverbs, has often been used as a memorable
way to disseminate crucial information. Rhetorical ﬁnesse is part of the up-
bringing of aristocrats in a traditional castelike system, even as it may prove
to be a signiﬁcant survival skill among lower echelons of a society. A tradi-
tional source of prestige among elder males is their knowledge of the
meanings of proverbs and traditional phrases that may still be opaque to
less venerable members of the society. Indeed, among the Kpelle of Liberia
there is a patois, “deep Kpelle”—a complex language replete with proverbs,
which may defy interpretation by the younger members of the culture.
Furthermore, in a number of traditional societies, the ability to wax eloquent
about one’s own case often provides a decisive edge in “court speech.”
Among the Tshidi of Botswana, the effective power of a chief is deter-
mined by his performances in public debates, which are carefully analyzed
afterward by members of the group. We can see manifestations of these
values in certain pockets of our own civilization—for example, among pub-
lic school graduates in England or among individuals from the southern
regions of the United States, where training in political rhetoric is still val-
ued in childhood, and where well-honed skills are displayed up to old age.
And, in fact, the roots of this esteem can be traced back within our own so-
ciety to Greek times, where political power was regularly held by those in-
dividuals who had superior linguistic skills. According to Eric Havelock,
who studied the oral culture of that time:
within limits, the community’s leadership lay with those who had a su-
perior ear and rhythmic aptitude, which would be demonstrable in
epic hexameter. It would also however show itself in the ability to com-
pose rhemata—effective sayings which used other devices besides the
99
Linguistic Intelligence

metrical, such as assonance and parallelism. Again, the good performer
at a banquet would be estimated not exclusively as an entertainer but as
a natural leader of man. . . . The effective judge or even general tended
to be the man with the superior oral memory. . . . The general effect was
to put a great premium upon the intelligence in Greek social trans actions
and to identify intelligence with power. By intelligence we specially mean
a superior memory and a superior sense of verbal rhythm. 
It would be a mistake to designate our society as one in which the pow-
ers of language have been gradually downplayed (witness the political ef-
fectiveness of skilled speakers like Franklin Roosevelt, John Kennedy, or
more recently, Ronald Reagan). Yet, on a comparative basis, it does seem
that language is less highly valued in our society. Logical-mathematical
forms of intelligence, of relatively little moment elsewhere, are certainly as
esteemed as language. Also, while the emphasis in traditional cultures still
falls very much on oral language, rhetoric, and word play, our culture
places relatively greater emphasis on the written word—on securing in-
formation from reading and on expressing oneself properly through the
written word.
While oral and written forms of language doubtless draw on some of
the same capacities, speciﬁc additional skills are needed to express oneself
appropriately in writing. The individual must learn to supply that context
that in spoken communication is evident from nonlinguistic sources (like
gestures, tone of voice, and the surrounding situations); one must be able
to indicate through words alone just what point one wishes to make. These
challenges often elude individuals when they are ﬁrst attempting to write.
As an individual becomes more skilled in one means of expression, it may
well become more difﬁcult for him to excel in the other (although there are
always impressive exceptions, like Winston Churchill and Charles de Gaulle).
The construction of a lengthy work—a novel, a history, a textbook—
poses organizational challenges that are different from those entailed in
shorter linguistic entities, like a letter or poem, and in spoken perform-
ances, be they brief speeches, lengthy orations, or recitations of oral verse.
Whereas the emphasis in a poem falls on the choice of every word and on
the delivery, within a relatively compact set of lines, of one or a small num-
ber of messages, the emphasis in a novel necessarily falls on the conveying
of a larger collection of ideas and themes, which may bear a complex re-
lationship to one another. Choice of word remains important, to be sure,
100
The Theory

but proves less at a premium than the successful communication of a set
of ideas, themes, moods, or scenes. Of course, some novelists (like Joyce,
Nabokov, or Updike) exhibit the poet’s obsession with lexical choice,
while others (like Balzac or Dostoevsky) are far more immersed in
themes and ideas.
Language as a Tool
For the most part, I have focused on those domains of expertise in which
language itself is at the fore. Whether it be the penning of a poem or the
winning of a verbal joust, the precise choice of words proves important, if
not all important. But in most societies, for most of the time, and most
strikingly in a complex society such as ours, language is as often as not a
tool—a means for accomplishing one’s business—rather than the central
focus of attention.
A few examples. Scientists certainly rely on language for communicat-
ing their ﬁndings to others. Moreover, as I have noted, breakthroughs in
science are often presented in terms of revealing ﬁgures of speech or
through well-organized essays. Still, the focus here falls not on the lan-
guage per se but rather on the communication of ideas that could certainly
have been conveyed in other words (no need to endure Spenderlike ago-
nies) and, ultimately, may be quite adequately expressed in pictures, dia-
grams, equations, or other symbols. Freud may have initially required the
metaphor of a willful rider upon a horse in order to convey the relationship
between the ego and the id; Darwin may have been helped by the
metaphor of “a race for survival”; but ultimately their conceptions can be
appreciated by individuals who have never read a word by these scholars
and have never even been exposed to the original verbal formulation of
the concepts.
At ﬁrst glance, other scholars, such as historians or literary critics, may
seem far more dependent upon language, not only as a source of what they
study but also as a means for conveying their conclusions. And, as a prac-
tical matter, scholars in the humanities do attend much more closely to
words in the texts they study, in the writings of their colleagues, and in
their own manuscripts. Yet, even here, the use of language is best viewed
as a vital, perhaps irreplaceable, means but still not the essence of the work
being accomplished. The goal of the scholar is to describe with accuracy a
101
Linguistic Intelligence

problem or a situation that he has elected to study and to convince others
that his vision, his interpretation of the situation, is appropriate and accu-
rate. The humanist is tied closely to evidence—facts, records, artifacts,
ﬁndings of predecessors; and if his case strays too far from what has been
proposed by others, he may well not be taken seriously. But the particular
format of his ﬁnal product is not ﬁxed, and once his viewpoint or conclu-
sion has been gotten across, the particular lexical choices made by the
scholar recede in importance, leaving the message to speak for itself. We
cannot brook any substitute for the verses of T. S. Eliot, but we can read-
ily enough assimilate the points of his criticism without reading his essays
(though in the case of Eliot, much of the power of what he says does in-
here in his unusually felicitous phrasing).
Finally, the expressive writer—the novelist, the essayist. Surely here,
the particular choice of words is of crucial importance, and we would not
readily accept a “trot” for the writings of Tolstoy or Flaubert, Emerson or
Montaigne. Yet the purpose does seem to be different, or at least different
in emphasis, from that of the poet. For, what the writer of ﬁction wants
most critically, as Henry James once put it, is to wrest the essence, the real
truth, “the fatal futility of fact,” from “clumsy life.” The narrative writer
witnesses or envisions an experience or a set of experiences, an emotion or
a set of emotions; and his goal is to convey these to the reader as com-
pletely and effectively as possible. Once this has been conveyed, the ac-
tual words used become less important—though surely they remain a
signiﬁcant proportion of the pleasure of the message, “of language calling
attention to itself.” Whereas the meaning of the poem continues to inhere
in its words, the meaning of a novel is much less tied to these words: that
translation that is virtually impossible to carry out faithfully for poems is
done without excessive difﬁculty for most novels—though not for all, and
with greatest difﬁculty, for those written by poets.
Conclusion
While language can be conveyed through gesture, and through writing, it
remains at its core a product of the vocal tract and a message to the human
ear. Understanding of the evolution of human language, and its current
representation in the human brain, is likely to fall wide of the mark if it
minimizes the integral tie between human language and the auditory-oral
102
The Theory

tract. At the same time, a student of language who focuses only upon this
anatomical arrangement may miss the amazing ﬂexibility of language, the
variety of ways in which humans—skilled as well as impaired—have ex-
ploited their linguistic heritage for communicative and expressive purposes.
My belief in the centrality of the auditory—and oral—elements in lan-
guage has motivated my focus upon the poet as the user of language par
excellence and my citation of the evidence from aphasia as a strong argu-
ment in favor of the autonomy of language. To the extent that language
were to be considered a visual medium, it would ﬂow much more directly
into spatial forms of intelligence; that this is not the case is underscored by
the fact that reading is invariably disturbed by injury to the language sys-
tem, while, amazingly, this linguistic decoding capacity proves robust de-
spite massive injury to the visual-spatial centers of the brain.
And yet I have taken care not to term this capacity as an auditory-oral
form of intelligence. There are two reasons. First of all, the fact that deaf
individuals can acquire natural language—and can also devise or master
gestural systems—serves as decisive proof that linguistic intelligence is not
simply a form of auditory intelligence. Second, there is another form of in-
telligence, with a history of equal longevity, and an autonomy of equal per-
suasiveness, which is also tied to the auditory-oral tract. I refer, of course,
to the musical intelligence—the abilities of individuals to discern meaning
and importance in sets of pitches rhythmically arranged and also to produce
such metrically arranged pitch sequences as a means of communicating
with other individuals. These capacities also rely heavily on auditory-oral
abilities—indeed, they prove even less susceptible to visual translation
than does language; and yet counter to intuition, musical abilities are me-
diated by separate parts of the nervous system and consist of separate sets
of competence.
Buried far back in evolution, music and language may have arisen from
a common expressive medium. But whether that speculation has any merit,
it seems clear that they have taken separate courses over many thousands
of years and are now harnessed to different purposes. What they share is
an existence that is not closely tied to the world of physical objects (in con-
trast to spatial and logical-mathematical forms of intelligence) and an
essence that is equally remote from the world of other persons (as mani-
fest in various forms of personal intelligence). And so, in taking the meas-
ure of another autonomous intellectual competence, I turn to the nature
and operation of musical intelligence.
103
Linguistic Intelligence


105
6
Musical Intelligence
[Music is] the corporealization of the intelligence that is
in sound.
HOENE WRONSKY
O
f all the gifts with which individuals may be endowed, none emerges
earlier than musical talent. Though speculation on this matter has
been rife, it remains uncertain just why musical talent emerges so early,
and what the nature of this gift might be. A study of musical intelligence
may help us understand the special ﬂavor of music and at the same time
illuminate its relation to other forms of human intellect.
Some feeling for the range and sources of early musical gifts can be
gleaned by attending a hypothetical musical audition in which the per-
formers are three preschool children. The ﬁrst child plays a Bach suite for
solo violin with technical accuracy as well as considerable feeling. The sec-
ond child performs a complete aria from a Mozart opera after hearing it
sung but a single time. The third child sits down at the piano and plays a
simple minuet that he himself has composed. Three performances by three
musical prodigies.
But have they all arrived at these heights of youthful talent by the same
routes? Not necessarily. The ﬁrst child could be a Japanese youngster who
has participated since age two in the Suzuki Talent Education Program
and has, like thousands of her peers, mastered the essentials of a string in-
strument by the time she enters school. The second child could be a vic-
tim of autism, a youngster who can barely communicate with anyone else
and who is severely disturbed in several affective and cognitive spheres;
still, he exhibits an isolated sparing of musical intelligence, such that he
can sing back ﬂawlessly any piece he hears. The third could be a young
child raised in a musical family who has begun to pick out tunes on his

own—a throwback to the precocious young Mozart, Mendelssohn, or
Saint-Saens.
Enough children exemplifying each of these patterns have been observed
so that we can say with conﬁdence that these performances are genuine phe-
nomena. One can exhibit musical precocity as a result of involvement in a
superbly designed instructional regime, by virtue of life in a household
ﬁlled with music, or despite (or as part of) a crippling malady. Underlying
each of these performances, there may well be a core talent, one that has
been inherited; but, clearly, other factors are also at work. At the very least,
the extent to which the talent is expressed publicly will depend upon the
milieu in which one lives.
But these early performances, however charming, mark the barest be-
ginning. Each of these children may go on to achieve a high degree of
musical competence, but it is equally possible that one or another will not
realize such heights. Accordingly, just as I ﬁrst introduced linguistic in-
telligence through the perspective of the poet, I will begin by examining
instances of unambiguous musical accomplishment in adulthood—those
skills most lavishly found among individuals who make their livelihood as
composers. Having presented an “end-state” of musical intelligence, I will
then describe some of the core abilities that underlie musical competence
in ordinary individuals—those abilities of a relatively microscopic sort, as
well as those that involve larger passages of music. In an effort to gain fur-
ther purchase on the kinds of talent exhibited by our opening trio of chil-
dren, I will consider aspects of normal development as well as the training
of musical skills. As a complement, I will also investigate musical break-
down and, in the course of this discussion, touch upon the brain organi-
zation that makes possible musical achievement. Finally, having surveyed
the evidence for an autonomous musical intelligence, in our own and
other cultures, I shall in conclusion consider some of the ways in which
musical intelligence has—and can—interact with other human intellec-
tual competences.
Composing
The twentieth-century American composer Roger Sessions has provided a
revealing account of what it is like to compose a piece of music. As he ex-
plains it, a composer can be readily identiﬁed by the fact that he constantly
106
The Theory

has “tones in his head”—that is, he is always, somewhere near the surface
of his consciousness, hearing tones, rhythms, and larger musical patterns.
While many of these patterns are worth little musically and may, in fact, be
wholly derivative, it is the composer’s lot constantly to be monitoring and
reworking these patterns.
Composing begins at the moment when these ideas begin to crystal-
lize and to assume a signiﬁcant shape. The pregnant musical image can be
anything from the simplest melodic, rhythmic, or harmonic fragment to
something considerably more elaborate; but in any event, the idea seizes
the composer’s attention, and his musical imagination begins to work
upon it.
In what direction will the idea be taken? As Sessions describes it, the
initial idea harbors many implications. Often it stimulates something con-
trasting or complementary, though the two motifs will remain part of the
same overall design. All the ideas that succeed the initial one will bear
some relationship to it, at least until that idea has either been completed
or abandoned. At the same time, the composer is nearly always certain
which elements belong to an elaboration of the original idea and which 
do not:
Assuming, as I am doing, that the conception is adequately strong and
ﬁrmly established, it will govern every move that the composer makes
from this point on. . . . Choices are made within a speciﬁc framework
which, as it grows, exerts an ever greater inﬂuence on what is to come. 
For the outside world this process may seem mysterious, but for the
composer it has a compelling logic of its own:
What I have called logical musical thinking is the consequential working
out of a sustained musical impulse, pursuing a result constantly implicit
in it. It is not in any sense a shrewd calculation of what should . . . hap-
pen next. The aural imagination is simply the working of the composer’s
ear, fully reliable and sure of its direction as it must be, in the service of
a clearly envisaged conception.
In these efforts, the composer relies on the aforementioned technique of
contrast, but also on other dictates of his ear—passages associated with 
the original idea, passages that articulate or place into proper proportion
107
Musical Intelligence

the elements of the initial idea. Working with tones, rhythms, and, above
all, an overall sense of form and movement, the composer must decide
how much sheer repetition, and which harmonic, melodic, rhythmic, or
contrapuntal variations, are necessary to realize his conception.
Other composers echo this description of the processes in which they
are engaged. In his account, Aaron Copland indicates that composing is as
natural as eating or sleeping: “It is something that the composer happens
to have been born to do; and because of that it loses the character of a spe-
cial virtue in the composer’s eyes.” Wagner said he composed like a cow
producing milk, whereas Saint-Saens likened the process to an apple tree
producing apples. The sole element of mystery, in Copland’s view, is the
source of an initial musical idea: as he sees it, themes initially come to 
the composer as a gift from heaven, much like automatic writing. And
that is the reason many composers keep a notebook around. Once the idea
has come, the process of development and elaboration follows with sur-
prising naturalness, eventually with inevitability, thanks in part to the many
techniques available as well as to the accessibility of structural forms or
“schemes” that have evolved over the years. As Arnold Schoenberg puts
it, “Whatever happens in a piece of music is nothing but the endless re-
shaping of a basic shape. Or, in other words, there is nothing in a piece of
music but what comes from the theme, springs from it, and can be traced
back to it.”
What is the source of that musical repository from which the musical
ideas come? Another twentieth-century American composer, Harold Shap-
ero, helps us to understand the musical lexicon:
The musical mind is concerned predominantly with the mechanisms of
tonal memory. Before it has absorbed a considerable variety of tonal ex-
periences, it cannot begin to function in a creative way. . . . The musical
memory, where its physiological functions are intact, functions indis-
criminately; a great percentage of what is heard becomes submerged in
the unconscious and is subject to literal recall.
But the materials exploited by the composer are treated differently:
The creative portion of the musical mind . . . operates selectively, and
the tonal material which it offers up has been metamorphized and has
become identiﬁable from the material which was originally absorbed. In
108
The Theory

the metamorphosis . . . the original tonal memory has been compounded
with remembered emotional experiences and it is this act of the creative
unconscious which renders more than an acoustical series of tones.
Even as we ﬁnd consensus among articulate composers about the nat-
uralness of the act of composition (if not about the source of the germinal
idea), there is considerable agreement about what music is not. Roger Ses-
sions goes to great pains to indicate that language plays no role in the act
of composition. Once when stuck in the middle of composition, he was
able to describe the source of his difﬁculty to a young friend. But this was
a wholly different medium from the one in which the composer must work:
I would like to point out that at no time in the course of the actual
process of composition were words involved. . . . In no way, however,
did these words [told to the friend] help me—nor could they have helped
me—to ﬁnd the precise pattern that I was seeking. . . . I was trying hard
to ﬁnd the proper words with which to describe a sequence of thought
that was carried on in the musical medium itself—by which I mean
sounds and rhythms, heard to be sure in imagination, but nevertheless
heard accurately and vividly. 
Igor Stravinsky goes a step further: as he indicated in conversations
with Robert Craft, composing is doing, not thinking. It occurs not by acts
of thought or will: it is accomplished naturally. And Arnold Schoenberg
quotes with approval Schopenhauer’s view, “The composer reveals the
inmost essence of the world and utters the most profound vision in a lan-
guage which his reason does not understand, just as a magnetic somnam-
bulist gives disclosures about things which she has no idea of when awake,”
even as he castigates that philosopher of music “when he tries to translate
details of this language which the reason does not understand into our
terms” (italics in original). In Schoenberg’s view, it is the musical material
that must be dealt with: “I don’t believe a composer can compose if you
give him numbers instead of tones”—this from the individual who has been
accused of expelling melody and converting all music to a numerical ma-
nipulation system.
For those of us who do not readily compose music—who are excluded
from that small minority of humankind “whose minds secrete music”—
these processes necessarily have a remote air. We can perhaps identify
109
Musical Intelligence

somewhat more easily with one who performs works written by other 
individuals—such as an instrumentalist or a singer—or with one charged
with interpretation, like a conductor. Yet, in Aaron Copland’s view, the skills
involved in listening to music have a clear link to those involved in musi-
cal creation. As Copland puts it,
The intelligent listener must be prepared to increase his awareness of
the musical material and what happens to it. He must hear the melodies,
the rhythms, the harmonies, and the tone colors in a more conscious
fashion. But above all he must, in order to follow the line of the com-
poser’s thought, know something of the principles of musical form.
The musicologist Edward T. Cone suggests, “active listening is, after
all, a kind of vicarious performance, effected, as [Roger] Sessions puts it,
by ‘inwardly reproducing the music.’” In Cone’s view, the performer’s as-
signment follows from this prescription: an adequate performance can be
best achieved by discovering and making clear the rhythmic life of a com-
position. Composer and listener come together in full circle in Stravinsky’s
remark about his intended audience:
When I compose something, I cannot conceive that it should fail to be
recognized for what it is and understood. I use the language of music
and my statement in grammar will be clear to the musician who has fol-
lowed music up to where my contemporaries and I have brought it.
There are several roles that musically inclined individuals can assume,
ranging from the avant-garde composer who attempts to create a new
idiom, to the ﬂedgling listener who is trying to make sense of nursery
rhymes (or other “primer level” music). There may well be a hierarchy of
difﬁculty involved in various roles, with performing exacting more de-
mands than listening does, and composing making more profound (or at
least different) demands than performing. It is also probable that certain
kinds of music—such as the classical forms under discussion here—are
less accessible than folk or musical forms. Yet, there is also a core set of
abilities crucial to all participation in the musical experience of a culture.
These core abilities should be found in any normal individual brought into
regular contact with any kind of music. To the identiﬁcation of such core
musical abilities, I now turn.
110
The Theory

The Components of Musical Intelligence
There is relatively little dispute about the principal constituent elements
of music, though experts will differ on the precise deﬁnition of each as-
pect. Most central are pitch (or melody) and rhythm: sounds emitted at
certain auditory frequencies and grouped according to a prescribed sys-
tem. Pitch is more central in certain cultures—for example, those Orien-
tal societies that make use of tiny quarter-tone intervals; while rhythm is
correlatively emphasized in sub-Saharan Africa, where the rhythmic ratios
can reach a dizzying metrical complexity. Part of the organization of music
is horizontal—the relations among the pitches as they unfold over time;
and part is vertical, the effects produced when two or more sounds are
emitted at the same time, giving rise to a harmonic or a dissonant sound.
Next in importance only to pitch and rhythm is timbre—the characteristic
qualities of a tone.
These central elements—these “cores” of music—raise the question 
of the role of audition in the deﬁnition of music. There is no question that
the auditory sense is crucial to all musical participation: any argument to
the contrary would be fatuous. Yet it is equally clear that at least one central
aspect of music—rhythmic organization—can exist apart from any audi-
tory realization. It is, in fact, the rhythmic aspects of music that are cited
by deaf individuals as their entry point to musical experiences. Some com-
posers, such as Scriabin, have underscored the importance of this aspect
of music by “translating” their works into rhythmic series of colored forms;
and other composers, such as Stravinsky, have stressed the signiﬁcance of
seeing music performed, whether by an orchestra or a dance troupe. Thus,
it is probably fair to say that certain aspects of the musical experience are
accessible even to those individuals who (for one or another reason) can-
not appreciate its auditory aspects.
Many experts have gone on to place the affective aspects of music close
to its core. On Roger Sessions’s account, “music is controlled movement of
sound in time. . . . It is made by humans who want it, enjoy it, and even
love it.” Arnold Schoenberg, hardly known for his sentimentality, put it
this way:
Music is a succession of tones and tone combinations so organized as
to have an agreeable impression on the ear and its impression on the
111
Musical Intelligence

intelligence is comprehensible. . . . These impressions have the power
to influence occult parts of our soul and of our sentimental spheres
and . . . this inﬂuence makes us live in a dreamland of fulﬁlled desires or
in a dreamed hell.
In alluding to affect and pleasure, we encounter what may be the cen-
tral puzzle surrounding music. From the point of view of “hard” positivis-
tic science, it would seem preferable to describe music purely in terms of
objective, physical terms: to stress the pitch and rhythmic aspects of music,
perhaps recognizing the timbre and the permissible compositional forms;
but taking care to avoid the pathetic fallacy, where explanatory power is
granted to an object because of the effects it may induce in someone else.
Indeed, attempts over the centuries to associate music with mathematics
seem a concerted effort to underscore the rationality (if not to deny the
emotional powers) of music. Yet hardly anyone who has been intimately
associated with music can forbear to mention its emotional implications:
the effects it has upon individuals; the sometimes deliberate attempts by
composers (or performers) to mimic or communicate certain emotions; or,
to put it in its most sophisticated terms, the claim that if music does not in
itself convey emotions or affects, it captures the forms of these feelings.
Testimony can be found wherever one looks. Socrates recognized early the
links between speciﬁc musical modes and different human character traits,
associating the Ionian and Lydian modes with indolence and softness, the
Dorian and Phrygian modes with courage and determination. Sessions
seems to favor this way of speaking:
Music cannot express fear, which is certainly an authentic emotion. But its
movement, in tones, accents, and rhythmic design, can be restless, sharply
agitated, violent, and even suspenseful. . . . It cannot express despair, but
it can move slowly, in a prevailingly downward direction; its texture can
become heavy and, as we are wont to say, dark—or it can vanish entirely.
And even Stravinsky, who in a famous remark once challenged this
way of thinking (“Music is powerless to express anything”), later went on
to recant: “Today I would put it the other way around. Music expresses
itself. . . . A composer works in the embodiment of his feelings and, of
course, it may be considered as expressing or symbolizing them.” Turning
to the experimental laboratory, the psychologist Paul Vitz has demonstrated
112
The Theory

in a number of studies that higher tones evoke a more positive affect in
listeners. And even “cold-hearted” performers have conﬁrmed this link: it
is commonly reported that performers are so deeply affected by a given
composition that they request to have it played at their funeral. The virtual
unanimity of this testimony suggests that when scientists ﬁnally unravel
the neurological underpinnings of music—the reasons for its effects, its
appeal, its longevity—they will be providing an explanation of how emo-
tional and motivational factors are intertwined with purely perceptual ones.
Bearing these core abilities in mind, psychologists have attempted to
examine the mechanism by which musical patterns are perceived. For
some time, one could discern two radically different approaches to the psy-
chological investigation of music. The more prevalent school has taken
what might be called a “bottom-up” approach, examining the ways in which
individuals process the building blocks of music: single tones, elementary
rhythmic patterns, and other units that allow ready presentation to exper-
imental subjects and are devoid of the contextual information encountered
in performances of works of music. Subjects are asked to indicate which 
of two tones is higher, whether two rhythmic patterns are the same,
whether two tones are played by the same instrument. The precision with
which these studies can be carried out makes them appealing to experi-
mental investigators. Yet musicians have often questioned the relevance of
ﬁndings obtained with such artiﬁcial patterns for the larger musical enti-
ties typically encountered by human beings.
This skepticism about the possibility of building up to music from its
component parts accounts for the appeal of a “top-down” approach to mu-
sical perception, where one presents to subjects musical pieces or, at least,
healthy musical segments. In such studies, one typically examines reac-
tions to more global properties of music (does it get faster or slower, louder
or softer?) and also to metaphoric characterizations of the music (is it heavy
or light, triumphant or tragic, crowded or sparse?). What this approach
gains in face validity, it typically sacriﬁces in terms of experimental control
and susceptibility to analysis.
It is perhaps inevitable and, to most minds, entirely desirable that a
“middle ground” approach has recently come to the fore. The goal here is
to sample musical entities that are large enough to bear a nonsuperﬁcial
resemblance to genuine musical (as opposed to simple acoustic) entities,
yet sufﬁciently susceptible to analysis to permit systematic experimental 
manipulations. Research in this vein has generally involved the presentation
113
Musical Intelligence

to subjects of short pieces, or incomplete fragments of pieces, that have a
clear key or a clear rhythm. Subjects are asked to compare completions
with one another, to group together pieces in the same key or rhythm pat-
terns, or to fashion their own completions.
Such research reveals that all but the most naïve (or most disabled)
subjects appreciate something of the structure of music. That is, given a
piece in a certain key, they can judge which sort of ending is more appro-
priate, which sort is less appropriate; hearing a piece in a certain rhythm,
they can group it together with others of similar rhythm or, again, com-
plete the rhythm appropriately. Individuals with a modest amount of mu-
sical training or sensitivity are able to appreciate the relationships that
obtain within a key—to know that the dominant or the subdominant enjoy
a privileged relationship to the tonic—and which keys are musically close
to one another so that a modulation between them is appropriate. Such
individuals are also sensitive to the properties of a musical contour, ap-
preciating, for example, when one phrase displays a contour that is the con-
verse of a previous phrase. Scales are recognized as a series of tones with
a deﬁnite structure, and there are expectations about leading tones, rest-
ing tones, cadences, and other ﬁxtures of musical compositions. At the
most general level, individuals appear to have “schemas” or “frames” for
hearing music—expectations about what a well-structured phrase or sec-
tion of a piece should be—as well as at least a nascent ability to complete
a segment in a way that makes musical sense.
An analogy to language may not be out of place here. Just as one can
tease apart a series of levels of language—from the basic phonological
level, through a sensitivity to word order and word meaning, to the ability
to appreciate larger entities, like stories—so, too, in the realm of music, it
is possible to examine sensitivity to individual tones or phrases, but also to
look at how these ﬁt together into larger musical structures that exhibit
their own rules of organization. And just as these different levels of analy-
sis can—and should—be brought to bear in apprehending a literary work
like a poem or novel, so, too, the apprehension of musical works requires
the ability to make the local analysis of the “bottom-up” camp as well as the
“top-down” schematizations of the Gestalt school. Increasingly, researchers
in music are avoiding the Scylla of total concern with detail and ornamen-
tation, and the Charybdis of attention only to overall form, in favor of
analyses that take into account aspects at each of these levels and strive for
an integration in the Final Analysis. Perhaps in the future, individuals
114
The Theory

charged with assessing promise in the musical domain will be able to draw
on ﬁndings from this eclectic approach to musical competence.
The Development of Musical Competence
In Europe during the early years of the twentieth century, there was a fair
amount of interest in the development of artistic abilities in children, in-
cluding the growth of musical competence. My opening vignette would
have seemed entirely ﬁtting in Vienna seventy-ﬁve years ago. For reasons
that one could speculate about, this interest rarely crossed the Atlantic.
Therefore, little has been ﬁrmly established about the normal develop-
ment of musical competence in our society or, for that matter, about the
development of such competence in any culture.
Nonetheless, at least a rough-and-ready portrait of early musical com-
petence can be proposed. During infancy, normal children sing as well as
babble: they can emit individual sounds, produce undulating patterns, and
even imitate prosodic patterns and tones sung by others with better than
random accuracy. In fact, it has recently been claimed by Mechthild Pa-
poušek and Hanus Papoušek that infants as young as two months are able
to match the pitch, loudness, and melodic contour of their mother’s songs,
and that infants at four months can match rhythmic structure as well.
These authorities claim that infants are especially predisposed to pick up
these aspects of music—far more than they are sensitive to the core prop-
erties of speech—and that they can also engage in sound play that clearly
exhibits creative, or generative, properties.
In the middle of the second year of life, children effect an important
transition in their musical lives. For the ﬁrst time, they begin on their own
to emit series of punctate tones that explore various small intervals; sec-
onds, minor thirds, major thirds, and fourths. They invent spontaneous
songs that prove difﬁcult to notate; and, before long, they begin to pro-
duce small sections (“characteristic bits”) of familiar songs heard around
them—such as the “EI-EI-O” from “Old MacDonald” or “all fall down”
from “Ring Around the Rosie.” For a year or so, there exists a tension be-
tween the spontaneous songs and the production of “characteristic bits”
from familiar tunes; but, by the age of three or four, the melodies of the
dominant culture have won out, and the production of spontaneous songs
and of exploratory sound play generally wanes.
115
Musical Intelligence

Much more so than in language, one encounters striking individual dif-
ferences in young children as they learn to sing. Some can match large seg-
ments of a song by the age of two or three (in this they are reminiscent of
our autistic child); many others can emit only the grossest approximations
of pitch at this time (rhythm and words generally pose less of a challenge)
and may still have difﬁculty in producing accurate melodic contours at the
age of ﬁve or six. Still, it seems fair to say that by school age, most children
in our culture have a schema of what a song should be like and can produce
a reasonably accurate facsimile of the tunes commonly heard around them.
Except among children with unusual musical talent or exceptional op-
portunities, there is little further musical development after the school
years begin. To be sure, the musical repertoire expands, and individuals
can sing songs with greater accuracy and expressivity. There is also some
increase in knowledge about music, as many individuals become able to
read music, to comment critically on performances, and to employ musical-
critical categories, such as “sonata form” or “duple meter.” But whereas in
the case of language there is considerable emphasis in the school on fur-
ther linguistic attainments, music occupies a relatively low niche in our
culture, and so musical illiteracy is acceptable.
Once one casts a comparative glance around the globe, a far wider va-
riety of musical trajectories becomes manifest. At one extreme are the
Anang of Nigeria. Infants scarcely a week old are introduced to music and
dancing by their mothers. Fathers fashion small drums for their children.
When they reach the age of two, children join groups where they learn
many basic cultural skills, including singing, dancing, and playing of in-
struments. By the age of ﬁve, the young Anang can sing hundreds of songs,
play several percussion instruments, and perform dozens of intricate dance
movements. Among the Venda of Northern Transvaal, young children start
with motor response to music and don’t even try to sing. The Griots, tra-
ditional musicians of Senegambia, require an apprenticeship of several
years. In some cultures, wide individual differences are recognized: for ex-
ample, among the Ewe of Ghana, less talented persons are made to lie on
the ground while a musical master sits astride them and beats rhythms
into their body and their soul. In contrast, the aforementioned Anang claim
that all individuals are musically proﬁcient; and the anthropologists who
studied this group claim never to have encountered in it a “non-musical”
member. In some contemporary cultures, musical competence is highly
prized: in China, Japan, and Hungary, for example, children are expected
116
The Theory

to gain proﬁciency in singing and, if possible, in instrumental performance
as well.
Our understanding of levels of musical competence has been signiﬁ-
cantly enhanced by Jeanne Bamberger, a musician and developmental psy-
chologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Bamberger has
sought to analyze musical development along the lines of Piaget’s stud-
ies of logical thought, but she has insisted that musical thinking involves its
own rules and constraints and cannot simply be assimilated to linguistic or
logical-mathematical thinking. Pursuing one line of study, she has demon-
strated forms of conservation that exist in the realm of music but are not
interchangeable with the classical forms of physical conservation. For ex-
ample, a young child will confuse a tone with the particular bell from which
it is made, and will not appreciate that many bells can produce the same
tone or that a bell that is moved will retain its sound. On the other hand,
the young child may also recognize that no two performances of a song are
exactly identical. Such demonstrations underscore the fact that the con-
cept “same” bears a different meaning in music than it does in the math-
ematical sphere.
Bamberger has called attention to two contrasting ways of processing
music, which correspond roughly to “know-how” versus “know-that.” In 
a ﬁgural approach, the child attends chieﬂy to the global features of a
melodic fragment—whether it gets louder or softer, faster or slower—and
to the “felt” features of groupings—whether a set of tones appears to be-
long together and to be separated in time from its neighbors. The approach
is intuitive, based solely on what is heard irrespective of any theoretical
knowledge about music. In contrast, the individual with a formal mode of
thought can conceptualize his musical experience in a principled manner.
Equipped with propositional knowledge about music as a system, he un-
derstands what occurs on a measure-by-measure basis and can analyze pas-
sages in terms of their time signature. Thus, he can appreciate (and notate)
a passage in terms of the number of beats per measure and the occurrence
of particular rhythmic patterns against this metrical background.
Ultimately, any individual in our culture who would wish to gain musi-
cal competence should master formal musical analysis and representation;
but at least initially, this move to the level of “knowledge about music” may
involve a cost. Certain important aspects of music that are “naturally” per-
ceived according to the initial “ﬁgural” mode of processing may be at least
temporarily obscured (“wiped out”) as an individual attempts to assess and
117
Musical Intelligence

classify everything according to a formal mode of analysis—to super impose
propositional knowledge upon ﬁgural intuitions.
Indeed, the clash between ﬁgural and formal modes of processing may
even occasion a crisis in the lives of young musicians. According to Bam-
berger, children treated by their communities as prodigies often advance
quite far on the basis of ﬁgural apprehension of music. At a certain point,
however, it becomes important for them to supplement their intuitive un-
derstanding with a more systematic knowledge of music lore and law. This
bringing-to-consciousness of what was previously assumed (or ignored) can
be unsettling for youngsters, particularly for ones who have depended sim-
ply upon their intuition, and who may have a resistance to propositional
(linguistic or mathematical) characterizations of musical events. The so-
called midlife crisis occurs in the lives of prodigies in adolescence, some-
where between the ages of fourteen and eighteen. If this crisis is not
successfully negotiated, it may ultimately prompt the child to cease alto-
gether participating in musical life.
One can posit a pattern of growth for the young musical performer. Up
till the age of eight or nine, in a manner reminiscent of the young literary
Sartre, the child proceeds on the basis of sheer talent and energy: he learns
pieces readily because of his sensitive musical ear and memory, gains ap-
plause for his technical skill, but essentially does not expend undue effort.
A period of more sustained skill building commences around the age of
nine or so, when the child must begin to practice seriously, even to the ex-
tent that it may interfere with his school and his friendships. This may, in
fact, occasion an initial “crisis” as the child starts to realize that other val-
ues may have to be suspended if his musical career is to be pursued. The
second and more pivotal crisis occurs in early adolescence. In addition to
confronting the clash between ﬁgural and formal ways of knowing, the
youth must ask whether he actually wishes to devote his life to music. Ear-
lier, he has been a (often willing) vessel in the grasp of ambitious parents
and teachers; now he must ponder whether he himself wants to pursue
this calling, whether he wants to use music to express to others what is
most important in his own existence, whether he is willing to sacriﬁce his
other pleasures and possibilities for an uncertain future where luck and
extra-musical factors (like interpersonal skills) may well prove decisive.
In speaking of musically talented children, I am concerned with a tiny
group of children who have been singled out by their families and their
communities. It is not known to what extent this number could be signiﬁ-
118
The Theory

cantly increased were values and training methods to change. Still, my
opening vignettes offer suggestive clues.
In Japan, the great master Suzuki has shown that large numbers of in-
dividuals can learn to play musical instruments extremely well (according
to Western standards) even at an early age. To be sure, most of these in-
dividuals do not go on to become concert musicians—a result that does
not disturb Suzuki, who sees his goal as the training of character, not of
virtuoso performance. Suzuki’s population may be, to some extent, self-
selected. Still, the astonishing performances by large numbers of Japan-
ese children—and by “Suzuki-style youngsters” in other cultural settings as
well—indicates that such ﬂuency is a reasonable target for a much larger
proportion of the population than is currently the case in the United States.
The existence of accomplished singing skill in certain cultural groups
(Hungarians inﬂuenced by the Kodaly method, or members of the Anang
tribe in Nigeria) and of comparably high-quality instrumental perform-
ances among Russian Jewish violinists or Balinese gamelan players sug-
gests that musical achievement is not strictly a reﬂection of inborn ability
but is susceptible to cultural stimulation and training.
On the other hand, if there is any area of human achievement in which
it pays to have adequate or lavish genetic background, music would be a
formidable contender. The extent to which music runs in families—like
the Bach, Mozart, or Haydn households—is one possible line of evidence;
but nongenetic factors (such as value systems or training procedures) might
be equally responsible in such cases. Probably a more persuasive line of
evidence comes from those children who, in the absence of a hospitable
family environment, present themselves initially as able to sing very well,
to recognize and recall numerous tunes, to pick out melodies on a piano
or other instrument. Even the slightest musical stimulation becomes a crys-
tallizing experience. Moreover, once exposed to formal training, these same
children appear to pick up requisite skills with great rapidity—as Vygot-
sky would put it, they exhibit a large zone of potential (or proximal) de-
velopment. It seems reasonable to regard this ability as the manifestation
of a considerable genetic proclivity to hear accurately, to remember, and
to master (and, eventually, produce) musical sequences. And it would seem
that both our autistic child and our young composer display considerable
genetic potential in the area of music.
A particularly dramatic instance of a talent that announced itself to the
world can be found in the saga of the renowned twentieth-century pianist
119
Musical Intelligence

Arthur Rubinstein. Rubinstein came from a family none of whom, in his
own words “had the slightest musical gift.” As a toddler in Poland, he loved
all manner of sounds, including factory sirens, the singing of old Jewish
peddlers, and the chants of ice cream sellers. While he refused to speak,
he was always willing to sing and thereby created quite a sensation at
home. In fact, his abilities soon degenerated into a sport, where everyone
tried to reach him by songs, and he himself came to recognize people by
their tunes.
Then, when he had attained the advanced age of three, his parents
bought a piano so that the older children in the family could have lessons.
Though not studying piano himself, Rubinstein reports:
The drawing room became my paradise. . . . Half in fun, half in earnest,
I learned to know the keys by their names and with my back to the piano
I would call the notes of any chord, even the most dissonant one. From
then on it became mere “child’s play” to master the intricacies of the key-
board, and I was soon able to play ﬁrst with one hand, later with both, any
tune that caught my ear. . . . All this, of course, could not fail to impress
my family—none of whom, I must now admit, including grandparents,
uncles, aunts, had the slightest musical gift. . . . By the time I was three
and a half years old my ﬁxation was so obvious that my family decided to
do something about this talent of mine.
The Rubinsteins in fact took their young prodigy to meet Joseph
Joachim, the most celebrated violinist of the nineteenth century, who pro-
claimed that young Arthur might one day become a great musician, be-
cause his talent was extraordinary.
Even given generous dollops of talent, musical achievement need not
follow. For every ten musical prodigies (with the presumptive inborn tal-
ent), there are several failed prodigies, some of whom ceased music alto-
gether, others of whom tried but failed to reach the heights of musical
achievement. (Even Rubinstein had to confront several crises regarding
his own talent and will to make music.) Issues of motivation, personality,
and character are generally singled out as decisive here—though luck cer-
tainly contributes as well. A musician in our culture must be more than
simply technically proﬁcient. One must be able to interpret music, to glean
the composer’s intentions, to realize and project one’s own interpretations,
120
The Theory

to be a convincing performer. As Rudolf Serkin, one of the leading pianists
of our day, has put it:
Ivan Galamian [the leading violin teacher of the middle twentieth cen-
tury] believes in taking them young, at 10 or 12. So do I. At that age you
can already tell the talent, but not . . . character or personality. If they
have personality they will develop into quite something. If not, at least
they will play well.
Nearly all composers begin as performers, though some performers
begin to compose during the ﬁrst decade of their lives. (Composing at the
level of a world-class artist seems to require at least ten years to ﬂower—
no matter how gifted one is.) Why a small percentage of performers be-
come composers has not been much studied, though there are presumably
positive factors (proclivity and skill) as well as negative ones (shyness, awk-
wardness) that prompt one decision rather than the other. In my own cur-
sory study of this question, I uncovered one common theme. Individuals
who later became composers (rather than, or in addition to, performers)
found themselves by the age of ten or eleven experimenting with pieces
that they were performing, rewriting them, changing them, turning them
into something other than what they were—in a word, decomposing
them. Indeed, sometimes this discovery occurs even earlier. Igor Stravin-
sky recalls trying to pick out at the piano the intervals he had heard “as
soon as I could reach the piano—but found other intervals in the process
that I liked better, which already made me a composer.” For the future
composers, like Stravinsky, pleasure came increasingly from what changes
they could effect rather than simply from performing the piece literally as
well as it could be performed.
In all probability, issues of personality ﬁgure crucially here. The
sources of pleasure for composition are different from those surrounding
performance—the need to create and dissect, to compose and decompose
arises from different motivations than the desire to perform or simply to
interpret. Composers may resemble poets in the sudden apprehension of
the initial germinal ideas, the need to explore and realize them and the in-
tertwining of emotional and conceptual aspects.
My discussion has been partial to Western civilization in the period fol-
lowing the Renaissance. Cults of performer and composer were far less
121
Musical Intelligence

prevalent in the medieval era; and, indeed, the line between composing
and performing does not exist in many cultures. Performers are the inter-
preters and composers; they constantly make small changes in the works
that they perform, so that they ultimately build up an oeuvre; but they do
not self-consciously set themselves off from others as “composers.” Indeed,
cross-cultural studies suggest a stunning range of attitudes toward the cre-
ation of music, with the Congo Basongye feeling uncomfortable with any
personal role in the creation of new music; the Plains Indians willing to
claim credit for a composition, so long as it was conceived during a vision
quest; and the Greenland Eskimos actually judging the results of a ﬁght
among men in terms of which antagonist can compose the songs that best
convey his side in a dispute. We simply do not know whether individuals
in other cultures feel as Beatle John Lennon did during early childhood:
People like me are aware of their so-called genius at ten, eight, nine. . . .
I always wondered, “Why has nobody discovered me? In school, didn’t
they see that I’m more clever than anybody in this school? That the
teachers are stupid, too? That all they had was information that I didn’t
need.” It was obvious to me. Why didn’t they put me in art school? Why
didn’t they train me? I was different, I was always different, Why didn’t
anybody notice me?
Evolutionary and Neurological Facets of Music
The evolutionary origins of music are wrapped in mystery. Many scholars
suspect that linguistic and musical expression and communication had
common origins and, in fact, split off from one another several hundred
thousand, or perhaps even a million, years ago. There is evidence of mu-
sical instruments dating back to the Stone Age and much presumptive ev-
idence about the role of music in organizing work groups, hunting parties,
and religious rites; but, in this area, theories are all too easy to fabricate
and too difﬁcult to discredit.
Still, in studying the ontogenesis of music, we possess at least one ad-
vantage not available in questions concerning language. While ties between
human language and other forms of animal communication seem to be
limited and controversial, there is at least one instance in the animal king-
dom whose parallels to human music are difﬁcult to ignore. That is bird song.
122
The Theory

As I noted in discussions of the biological underpinnings of intelligence,
much has recently been discovered about the development of song in
birds. For present purposes, I wish to stress the following aspects. First of
all, one observes a wide range of developmental patterns of bird song, with
some species being restricted to a single song learned by all birds, even
those that are deaf; other species feature a range of songs and dialects, de-
pending clearly on environmental stimulation of speciﬁable sorts. We ﬁnd
among birds a remarkable mix of innate and environmental factors. And
these can be subjected to that systematic experimentation that is imper-
missible in the case of human capacities.
Within these different trajectories, there is a prescribed path to devel-
opment of the ﬁnal song, beginning with subsong, passing through plastic
song, until the species song or songs are ﬁnally achieved. This process bears
nontrivial and perhaps striking parallels to the steps through which young
children pass as they ﬁrst babble and then explore fragments from the
songs of their environments. To be sure, the ultimate output of human
singers is much vaster and more varied than even the most impressive bird
repertoire; and this discontinuity between the two vocalizing species needs
to be kept in mind. All the same, suggestive analogies in the development
of singing should stimulate experimentation that may illuminate more gen-
eral aspects of musical perception and performance.
But without question, the most intriguing aspect of bird song from
the point of view of a study of human intelligence is its representation in
the nervous system. Bird song turns out to be one of the few instances of
a skill that is regularly lateralized in the animal kingdom—in this case, in
the left part of the avian nervous system. A lesion there will destroy bird
song, whereas comparable lesions in the right half of the brain exert much
less debilitating effects. Moreover, it is possible to examine the bird’s brain
and to ﬁnd clear indices to the nature and the richness of songs. Even
within a species, birds differ in whether they have a well or a sparsely
stacked “library of songs,” and this information is “legible” in the avian
brain. The stock of song changes across seasons, and this alteration can ac-
tually be observed by inspecting the expansion or the shrinkage of the rel-
evant nuclei during different seasons. Thus, while the purposes of bird
song are very different from those of human song (“bird songs are prom-
ise of music, but it takes a human being to keep them”), the mechanism by
which certain core musical components are organized may well prove anal-
ogous to those exhibited by human beings.
123
Musical Intelligence

Whether there is, in fact, some direct phylogenetic link between human
and bird music proves difﬁcult to determine. Birds are sufﬁciently remote
from human beings to make the wholly separate invention of avian and
human auditory-oral activity more than just an idle possibility. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, primates exhibit nothing similar to bird song; but individuals in
many species do issue sounds that are expressive and can be understood by
conspeciﬁcs. It seems more likely that in human song we witness the bring-
ing together of a number of abilities—some of which (for example, imita-
tion of vocalic targets) may exist in other forms in other species; others of
which (for example, sensitivity to relative as well as absolute pitch, or the
ability to appreciate various kinds of musical transformation) are unique
to our own.
The temptations are considerable to draw analogies between human
music and language. Even in a work devoted to establishing the autonomy
of these realms, I have not refrained from drawing such parallels in order
to convey a point. It is therefore important to stress the experimental sup-
port for this proposed separation. Investigators working with both normal
and brain-damaged humans have demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt
that the processes and mechanisms subserving human music and language
are distinctive from one another.
One line of evidence in favor of this dissociation has been summarized
by Diana Deutsch, a student of the perception of music whose work falls
largely in the “bottom-up” tradition. Deutsch has shown that, counter to
what had been believed by many psychologists of perception, the mecha-
nisms by which pitch is apprehended and stored are different from the
mechanisms that process other sounds, particularly those of language. Con-
vincing documentation comes from studies in which individuals are given
a set of tones to remember and then presented with various interfering
material. If the interfering material is other tones, recall for the initial set
is drastically interfered with (40 percent error in one study). If, however, the
interposed material is verbal—lists of numbers, for example—individuals
can handle even large amounts of interference without material effect
on the memory for pitch (2 percent error in the same study). What makes
this ﬁnding particularly compelling is that it surprised the subjects them-
selves. Apparently, individuals expect that the verbal material will inter-
fere with the melodic material and are frankly incredulous when they are
so little affected.
124
The Theory

This specialness of musical perception is conﬁrmed dramatically by
studies of individuals whose brains have been damaged as a result of stroke
or other kinds of trauma. To be sure, there are cases in which individuals
who have become aphasic have also exhibited diminished musical ability;
but the key ﬁnding of this research is that one can suffer signiﬁcant aphasia
without any discernible musical impairment, even as one can become dis-
abled musically while still retaining one’s fundamental linguistic competences.
The facts are as follows: whereas linguistic abilities are lateralized al-
most exclusively to the left hemisphere in normal right-handed individu-
als, the majority of musical capacities, including the central capacity of
sensitivity to pitch, are localized in most normal individuals in the right
hemisphere. Thus, injury to the right frontal and temporal lobes causes
pronounced difﬁculties in discriminating tones and in reproducing them
correctly, even as injuries in the homologous areas in the left hemisphere
(which cause devastating difﬁculties in natural language) generally leave
musical abilities relatively unimpaired. Appreciation of music also seems
to be compromised by right hemisphere disease. (As the names promise,
amusia is a disorder distinct from aphasia.)
Once one dons a ﬁne lens, a far more complicated picture emerges,
one interestingly more diverse than that found in the case of language.
While the syndromes of language seem to be uniform, even across cul-
tures, a great variety of musical syndromes can be found even within the
same population. Accordingly, while some composers (like Maurice Ravel)
have become amusic following the onset of aphasia, other composers have
succeeded in continuing to compose despite a signiﬁcant aphasia. The
Russian composer Shebalin proved able to compose very competently
despite a severe Wernicke’s aphasia; and several other composers, includ-
ing one whom I studied with my colleagues, retained their composing
prowess. Similarly, while the ability to perceive and criticize musical per-
formances seems to rely on right hemisphere structures, certain musicians
have exhibited difﬁculties following injury to the left temporal lobe.
Yet another fascinating wrinkle has been recently uncovered. In most
tests with normal individuals, musical abilities turn out to be lateralized to
the right hemisphere. For example, in tests of dichotic listening, individ-
uals prove better able to process words and consonants presented to the
right ear (left hemisphere) while more successful at processing musical
tones (and often other environmental noises as well) when these have been
125
Musical Intelligence

presented to the right hemisphere. But there is a complicating factor. When
these, or more challenging tasks, are posed to individuals with musical
training, there are increasing left hemisphere, and decreasing right hemi-
sphere, effects. Speciﬁcally, the more musical training the individual has,
the more likely he will draw at least partially upon the left hemisphere
mechanisms in solving a task that the novice tackles primarily through the
use of right hemisphere mechanisms.
An image of musical competence crossing the corpus callosum as train-
ing accrues must not be taken too far. For one thing, it is not found with
every musical skill: for instance, Harold Gordon found that even musicians
performed chord analysis with the right, rather than with the left, hemi-
sphere. For another, it is not exactly clear why increasing left hemisphere
effects are found with training. While the actual processing of music may
change loci, it is also possible that the mere afﬁxing of verbal labels to mu-
sical fragments brings about apparent left hemisphere dominance for
musical analysis. Trained musicians may be able to use “formal” linguistic
classiﬁcations as aids where untrained subjects must fall back on purely
ﬁgural processing capacities.
What must be stressed in this review, however, is the surprising variety
of neural representations of musical ability found in human beings. In my
own view, this range rests on at least two factors. First of all, there is the
tremendous range of types and degrees of musical skill found in the human
population; because individuals differ so much in what they can do, it is
conceivable that the nervous system can offer a plurality of mechanisms
for carrying out these performances. Second, and relatedly, individuals may
make their initial encounter with music through different media and
modalities and, even more so, continue to encounter music in idiosyncratic
fashion. Thus, while every normal individual is exposed to natural language
primarily through listening to others speak, humans can encounter music
through many channels: singing, playing instruments by hand, inserting in-
struments into the mouth, reading of musical notation, listening to records,
watching dances, or the like. Even as the way in which written language is
represented neurally reﬂects the kind of script used in one’s culture, the
various ways in which music can be processed cortically probably reﬂect
the wealth of ways in which humans have found to make and absorb music.
Given the apparently greater variability in brain representation, how
does this affect my claim that music qualiﬁes as an autonomous intellectual
competence? To my mind, the variation in representation does not com-
126
The Theory

promise my argument. So long as music is represented with some local-
ization in an individual, it is not relevant that one individual’s localization
is not identical to another’s (after all, if one includes left-handers, the va-
riety of linguistic localization proves much greater than if one ignores
them). Second, what is really crucial is whether other abilities predictably
occur together with music, such that when musical ability is destroyed, so
are the others. So far as I am aware, none of the claims with respect to mu-
sical breakdown suggest any systematic connection with other faculties
(such as linguistic, numerical, or spatial processing): music seems, in this
regard, sui generis, just like natural language.
Finally, I believe that, in the last analysis, there may be considerable
underlying regularity in musical representation across individuals. The
equation for explaining that uniformity may be complicated, having to
take into account the means by which music is initially encountered and
learned, the degree and type of training an individual has, and the kinds of
musical tasks that person is called upon to perform. Given this variety, we
may need to examine large numbers of individuals before the genuine uni-
formities become evident. Perhaps once we have reﬁned the proper ana-
lytic tools for studying various forms of musical competence, we may ﬁnd
that it is even more lateralized and localized than human language. Indeed,
recent studies converge on the right anterior portions of the brain with
such predictability as to suggest that this region may assume for music the
same centrality as the left temporal lobe occupies in the linguistic sphere.
Unusual Musical Talents
Patterns of unique breakdown of musical ability provide one strong line of
evidence for the autonomy of musical intelligence. Its selective preserva-
tion or early appearance in otherwise unremarkable individuals is another
line. I have already suggested that unusual musical aptitude is a regular
concomitant of certain anomalies, such as autism. Indeed, the literature is
ﬁlled with accounts of astonishing musical and acoustical feats carried out
by autistic youngsters. There have also been more than a few idiots savants
with unusual musical skills. One such child named Harriet was able to play
“Happy Birthday” in the style of various composers, including Mozart,
Beethoven, Verdi, and Schubert. That this was not rote familiarity was sug-
gested by the fact that she could recognize a version that her physician had
127
Musical Intelligence

contrived in the style of Haydn. Harriet exerted her musical passions in
other ways—for example, knowing the personal history of every member
of the Boston Symphony Orchestra. At the age of three, her mother called
her by playing incomplete melodies, which the child would then complete
with the appropriate tone in the proper octave. Other children described
in the literature have been able to remember hundreds of tunes or pick
out familiar melodies on a variety of instruments.
While the retarded or autistic child may cling to music because it rep-
resents a relative island of preservation in a sea of impairments, there are
also more positive signs of isolation, where an otherwise normal child sim-
ply displays a precocious ability in the musical sphere. Tales abound about
young artists. One composer recalls, “I can never understand how anyone
could have difﬁculty recognizing tones and deciphering musical patterns.
It’s something I’ve been doing since the age of three at least.” Igor Stravin-
sky was apparently able to remember the ﬁrst music that he ever heard:
a bristling ﬁfe-and-drum marine band from the marine barracks near our
house. . . . This music, and that of the full band which accompanied the
Horse Guards, penetrated my nursery every day, and the sound of it, es-
pecially of the tuba and the piccolos and drums, was the pleasure of my
childhood. . . . The noises of wheels and horses and the shots and
whipcracks of coachmen must have penetrated my earliest dreams: they
are, at any rate, my ﬁrst memory of the street of childhood.
Stravinsky recalls that when he was two, some nearby countrywomen
had sung an attractive and restful song on their way home from the ﬁelds
in the evening. When his parents asked him what he had heard, “I said 
I had seen the peasants and I had heard them sing, and I sang what they
had sung. Everyone was astonished and impressed at this recital and I
heard my father remark that I had a wonderful ear.” Yet, as we have seen,
even the most gifted young child will take about ten years to achieve those
levels of performance or composition that we associate with mastery of the
musical realm.
A different set of prized musical capacities may be gleaned from scat-
tered studies of musical performance in other cultural settings. In tradi-
tional cultures, one generally ﬁnds far less of an emphasis on the individual
performance or on an innovative departure from cultural norms, far more of
a treasuring of individuals who have mastered the genres of their culture
128
The Theory

and can elaborate upon them in appealing ways. One ﬁnds in preliterate
cultures individuals with prodigious memories for tunes, memories that
rival those displayed elsewhere with stories. (Indeed, musical gifts are often
equated with memory for lyrics.) Equipped with basic schemas, such in-
dividuals have the option of combining portions of chants in countless ways
that give pleasure and prove appropriate to the circumstance for which
they have been contrived.
The properties valued in diverse cultures will also determine which
youngsters are picked out to participate actively in the musical life of the
community. Thus, where rhythmic, dance, or group participation in
music is at a premium, individuals with gifts in these areas will be espe-
cially esteemed. And sometimes factors that we would consider decidedly
nonmusical, such as a visually attractive performance, are considered at 
a premium.
There are also instructive adaptations to limited cultural resources. For
example, in Naven, Gregory Bateson relates the following anecdote: two
individuals were playing ﬂutes, neither of which had stops. It was not pos-
sible to play the whole tune on a single instrument. So the performers con-
trived to alternate pitches between them, so that all the tones in the tune
could be emitted at the proper time.
Relation to Other Intellectual Competences
The various lines of evidence that I have reviewed in this chapter suggest
that, like language, music is a separate intellectual competence, one that
is also not dependent upon physical objects in the world. As is the case
with language, musical facility can be elaborated to a considerable degree
simply through exploration and exploitation of the oral-aural channel. In
fact, it scarcely seems an accident that the two intellectual competences
that, from the earliest period of development, can proceed without relation
to physical objects, both rely on the oral-auditory system; though, as it turns
out, they do so in neurologically distinct ways.
But, in closing, it is equally important to note important and integral
links that obtain between music and other spheres of intellect. Richard
Wagner located music centrally in his Gesamtkunstwerk (“panartistic
work”), and that placement was not altogether an arrogance: in fact, music
does relate in a variety of ways to the range of human symbol systems and
129
Musical Intelligence

intellectual competences. Moreover, precisely because it is not used for
explicit communication, or for other evident survival purposes, its contin-
uing centrality in human experience constitutes a challenging puzzle. The
anthropologist Lévi-Strauss is scarcely alone among scientists in claim-
ing that if we can explain music, we may ﬁnd the key for all of human
thought—or in implying that failure to take music seriously weakens any
account of the human condition.
Many composers, Roger Sessions among them, have stressed the close
ties that exist between music and bodily or gestural language. On some
analyses, music itself is best thought of as an extended gesture—a kind of
movement or direction that is carried out, at least implicitly, with the body.
Echoing this sentiment, Stravinsky has insisted that music must be seen to
be properly assimilated: thus, he was partial to the ballet as a mode of per-
formance and always insisted that one observe instrumentalists when they
were performing a piece. Young children certainly relate music and body
movement naturally, ﬁnding it virtually impossible to sing without engag-
ing in some accompanying physical activity; most accounts of the evolu-
tion of music tie it closely to primordial dance; many of the most effective
methods of teaching music attempt to integrate voice, hand, and body. In-
deed, it is probably only in recent times and in Western civilization that
the performance and appreciation of music, quite apart from movement
of the body, has become just the pursuit of a tiny “vocal” minority.
Ties between music and spatial intelligence are less immediately evi-
dent but, quite possibly, no less genuine. The localization of musical ca-
pacities in the right hemisphere has suggested that certain musical abilities
may be closely tied to spatial capacities. Indeed, the psychologist Lauren
Harris quotes claims to the effect that composers are dependent upon
powerful spatial abilities, which are required to posit, appreciate, and re-
vise the complex architectonic of a composition. And he speculates that
the dearth of female composers may be due not to any difﬁculty with mu-
sical processing per se (witness the relatively large number of female
singers and performers) but rather to the relatively poorer performances
in spatial tasks exhibited by females.
Recently, an intriguing possible analogue between musical and spatial
abilities has come to light. Arthur Lintgen, a physician in Philadelphia, has
astonished onlookers by his ability to recognize musical pieces simply by
studying the pattern of grooves on a phonograph record. No claims for
magic here. According to Lintgen, phonographic grooves vary in their spac-
130
The Theory

ing and contours depending on the dynamics and frequency of the music.
For instance, grooves containing soft passages look black or dark gray,
while the grooves turn silvery as the music becomes louder or more com-
plicated. Lintgen performs his stunt by correlating vast knowledge of the
sound properties of classical music with the distinctive pattern of grooves
on records, including ones that he has never seen recorded before. For
our purposes, the relevant aspect of Lintgen’s demonstration is the impli-
cation that music has some analogues in other sensory systems; perhaps,
then, a deaf person can come to appreciate at least certain aspects of music
by studying these patterns (though presumably not so much as a blind per-
son who is able to “feel” a piece of sculpture). And in cultures where
nonauditory aspects of music contribute to its effect, at least these features
can be appreciated by those individuals who, for one or another reason,
are deaf to tone.
I have already noted the universally acknowledged connection be-
tween musical performance and the feeling life of persons; and because
feelings occupy a central role in the personal intelligences, some further
comments may be in order here. Music can serve as a way of capturing
feelings, knowledge about feelings, or knowledge about the forms of feel-
ing, communicating them from the performer or the creator to the at-
tentive listener. The neurology that permits or facilitates this association
has by no means been worked out. Still, it is perhaps worth speculating
that musical competence depends not upon cortical analytic mechanisms
alone but also upon those subcortical structures deemed central to feel-
ing and to motivation. Individuals with damage to the subcortical areas,
or with disconnection between cortical and subcortical areas, are often
described as being ﬂat and devoid of affect; and while it has not been com-
mented upon in the neurological literature, it is my observation that such
individuals seem rarely to have any interest in or attraction to music. Quite
instructively, one individual with extensive right hemisphere damage re-
mained able to teach music and even to write books about it but lost the
ability and the desire to compose. According to his own introspection, he
could no longer retain the feeling of the whole piece, nor a sense of what
worked and what did not work. Another musician with right hemisphere
disease lost all aesthetic feelings associated with his performances. Per-
haps these feeling aspects of music prove especially brittle in the instance
of damage to the right hemisphere structures, whether they be cortical
or subcortical.
131
Musical Intelligence

Much of the discussion in this chapter has centered on an implicit com-
parison between music and language; and it has been important for my
claim of autonomous intellectual competences to show that musical intel-
ligence has its own developmental trajectory as well as its own neuro-
logical representation, lest it be swallowed up by the omnivorous jaws of
human language. Still, I would be derelict if I did not note the continuing
efforts on the part of musicologists, and also of well-informed musicians
like Leonard Bernstein, to search for nontrivial parallels between music
and language. Recently, these efforts have focused on attempts to apply at
least parts of Noam Chomsky’s analysis of the generative structure of lan-
guage to the generative aspects of musical perception and production.
These commentators are quick to point out that not all aspects of language
are directly analogous to music: for example, the whole semantic aspect of
language is radically underdeveloped in music; and the notion of strict
rules of “grammaticality” is once again extraneous in music, where viola-
tions are often prized. Still, if these caveats are borne in mind, there do
seem to be nontrivial parallels in the modes of analysis that seem appro-
priate for natural language, on the one hand, and for Western classical
music (1700–1900), on the other. But whether these parallels occur chieﬂy
(or even solely) at the level of formal analysis, or whether they also obtain
with respect to the fundamental modes of information processing featured
in these two intellectual spheres, has by no means been resolved.
I have saved until last that area of intellectual competence that, in pop-
ular lore, has been most closely tied to music—the mathematical sphere.
Dating back to the Classical discoveries of Pythagoras, the links between
music and mathematics have attracted the imagination of reﬂective indi-
viduals. In medieval times (and in many non-Western cultures), the care-
ful study of music shared many features with the practice of mathematics,
such as an interest in proportions, special ratios, recurring patterns, and
other detectable series. Until the time of Palestrina and Lasso, in the six-
teenth century, mathematical aspects of music remained central, though
there was less overt discussion than before about the numerical or math-
ematical substrata of music. As harmonic concerns gained in ascendancy,
the mathematical aspects of music became less apparent. Once again,
however, in the twentieth century—ﬁrst, in the wake of twelve-tone music,
and more recently, because of the widespread use of computers—the re-
lationship between musical and mathematical competences has been
widely pondered.
132
The Theory

In my own view, there are clearly musical, if not “high math,” elements
in music: these should not be minimized. In order to appreciate the oper-
ation of rhythms in musical work, an individual must have some basic nu-
merical competence. Performances require a sensitivity to regularity and
ratios that can sometimes be quite complex. But this remains mathemati-
cal thinking only at a relatively basic level.
When it comes to an appreciation of basic musical structures, and of
how they can be repeated, transformed, embedded, or otherwise played off
one against another, one encounters mathematical thought at a somewhat
higher scale. The parallels have impressed at least some musicians. Stravin-
sky comments:
[Musical form] is at any rate far closer to mathematics than to 
literature . . . certainly to something like mathematical thinking and
mathematical relationships. . . . Musical form is mathematical because
it is ideal, and form is always ideal. . . . Though it may be mathematical,
the composer must not seek mathematical formula.
I know . . . that these discoveries are abstract in a similar sense.
A sensitivity to mathematical patterns and regularities has character-
ized many composers, ranging from Bach to Schumann, who have given
vent to this interest, sometimes overtly, sometimes through a kind of play-
ful exploration of possibilities. (Mozart even composed music according to
the roll of dice.)
Evidently, there is no problem in ﬁnding at least superﬁcial links be-
tween aspects of music and properties of other intellectual systems. My
own hunch is that such analogies can probably be found between any two
intelligences, and that, in fact, one of the great pleasures in any intellec-
tual realm inheres in an exploration of its relationship to other spheres of
intelligence. As an aesthetic form, music lends itself especially well to play-
ful exploration with other modes of intelligence and symbolization, par-
ticularly in the hands (or ears) of highly creative individuals. Yet, according
to my own analysis, the core operations of music do not bear intimate con-
nections to the core operations in other areas; and therefore, music de-
serves to be considered as an autonomous intellectual realm. In fact, this
autonomy should be underscored as we look more closely in the next chap-
ter at those forms of intelligence whose connection to music has most often
been alleged—logical and mathematical forms of thought.
133
Musical Intelligence

In my own view, the task in which musicians are engaged differs fun-
damentally from that which preoccupies the pure mathematician. The
mathematician is interested in forms for their own sake, in their own im-
plications, apart from any realization in a particular medium or from any
particular communicative purpose. He may choose to analyze music and
even have gifts for doing so; but from the mathematical point of view,
music is just another pattern. For the musician, however, the patterned el-
ements must appear in sounds; and they are ﬁnally and ﬁrmly put together
in certain ways not by virtue of formal consideration, but because they have
expressive power and effects. Despite his earlier remarks, Stravinsky con-
tends that “music and mathematics are not alike.” The mathematician 
G. H. Hardy had these differences in mind when he pointed out that it
was music that could stimulate emotions, accelerate the pulse, cure the
course of asthma, induce epilepsy, or calm an infant. The formal patterns
that are a mathematician’s raison d’être are for musicians a helpful, but not
essential, ingredient for the expressive purposes to which their own ca-
pacities are regularly marshaled.
134
The Theory

7
Logical-Mathematical 
Intelligence
The ﬁrst man who noted the analogy between a group of
seven ﬁshes and a group of seven days made a notable
advance in the history of thought. He was the ﬁrst man
who entertained a concept belonging to the science of
pure mathematics.
ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD
Piaget’s Portrait of Logical-Mathematical Thought
Piaget was fond of relating an anecdote about a child who grew up to be
an accomplished mathematician. One day the future mathematician con-
fronted a set of objects lying before him and decided to count them. He
determined that there were ten objects. He then pointed to each of the
objects, but in a different order, and found that—lo and behold!—there
were again ten; the child repeated this procedure several times, with grow-
ing excitement, as he came to understand—once and for all—that the
number 10 was far from an arbitrary outcome of this repetitive exercise.
The number referred to the aggregate of elements, no matter how they
happened to be acknowledged in the sequence, just so long as each of
them was taken into account once and once only. Through this playful dub-
bing of a group of objects, the youngster had (as all of us have at one time
or another) arrived at a fundamental insight about the realm of number.
In contrast to linguistic and musical capacities, the competence that I
am terming “logical-mathematical intelligence” does not have its origins
in the auditory-oral sphere. Instead, this form of thought can be traced to
135

a confrontation with the world of objects. For it is in confronting objects,
in ordering and reordering them, and in assessing their quantity, that the
young child gains his or her initial and most fundamental knowledge
about the logical-mathematical realm. From this preliminary point, logical-
mathematical intelligence rapidly becomes remote from the world of ma-
terial objects. By a sequence to be described in this chapter, the individual
becomes more able to appreciate the actions that one can perform upon
objects, the relations that obtain among those actions, the statements (or
propositions) that one can make about actual or potential actions, and the
relationships among those statements. Over the course of development,
one proceeds from objects to statements, from actions to the relations
among actions, from the realm of the sensori-motor to the realm of pure
abstraction—ultimately, to the heights of logic and science. The chain is
long and complex, but it need not be mysterious: the roots of the highest
regions of logical, mathematical, and scientiﬁc thought can be found in the
simple actions of young children upon the physical objects in their worlds.
In describing the early development of language abilities, I found my-
self drawing on the works of numerous scholars. When it comes to the on-
togenesis and development of logical-mathematical thought, one scholar’s
work is preeminent. Accordingly, in what follows, I build upon the path-
breaking research of the Swiss developmental psychologist Jean Piaget.
In Piaget’s view, all knowledge—and in particular, the logical-
mathematical understanding that constituted his primary focus—derives
in the ﬁrst instance from one’s actions upon the world. Accordingly, the
study of thought should (indeed, must) begin in the nursery. Here one be-
holds the infant exploring every manner of objects—nipples, rattles, mo-
biles, and cups—and, soon enough, coming to form expectations about
how these objects will behave under diverse circumstances. For many
months, the child’s knowledge of these objects and of the simple causal
connections that exist among them is tied completely to his moment-
to-moment experience with them; and so, when they disappear from sight,
they no longer occupy his consciousness. Only after the ﬁrst eighteen
months of life does the child come fully to appreciate that objects will con-
tinue to exist even when they have been removed from his time-and-space
frame. This attainment of a sense of object permanence—that objects have
an existence apart from one’s particular actions upon them at a given 
moment—proves to be a crucial cornerstone for later mental development.
136
The Theory

Once the child appreciates the permanence of objects, he can think of
and refer to them even in their absence. He also becomes able to appre-
ciate the similarities among certain objects—for instance, the fact that all
cups (despite differences in size and color) belong to the same class. In
fact, within a matter of months, the child becomes able to effect group-
ings on this basis: he can put together all the trucks, all the yellow cars, all
the baby’s toys—though as a young toddler, he does this only ﬁtfully and
only if he is in a cooperative mood.
The ability to group together objects serves as a “public manifestation”
of the child’s emerging knowledge that certain objects possess speciﬁable
properties in common. It signals, if you like, the recognition of a class or
set. However, for a few years, such a recognition lacks a quantitative as-
pect. The child is aware that there are larger and smaller piles, more or
fewer coins or M&Ms; but these understandings remain at best approximate.
True enough, the child may have a mastery of very small quantities—two
and three objects—that he (like some birds and certain primates) can rec-
ognize by simple inspection. But he lacks the crucial understanding that
there exists a regular number system, with each number signifying one
more (+1) than the previous one, and that any set of objects has a single,
unambiguous quantity. This failure to conserve number is borne out by the
fragility of “counts” in the face of competing cues. For instance, the child
who beholds two arrays of M&Ms, one covering a wider space than the
other, is likely to conclude that the more widely dispersed pile contains
more candies, even if in fact the other (denser) heap is the more numerous.
Except for very small amounts, sheer quantitative estimates are still over-
whelmed by perceptually seductive cues, such as density or spatial extension.
Often at this age, the child can count—that is, he can recite the rote
number series. But until the age of four or ﬁve, this rote performance—
essentially a manifestation of linguistic intelligence—remains removed
from his simple estimates of small sets of objects and from his ability to as-
sess the numerosity of a larger array. But then pivotal events ensue. The
child learns that the number series can be mapped onto arrays of objects;
if he says a single number after pointing to a single object and repeats this
process with each succeeding “numerlog” in the series, he can make an ac-
curate assessment of the number of objects in an array. The ﬁrst object
touched is number 1, the second is number 2, the third is number 3, and
so forth. The child of four or ﬁve has come to realize that the ﬁnal number
137
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

in this oral recitation is also the totality (the cardinal quantity) of objects
in an array.
Finally, by the age of six or seven, the child has reached the level of Pi-
aget’s young mathematician-to-be. Confronted by two arrays, the child can
count the number of entities (M&Ms or balls) in each, compare the totals,
and determine which (if either) contains the greater amount. No longer is
he likely to err, for instance, by confusing spatial extent with quantity, or
to reach a wrong total because he fails to coordinate his pointing with his
numerical recitation. Indeed, he has arrived at a relatively foolproof method
of assessing quantity and has, at the same time, gained a reasonable grasp
of what quantity means.
The processes involved in mastering such equivalences play an impor-
tant role in Piaget’s view of intelligence. In equating two arrays on the basis
of number, the child has, in effect, created two mental sets or mental 
images—two arrays. He is then capable of an action of comparison—
contrasting the number in one set to the number in another, even if the
sets are not identical in appearance, and even (for that matter) if they are
not both available for inspection.
Once such actions of comparing have been mastered, the child can un-
dertake additional operations. He can add the same number of elements
to both; and the result of these two adding operations will yield identical
sums. He can subtract equal amounts and again conﬁrm equivalence.
More complex operations become possible. Beginning with nonequivalent
amounts, he can add to each the same quantity, secure in the knowledge
that nonequivalence will be preserved. On his own (or with help), the child
can evolve the understandings needed for the gamut of basic numerical
operations: adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing. And by the same
token, he should be able to call upon these operations in negotiating the
tasks of daily life—buying goods at the store; trading with friends; follow-
ing cooking recipes; playing marbles, balls, cards, or computer games.
The actions just described may be—and at ﬁrst generally are—performed
physically upon the material world: that is, the child actually manipulates
the candies or marbles as he is engaged in numerical operations. Similarly,
other elementary forms of logical-mathematical intelligence—for exam-
ple, the child’s initial appreciation of causal relations and his ﬁrst efforts to
classify objects consistently—are also manifest at ﬁrst through observation
and manipulation of physical objects. In short, according to this analysis,
138
The Theory

the basis for all logical-mathematical forms of intelligence inheres initially
in the handling of objects.
Such actions can, however, also be conducted mentally, inside one’s
head. And after a time, the actions in fact become internalized. The child
need not touch the objects himself; he can simply make the required com-
parisons, additions, or deletions “in his head” and, all the same, arrive at
the correct answer. (“If I were to add two objects to the pile, I would
have . . . ,” he reasons to himself.) Moreover, these mental operations be-
come increasingly certain: no longer does the child merely suspect that
two different orders of counting will yield ten objects—he is now certain
that they will. Logical necessity comes to attend these operations, as the
child is now dealing with necessary truths, not merely with empirical dis-
coveries. Deductions, tautologies, syllogisms, and the like are true, not just
because they happen to conﬁrm a state of affairs in the world but also be-
cause certain rules of logic must apply: two piles remain the same, not 
because a count reveals them to be identical, but rather because “you
haven’t added or taken anything away, and therefore, they must remain the
same.” Yet, for the period under discussion (roughly the ages of seven to
ten), these actions—whether physical or mental—remain restricted to
physical objects, which at least potentially can be manipulated. Hence, Pi-
aget terms them “concrete” operations.
Further cognitive growth is essential before the child reaches the
next—and for Piaget—the ﬁnal stage of mental development. During 
the early years of adolescence, at least in the Western societies studied by
Piagetians, the normal child becomes capable of formal mental operations.
Now he can operate not only upon objects themselves, and not only upon
mental images or models of these objects, but also upon words, symbols,
or strings of symbols (like equations) that stand for objects, and for actions
upon objects. He is able to state a set of hypotheses and to infer the con-
sequences of each. Where once his physical actions transformed objects,
now mental operations transform sets of symbols. Where once the child
added balls to each pile and conﬁdently declared that the totals remained
the same, now the child adds symbols to each side of an algebraic equation,
secure in the knowledge that equivalence has been preserved. These
symbol-manipulating capacities prove “of the essence” in higher branches
of mathematics, with the symbols standing for objects, relations, functions,
or other operations. The symbols to be manipulated may also be words, as
139
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

in the case of syllogistic reasoning, scientiﬁc hypothesis formation, and
other formal procedures.
While the performing of operations upon equations will be familiar to
anyone who recalls school mathematics, the use of logical reasoning in the
verbal sphere needs to be distinguished from the rhetorical language that
we encountered earlier. One can, of course, make logical inferences that are
consistent with common sense. The same rules of reasoning can be equally
well applied, however, to apparently unrelated statements. Thus given the
assertion “If it is winter, my name is Frederick” and the fact “It is winter,”
one can infer that one’s name is indeed Frederick. But the procedure does
not work in reverse. Knowledge that one’s name is Frederick in no way
justiﬁes the inference that it is winter. That inference would be valid only
if one had been given the assertion “If my name is Frederick, it is winter.”
Such sets of phrases, which delight logicians almost as much as they infu-
riate the rest of us, serve as a reminder that operations of logic can be (and
routinely are) carried out quite apart from common-sense applications
of ordinary language. Indeed, only when the statements are treated like
elements—or objects—to be manipulated (rather than as meaningful ut-
terances to be pondered) will the correct inferences be drawn.
Note that, in these cases, the kinds of operation carried out earlier
with objects themselves have now resurfaced with reference to symbols—
numbers or words—that can substitute for the objects and events en-
countered in real life. Even a three-year-old can appreciate that if you pull
lever A, event B will follow; but the parallel inference on the purely sym-
bolic plane takes several years to evolve. Such “second-level” and “higher-
level” operations become possible only during adolescence (and if luck and
brain cells hold out, afterward as well). And they may sometimes attain
such complexity that even otherwise highly competent individuals cannot
follow all the processes of reasoning in the chain.
The sequence of development outlined here—Piaget’s account of the
passage from sensori-motor actions to concrete to formal operations—is
the best worked-out trajectory of growth in all of developmental psychol-
ogy. While many parts of it are susceptible to criticism, it remains the ac-
count of development against which all other formulations continue to be
judged. I have traced its path with regard to a single topic—the under-
standing of number and of number-related operations; but to suggest that
the sequence is limited to numerical understanding would be a gross error.
Indeed, the state of affairs is precisely the opposite: according to Piaget
140
The Theory

this developmental sequence obtains in all domains of development, in-
cluding those Kantian categories of special interest to him—time, space,
and causality. Piaget’s fundamental stages of development are like giant
cognitive waves, which spontaneously spread their principal ways of
knowing across all important domains of cognition. For Piaget, logical-
mathematical thought is the glue that holds together all cognition.
My major bone of contention with Piaget has already been revealed in
earlier chapters. In my view, Piaget has painted a brilliant portrait of de-
velopment in one domain—that of logical-mathematical thought—but has
erroneously assumed that it pertains to other areas, ranging from musical
intelligence to the interpersonal domain. Much of this book is an effort to
call attention to the divergent considerations relevant to an understanding
of the developmental course in more remote domains of intellect. For
present purposes, however, this particular quarrel with Piaget can be sus-
pended: we are now confronting development in that domain where Pi-
aget’s work remains supremely germane.
Still, there are problems with the Piagetian perspective here as well.
It has been well documented by now that development in the logical-
mathematical domain is less regular, lock-step, and stagelike than Piaget
would have wished. Stages prove far more gradual and heterogeneous.
Moreover, children show some signs of operational intelligence far earlier
than Piaget had thought, while they fail to exhibit comprehensive formal-
operational thought even at the very height of their intellectual powers.
The Piagetian picture of higher operational thought also applies princi-
pally to the mainstream of Western middle-class development: it is less rel-
evant to individuals drawn from traditional or nonliterate cultures and also
explains little about original research or path-breaking scientiﬁc work.
What I wish to stress here is that Piaget did pose the right questions
and achieve the crucial insights about the main factors involved in logical-
mathematical development. He shrewdly discerned the origins of logical-
mathematical intelligence in the child’s actions upon the physical world;
the crucial importance of the discovery of number; the gradual transition
from physical manipulation of objects to interiorized transformations of
actions; the signiﬁcance of relations among actions themselves; and the
special nature of higher tiers of development, where the individual begins
to work with hypothetical statements and to explore the relationships and
implications that obtain among those statements. To be sure, the realms
of number, mathematics, logic, and science are not coextensive with one
141
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

another, and, reflecting the views of many scholars, this chapter will
treat differences in accent and coloration across these facets of logical-
mathematical intellect. But that they do form a family of interrelated com-
petences seems to me true: one of Piaget’s enduring contributions is to
have suggested some of the integrating links.
Other scholars in the areas of mathematics, logic, and science have also
discerned and stressed the links between these domains of knowledge. The
mathematician Brian Rotman indicates that “the whole of contemporary
mathematics takes for granted and rests on the notion of counting . . . on
the interpretation that occurs in the message 1, 2, 3.” The great eighteenth-
century mathematician Leonhard Euler underscored the importance of
number as a basis for mathematical development:
The properties of the numbers known today have been mostly discov-
ered by observation and discovered long before their truth has been con-
ﬁrmed by rigid demonstrations. . . . We should use such discovery as an
opportunity to investigate more exactly the properties discovered and to
prove or disprove them; in both cases we may learn something useful. 
Willard Quine, perhaps the preeminent logician of the past half-century,
indicates that logic is involved with statements while mathematics deals
with abstract, nonlinguistic entities, but that at its “higher reaches” logic
leads by natural stages into mathematics. To be sure, numbers compose
but a small part of mathematics at its highest levels: mathematicians are
interested more in general concepts than in speciﬁc calculations, seeking
in fact to formulate rules that can apply to the widest possible range of
problems. But, as Whitehead and Russell sought to show, underlying even
the most complex mathematical statements, one can ﬁnd simple logical
properties—the sorts of intuition that the child is beginning to display as
his operational thinking unfolds.
As Russell himself observed, logic and mathematics have had different
histories but, in modern times, have moved closer together: “The conse-
quence is that it has now become wholly impossible to draw a line between
the two: in fact the two are one. They differ as boy and man: logic is the
youth of mathematics and mathematics is the manhood of logic.”
Whatever the views of the experts in these particular disciplines, then,
it seems legitimate from the psychological point of view to speak of a fam-
ily of interlocking capacities. Beginning with observations and objects in
142
The Theory

the material world, the individual moves toward increasingly abstract for-
mal systems, whose interconnections become matters of logic rather than
of empirical observation. Whitehead put it succinctly: “So long as you are
dealing with pure mathematics, you are in the realm of complete and ab-
solute abstraction.” Indeed, the mathematician ends up working within a
world of invented objects and concepts that may have no direct parallel in
everyday reality, even as the logician’s primary interests fall on the rela-
tionships among statements rather than on the relation of those statements
to the world of empirical fact. It is primarily the scientist who retains the
direct tie to the world of practice:
He must come up with statements, models, and theories which, in addi-
tion to being logically consistent and susceptible to mathematical treat-
ment, must also bear a justiﬁable and continuing relationship to facts
which have been (and will be) discovered about the world. However,
even these characterizations must be tempered. A scientiﬁc theory will
often persist despite its inconsistency with certain empirical facts; and
mathematical truths can themselves be altered, based upon new discov-
eries, in view of new demands placed on the characteristics of mathe-
matical systems. 
The Work of the Mathematician
While the products fashioned by individuals gifted in language and music
are readily available to a wide public, the situation with mathematics is at
the opposite extreme. Except for a few initiates, most of us can only admire
from afar the ideas and works of mathematicians. Andrew Gleason, a lead-
ing contemporary mathematician, develops a telling ﬁgure of speech to
portray this lamentable state of affairs:
It is notoriously difﬁcult to convey a proper impression of the frontiers
of mathematics to non-specialists. . . . Topology, the study of how space
is organized, is like the great temples of some religions. That is to say,
those uninitiated into its mysteries can view it only from the outside. 
Michael Polanyi, eminent scientist and philosopher, confessed that he
himself lacked the necessary intellectual equipment to master many
143
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

contemporary aspects of mathematics that those within the tribe would
consider (as mathematicians are fond of saying) relatively trivial. One
can glimpse the kinds of demand made in mathematical thinking by not-
ing the difficulties in decoding this English sentence:
We cannot prove the statement which is arrived at by substituting for the
variable in the statement form, “we cannot prove the statement which is
arrived at by substituting in the statement form the name of the state-
ment form in question,” the name of the statement form in question. 
As Polanyi suggests, understanding this sentence may well require the
setting up of a string of symbols and then carrying out a set of operations
upon these symbols. Clearly, the comprehension of certain strings of the
symbols of language requires more than simple competence in linguistic
syntax and semantics (though, it may be properly pointed out, such com-
petences are a prerequisite for “solving” a sentence of this sort).
In attempting to gain further insight into the thought processes of
mathematicians, I (like many others) have found especially helpful the in-
trospections of Henri Poincaré, one of the leading mathematicians in the
world at the turn of the century. Poincaré raised the intriguing question
why, if mathematics only involves the rules of logic, which are presumably
accepted by all normal minds, anyone should have difﬁculty in under-
standing mathematics. To suggest an answer, he asks us to imagine a long
series of syllogisms, where the conclusion of each one serves as the prem-
ise for the next. Because some time will elapse between the moment when
we encounter a proposition at the conclusion of one syllogism, and the
time when we re-encounter it as the premise in the next syllogism, it is
possible that several links of the chain may have unrolled—or we may have
forgotten the proposition or changed it in some unrecognized way.
If this ability to recall and use a proposition were the sine qua non of
mathematical intelligence, then (Poincaré reasons) the mathematician
would need to have a very sure memory or prodigious powers of attention.
But many individuals skilled in math stand out neither for mnemonic nor
for attentional powers, while a far larger group of individuals with keen
memories or superb attentional span display little aptitude for mathemat-
ics. The reason the mathematician’s memory does not fail him in a difﬁ-
cult piece of reasoning, Poincaré testiﬁes, is because it is guided by
reasoning:
144
The Theory

A mathematical demonstration is not simply a single juxtaposition of
syllogisms, it is syllogisms placed in a certain order, and the order in
which these elements are placed is much more important than the ele-
ments themselves. If I have the feeling, the intuition, so to speak, of this
order, so as to perceive at a glance the reasoning as a whole, I need no
longer fear lest I forget one of the elements, for each of them will take
its allotted place in the array, and that without any effort of memory on
my part. 
Poincaré distinguishes, then, between two abilities. One is sheer mem-
ory for steps in a chain of reasoning, which might well sufﬁce for the re-
call of certain proofs. The other ability—and, in his view, by far the more
important one—is an appreciation of the nature of the links between the
propositions. If these links have been appreciated, the exact identity of
the steps in the proof becomes less important, because, if necessary, they
can be reconstructed or even reinvented. We can observe this ability at
work simply by trying to re-create Poincaré’s own reasoning as just pre-
sented. If the drift of the argument has been grasped, its re-creation proves
a relatively simple matter. If one has not grasped the reasoning, however,
one is consigned to falling back on literal verbal memory, which, even if it
rescues an individual on a given occasion, is unlikely to exhibit much stay-
ing power.
While the mental powers central to any ﬁeld are spread out unequally
within the population, there are few ﬁelds of endeavor where the extremes
are so great, and the importance of generous initial endowment so patent.
As Poincaré points out, the capacity to follow the chain of reasoning is not
that elusive, but the ability to invent signiﬁcant new mathematics is rare:
Anyone could make new combinations with mathematical entities . . . to
create consists precisely in not making useless combinations and in mak-
ing those which are useful, and which are only a small minority: inven-
tion is discernment, choice. . . . Among chosen combinations the most
fertile will often be those formed of elements drawn from domains which
are far apart. 
According to Alfred Adler, a mathematician who has introspected tellingly
upon the trials and the triumphs of his ﬁeld,
145
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

Almost no one is capable of doing signiﬁcant mathematics. There is no
acceptably good mathematics. Each generation has its few great mathe-
maticians and mathematics would not even notice the absence of the
others. In mathematics, those with true genius are discovered virtually
immediately and (in comparison with other disciplines) there is little en-
ergy wasted in jealousy, bitterness, or reservation, because the charac-
teristics of the mathematically blessed are so evident. 
What characterizes those with mathematical gifts? According to Adler,
the powers of mathematicians rarely extend beyond the boundary of the
discipline. Mathematicians are seldom talented in ﬁnance or the law. What
characterizes the individual is a love of dealing with abstraction, “the ex-
ploration, under the pressure of powerful implosive forces, of difﬁcult
problems for whose validity and importance the explorer is eventually held
accountable by reality.” The mathematician must be absolutely rigorous
and perennially skeptical: no fact can be accepted unless it has been proved
rigorously by steps that are derived from universally accepted ﬁrst princi-
ples. Mathematics allows great speculative freedom—one can create any
kind of system that one wants; but in the end, every mathematical theory
must be relevant to physical reality, either in a straightforward manner or
by relevance to the main body of mathematics, which in turn has direct
physical implications. What sustains and motivates the mathematician is
the belief that he may be able to create a result that is entirely new, one
that changes forever the way that others think about the mathematical
order: “A great new mathematical ediﬁce is a triumph that whispers of im-
mortality.” Adler’s sentiments echo those of a renowned mathematician of
an earlier generation, G. H. Hardy:
It is undeniable that a gift for mathematics is one of the most specialized
talents and that mathematicians as a class are not particularly distin-
guished for general ability or versatility. . . . If a man is in any sense a real
mathematician, then it is a hundred to one that his mathematics will be
far better than anything else he can do and . . . he would be silly if he
surrendered any decent opportunity of exercising his one talent in order
to do any undistinguished work in other ﬁelds. 
Like a painter or a poet, a mathematician is a maker of patterns; but the
special characteristics of mathematical patterns are that they are more
146
The Theory

likely to be permanent because they are made with ideas: “A mathemati-
cian has no materials to work with, and so his patterns are likely to last
longer, since ideas erase less well than words do,” comments Hardy.
Quite possibly, the most central and least replaceable feature of the
mathematician’s gift is the ability to handle skillfully long chains of rea-
soning. If a biologist were to study the locomotive processes of an amoeba
and then try to apply his conclusions to successive levels of the animal
kingdom, ending up with a theory of human walking, we might think him
eccentric. Yet, as Andrew Gleason has pointed out, the mathematician
regularly does just this sort of thing. He applies in very complicated con-
texts theories that were derived in very simple ones; and he generally ex-
pects that the results will be valid, not merely in outline, but in detail.
Initially, this prosecution of an extended line of reasoning may be intu-
itive. Many mathematicians report that they sense a solution, or a direc-
tion, long before they have worked out each step in detail. Stanislaw
Ulam, a contemporary mathematician, reports, “If one wants to do some-
thing original, it is no longer a case of syllogism chains. One is only occa-
sionally aware of something in the brain which acts as a summarizer or
totalizer of the process going on and that probably consists of many parts
acting simultaneously.” Poincaré speaks of mathematicians who “are
guided by intuition and, at ﬁrst stroke, make quick, but sometimes pre-
carious conquests, like bold cavalry men of the advance guard.” But even-
tually, if the mathematics is to convince others, it must be worked out in
precise detail, with nary an error in deﬁnition or in chain of reasoning;
and this Apollonian aspect is essential to the performance of the mathe-
matician. In fact, either errors of omission (forgetting a step) or of com-
mission (making some assumption that is unnecessary) can destroy the
value of a mathematical contribution.
The launching of a ﬁeld of study—of, if you will, a science of 
mathematics—occurs when the ﬁndings of each generation build upon
those of the last. In earlier times, it was possible for an educated person to
follow mathematical thinking pretty much up to the contemporary mo-
ment; but for at least a century, this has not been possible. (It is notable
that while the cultural domains that invoke different intelligences all con-
tinue to develop, few, if any, have evolved in so arcane a way as has logical-
mathematical thought.) In fact, in a manner paralleling the individual
developmental pattern I have sketched, mathematics has become increas-
ingly abstract with the years.
147
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

Alfred Adler traces this course. The ﬁrst abstraction is the idea of num-
ber itself, and the idea that different quantities can be distinguished from
one another on that basis. Every human culture has made this step. Next
comes the creation of algebra, where numbers are regarded as a system,
and one can introduce variables to take the place of particular numbers.
The variables, in turn, are simply specialized cases of the more general-
ized dimension of mathematical functions, where one variable has a sys-
tematic relation to another variable. These functions need not be restricted
to real values, such as lengths or widths, but can confer meaning upon
other functions, upon functions of functions, and upon even longer strings
of reference as well.
In short, as Adler indicates, by abstracting and generalizing ﬁrst the
concept of number, then the concept of the variable, and finally that of
the function, it is possible to arrive at an extremely abstract and general
level of thought. Naturally, with each further step in the ladder of ab-
straction, some individuals will ﬁnd the sequence too difﬁcult, too painful,
or insufﬁciently rewarding and hence will “drop out.” It ought to be
pointed out that there is also in mathematics a powerful pull toward ﬁnd-
ing simpler expressions and for returning to the fundamental notions of
numbers. Therefore, there may be a place in the discipline of mathemat-
ics for individuals who are not especially gifted in following through these
long chains of reasoning or these increasingly abstract tiers of analysis.
To choose life as a mathematician would seem a difﬁcult move. It is not
surprising that mathematicians seem (to an outsider) to be chosen by their
precocious skills in the numerical realms and by their singular passion for
abstraction. The world of the mathematician is a world apart, and one must
be ascetic to derive sustenance from it. The imperative to concentrate en-
ergies for many hours on seemingly intractable problems is the norm, and
casual contacts with other individuals cannot be allowed to attain much
importance. Language is also not much help. One is on one’s own with
pencil and paper and one’s own mind. One must think very hard; and, thus,
one often suffers severe strain, if not a breakdown. But mathematics can
also provide protection against anxiety. As Stanislaw Ulam suggests, “A
mathematician ﬁnds his own monastic niche and happiness in pursuits that
are disconnected from external affairs. In their unhappiness over the
world, mathematicians ﬁnd a self-sufﬁciency in mathematics.”
If the isolation is severe and the concentration demanding and painful,
the rewards seem to be of high order indeed. Mathematicians who have in-
148
The Theory

trospected about their feelings upon solving a difﬁcult problem regularly
stress the exhilaration that accompanies the moment of breakthrough.
Sometimes the intuition comes through ﬁrst, and then one must actually
make efforts to work through the details of the solution; at other times, the
careful execution of the steps actually suggests the solution; less frequently,
intuition and discipline arrive at the same time or work in concert. But
whatever its mode, the solving of a difﬁcult and important problem—and
this is the only problem that mathematicians feel worthy of their energy
(unless it be to demonstrate that a problem cannot in principle be
solved)—provides a thrill of a very special sort.
But what excites mathematicians? One obvious source of delight at-
tends the solution of a problem that has long been considered insoluble.
Inventing a new ﬁeld of mathematics, discovering an element in the foun-
dation of mathematics, or ﬁnding links between otherwise alien ﬁelds of
mathematics are certainly other rewards.
In fact, the ability not merely to discover an analogy but to ﬁnd an
analogy between kinds of analogies has been singled out as an especial
mathematical delight. And it seems that dealing with elements that are
counterintuitive provides yet another special kind of gratiﬁcation for math-
ematicians. Roaming in the realm of imaginary numbers, irrational num-
bers, paradoxes, possible and impossible worlds having their own peculiar
properties, yields yet other delicacies. It is possibly not an accident that
one of the outstanding inventors of a world contrary to fact, Lewis Carroll,
was also a ﬁrst-rate logician and mathematician.
The tribe of mathematicians is sufﬁciently special (and sufﬁciently re-
mote) that it is tempting to lump all its members together. However, within
the discipline, individuals readily rate and contrast one another. Speed and
power of abstraction provide an immediate means of ranking and, quite
possibly, the one that matters above all else. It is paradoxical that, in math-
ematics, there is still no Nobel prize, because it is probably the single
human intellectual endeavor in which consensus about distribution of tal-
ent is the greatest among its practitioners. But other dimensions as well
are often invoked in discussions of mathematical skill. For instance, some
mathematicians are much more given to the use and the valuing of intu-
ition, while others extol only systematic proof.
Nowadays, mathematicians are fond of assessing the greatest mathe-
matician of the previous generation—John von Neumann. In such evalu-
ations, relevant criteria include the ability to size up an area and decide
149
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

whether it harbors interesting problems, the courage to take on difﬁcult
and seemingly intractable problems, and the ability to think extremely rap-
idly. In discussing von Neumann, whom he knew well, Ulam comments,
As a mathematician, von Neumann was quick, brilliant, efﬁcient, and enor-
mously broad in scientiﬁc interests beyond mathematics itself. He knew
his technical abilities; his virtuosity in following complicated reasoning and
his insights were supreme; yet he lacked absolute self-conﬁdence. Perhaps
he felt that he did not have the power to divine new truths intuitively at
the highest level or the gift for a seemingly irrational perception of proofs
or formulation of new theorems. . . . Perhaps it was because on a couple
of occasions, he had been anticipated, preceded, or even surpassed 
by others. 
In other words, von Neumann was the master of, but also a little bit the
slave to, his own technical skill. Further insight into von Neumann’s powers
comes from a recollection of Jacob Bronowski, himself trained as a math-
ematician. Von Neumann was trying to explain a ﬁnding to Bronowski, who
could not grasp the point:
Oh, no [said von Neumann], you are not seeing it. Your kind of visualiz-
ing mind is not right for seeing this. Think of it abstractly. What is hap-
pening on this photograph of an explosion is that the ﬁrst differential
coefﬁcient vanishes identically and that is why what becomes visible is
the trace of the second differential coefﬁcient.
The engineer Julian Bigelow recalls:
Von Neumann was a fantastic craftsman of theory. . . . He could write a
problem out the ﬁrst time he heard it, with a very good notation to ex-
press the problem. . . . He was very careful that what he said and what he
wrote down was really exactly what he meant.
According to historian of mathematics Steve Heims, this ability to write
down a problem in proper notation indicates that, regardless of the content
of a problem, von Neumann was immediately concerned with form. Thus
he demonstrated a power of intuition denied to his colleagues, one of
whom said, “Beyond anyone else, he could almost instantly understand
150
The Theory

what was involved and show how to prove the theorem in question or to
replace it by what was the true theorem.”
Ulam compares himself to other mathematicians, including, it would
seem, von Neumann, when he says:
As for myself, I cannot claim that I know much of the technical material
of mathematics. What I may have is the feeling for the gist, or maybe only
the gist of the gist, in a number of its ﬁelds. It is possible to have this knack
for guessing or feeling what is likely to be new or already known, or else
not known, in some branch of mathematics, where one does not know the
details. I think I have the ability to a degree and can often tell whether a
theorem is known; i.e., already proved or is new conjecture.
Ulam adds an interesting aside on the relation between this skill and the
musical faculty:
I can remember tunes and am able to whistle various melodies rather
correctly. But when I try to invent or compose some new “catchy” tune,
I ﬁnd rather impotently that what I do is a trivial combination of what I
have heard. This is in complete contrast to mathematics where I believe,
with a mere touch, I can always propose something new.
It seems evident that mathematical talent requires the ability to discover a
promising idea and then to draw out its implications. Ulam can accomplish
this feat readily in mathematics but lacks the ability almost totally in the mu-
sical sphere. In contrast, Arthur Rubinstein, one of our guides to the area of
music, utters the opposite complaint: for him, mathematics is “impossible.”
At the center of mathematical prowess lies the ability to recognize sig-
niﬁcant problems and then to solve them. As for what permits recognition
of promising problems, mathematicians seem at a loss. The context of dis-
covery remains a mystery, although (as in music) it is clear that some tech-
nically gifted individuals are immediately drawn to discovery and have a
ﬂair for it, while others of equal (or even greater) technical competence
lack this particular bent. In any event, a considerable literature has devel-
oped on methods of problem solving. Mathematicians have devised vari-
ous heuristics that help individuals to solve problems, and informal training
in mathematics often involves assimilating and passing on these techniques
to the next generation. From students of mathematical problem solving,
151
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

like George Polya, Herbert Simon, and Allen Newell, one picks up point-
ers. Mathematicians are advised to generalize—to proceed from the given
set of objects in a problem to a larger set that contains the given one. Con-
versely, mathematicians are also advised to specialize, to pass from a given
set of objects to a smaller set, itself contained in the given one; to ferret out
analogies, thereby ﬁnding a problem or a situation that bears instructive
similarities (and differences) from the one under consideration.
Other procedures are frequently mentioned. Faced with a problem too
complex or unwieldy to solve, the mathematician is counseled to ﬁnd a
simpler problem within the larger one, to seek a solution to the simpler
component, and then to build upon that solution. The student is also ad-
vised to propose a possible solution and to work backward to the problem;
or to describe the characteristics that a solution should have and then, in
turn, to try to attain each of them. Another popular method is indirect
proof: one assumes the opposite of what one is trying to prove and ascer-
tains the consequence of that assumption. More speciﬁc heuristics exist—
and are drawn upon—within particular areas of mathematics. Clearly,
because the most interesting problems are difﬁcult to solve, the mathe-
matician who can draw upon these heuristics appropriately and shrewdly
is at a decided advantage. Perhaps the ability to learn and to deploy such
heuristics—to supplement purely logical considerations with a sense of
what might work—helps deﬁne the “zone of proximal development” in the
aspiring mathematician.
Though many mathematicians highly value their intuition, these ex-
plicit methods of problem solving are their stock in trade—what they fall
back on when inspiration and intuition fail. But these heuristics are not ex-
clusively the possession of the mathematician. Indeed, they prove equally
useful to individuals involved in problem solving in other areas of life, and
serve as one way of connecting the activities of that rare bird—the pure
mathematician—to the pursuits of the others. In particular, they help illu-
minate the lot of the practicing scientist who must also pose and then solve
problems in the most efﬁcient and effective way.
The Practice of Science
Certainly, science and mathematics are closely allied. The progress—even
the invention—of science has been linked to the status of mathematics
152
The Theory

during particular historical epochs, and practically every signiﬁcant math-
ematical invention has eventually proved useful within the scientiﬁc com-
munity. To cite just a few examples, the Greek study of conic sections in
200 bc made possible Johannes Kepler’s laws of planetary motion in 1609.
More recently David Hilbert’s theory of integral equations was needed for
quantum mechanics, and Georg Friedrich Riemann’s differential geo metry
proved basic for the theory of relativity. Indeed, the marked progress of
Western science since the seventeenth century can be traced to a signiﬁ-
cant extent to the invention of differential and integral calculus. Chem-
istry and physics are concerned with explaining change—the evolution of
physical systems—and not the description of steady states. Without the
calculus, the process of dealing with such changes could be very difﬁcult
because one would have to calculate every tiny step of the process. But
with the calculus, it is possible to determine how the change of one quan-
tity relates to other quantities connected to it. It is thus ﬁtting that New-
ton, one of the inventors of the calculus, had the opportunity to work out
the motion of the planets.
The scientist needs mathematics because the body of brute fact is un-
wieldy: the orderly scheme of abstract relations that he can obtain from
mathematics is a chief tool in making some order out of this chaos. Yet the
core of the ﬁelds of science (for example, physics) and mathematics can
be clearly distinguished. Whereas the mathematician is interested in ex-
ploring abstract systems for their own sake, the scientist is motivated by a
desire to explain physical reality. For him, mathematics is a tool—albeit an
indispensable one—for building models and theories that can describe
and, eventually, explain the operation of the world—be it the world 
of material objects (physics and chemistry), of living things (biology), of
human beings (social or behavioral sciences), or of the human mind (cog-
nitive science).
In Classical times, science was closely tied with philosophy (from which
it took its questions) and with mathematics (whose methods were often
devised in the course of attempting to resolve speciﬁc questions). With the
passage of time, however, the enterprise of science has become increas-
ingly independent, though it continues to cross-fertilize with philosophy
and mathematics. Among the factors important in the rise of science as a
separate (and, nowadays, increasingly splintered) enterprise have been its
dissociation from politics and theology; the increasing reliance on empiri-
cal observation, measurement, and crucial experiments designed to test
153
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

one model or theory against another; and the rise of public (published) sci-
entiﬁc reports where claims are written out and procedures detailed, so
that other individuals have the opportunity to replicate studies, to criticize
them, and to carry out their own further line of investigation in an effort
to support, reformulate, or undermine the scientiﬁc dogma of their time.
As Piaget noted long ago, the evolution of science here displays cer-
tain intriguing parallels with the development in children of logical-
mathematical thought. In both cases, we ﬁnd simple experimentation with
objects and the noting of their patterns of interaction and behavior to be
the earliest (and most basic) procedure. The practice of making careful
measurements, devising statements about the way in which the universe
works, and then subjecting these statements to systematic conﬁrmation
does not occur until relatively late in the evolution of the individual and at
a comparably tardy moment in the evolution of scientiﬁc thought.
We can observe as well a series of stages in the advent of modern sci-
ence. First, early in the seventeenth century, Francis Bacon stressed the im-
portance of systematic accumulation of facts. However, given his ignorance
of mathematics and his failure to pose pregnant questions, Bacon’s contri-
bution remained more programmatic than substantive. Shortly afterward,
Galileo championed the introduction of mathematics into scientiﬁc work.
He argued against the simple recording of colors, tastes, sounds, and smells
and pointed out that these elements would not even exist were it not for the
particular sense organs with which individuals happen to be endowed. Yet
even Galileo’s introduction of structured techniques of measurement into
the scientist’s arsenal did not sufﬁce to usher in the modern era. To do so
was left to Isaac Newton, an incomparable thinker who, in explicit formal
operational style, made a comprehensive survey of physical ﬁndings and, ap-
plying both analysis and synthesis, ﬁtted together the various pieces into a co-
herent pattern. As the historian of science Herbert Butterﬁeld put it, “One
youth who made a comprehensive survey of the ﬁeld and possessed great
elasticity of mind, could place the pieces into the proper pattern with the
help of a few intuitions.” In a manner that cannot fail to please Piagetians,
Newton postulated an absolute framework of time and space, within which
physical events unfold according to a set of immutable laws.
Though scientiﬁc and mathematical talent may reside in the same in-
dividual (for example, in Newton), the motives behind scientists’ passions
do not much resemble those we encountered in the lives of mathemati-
154
The Theory

cians. What seemed, more than anything else, to impel Newton the scien-
tist was desire to ﬁnd the secrets or the secret of nature. Newton himself
knew it was too difﬁcult to explain all of nature, but he did share the no-
tion of being an explorer:
I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to
have been only like a boy playing on the sea shore and diverting himself
and then ﬁnding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary,
while the greater ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me. 
Bronowski comments on the pleasure attending a discovery by the scientist:
When the ﬁgures come out right like that, you know as Pythagoras did
that a secret of Nature is open in the palm of your hand. A universal law
governs the majestic clockwork of the heavens, in which the motion of
the moon is one harmonious incident. It is a key that you have put into
the lock and turned and nature has yielded in numbers the conﬁrmation
of her structure. 
The desire to explain nature, rather than to create a consistent abstract
world, engenders an instructive tension between pure scientists and pure
mathematicians. The mathematician may peer down his nose at scientists
for being practical, applied, insufﬁciently interested in the pursuit of ideas
for their own sake. The scientist, in turn, may feel that the mathematician
is out of touch with reality and tends to pursue ideas forever even when (or
perhaps even especially when) they do not lead anywhere and may not be
of practical consequence. These “ideal/real” prejudices aside, the talents
rewarded by the two ﬁelds also seem different. For the mathematician, it
is most important that one recognize patterns wherever they may exist,
that one be able to carry out the implications of one’s train of thinking
wherever they may lead. For the scientist, a healthy planting of one’s feet
on the ground and perpetual concern with the implication of one’s ideas for
the physical universe is a needed and useful feature that goes beyond the
mathematician’s burden. As Albert Einstein, who considered both careers,
put it, “Truth in physical matters can of course never be founded on math-
ematical and logical considerations alone.” And he reminisced illuminat-
ingly on his own career decision:
155
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

The fact that I neglected mathematics to a certain extent had its cause,
not merely in my stronger interest in science than in mathematics, but
also in the following strange experience. I saw that mathematics was split
up into numerous specialties, each of which could easily absorb the short
lifetime granted to us. This was obviously due to the fact that my intu-
ition was not strong enough in the ﬁeld of mathematics. . . . In [physics],
however, I soon learned to scent out that which was able to lead to fun-
damentals and to turn aside from everything else, from the multitude of
things that clutter up the mind and divert it from the essential. 
Just what is the nature of the intuitions that characterize outstanding
scientists, ones of the caliber of a Newton and an Einstein? Beginning with
an absorbing interest in the objects of the world and how they operate,
these individuals eventually enter into a search for a limited set of rules or
principles that can help to explain the behavior of objects. The greatest
progress is made when disparate elements are linked and a few simple
rules can explain observed interactions. Conceding that this ability differs
from the analogizing powers of the pure mathematician, Ulam confesses
that it is difﬁcult for the mathematician to understand what it means to
have an intuition for the behavior of physical phenomena: he suggests, in
fact, that few mathematicians actually have this intuition. Werner Heisen-
berg, himself a Nobel laureate in physics at the age of thirty-two, recalls the
physical intuitions of his mentor Niels Bohr, and how they often overran
what the latter could prove:
Bohr must surely know that he starts from contradictory assumptions
which cannot be correct in their present form. But he has an unerring in-
stinct for using these very assumptions to construct fairly convincing
models of atomic processes. Bohr uses classical mechanics or quantum
theory that way just as a painter uses his brush and colors. Brushes do not
determine the picture, and color is never the full reality, but if he keeps
the picture before his mind’s eye, the artist can use his brush to convey,
however inadequately, his own mental picture to others. Bohr knows pre-
cisely how atoms behave during light emission, in chemical processes
and in many other phenomena, and this has helped him to form an in-
tuitive picture of the structure of different atoms: it is not at all certain
that Bohr himself believes that electrons revolve inside the atom. But he
is convinced of the correctness of his picture. The fact that he cannot yet
156
The Theory

express it by adequate linguistic or mathematical techniques is no disas-
ter. On the contrary, it is a great challenge.
Such faith in the power of one’s own intuitions concerning the ultimate
nature of physical reality recurs over and over again in the introspections
of the physicists. In speaking to Einstein, Heisenberg once said:
I believe, just like you, that the simplicity of natural laws has an objec-
tive character, that it is not just the result of thought economy. If nature
leads us to mathematical forms of great simplicity and beauty—by
forms, I am referring to coherent systems of hypotheses, actions, etc.—
to forms that no one has previously encountered, we cannot help think
that they are “true,” that they reveal a genuine feature of nature. . . . 
But the mere fact that we could never have arrived at these forms by
ourselves, that they were revealed to us by nature, suggests strongly that
they must be part of reality itself, not just our thoughts about reality. . . .
I am strongly attracted by the simplicity and beauty of the mathematical
schemes with which nature presents us. You must have felt this too: the
almost frightening simplicity and wholeness of the relationships which
nature suddenly spreads out before us and for which none of us was in
the least prepared. 
It is left to the greatest scientists to pose questions that no one has
posed before, and then to arrive at an answer that changes for all time the
way in which scientists (and eventually laymen) construe the universe. Ein-
stein’s genius lay in his persistent questioning of the absoluteness of time
and space. Already as a teenager, Einstein pondered what our experience
would be like if we ourselves were operating from the point of view of light,
or, to put it more concretely, if we rode on a beam of light. Suppose, he
asked, that we were looking at a clock, but were ﬂying away from it at the
speed of light. The time on the clock would then be frozen because a new
hour could never travel fast enough to catch up with us; on the beam of
light, the time of that clock would remain perpetually the same.
Einstein came to think that as one approximated the speed of light,
one became increasingly isolated in his box of time and space and de-
parted increasingly from the norms around him. No longer was there such
a thing as universal time: indeed, the experience of time would now become
different for the traveler on the beam from what it was for the individual
157
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

remaining at home. However, one’s experiences on the beam of light are
consistent with each other: the same relations among time, distance, speed,
mass, and force that Newton had described continue to obtain on that
beam; and they continue to obtain with a similar consistency in the region
of the clock. It is just that the actual values produced for time, distance,
and the like are no longer identical for both the beam traveler and the in-
dividual who has remained in the vicinity of the clock.
To follow through this line of thinking, to reconcile it with ﬁndings of
the past (like the Michelson-Morley experiment that challenged the exis-
tence of the medium of ether) and with hypothetical future experiments,
and then to write out the mathematics needed to create a theory of rela-
tivity, took Einstein years and constitutes part of the history of our times.
What should be remarked upon here is that his scientiﬁc originality lay in
the boldness of conceiving the problem; in the persistence in carrying it
through, with all of its mystifying and unsettling implications; and in the
subtlety to appreciate its connection to the most basic questions about
the nature and structure of the universe. Einstein required courage to ex-
ecute this line of thinking on his own for years, despite the fact that it
flouted conventional wisdom, and to believe that his resulting descrip-
tion might be truly more simplifying, edifying, and comprehensive (hence
more “true”) than Newton’s universally accepted synthesis of two cen-
turies before.
As the physicist Gerald Holton has persuasively argued, such a program
requires more than just technical facility, mathematical acuity, and keen
observational powers—though each of these is probably a prerequisite.
Scientists are also guided by underlying themes of themata—beliefs about
how the universe must work, and basic convictions about how these prin-
ciples are best revealed. In Einstein’s case, the very belief that there will
be a few simple laws, that they will unify diverse phenomena, and that
there will be no element of chance or indeterminacy in these laws, are part
and parcel of his professional code: Einstein is said to have remarked, “God
wouldn’t have passed up the opportunity to make Nature this simple.” The-
mata such as these may at times be more central to discussion than the ob-
jective facts and ﬁgures that are the scientist’s normal stock in trade. As
Holton puts it, “The awareness of themata which are sometimes held with
obstinate loyalty help one to explain the character of the discussion be-
tween antagonists far better than do scientiﬁc content and social sur-
roundings alone.”
158
The Theory

The discussion of themes situated at the core of a scientist’s system
brings to the fore a puzzling but central aspect of scientiﬁc practice. Even
though the scientist’s self-image nowadays highlights rigor, systematicity,
and objectivity, it seems that, in the ﬁnal analysis, science itself is virtually
a religion, a set of beliefs that scientists embrace with a zealot’s conviction.
Scientists not only believe in their methods and themes from the depth of
their being, but many are also convinced it is their mission to use these
tools to explain as much of reality as falls within their power. This convic-
tion is perhaps one of the reasons that the great scientists have typically
been concerned with the most cosmic questions, and that, particularly in
the latter years of life, they are often given to making pronouncements
about philosophical issues, such as the nature of reality or the meaning of
life. Even Newton, it has recently been documented, devoted much of his
lengthy life to a consideration of diverse aspects of mysticism, metaphysics,
and cosmology and put forth many views that would strike us today as me-
dieval, if not wholly bizarre. Underlying this interest, it seems to me, is
much the same desire to explain the world that comes through in a more
constrained and disciplined fashion in physics. Commentator Frank
Manuel has expressed it this way:
Newton’s statement of fundamental religious principles, his interpreta-
tion of prophecy, his textual criticism of the historical words of Scripture,
his system of world chronology, his cosmological theories, and his Eu-
hemeristic reduction of pagan mythology all bespeak the same mental-
ity and style of thought. As Nature was consonant with itself, so was Isaac
Newton’s mind. At the height of his powers there was in him a com-
pelling desire to ﬁnd order and design in what appeared to be chaos, to
distill from a vast inchoate mass of materials a few basic principles that
would embrace the whole and deﬁne the relationships of its component
parts. . . . In whatever direction he turned, he was searching for a unify-
ing structure.
Here, certainly, we see divergence from the concerns of most mathe-
maticians, who would just as soon turn their backs on reality as try to en-
compass within their equations and theorems all of its complexity and
messiness. And this passion for the single unifying explanation may demark
a line between the physical sciences and other disciplines as well. While 
individuals in other sciences are certainly drawn to explanations of their
159
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

reality—be it biological, social, or cognitive—they are less likely to search
for the overall explanations of the essence of life. And others of a strong
logical-mathematical ability—for example, chess players—are also unlikely
to devote much energy to a search for the secret of the world’s powers.
Perhaps—though just perhaps—the desire to solve the principal philo-
sophical puzzles of existence is a special feature of the childhood of the
young physical scientist.
As a child of four or ﬁve, Albert Einstein received a magnetic compass.
He was awed by the needle, isolated and unreachable, yet seemingly
caught in the grip of an invisible urge that attracted it toward the north.
The needle came as a revelation, for it challenged the child’s tentative be-
lief in an orderly physical world: “I can still remember—or at least I believe
I remember—that this experience made a deep and abiding impression
on me.” It is risky to make too much of a single childhood memory; and
Einstein, ever careful with his thoughts and words, encircles his own un-
certainty by the telltale phrase, “I believe I remember.” Yet it is instructive
to compare Einstein’s recollections of a pivotal early experience with those
of other individuals in the logical-mathematical ﬁeld.
An example: our mathematical guide Stanislaw Ulam recalls that as a
young child, he was fascinated by the intricate patterns in an Oriental rug.
The resulting visual picture seemed to produce a “melody” with relations
among the various parts resonating with one another. Ulam speculates that
such patterns feature a kind of inherent mathematical regularity and power
to which certain young individuals are particularly sensitive. And such sen-
sitivity may rely in large measure on a kind of keen memory that enables
the child to compare a presently perceived pattern—be it primarily visual
or merely ordered—with others “operated upon” in the past. As an aside,
I might mention that in our observations of young children, my colleagues
and I have identiﬁed a group of youngsters who are especially attracted to,
if not ﬁxated upon, repetitive patterns. Then unaware of Ulam, we nick-
named these children “patterners” and contrasted them with another
group, presumably more linguistically oriented, whom we termed “drama-
tists.” Of course, we do not yet know whether children dubbed patterners
in their youth are more “at risk” to become mathematicians.
And other childhood attractions for those in the logical-mathematical
field? As a youth, Pascal was avid to learn about mathematics but was
kept from doing so by his father, who, in fact, forbade him to speak about
mathematics.
160
The Theory

Pascal, however, began to dream [about] the subject and . . . he used to
mark with charcoal the walls of his playroom, seeking a means of mak-
ing a circle perfectly round and a triangle whose sides and angles were
all equal. He discovered these things for himself and then began to seek
the relationship which existed between them. He did not know any math-
ematical terms and so he made up his own. . . . Using these names he
made axioms and ﬁnally developed perfect demonstrations . . . until he
had come to the thirty-second proposition of Euclid.
Bertrand Russell recalls:
I began Euclid, with my brother as my tutor, at the age of eleven. It was
one of the great events of my life, as dazzling as ﬁrst love. I had not imag-
ined that there was anything as delicious in the world. . . . From that 
moment until . . . I was thirty-eight, it was my chief interest and my chief
source of happiness. . . . [Mathematics] is not human and has nothing
particular to do with this planet or with the whole accidental universe—
because like Spinoza’s God, it won’t love us in return.
Ulam offers one possible account of the course of such passions. At ﬁrst
a young child undergoes some satisfying experiences with numbers; then
he experiments further and builds up his store (and memory) of experi-
ences in the numerical and symbolic domains. Eventually the child pro-
ceeds beyond his own idiosyncratic (though sometimes universally shared)
explorations—his natural mathematical curiosity—to an acquaintance with
problems that have in the past challenged mathematicians. If he is to
achieve much, he must then spend hours each day thinking about these
issues. For the bald fact is that, in mathematics more so than in any other
intellectual domain, the years of the third and the fourth decades of life
are crucial. The ability to store and manipulate within one’s mind during
a ﬁnite period of time all the variables necessary to make progress on im-
portant mathematical problems is one that, for one or another (presumably
neurological) reason, proves especially vulnerable to age, even as young an
age as thirty or forty. It is a difﬁcult and often tormenting assignment.
Still another childhood journey surrounds the contemporary Ameri-
can philosopher and logician Saul Kripke, reputed to be the most bril-
liant philosopher of his generation. At age three, young Saul went to see
his mother in the kitchen and asked her if God were truly everywhere. 
161
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

Receiving an afﬁrmative answer, he then asked whether he had squeezed
part of God out of the kitchen by coming in and taking out some of the
space. Beﬁtting a mathematical prodigy, Kripke went forth quickly on his
own and had reached the level of algebra by the time he was in fourth
grade. For instance, he discovered that in multiplying the sum of two num-
bers by the difference between them, he got the same answer as he did
when he subtracted the square of the smaller one from the square of the
larger number. Once he realized that this pattern applied to any set of
numbers, he had arrived at the core of algebra. Kripke once mentioned to
his mother that he would have himself invented algebra if it had not al-
ready been invented, because he came upon its insights so naturally. This
ability to devise areas of study may be common among prodigious young
mathematicians. The great Descartes said, “As a young man, when I heard
about ingenious inventions, I tried to invent them by myself, even without
reading the author.”
Such biographical notes conﬁrm that talent in the logical-mathemati-
cal sphere announces itself very early. Initially, the individual can proceed
rapidly on his own, as it were, almost apart from experience. Perhaps in-
dividuals with this general talent might, by an accident of history, be di-
rected randomly to mathematics, logic, or physics. My own guess is that
careful study might uncover different “telltale” early experiences in indi-
viduals: the physicists may be especially intrigued by physical objects and
their operations; the mathematician may be immersed in patterns per se;
the philosopher will be intrigued by paradoxes, by questions about ulti-
mate reality, and by the relationships among propositions. Of course,
whether this afﬁnity is in itself accidental, or whether each individual grav-
itates toward those objects or elements for which he has certain proclivi-
ties, is a riddle I had better leave to someone of a more decidedly
logical-mathematical bent.
Whatever the precocity of the young logician-mathematician, it is cru-
cial that he advance quickly in his ﬁeld. As we have seen, the best years
for productivity in these ﬁelds are before the age of forty, maybe even be-
fore the age of thirty; and while solid work can be conducted after that
time, it seems relatively rare. G. H. Hardy says, “I write about mathemat-
ics because, like any other mathematician who has passed sixty, I have no
longer the freshness of mind, the energy, or the patience to carry on ef-
fectively with my proper job.” I. I. Rabi, Nobel laureate physicist, observes
162
The Theory

that younger individuals carry the baton in his ﬁeld because they have vast
physical energy. Queried about what age physicists tend to run down, 
he says:
It very much depends on the individual. . . . I’ve seen people run down
at thirty, at forty, at fifty. I think it must be basically neurological or
physiological. The mind ceases to operate with the same richness and
association. The information retrieval part sort of goes, along with the
interconnections. I know that when I was in my late teens and early
twenties the world was just a Roman candle—rockets all the time. . . .
You lose that sort of thing as time goes on. . . . Physics is an otherworld
thing, it requires a taste for things unseen, even unheard of—a high
degree of abstraction. . . . These faculties die off somehow when you
grow up. . . . Profound curiosity happens when children are young. I
think physicists are the Peter Pans of the human race. . . . Once you
are sophisticated, you know too much—far too much. [Wolfgang] Pauli
once said to me, “I know a great deal. I know too much. I am a quan-
tum ancient.”
In mathematics, the situation may be even more severe. Alfred Adler
says that the major work of most mathematicians is over by the age of
twenty-ﬁve or thirty. If little has been accomplished by that time, little is
likely to be accomplished in the future. Productivity drops off with each
decade, and what is known with difﬁculty by the teacher is picked up eas-
ily, sometimes even effortlessly, by the students. This leads to a kind of
poignant technological unemployment, where even the greatest mathe-
maticians are doomed, like young swimmers or runners, to spending most
of their self-conscious lives burdened with the knowledge that they have
passed their primes. This situation contrasts with that found in many hu-
manistic areas of scholarship, where major works typically appear during
the ﬁfth, the sixth, or the seventh decades of life.
Mathematical Talent in Isolation
As we have seen, the ability to calculate rapidly is at best an accidental ad-
vantage for mathematicians: certainly it is far from central to their talent,
163
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

which must be of a more general and abstract variety. There are, however,
selected individuals who have an ability to calculate enormously well, and
one can see in them a portion of logical-mathematical ability operating in
relatively autonomous form.
Probably the chief examples of this proﬁle are idiots savants, individuals
who, with meager or even retarded abilities in most areas, display from early
childhood an ability to calculate very rapidly and very accurately. The human
calculator has learned a set of tricks: he can add large numbers in his head,
commit to memory long sequences of numbers, perhaps state the day of the
week for any randomly chosen date in the last three centuries. It must be
stressed that these individuals typically are not interested in discovering new
problems, or in solving venerable old ones, or even in observing how other
people have solved them. Idiots savants do not seek to use mathematics to
help them in other areas of daily life or to tackle scientiﬁc puzzles: instead,
they have mastered a series of maneuvers that enable them to stand out—
like freaks. There are exceptions—the mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss
and the astronomer Truman Safford were outstanding calculators; but, in
general, this talent is most salient in other wise unremarkable persons.
In most cases, the idiot savant appears to have a genuine calculating
ability, one that sets him apart from an early age. For example, an institu-
tionalized child named Obadiah taught himself at the age of six to add,
subtract, multiply, and divide. George, a calendar calculator, was discov-
ered poring over the perpetual calendar in an almanac at age six and, al-
most from the beginning, proved completely accurate in his calendar
calculation. L., an eleven-year-old who was studied by the neurologist Kurt
Goldstein, was able to remember virtually endless series, such as railroad
timetables and newspaper ﬁnancial columns. From an early age, this
youngster had delighted in counting objects and had shown remarkable
interest in all aspects of numbers and of musical sounds. In other cases,
however, there seems to have been no great skill or promise to begin with:
rather, being relatively more skilled at this particular pursuit than at oth-
ers, an otherwise hapless individual invested considerable energy in achiev-
ing one particular island of superiority over other individuals. Should this
speculation be valid, it might be possible to take individuals with other-
wise crippling deﬁcits and train them to achieve such mathematical facility.
My own guess, however, is that early arithmetical or calendrical prodi-
giousness is based upon the relative sparing or proliferation of certain brain
areas; like hyperlexia, it represents an automatic, impossible-to-stop
164
The Theory

process, rather than one that comes about because of excessive applica-
tion in a casually chosen domain of potential expertise.
Even as certain individuals appear blessed with at least one core com-
ponent of logical-mathematical aptitude, those of otherwise normal abili-
ties show selective weakness in the numerical realm. Some of these may
well have a selective numerical difﬁculty, akin to the difﬁculties exhibited
by many children with written language (dyslexics) and by a far smaller
number with spoken language (dysphasics).
The most intriguing manifestation of this disability occurs in individu-
als diagnosed as having the developmental Gerstmann syndrome. Pat-
terned after an adult syndrome of the same name, youngsters with this
condition exhibit isolated impairment in learning arithmetic, along with
difﬁculties in recognizing and identifying ﬁngers and in distinguishing their
left from right. Though there may be selective problems in writing or
spelling, language is normal in these children: this is how we know they
are not generally retarded. Neurologists have speculated that these indi-
viduals have a deﬁciency in those regions—the association cortexes in the
posterior areas of the dominant hemisphere—that are involved in recog-
nizing ordered arrays and patterns in the visual sphere. According to the
prevailing analysis, such selective difﬁculty with order (especially of a 
visual-spatial sort) can at one swoop bring about problems in ﬁnger recog-
nition, left-right orientation, and numerical calculation. The fact that most
children begin their numerical calculations by using ﬁngers confers an es-
pecially intriguing ﬂavor upon this exotic syndrome.
There may be other children who also exhibit selective difﬁculties in
logical-mathematical thinking. In those cases where the problem is not
simply (or complexly) motivational, the difﬁculty may inhere in under-
standing principles of causality or strings of logical implication, which be-
come vital in mathematics once one has passed the stage of simple
counting and elementary calculation. As the educator John Holt has ques-
tioned, somewhat plaintively, “What must it be like to have so little idea of
the way the world works, so little feeling for the regularity, the orderliness,
the sensibleness of things?” Stranded at the opposite end of the contin-
uum from the future physicists, such youngsters not only have no desire to
ﬁnd out the secrets of the world’s orderliness but may not even detect such
order as does manifestly exist (for others).
In comparison with language, and even with music, we know little about
the evolutionary antecedents of numerical ability and a comparatively
165
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

minimal amount about its organization in the brain of the normal human
adult of today. There are certainly, in other animals, precursors of numer-
ical ability: these include the abilities of birds to recognize arrays of up to
six or seven objects reliably, the instinctive ability of bees to calculate dis-
tances and directions by observing the dance of their conspeciﬁcs, and the
capacity of primates to master small numbers and also to make simple es-
timates of probability. Calendars and other notational systems go back at
least thirty thousand years, well before the existence of written language:
the former way of ordering one’s life was certainly available to individuals
during the later Stone Age. Our ancestors must have possessed the prin-
cipal insight of number as an endless sequence, where one could contin-
ually add one to make a larger unit; thus, they were not restricted to the
small set of perceptibly accessible numbers that seems to be the limit for
infrahuman organisms.
As for the organization of numerical abilities in the brain, there are
clearly individuals who lose the ability to calculate while remaining lin-
guistically intact, as well as a far larger set of cases of individuals who are
aphasic but can still make change, play games requiring calculation, and
manage their ﬁnancial affairs. As was the case with language and music,
language and calculation at even the most elementary level prove to be
quite separate. Moreover, as evidence accumulates, we are ﬁnding (shades
of music once again!) that important aspects of numerical ability are nor-
mally represented in the right hemisphere. Most observers agree that there
can be a breakdown of separate arithmetical abilities: comprehending nu-
merical symbols, appreciating the meaning of signs referring to numerical
operations, understanding the underlying quantities and operations them-
selves (apart from the symbols that designate them). The ability to read
and produce the signs of mathematics is more often a left hemisphere
function whereas the understanding of numerical relations and concepts
seems to entail right hemisphere involvement. Elementary difﬁculties in
language can impair the understanding of number terms, even as impair-
ments in spatial orientation can render inoperative the ability to use paper
and pencil to carry out sums or geometrical demonstrations. Deﬁcits in
planning, secondary to frontal lobe lesions, prove crippling in dealing with
problems that have many steps.
Despite this variety, there is a fragile consensus that a certain area of
the brain—the left parietal lobes, and the temporal and occipital associa-
166
The Theory

tion areas contiguous to them—may assume a particular importance in
matters of logic and math. It is from lesions in this area of the angular gyrus
that one gets the original adult version of the Gerstmann syndrome—a
condition in which calculation, drawing, left-right orientation, and ﬁnger
knowledge are supposed to break down in relative isolation of other cog-
nitive faculties. A. R. Luria adds that lesions in this area may also reduce
the ability to orient oneself in space and to understand certain grammati-
cal structures, such as prepositional phrases and passive constructions.
I deliberately employ the phrase fragile consensus. In my own view,
ﬁrm evidence has yet to be established that this area of the brain plays the
crucial role in logical-mathematical thought. Regions in the parietal area
may be important in many individuals: but an equally persuasive case can
be made that, in other individuals or with respect to other operations,
structures in the frontal lobes or elsewhere in the right hemisphere can
compromise key logical-mathematical functions.
I wish to propose a different account of the neurological organization
underlying logical-mathematical operations. In my view, certain neural
centers may well be important for speciﬁc logical-mathematical operations,
such as the ones I have cited. But these centers do not seem as indispen-
sable for logic and mathematical thought as certain areas in the temporal
and the frontal lobes appear to be in language or music. There is, in other
words, considerably more ﬂexibility in the human brain in the way that
such operations and logical implications can be carried out.
A solution lies, I think, in the work of Piaget. The ability to carry out
logical-mathematical operations commences in the most general actions
of infancy, develops gradually over the ﬁrst decade or two of life, and in-
volves a number of neural centers that work in concert. Despite focal
damage, it is usually the case that these operations can nonetheless be
carried out—because the operations inhere not in a given center but in a
generalized and highly redundant form of neural organization. Logical-
mathematical abilities become fragile not principally from focal brain dis-
ease but, rather, as a result of more general deteriorating diseases, such as
the dementias, where large portions of the nervous system decompose
more or less rapidly. I think that the operations studied by Piaget do not
exhibit the same degree of neural localization as those that we have ex-
amined in other chapters, and that they therefore prove relatively more
fragile in the case of general breakdowns of the nervous system. In fact,
167
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

two recent electrophysiological studies document considerable involve-
ment of both hemispheres during the solution of mathematical problems.
As one author puts it, “Each task produces a complex, rapidly changing
pattern of electrical activity in many areas in front and back of both sides
of the brain.” In contrast, abilities like language and music remain rela-
tively robust in the case of general breakdowns, provided that certain focal
areas have not themselves been especially singled out for destruction.
In sum, there is a rationale to the neural organization of logical-
mathematical abilities, but it is a far more general kind of representation
than we have hitherto encountered. Wielding Ockham’s razor, one could
conclude that logical-mathematical ability is not as “pure” or “autonomous”
a system as others reviewed here, and perhaps should count not as a sin-
gle intelligence but as some kind of supra- or more general intelligence. I
have at times felt sympathy for this argument and do not want, in these
pages, to come off as more deﬁnitive than I actually feel. However, in my
view, the fact that one can encounter speciﬁc and particular breakdowns
of logical-mathematical ability, as well as many kinds of extreme precocity,
makes the elimination of logical-mathematical intellect far too extreme a
scientiﬁc maneuver. After all, most of the signs of an “autonomous intelli-
gence” register positively in the case of logical-mathematical thought.
Moreover, it is also possible that logical-mathematical competence may
simply involve the concatenation of a number of essential, but somewhat
redundant, systems. Were these to be destroyed discretely and simultane-
ously (an event that could come about only through impermissible exper-
imental intervention), one would then encounter syndromes focused to
the same degree as those in the linguistic and musical realms.
Logic and Mathematics Across Cultures
That the concerns of this chapter are not parochial to the West is amply
documented by the many systems of number and calculation that have
evolved in different corners of the world. From the counting in terms of
body parts found among Papuan New Guineans to the use of cowrie
shells for market transactions in Africa, we see ample evidence of the
agility of the human mind in wedding our natural proclivities to order
and count to the carrying out of functions considered important in diverse
cultural settings.
168
The Theory

Throughout the history of Western anthropology, there has been a run-
ning debate between those scholars who discern an essential continuity
between Western and other forms of thought, and those who emphasize
the “primitiveness” or savagery of the non-Western mind. This controversy
shows no signs of abating soon, though claims that the mind of the “savage”
is radically different from our own are not made nearly so readily these
days as they were some decades ago.
Because mathematics and science are among the proudest achieve-
ments of Western society, it is not surprising that the initial claims for “su-
periority” came in these areas. Considerable energy was invested in
determining whether primitive individuals do (or do not) have the same
logics that we have; can (or cannot) calculate accurately; have (or lack) a
system of explanation that allows experimentation and disproof; and other
such conundrums. In general, when Western social scientists imported
their methods of testing and searched, in alien lands, for their own modes
of thinking, they found little evidence for them. And so, for example, ini-
tial transportation of Piagetian tasks to exotic societies revealed that few
individuals scored beyond concrete operations; sometimes even the abil-
ity to appreciate conservation failed to be exhibited. Conversely, when ev-
idence was accrued about thinking within the culture itself, particularly in
tasks that mattered to the inhabitants, alleged differences between prim-
itive and domesticated minds were lessened and, indeed, sometimes the
“primitives” came off as superior to the investigators.
One way to enter into this controversy (without being overwhelmed by
it) is to think of non-Western societies in terms of the various scholarly
roles I have described. When one searches in other traditional cultures for
explicit evidence of the mathematician or the scientist, as we know him,
there emerges little evidence that such concerns matter. A desire to build
up an elaborate abstract system of mathematical relations for its own
sake, or to come up with experiments to test a set of propositions about
how the world works, does seem to be a concern of the Western world—
commencing in Greek times but really launched with a vengeance in the
Renaissance (and now spreading rapidly to every corner of the globe).
Analogously, the accumulation of vast written records and debates on these
topics seems a Western invention of the past few centuries.
When one shifts the focus, however, and seeks the basic operations of
mind on which sciences are based, one ﬁnds little reason to doubt the basic
universality of logical-mathematical thought. To be speciﬁc: where there is
169
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

a market economy, individuals are perfectly capable of bargaining in their
own self-interest, in removing items from sale when they will not fetch a
good price, and in making trades that are equitable or advantageous.
Where it is important to be able to classify objects—be it for botanical or
for social reasons—individuals are capable of coming up with elaborate
and hierarchically organized systems and of utilizing them appropriately.
Where it is desirable to have a calendar that allows one to perform actions
on a regular basis, or a mode of calculation that is rapid and reliable (e.g.,
the abacus), societies have contrived solutions that are at least as adequate
as ours. And while their scientiﬁc theories are not propounded in the pat-
ois of the West, bushmen of the Kalahari use the same kinds of methods
to make needed discoveries. For example, in hunting, they differentiate
among those times when they have seen prey with their own eyes, when
they have seen the tracks but not the animals themselves, when they have
heard of the animals from others, or when one must remain uncertain be-
cause one has neither seen them oneself nor talked directly to individuals
who have seen them. As Nicholas Blurton-Jones and Melvin Konner con-
clude in their study of Bushmen hunting:
The resulting body of knowledge was detailed, wide-ranging, and 
accurate. . . . The processes of tracking, speciﬁcally, involve patterns of
inference, hypothesis-testing and discovery that tax the best inferential
and analytical capacities of the human mind. Determining, from tracks,
the movements of animals, their timing, whether they are wounded 
and if so, how, and predicting how far they will go and in which direction
and how fast all involved repeated activation of hypotheses, trying them
out against new data, integrating them with previous known facts about
animal movements, rejecting the ones that do not stand up and ﬁnally
getting a reasonable ﬁt.
To suggest the ways in which logical-mathematical intelligence has
been enculturated, it may be useful to characterize some of the arith-
metical systems of preliterate groups. In many societies, individuals are
able to come up with a reasonable estimate of the number of objects, in-
dividuals, or organisms in a ﬁeld—in fact, estimation ability may be aston-
ishingly powerful. Gay and Cole found that Kpelle adults in Liberia
succeeded much better than American adults at estimating the number of
stones in piles ranging from ten to one hundred stones. In comparison with
170
The Theory

the algorithms used in the West, systems based on estimating have the ad-
vantage that an individual will almost never be wildly off in a calculation.
Using our algorithms for calculation, we are more likely to be completely
accurate, but also far more likely to come up with a total that is widely
off—if, for example, we misalign the columns in a sum or press the wrong
buttons on a hand-held calculator.
If, in fact, one is looking for instances of highly developed numerical
ability in Africa, the best place to look is in a game such as kala (also called
malang or Oh-War-ree), a pit and pebbles game considered “the most
arithmetical game with a mass following anywhere in the world.” The basic
idea of this intricate game is to drop seeds seriatim in holes around a board
and to capture one’s opponent’s seeds by placing the ﬁnal seed in one’s
hand in an opponent’s hole that harbors one or two seeds. Observing indi-
viduals at play in this game, Cole and his colleagues found that winners
used clear and consistent sets of strategies:
The winning player makes sure he has solid defenses, that he catalogues
the possibilities of every move, that he reserves time to himself, that he
lures the opponent into making premature captures, that he moves for
decisive rather than piecemeal victories, and that he is ﬂexible in redis-
tributing his forces in preparation for new assaults.
Inasmuch as games can last three hundred or more moves, the skilled
Kpelle player must wield these strategies with considerable ﬁnesse. And in-
deed, excellent players bring honor to their family and may even be com-
memorated in song.
Some uses of numerical abilities are straightforward, as, for example, in
trade or in keeping track of possessions. One also ﬁnds, however, mathe-
matical thinking intertwined with religious and mystical pursuits. Among
the Jewish people, insights into numerical properties were closely tied to
interpretation and, at times, to prophecy. In the Spanish Inquisition, one
could receive life imprisonment or even a death sentence if one possessed
Arab manuscripts dealing with mathematics: “Mathematicians were de-
nounced as the greatest of all heretics.” Medieval Islamic and Christian
scholars believed that magic squares (arrays in which all the rows and
columns sum to the same total) could ward off the plague or cure sterility;
and in many parts of Africa, there is a taboo on counting humans, domes-
tic animals, or valuable possessions. The interrelation between numerical
171
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

and other symbol systems has also been central to activities of various sects.
Medieval Indians substituted evocative words for numbers (moon for one,
eyes or arms for two) and wrote their mathematical and astronomical trea-
tises in verse. Even today, the manipulation of elaborate systems in which
words and numbers stand for one another, and secret messages can be con-
veyed through strings of numbers, is a skill cultivated by Islamic scholars.
When it comes to a sensitivity to numerical properties, then, both pre-
literate and traditional literate societies recognize these skills as being im-
portant. The numerical core of mathematical intelligence seems to be
honored universally. Still, a seemingly strong challenge to the rationality
of the primitive mind is the evident embracing by individuals of positions
that logically are inconsistent with one another, positions that invoke the
supernatural as well as the occult. How can individuals who would pro-
pose to be rational believe that they can be a cat at the same time as a
human, that childbirth is due to the movement of the stars, and the like?
Earlier commentators might have been tempted to pounce on (or attempt
to deny) this apparent irrationality, but some anthropologists now make a
different analytic move. In their view, all peoples—not excluding those
in our society—hold on to many beliefs that are nonrational, if not simply
irrational. Indeed, it is impossible to exist as a thinking human being with-
out subscribing to many beliefs, at least some of which will turn out to be
inconsistent with one another. One need think only of the beliefs of our
religions; and even the beliefs of science are often inconsistent with one an-
other. (Consider, for example, the belief in scientiﬁc themata without any
logical reason for them or the belief on the part of physicists in pre-
dictability as well as in indeterminacy.)
What is important to note here is that, however strongly they may be
held, these beliefs do not actually interfere with how one makes decisions
on a practical day-to-day basis. (In fact, if these beliefs do so interfere, one
is seen as crazy, irrespective of the society in which one happens to live.)
Instead, they are seen as cosmological or metaphysical theories that have
to do with the ultimate nature of reality and not with how one grills a piece
of meat, gets from one place to another, or strikes a deal with an acquain-
tance. It is in these everyday sites of reasoning—and not in our cosmolo-
gies, be they mythological or scientiﬁc—that the daily practices of human
beings are carried out.
Even as numerical thinking is readily found across traditional cultures,
high levels of logical thinking can also be discerned. In an elegant study of
172
The Theory

land tenure disputes in the Trobriand Islands, Edwin Hutchins has demon-
strated that litigants in a dispute are capable of long and complex chains of
reasoning. According to Hutchins’s account, every litigant who wants to
demonstrate his ownership of a garden must produce a culturally mean-
ingful account of the history of the garden that terminates in the state
where the litigant himself has rights to own the garden. He also is well ad-
vised to show that there exists no reasonable history of the garden that ter-
minates in his opponent’s having a plausible claim to that garden.
In some respects [notes Hutchins] the problem-solving task of the litigant
is akin to theorem-proving in mathematics of logic. The cultural code
provides the axioms or implicit premises of the system. The historical
background of the case, and especially the state in the past at which the
litigants agree on the disposition of the garden, provides the explicit
premises of the problem. The theorem to be proved is a proposition
which represents the litigant’s own rights in the land.
In Hutchins’s judgment, the model of folk logic that has been developed
from purely Western sources proves adequate as an account of the spon-
taneous chains of reasoning displayed by the Trobriand litigants. To be
sure, it is not straight Aristotelian logic, because it contains plausible as
well as necessary inferences; but, as Hutchins points out, “so does our 
own reasoning.”
But if, as a result of such studies, the differences in rationality between
“us” and “them” have been minimized, there is also a fresh recognition
that schooling in general, and literacy in particular, can bring about major
changes in the ways in which individuals think about themselves and 
in how they communicate with other people. As I shall discuss in detail in
Chapter 13, one learns in school to deal with information outside of the
context in which it is generally encountered; to entertain abstract posi-
tions and to explore the relations among them on a hypothetical basis; to
make sense of a set of ideas, independent of who says them or of the tone
of voice in which they are said; to criticize, to detect contradictions, and to
try to resolve them. One also acquires a respect for the accumulation of
knowledge, for ways to test statements in which one does not have an im-
mediate interest, and for the relationship between bodies of knowledge
that might otherwise seem remote from one another. This valuing of ab-
stract concerns, which relate to reality only by a lengthy chain of inference,
173
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

and a growing familiarity with “objective” writing, reading, and testing
eventually spawns a person at home with the principles of science and
mathematics and concerned about the extent to which his views and be-
havior accord with these somewhat esoteric standards.
In many primitive societies, there is little encouragement to ask ques-
tions, to challenge the established wisdom, to question magical or mystical
explanations. In contrast, the whole thrust in many “schooled” environ-
ments is to challenge statements made without evidence, to attempt to re-
formulate faulty arguments, and even to forge new syntheses on one’s own.
The end result is a society that cares deeply about the logical, scientiﬁc,
and mathematical concerns that I have reviewed here, even, it would ap-
pear, at the expense of some of the more aesthetic or personal forms of in-
telligence that I have reviewed elsewhere in this volume.
Mathematics, Science, 
and the Passage of Time
In treating the effects of schooling and literacy on the attitudes of a pop-
ulation, I touch on an important aspect of logical-mathematical thought
that I have so far minimized. While scientists and mathematicians like to
think of themselves as concerned with the eternal verities, their pursuits
are in fact rapidly developing and have already undergone profound
changes. Conceptions of these realms have also changed over the centuries.
As Brian Rotman points out, for the Babylonians, mathematics was a way
of astronomical reckonings; for the Pythagorean, it was thought of as an
embodiment of the universe’s harmonies; for scientists of the Renaissance,
it became a means of uncovering nature’s secrets; for Kant, it was the per-
fect science whose propositions were constructed in the deepest layer of
our rational faculties; while for Frege and Russell, it became the paradigm
of clarity against which ambiguities of ordinary language could be judged.
These views will no doubt continue to change; in fact, among leading math-
ematicians, there are profound differences of opinion about the nature of
their whole enterprise, which goals are paramount, which methods of dis-
covery are allowable, and which are not.
Science, of course, changes as well. The change is often seen as
progress; but after the provocative writings of Thomas Kuhn, commenta-
174
The Theory

tors are more hesitant to see science as marching in a unilinear path to-
ward ﬁnal truth. Few would go so far as some Kuhnians have gone, and
declare that science is simply the substitute of one worldview for another,
or, to deny, with Paul Feyerabend, the distinction between science and
nonscience. But there is considerable recognition that each worldview clar-
iﬁes certain issues while neglecting or obscuring others; and that the goal
of a single science—one uniﬁed across all ﬁelds—is a chimera that one
would do well to exorcise. As one investigates particular scientiﬁc work, it
is important to know who is writing against what, and who is writing for
what end. True, within the execution of “normal science” where the basic
paradigm can be assumed, there may be less reason to vex over the roots
of one’s work. And there may be steady progress toward deﬁning the an-
swers to problems within a circumscribed ﬁeld. But once one has come to
recognize that a scientiﬁc consensus may be overthrown tomorrow, the
changing nature of science becomes simply a fact of life.
Individuals are beneficiaries but also victims of these time changes.
A person with one set of skills may be a tremendous mathematician or
scientist in one era, because his skills are just what was needed, while prov-
ing relatively useless in succeeding (or prior) historical epochs. For in-
stance, the ability to recall vast strings of numbers or to envision complex
relations among forms may prove tremendously important in certain math-
ematical eras while of little use at other times, where books or computers
have taken over such mnemonic functions, or where the notion of spatial
concepts as integral to mathematics has not been accepted.
This accident of timing was conveyed most poignantly in the case of
the Indian Srinivasa Ramanujan, generally considered to be one of the
most talented natural mathematicians of recent centuries. Unfortunately
Ramanujan came from a rural site where there was no knowledge of mod-
ern mathematics. On his own, he had contrived many years of mathemat-
ics, well in advance of mathematics as it was then practiced in his own
home. Ramanujan ﬁnally moved to England, but it was too late for him to
contribute to the ﬁeld as it was practiced in the present century. G. H.
Hardy found it fascinating to teach the mathematics of today to someone
who had the deepest instincts and insights but had literally never heard
of most of the questions being addressed. As he lay dying, Ramanujan told
his teacher, Hardy, who had just arrived in a taxicab, that the number
1,729—the number of the cab—was not as Hardy had supposed, a dull
175
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

one but, rather, the smallest number that could be expressed as the sum
of two cubes in two different ways. This was an absolutely amazingly rapid
mathematical insight, but not the sort of contribution that was at a 
premium (or even especially appreciated) in the mathematical circles of
twentieth-century Britain. Beyond natural gifts, aspiring mathematicians
must be in the right place at the proper time.
Mathematics and science may accumulate and change, but are there
not, in these areas, at least some fundamental laws that remain immutable?
The renowned American philosopher W. V. Quine has written convincingly
on this issue. As he points out, we change our conceptions of history and
economics more readily than those of physics, and those more willingly
than laws of math and logic:
Mathematics and logic, central as they are to the conceptual scheme,
tend to be accorded such immunity, in view of our conservative prefer-
ence for revision which disturbs the system least; and herein, perhaps,
lies the necessity which the laws of mathematics are felt to enjoy.
And yet Quine indicates in each area, including logic and math, there is a
constant drift and drive toward simplicity. Accordingly, mathematics and
logic themselves will be revised whenever essential simpliﬁcation of the
whole conceptual enterprise of science is likely to result.
If our century is any indicator, change will become ever more rapid.
There has been as much science in the past few decades as in all human
history before. Moreover, the proliferation of new ﬁelds and of hybrid
ﬁelds and the explosion of new technology, most prominently the com-
puter, make it difﬁcult even to envision the scope of the scientiﬁc enter-
prise in the future or the issues to which logical and mathematical talent
may be applied. Certainly, scientists will make even greater use of new
technological innovations; and it is a rash person indeed who would doubt
that, before long, computers will themselves be contributing to the process,
not only by solving problems that would be beyond human energies to
tackle “by hand” but also by helping to deﬁne what the new problems will
be and how they ought to be approached. (Forms of life created by ge-
netic engineering and new robots with personlike qualities may compli-
cate the picture even further.) And perhaps more so than in the past,
individuals ignorant of these advances (and of their implications) will be in
an unfavorable position to participate productively in the society.
176
The Theory

Relation to the Other Intelligences
The drift of our own society, and perhaps of other societies as well, raises
sharply the question whether logical-mathematical intelligence may not be
in some way more basic than the other intelligences: more basic, in a con-
ceptual sense, as lying at the center of all human intellect; or more basic,
in a practical sense, as guiding the course of human history, its concerns,
its problems, its possibilities, and—perhaps—its ultimate constructive or
destructive fate. It is often said: there is, after all, only one logic, and only
those with developed logical-mathematical intelligences can exercise it.
I do not agree. It should be apparent from this chapter that logical-math-
ematical intelligence has been of singular importance in the history of the
West, and its importance shows no sign of diminishing. It has been less im-
portant elsewhere, and whether the present “unifying trends” will continue
is by no means certain. To my way of thinking, it is far more plausible to
think of logical-mathematical skill as one among a set of intelligences—
a skill powerfully equipped to handle certain kinds of problem, but one in
no sense superior to, or in danger of overwhelming, the others. (Indeed,
there are even different logics with contrasting strengths and limitations.)
As we have seen in earlier chapters, there is indeed a logic to language
and a logic to music; but these logics operate according to their own rules,
and even the strongest dosage of mathematical logic into these areas will
not change the ways in which their endogenous “logics” work. To be sure,
there have been, and will continue to be, productive interactions between
logical-mathematical and spatial intelligences in areas like chess, engineer-
ing, and architecture; and some of these synergistic applications will be
touched upon in the treatment of spatial knowledge in the next chapter.
Beyond question, then, there can be various links between logical-
mathematical and the other forms of intelligence that I am examining here.
And, as science and mathematics continue to expand, there is every reason
to think that even stronger and more extensive bonds will be established
with other intellectual domains. But as the deﬁnition of these ﬁelds
changes, one can also raise another question: Does it still make sense to
group all of logic and mathematics together, as one form of intelligence,
and to set it off sharply from other forms? Only time can tell whether the
grouping that I have proposed here has long-term validity. At present, I
remain persuaded that the line of development described by Piaget, which
177
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence

The Theory
178
begins with an intuition of number and an appreciation of simple cause
and effect, can be traced through to the highest reaches of contemporary
logic, mathematics, and science.
And what of the tie to music, with which the last chapter concluded? Can
it simply be an accident that so many mathematicians and scientists are at-
tracted to music? And what of the striking commonalities among the ener-
gizing ideas in areas like music, the visual arts, and mathematics, as conveyed
by Douglas Hofstadter in his justiﬁably acclaimed Godel, Escher, Bach?
A clue to this conundrum comes from the fact that while mathemati-
cally talented individuals are often intrigued by the order or patterning
found in apparently remote areas—ranging from G. H. Hardy’s fascina-
tion with cricket to Herbert Simon’s interest in architectural planning—
these interests have not been necessarily reciprocated. It is possible to be
a gifted sculptor, poet, or musician without having any particular interest
in, or knowledge about, that orderliness and system that form the center-
piece of logical-mathematical thinking. What we encounter in these ap-
parent coincidences of ﬁelds are simply, but properly, instances of the
intelligences of the logician, the scientist, or the mathematician, as they
are applied to other domains of experience. There will, of course, be pat-
terns or orders wherever one looks—some trivial, some not; and it is the
special genius (or curse) of logicians and mathematicians to discern these
patterns wherever they happen to be found.
It may even be the case—as individuals from Plato to Leibniz thought,
and as Einstein continued to hope—that these echoing patterns harbor
something of the secret of the universe. But perceiving these patterns and
making something of them is an example of the logical-mathematical in-
telligence at work, working well, or working badly, but displaying its own
wares. It does not reﬂect the core operations of other forms of intelligence.
It does not tell us what musical or linguistic or bodily intellect is centrally
about. To see these other competences at work, we need to look at the
kind of novel that a Saul Bellow might write (perhaps about a mathemati-
cian), or at the kind of ballet that a Martha Graham might choreograph
(perhaps about a set of equations or a proof!). Each intelligence has its own
ordering mechanisms, and the way that an intelligence performs its or-
dering reﬂects its own principles and its own preferred media. Perhaps in
Bali, one or another aesthetic faculty occupies the same apparent super-
ordinate ordering privileges that we in the West are likely to attribute, al-
most reﬂexively, to the abilities exhibited by a mathematician or a logician.

Figure 1.
Instruction: From the array of four, choose that form that is identical to the target form.
179
8
Spatial Intelligence
To play chess requires no intelligence at all.
JOSE RAUL CAPABLANCA,
former world chess champion
The Dimensions of Spatial Intelligence
One way to gain a feeling for the core of spatial intelligence is to attempt
the tasks devised by investigators of that intelligence. In Figure 1, we begin
with the simplest task, requiring only that one choose the form identical to
a target item:

Figure 2.
Instruction: From the array of four, choose that form which is a rotation of the target
form.
The Theory
180
A slightly greater demand is made when one is asked to recognize a par-
ticular target item, as viewed from a different angle. In Figure 2, the item
(or the observer) is assumed to have moved through space:
A test of spatial ability can offer a greater challenge. For example, in a
test item taken from the research of Roger Shepard and Jacqueline Met-
zler, the target is a depiction of an asymmetric three-dimensional form.
The task is for the subject to indicate whether the accompanying form
depicts a simple rotation of the target form or is, instead, the reproduc-
tion of a different form. In Figure 3, I have reproduced three such items:
in the ﬁrst (a), the forms are the same but differ by an 80-degree rotation
in the picture plane; the forms in the second item (b) are again the same
form but differ by an 80-degree rotation in depth; in the third item (c), the
forms are different from each other and cannot be brought into congru-
ence by any rotation. Note that, as with the test items in Figures 1 and 2,
the subject could be requested to draw the required forms, rather than
merely to select a single item from a multiple-choice array.
Problems that draw upon spatial capacities can also be couched exclu-
sively in verbal form. For example, take a square piece of paper, fold it in
one half, then fold it twice again in half. How many squares exist after this
ﬁnal fold? Or, consider another test: a man and a girl, walking together,
step out with their left feet ﬁrst. The girl walks three paces in the period
when the man walks two. At what point will both lift their right feet from
Target form
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)

Figure 3.
Instruction: (for a, b, c) Indicate whether the second form in each pair is a rotation of the
ﬁrst or is a different form.
Spatial Intelligence
181
the ground simultaneously? Then, to challenge your thinking powers con-
siderably further, attempt to follow this linguistic description, upon which
an explanation of Einstein’s theory of relativity can be constructed:
Imagine a large mass, A, traveling in a straight line through space. The
direction of travel is north from south. The mass is surrounded by a huge
glass sphere etched with circles parallel to each other and perpendicu-
lar to the line of travel, like a giant Christmas tree ornament. There ex-
ists a second mass, B, in contact with the glass sphere at one of the
(a)
(b)
(c)

etched circles. B’s contact with the sphere is at some point below the
largest circle, which is the middle circle. Both Mass A and B are travel-
ing in the same direction. As A and B continue their motion, B will be
continually displaced along the etched circle which is the point of contact
with the sphere. Since B is continually displaced, it is actually tracing a
spiral path through space-time, time being the north-bound movement.
Yet this path when viewed from someone on Mass A from inside the glass
sphere appears to be a circle, not a spiral. 
Finally, consider some problems that explicitly call upon the power to
create a mental image. First, imagine a horse. Which point is higher, the
zenith of the horse’s tail, or the lowest part of the horse’s head? Imagine an
elephant and a mouse. Now imagine the eyelashes of each creature. Which
takes longer to bring into sharper focus? Imagine your kitchen sink.
Which faucet controls the hot water? Or, to conclude this series, imagine
a campus or square with which you are familiar. Time yourself as you scan
from one building to the next, and now compare the time elapsed when you
scan from one side of the campus (or square) clear across to the other.
By now, you should have an intuitive grasp of the capacities that re-
searchers believe are central to spatial (or as it is often termed, visual-
spatial) thinking. Does this family of tasks appear to draw on special cog-
nitive mechanisms? You may also have formed some preliminary opinion
on controversial issues: is there such a discrete capacity as visual or spatial
imagery? Can problems that appear to call upon spatial capacities be solved
exclusively through verbal or logical-mathematical means? If, for example,
you solved the problem of folding paper simply by multiplying 2 × 2 × 2,
you are following a logical-mathematical path. You should also have a sense
of whether the spatial mode of thinking is natural for you, as it is for many
individuals gifted in the arts, in engineering, or in the sciences; or whether
it poses undue difﬁculties for you, as is sometimes the case for individuals
with talents in other areas, like music or language.
Central to spatial intelligence are the capacities to perceive the visual
world accurately, to perform transformations and modiﬁcations upon one’s
initial perceptions, and to be able to re-create aspects of one’s visual ex-
perience, even in the absence of relevant physical stimuli. One can be
asked to produce forms or simply to manipulate those that have been pro-
vided. These abilities are clearly not identical: an individual may be acute,
say, in visual perception, while having little ability to draw, imagine, or
182
The Theory

transform an absent world. Even as musical intelligence consists of rhyth-
mic and pitch abilities that are sometimes dissociated from one another,
and as linguistic intelligence consists of syntactic and pragmatic capacities
that may also come uncoupled, so, too, spatial intelligence emerges as an
amalgam of abilities. All the same, the individual with skills in several of the
aforementioned areas is most likely to achieve success in the spatial do-
main. The fact that practice in one of these areas stimulates development
of skills in related ones is another reason that spatial skills can reasonably
be considered “of a piece.”
A comment is in order concerning the phrase spatial intelligence. From
some points of view, it would be appropriate to propose the descriptor vi-
sual because, in normal human beings, spatial intelligence is closely tied to,
and grows most directly out of, one’s observation of the visual world. For
the sake of convenience, many examples in this chapter are in fact drawn
from the visual-spatial realm. But just as linguistic intelligence is not wholly
dependent upon the auditory-oral channels and can develop in an indi-
vidual deprived of these modes of communication, so, too, spatial intelli-
gence can develop (as we shall see) even in an individual who is blind and
therefore has no direct access to the visual world. Accordingly, just as I
have eschewed the preﬁx auditory in front of musical and linguistic intel-
ligence, it seems preferable to speak of spatial intelligence without linking
it inextricably to any particular sensory modality.
As a means of delineating spatial intelligence, we can return to my
opening examples. The most elementary operation, upon which other as-
pects of spatial intelligence rest, is the ability to perceive a form or an ob-
ject. One can test this ability by multiple-choice questions or by asking an
individual to copy a form; copying turns out to be a more demanding as-
signment, and often latent difﬁculties in the spatial realm can be detected
through errors in a copying task. Analogous tasks can, incidentally, be
posed in the tactile modality, for both blind and sighted individuals.
Once one is asked to manipulate the form or the object, appreciating
how it will be apprehended from another viewing angle, or how it would
look (or feel) were it turned around, one enters fully into the spatial realm,
for a manipulation through space has been required. Such tasks of trans-
formation can be demanding, as one is required to “mentally rotate” com-
plex forms through any number of twists and turns. Roger Shepard, one of
the leading students of spatial intelligence, has shown the amount of time
that it takes to judge whether two forms are in fact identical (as in Figure 3)
183
Spatial Intelligence

is tied directly to the number of degrees through which one form must be
displaced in order to coincide with the other. Given the difﬁculty of label-
ing these twisted forms verbally, one is hard pressed to account for this re-
sult unless one posits some form of spatial intelligence. In fact, subjects
seem to approach this task by attempting to move the form through the
requisite number of degrees, as if it existed in real space.
Problems of still greater difﬁculty can be posed in the “object” or “pic-
ture” domain. Indeed, problems in the mathematical branch of topology
call precisely for the ability to manipulate complex forms in several di-
mensions. But when a problem is phrased verbally, a clear option arises to
solve the problem strictly through the plane of words, without any resort
to the creation of a mental image or “picture in the head.” Indeed, each of
the problems cited earlier could conceivably be solved strictly in a propo-
sitional way. Yet both introspective and experimental evidence suggest that
the preferred mode for solution of “imagery problems” is through the
positing of an internal mental image that can then be manipulated in ways
that parallel operations in the workaday world.
That the ability to solve these problems efﬁciently is special, apart from
straight logical or linguistic ability, has been an article of faith for many
years among students of intelligence. One of the individuals who argued
strongly for the existence and the independence of spatial ability was the
pioneering psychometrician L. L. Thurstone, who saw spatial ability as one
of his seven primary factors of intellect. Most students of intelligence test-
ing since Thurstone have reinforced his conclusion that there is something
special about spatial ability, though the precise way in which the domain
has been carved out has differed across authorities. Thurstone himself di-
vided spatial ability into three components: the ability to recognize the
identity of an object when it is seen from different angles, the ability to
imagine movement or internal displacement among the parts of a conﬁg-
uration, and the ability to think about those spatial relations in which the
body orientation of the observer is an essential part of the problem. An-
other early worker, Truman Kelley, distinguished between the ability to
sense and retain geometric forms, and the capacity mentally to manipu-
late spatial relationships. A. A. H. El-Koussy, yet another authority, distin-
guished between two- and three-dimensional spatial aptitude, with each
having both static and dynamic aspects. And there have been other ty-
pologies as well.
184
The Theory

For present purposes, we can bypass the most vociferous discussions
among those psychometricians concerned with spatial imagery. The exact
number of components and their ideal deﬁnition invites a level of speci-
ﬁcity beyond the scope of my general survey. The extent to which spatial
capacities can be supplanted by verbal ones, possible differences between
operations in physical and mental space, and the philosophical ambiguity
that surrounds the concept of “mental” imagery can also be left to the ex-
perts. It remains for me to lay out those aspects of spatial intelligence that
fall most centrally into the competences I am examining here, and to sug-
gest some of the evidence that justiﬁes the positing of a separate domain
of intelligence.
We have seen, in the preceding discussion, that spatial intelligence en-
tails a number of loosely related capacities: the ability to recognize in-
stances of the same element, the ability to transform or to recognize a
transformation of one element into another, the capacity to conjure up
mental imagery and then to transform that imagery, the capacity to pro-
duce a graphic likeness of spatial information, and the like. Conceivably,
these operations are independent of one another and could develop or
break down separately; and yet, just as rhythm and pitch work together in
the area of music, so, too, the aforementioned capacities typically occur
together in the spatial realm. Indeed, they operate as a family, and use of
each operation may well reinforce use of the others.
These spatial capacities can be drawn on in a number of different 
arenas. They are important for orienting oneself in various locales, ranging
from rooms to oceans. They are invoked for the recognition of objects and
scenes, both when these are encountered in their original surroundings
and when some circumstance of the original presentation has been altered.
And they are also utilized when one works with graphic depictions—
two-dimensional or three-dimensional versions of real-world scenes—as
well as other symbols, such as maps, diagrams, or geometrical forms.
Two other uses of spatial capacities prove more abstract and elusive.
One involves sensitivity to the various lines of force that enter into a vi-
sual or spatial display. I refer here to the feelings of tension, balance, and
composition that characterize a painting, a work of sculpture, and many
natural elements (like a ﬁre or a waterfall) as well. These facets, which
contribute to the power of a display, occupy the attention of artists and
viewers of the arts.
185
Spatial Intelligence

A ﬁnal facet of spatial intelligence grows out of the resemblances that
may exist across two seemingly disparate forms, or, for that matter, across
two seemingly remote domains of experience. In my view, that metaphoric
ability to discern similarities across diverse domains derives in many in-
stances from a manifestation of spatial intelligence. For example, when the
gifted essayist Lewis Thomas draws analogies between micro-organisms
and an organized human society, depicts the sky as a membrane, or de-
scribes mankind as a heap of earth, he is capturing in words a kind of re-
semblance that may well have occurred to him initially in spatial form.
Indeed, underlying many scientiﬁc theories are “images” of wide scope:
Darwin’s vision of the “tree of life,” Freud’s notion of the unconscious as
submerged like an iceberg, John Dalton’s view of the atom as a tiny solar
system, are the productive ﬁgures that give rise to, and help to embody,
key scientiﬁc conceptions. It is possible that such mental models or images
also play a role in more mundane forms of problem solving. In each case,
these images have likely arisen in visual form, but each of them could have
been created—or appreciated—by an individual who is blind.
While these images are typically seen as helpful aids to thinking, some
commentators have gone much farther, deeming visual and spatial imagery
as a primary source of thought. An eloquent spokesman for this position is
the psychologist of art Rudolf Arnheim. In Visual Thinking, Arnheim ar-
gues that the most important operations of thinking come directly from
our perception of the world, with vision serving as the sensory system par
excellence that undergirds and constitutes our cognitive processes. As he
puts it, “the remarkable mechanisms by which the senses understand the
environment are all but identical with the operations described by the psy-
chology of thinking. . . . Truly productive thinking in whatever area of 
cognition takes place in the realm of imagery.” Arnheim is inclined to min-
imize the role of language in productive thinking: he suggests that unless
we can conjure up an image of some process or concept, we will be un-
able to think clearly about it. An alternative, more catholic view would hold
that visual or spatial intelligence contributes to scientiﬁc and artistic
thought but does not assume the priority that Arnheim chooses to attrib-
ute to it.
On the basis of the present discussion, and in light of many factor analy-
ses of intelligence test results, it seems reasonable to nominate spatial in-
telligence as a discrete form of intellect, a collection of related skills;
perhaps, in fact, that single cluster of abilities that would be most widely
186
The Theory

conceded by the students of this ﬁeld. In the view of many, spatial intelli-
gence is the “other intelligence”—the one that should be arrayed against,
and be considered equal in importance to, linguistic intelligence. Dualists
speak of two systems of representation—a verbal code and an imagistic
code: localizers place the linguistic code in the left hemisphere, the spatial
code in the right hemisphere.
Readers of earlier chapters will know that I do not subscribe to such
dichotomization of intellect. Still, I would admit that, for most of the tasks
used by experimental psychologists, linguistic and spatial intelligences pro-
vide the principal sources of storage and solution. Confronted by an item
in a standardized test, individuals appear to use words or spatial images to
approach the problem and to encode it and may well—though this as-
sumption is far more controversial—also exploit the resources of language
and/or imagery to solve the problem. Some of the most convincing demon-
strations come from Lee R. Brooks. This investigator varied both the mode
of presentation of materials (linguistic or pictorial) and the modes of re-
sponse (verbal or spatial—for example, pointing on a piece of paper).
Through clever manipulations, the various tasks called for using language
or for using spatial processing in somewhat different ways—for example,
forming a mental image and pointing to a mark on a sheet of paper, in the
case of the spatial domain; or memorizing a sentence and categorizing 
the parts of speech of each word, in the case of the linguistic domain.
Brooks consistently found subjects impaired in their performances when
they had to take in information to produce responses solely in the linguis-
tic or solely in the spatial domain. But when they had the option of taking
information in through one modality and then responding through a non-
competing modality, there was no such interference. Just as musical and
linguistic processing are carried out by different processing centers and
need not interfere with one another, so, too, spatial and linguistic faculties
seem able to proceed in relatively independent or complementary fashion.
Development of Spatial Intelligence
Though the centrality of spatial intelligence has long been recognized by
researchers who work with adult subjects, relatively little has been deﬁni-
tively established about the development of this set of capacities in chil-
dren. Just why is not clear. It may be that spatial skills are more difﬁcult to
187
Spatial Intelligence

test than linguistic or logical ones; it may also be that students of child de-
velopment have less intuition for, fewer skills in, or less interest concern-
ing spatial capacities.
An exception is Jean Piaget, who conducted several studies of the de-
velopment of spatial understanding in children. Nor surprisingly, Piaget
saw spatial intelligence as part and parcel of the general portrait of logical
growth that he was assembling across his diverse studies. And so, in re-
counting the course of spatial understanding, Piaget spoke of sensori-motor
understanding of space that emerges during infancy. Two abilities are cen-
tral: the initial appreciation of the trajectories observed in objects and the
eventual capacity to ﬁnd one’s way between various locales. At the end of
the sensori-motor stage of early childhood, youngsters become capable
of mental imagery. They can imagine a scene or an event without having
to be there. Piaget traced such mental imagery to the child’s earlier expe-
riences of having seen the object of the event itself and at that time ex-
ploring it in a sensori-motor manner. Mental imagery was accordingly seen
as a kind of internalized action or deferred imitation, the rough outlines or
schemas of actions that had previously been (and could still, in theory, be)
carried out in the world. Such imagery remains static during early child-
hood, however, and children cannot perform mental operations upon it.
Inasmuch as both logical-mathematical and spatial intelligence arise
from the child’s action upon the world, one may ask whether they in fact
entail different forms of intelligence. Even Piaget seems to have sensed
that they did. He introduced a distinction between “ﬁgurative” knowledge,
in which an individual retains the conﬁguration of an object (as in a men-
tal image); and “operative” knowledge, where the emphasis falls upon
transforming the conﬁguration (as in the manipulation of such an image).
As Piaget saw it, then, the split marked a line between the static conﬁgu-
ration and the active operation. For present purposes, one can distinguish
instead between relatively static and relatively active forms of spatial
knowledge, both of which should fall comfortably under the rubric of spa-
tial intelligence.
Continuing with Piaget’s account, the advent of concrete operations at
the start of school marks an important turning point in the child’s mental
development. The child has now become capable of far more active ma-
nipulation of images and objects in the spatial realm. Through reversible
mental operations, he can now appreciate how objects look to someone
situated elsewhere; here we encounter the well-known phenomenon of
188
The Theory

decentration, where the child can indicate what a scene would look like to
someone seated in another part of the room, or how an object would look
if rotated in space. Yet this variety of spatial intelligence is still restricted
to concrete situations and events. Only during the formal operation era, at
the time of adolescence, can the youth deal with the idea of abstract spaces
or with formal rules governing space. Thus, geometry comes to be appre-
ciated by the adolescent (or by the mathematically precocious child), who
is newly able to relate the world of ﬁgural images to propositional statements,
and to reason about the implications of various kinds of transformation.
We thus see a regular progression in the spatial realm, from the infant’s
ability to move around in space, to the toddler’s ability to form static men-
tal images, to the school child’s capacity to manipulate such static images,
and ﬁnally, to the adolescent’s capacity to relate spatial relations to propo-
sitional accounts. The adolescent, being able to appreciate all possible 
spatial arrangements, is in a favorable position to join together logical-
mathematical and spatial forms of intelligence into a single geometric or
scientiﬁc system.
As in other areas of study, Piaget provided the ﬁrst general picture of
spatial development, and many of his observations and characterizations
have stood the test of time. For the most part, however, he restricted him-
self to paper-and-pencil or to desk-top measures of spatial ability, and so
largely ignored the child’s understanding of the broader spatial environ-
ment. There have recently been studies of the child’s broader spatial un-
derstanding, and these yield intriguing ﬁndings. It turns out that children
of age three or less can retrace a route that they knew motorically, but have
difﬁculty anticipating what sorts of things they will encounter in regions
that they have not themselves visited, but about which they have accrued
some independent knowledge (for example, from verbal descriptions or
from a visit to a neighboring location). When children do manage to ﬁnd
their way around, landmarks play a central part.
Representing this knowledge poses a whole host of challenges. Even
older children have difﬁculty in capturing, in some other format, their in-
tuitive knowledge of layout. Thus, a ﬁve- or six-year-old may know his way
satisfactorily around a layout, even an unfamiliar one, but when asked to
describe it in words, or to draw a picture or a map, the child will either fail
altogether or will offer an essentially oversimpliﬁed and hence unhelpful
account (for example, describing the path as a straight line, even though it
is in fact convoluted). What proves most difﬁcult for school-age children
189
Spatial Intelligence

is to coordinate their knowledge of a spatial layout, as gained from a num-
ber of disparate experiences, into a single overall organized framework.
Put differently, the children may know their way around many areas in
their neighborhood or town and, in fact, never fail to ﬁnd what they are
looking for. Yet they often will lack the capacity to provide a map, a sketch,
or an overall verbal account of the relationship among several spots. Rep-
resenting their piecemeal knowledge in another format or symbol system
proves an elusive part of spatial intelligence. Or perhaps one could say:
while children’s spatial understanding develops apace, the expression of this
understanding via another intelligence or symbolic code remains difﬁcult.
Neuropsychological Considerations
If spatial intelligence has been neglected in studies of children, it has cer-
tainly partaken of its fair share of the research enterprise in neuropsy-
chology. In fact, with the possible exception of language, there has
probably been more established about spatial abilities in the brain than
about any other human faculty.
The outcome of this research tradition is clear and persuasive. Just as
the left hemisphere of the brain has, over the course of evolution, been
selected as the preeminent site for linguistic processing, the right hemi-
sphere of the brain, and in particular the posterior portions of the right
hemisphere, proves to be the site most crucial for spatial (and visual-spatial)
processing. To be sure, the right hemisphere is not quite so decisive in the
case of spatial processing as the left hemisphere is for language: for in-
stance, sizable deﬁcits in spatial ability can also follow upon damage to the
left posterior regions. But when it comes to ﬁnding one’s way around a site;
recognizing objects, faces, and scenes; noticing ﬁne details; and many other
functions, damage to the right posterior regions is far more likely to cause
impairment than damage to any other comparable region in the brain.
Moreover, injury to the right hemisphere produces the peculiar phenom-
enon of neglect, where individuals pay little attention to (or altogether ig-
nore) the left half of space around them. Thus, performance on tasks (or
on daily activities) where one must monitor both halves of space poses spe-
cial problems for people with this condition.
Evidence comes from three principle lines of study. Of foremost im-
portance are clinical studies of individuals who have suffered injury to the
190
The Theory

brain through stroke or other kinds of trauma. It has been amply docu-
mented that lesions to the right parietal regions cause difﬁculties in visual
attention, spatial representation and orientation, imagery production, and
memory. The bigger the lesion, the more pronounced the difﬁculty. Pres-
ence of even a small lesion in the left hemisphere, in addition to right
hemisphere damage, sufﬁces to devastate an individual’s spatial functioning.
A second and closely allied line of evidence comes from the per-
formance of unilaterally brain-injured individuals on standard tests of
spatial functioning. From the work of Nelson Butters and his colleagues at
the Boston Veterans Administration Medical Center, we have convincing
demonstrations of particular difﬁculties faced by right hemisphere patients
in transforming visual arrays, in anticipating how they will appear from
other vantage points, in reading a map or ﬁnding their way around an un-
familiar space, and in encoding and remembering visual and spatial infor-
mation. This damage rarely impairs linguistic ability (such as the reading
of symbols) to a signiﬁcant extent; left hemisphere dominance for language
is sufﬁciently profound to permit linguistic forms to be apprehended de-
spite massive right hemisphere damage.
Studies in other laboratories have documented further difﬁculties.
Brenda Milner and Doreen Kimura have shown that patients with right
temporal excisions are impaired in recognizing overlapping nonsense ﬁg-
ures and dot patterns. Elizabeth Warrington has documented a difﬁculty
among right hemisphere–injured patients in recognizing familiar objects
presented in unusual perspectives; and a number of investigators have
noted that right hemisphere patients exhibit particular difﬁculties in mak-
ing drawings. The drawings of such patients tend to include details in dis-
parate places, to lack an overall contour, and to feature that neglect of the
left half of space that is a peculiar sequel of right hemisphere brain dis-
eases. These drawings reveal an almost exclusive dependence upon propo-
sitional knowledge regarding the object (the names of the features of that
object) rather than sensitivity to the actual perceived contours of the enti-
ties and of the parts to be depicted.
One might question whether such effects of brain damage can be cir-
cumvented by linguistic strategies. Right hemisphere patients do indeed
try to use language to aid themselves: they will challenge the task, try to
reason their way to a solution aloud, or even confabulate answers. But only
the most fortunate succeed. Moira Williams relates a poignant anecdote
of a world-famous mathematician who had lost most of his right cerebrum
191
Spatial Intelligence

as a result of a trafﬁc accident. This individual was given an object-assembly
task taken from the standard intelligence battery. Exploiting his preserved
linguistic knowledge about principles of spatial relations, the man quipped,
“One can always use geometry.”
Recently, a fascinating set of difﬁculties in imagery faced by right hemi-
sphere patients has been documented by Eduardo Bisiach and his col-
leagues in Milan. It turns out that individuals who exhibit a neglect of the
left half of space in ordinary life display much the same symptoms in deal-
ing with mental imagery. That is, these patients prove able to image the
right half of objects or scenes, but not the left. This ﬁnding was dramati-
cally shown by asking brain-injured individuals to image the famous
Duomo Square in the heart of downtown Milan. Told to imagine the square
as seen from one vantage point, the patients were able to describe all the
objects in the right half of their ﬁeld, but none in the left half. Then, re-
quested to image while standing at an opposite side, they were able to
name the objects seen on the right side (those objects formerly omitted)
but not those on the left (those objects formerly listed). A more compelling
case for the “psychological reality” of visual imagery would be difﬁcult 
to envision.
A ﬁnal source of information about the role of the right hemisphere in
the processing of spatial information comes from studies of normal indi-
viduals. Subjects are exposed to stimuli either in the right visual ﬁeld (with
connections to the left hemisphere of the brain) or in the left visual ﬁeld
(with connections to the right hemisphere of the brain) and asked to per-
form various assignments. Findings are conﬁrmatory. In each of these
realms, the right hemisphere proves more important for the solution of
problems than does the left; though it should be indicated that results are
not as dramatic in normal individuals as in those who have sustained in-
jury to the brain.
This picture of right hemisphere involvement in spatial tasks, and par-
ticularly the involvement of the parietal lobe, seems firmly established.
Indeed, it is my belief that the neural basis for spatial intelligence is more
likely to be clarified in the foreseeable future than that underlying any
other of the intelligences treated here. We have here a function that, in
its simpler guises, is carried out by relatively elementary sensory recep-
tors, and that, even in its more sophisticated forms, is still shared with
other organisms to a higher degree than those of, say, logical or linguis-
tic intelligence.
192
The Theory

Let us survey the range of ﬁndings brieﬂy. From studies at the single-
cell level, by researchers like David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, a great deal
has already been established about the perception of lines, angles, edges,
and the other building blocks of objects. From studies by Charles Gross,
Mortimer Mishkin, and others who record from the inferior temporal re-
gions of the primate brain, we also know a considerable amount about the
perception and recognition of entire objects. It appears that inferior tem-
poral neurons participate in coding of the physical attributes of visual
stimuli, perhaps by serving as integrators of that information about depth,
color, size, and shape that is recorded in the prestriate cortexes. There is
a distance—but a navigable one—between this elementary recognition of
objects and that ability to trace the relationships among objects that proves
central in spatial intelligence. Other brain regions will certainly be involved—
for instance, the frontal lobes seem crucial for remembering a spatial lo-
cation; but the relevant connections can be traced as well. Once this story
has been laid out, we may be in a position to explain the operation of spa-
tial intelligence in neuronal terms. And then we can begin to investigate
the even more vexed issue of how this form intertwines with those intelli-
gences that are more exclusively the prerogative of Homo sapiens.
The evolution of spatial intelligence also seems more continuous with
processes found in infra-humans than appears to be the case with other
intelligences. The group life of many primates—today and millions of years
ago—seemed linked to spatial skills. On nearly all accounts, spatial intel-
ligence assumed pivotal importance for a roving band, whether it was in-
volved in gathering or in hunting. When individuals needed to traverse
wide spaces and return safely to their homes, it was important to have keen
spatial intellect—otherwise, the chance of getting lost would be too great.
Such skill remains dramatically present in the Arctic today: in the face of
near uniformity of landscape, every visual detail must be important, and
“Caucasians who have traveled with the Eskimos frequently remark upon
their apparently extraordinary ability to ﬁnd their ways through what ap-
pears to be a featureless terrain by remembering visual conﬁguration.” The
premium on spatial skills may also help to explain why sex differences 
appear more regularly in tests of spatial intelligence than on most other
forms of intelligence. To the extent that hunting and wandering were pre-
eminently male preoccupations, there would be more of a selective ad-
vantage for males to evolve highly developed visual-spatial abilities, and
more likely an early death for those who lacked such skills.
193
Spatial Intelligence

The marshaling of spatial abilities for solving problems has been an in-
terest of comparative psychologists. It is worth recalling the pioneering
studies of Wolfgang Köhler with the great apes on Tenerife during the First
World War. Köhler was able to show that at least some great apes, and in
particular the fabled Sultan, could make tools by combining two or more
objects, whose potential visual-spatial integration they were able to antic-
ipate. While interpretation of Köhler’s demonstrations is not straight  -
 forward, most analysts are comfortable with the notion that the chimpanzees
were able to envision—to create an image of—the state of affairs that would
obtain were they able, say, to connect two sticks in a certain way. Such in-
sight proved a necessary and often a sufﬁcient precursor for solving a prob-
lem and gaining a desired object. We can here see in nonhuman primates
an initial manifestation of the kind of spatial intelligence that many hu-
mans have brought to an extremely high level of accomplishment. How
spatial abilities unite with bodily skill in the area of tool use is an issue that
will concern us in the next chapter.
Unusual Forms of 
Spatial Ability and Disability
Until now, I have spoken of spatial capacities as they develop in normal
children and as they are represented in the nervous systems of normal and
brain-injured adults. Even though the lines of spatial intelligence are in
general regular, there are clear anomalies, and these can sometimes pro-
vide fresh insight into spatial intelligence.
The question of blind individuals immediately arises. Certain 
experiences—such as color—are forever closed to the individual blind
from birth, while many others—such as apprehension of perspective—can
be grasped only with the greatest difﬁculty. Nonetheless, research with
blind subjects has indicated that spatial knowledge is not totally depend-
ent upon the visual system, and that blind individuals can even appreciate
certain aspects of pictures.
A leading student of this issue has been John Kennedy of the Univer-
sity of Toronto. Kennedy and his associates have demonstrated that blind
subjects (as well as normal subjects who have been blindfolded) can read-
ily recognize geometrical shapes that have been presented via raised line
drawings. The blind individual tends to convert spatial experiences into
194
The Theory

the number of steps (or ﬁnger movements) taken in a certain direction and
into the kind of motion needed. Size must be discovered through indirect
methods, such as running one’s hand along an object: the more movement
in time, the larger the object appears to be. The blind individual can ex-
ploit cues like straightness, curvature, and prominence of features, to
recognize more complex ﬁgures (shades of visual imagery measures). In
Kennedy’s view, there is a perceptual system common to both the tactile
and the visual modalities: insights gleaned by normal individuals from a
combination of these modalities prove accessible to the blind from the tac-
tile realms alone.
Studies of drawing by Susanna Millar of Oxford University reinforce
this picture. Blind children display in their drawings many of the same fea-
tures and problems exhibited by younger sighted children. For example,
blind children are uncertain where and how to place objects on a canvas.
Initially, they do not appreciate how to depict the body in two dimensions,
nor how to array ﬁgures along the bottom of the ﬂat page; but once they
appreciate that drawing is possible with a raised line, and that certain ex-
periences known by touch can be realized by such a line, their drawings
come to resemble those of sighted subjects. Millar concludes that draw-
ing depends upon the acquisition of rules for which prior visual experience
is a facilitating, but not a necessary, condition; the absence of visual feed-
back during drawing wreaks effects chieﬂy on the degree of articulation
and precision in the drawing.
Gloria Marmor has ﬁlled out this picture by showing that blind chil-
dren are also capable of rotating ﬁgures and appreciating mirror images.
She concludes:
Without using mental imagery, the early blind appear to organize the at-
tributes of tactile forms into spatial representations that, like visual im-
ages, allow all attributes to be entertained simultaneously and are speciﬁc
enough to make possible mirror image discrimination. 
Probably the most dramatic account of spatial abilities in the blind
comes from studies by Barbara Landau and her colleagues at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. In one investigation, a congenitally blind two-
and-one-half-year-old child proved able to determine the appropriate path
between two objects after traveling to each of these objects only from a
third location. In order to set the course between objects along a route that
195
Spatial Intelligence

she had never herself followed, the child had to be able to detect the dis-
tances and the angular relationship of the familiar paths and then derive
the angle of the new path from this information. Clearly, her accomplish-
ment indicates that the metric properties of space can be inferred in the
absence of visual information. Moreover, the same child seen again at
age four was able to use a tactile map in order to ﬁnd a prize located in
the room. Though the child had never before been exposed to a map, she
was able immediately to grasp the concept of one, including its arbitrary
symbols, and to use it to guide her to the desired location. From such
demonstrations, Landau and her colleagues reached a conclusion vital to
our own study: spatial representational systems are equally accessible 
to visual or to tactile experience; and there is not necessarily a privileged
relationship between visual input and spatial intelligence.
Individuals with other kinds of pathology do display characteristic
deﬁcits in their spatial perception. One such population are females with
Turner’s syndrome, a condition involving lack of a second x chromosome.
While normal in linguistic matters, victims of this condition exhibit spatial
problems across the board, ones not reducible simply to problems in vi-
sual perception. Individuals with cerebral palsy exhibit disordered eye
movements, which in turn leads to difﬁculties in depth perception and to
poor performance on a host of visual-spatial measures. Numerous children
who have brain damage also exhibit special difﬁculties in visual-spatial
tasks—for example, in perceiving and understanding the diagonal: there
is at least suggestive evidence that some of these individuals suffer from a
junior version of a “right hemisphere syndrome.”
As for visual imagery, wide individual differences are reported. Indeed,
researcher Stephen Kosslyn indicates that he cannot use many individuals
as subjects in his studies, for they report absent or very poor visual im-
agery. In his pioneering investigation of the imagery faculty, Francis Gal-
ton found that when asked to recall the scene of that morning’s breakfast,
scientists typically reported little or no visual imagery, while individuals of
apparently modest intellectual powers often reported detailed concrete
imagery. This ﬁnding startled Galton, who himself possessed vivid imagery,
including an elaborate number-form array in which all the numbers from
0 to 200 were clearly represented. It would also have dismayed E. Titch-
ener, a turn-of-the-century psychologist with a strong belief in the power
of imagery. Wrote Titchener:
196
The Theory

The mind, in its ordinary operations, is a fairly complete picture
gallery. . . . Whenever I read or hear that somebody has done something
modestly, or gravely, or proudly, or humbly, or courteously, I see a visual
hint of the modesty or gravity or pride or humility or courtesy. The stately
heroine gives me a ﬂash of a tall ﬁgure, the only clear part of which is a
hand holding up a steely grey skirt; the humble suitor gives me a ﬂash of
a bent ﬁgure, the only clear part of which is the bowed back, though at
times there are hands held deprecatingly before the absent face. . . . All
the descriptions must be either self-evident or as unreal as a fairy tale.
But the ﬁnding of poor imagery would have made sense to novelist Aldous
Huxley, who confessed to being a poor visualizer, and conceded that words
did not evoke a picture in his mind. Only by an effort of will could he evoke
even a faint image. Perhaps this is one reason that Huxley eventually in-
dulged in drugs, an experience that allowed “the untalented visionary” to
perceive a reality “no less tremendous, beautiful, and signiﬁcant than the
world held by Blake.”
In a smattering of otherwise normal individuals, visual and spatial abil-
ities are remarkably developed. For example, the inventor Nikola Tesla
“could project before his eyes a picture complete in every detail, of every
part of the machine.” These pictures were more vivid than any blueprint.
Tesla’s inner imagery was sufﬁciently acute that he could build his com-
plex inventions without drawings. Further, he claimed to be able to test
his devices in his mind’s eye, “by having them run for weeks—after which
time he would examine them thoroughly for signs of wear.” Artists often
stand out for their spatial powers. Thus Rodin was able to represent dif-
ferent parts of the body as projections of interior volumes: “I forced my-
self to express in each swelling of the torso or the limbs the efﬂorescence
of a muscle or of a bone which lay deep beneath the skin”; while Henry
Moore is able to think of the entire sculpture as if it were in his hand:
He thinks of it, whatever its size, as if he were holding it completely en-
closed in the hollow of his hand; he mentally visualizes a complex form
from all round itself; he knows while he looks at one side what the other
side is like; he identiﬁes himself with its center of gravity, its mass, its
weight; he realizes its volume, as the space that the shape displaces in
the air.
197
Spatial Intelligence

Figure 4.
Instruction: Drawing of a horse by the autistic child Nadia at age ﬁve.
The Theory
198
At other times, such unusual spatial abilities can be found in individu-
als who are otherwise retarded. There is the English painter Bryan Pearce,
who, despite a subnormal IQ, can sell his paintings at a high price. There
are occasional idiots savants, such as the Japanese Yamashita and Yama-
mura, whose artistic abilities were of a surprisingly high caliber, completely
out of kilter with their other meager talents. And most mysteriously, there
is the English adolescent Nadia, who, despite a condition of severe autism,
was able as a very young child to make drawings of the most remarkable
ﬁnesse and representational accuracy. (See one of her drawings, done at
the age of ﬁve, in Figure 4.)
With these idiots savants and victims of autism, we encounter once
again the ﬂowering of a single intelligence in the face of an otherwise mea-
ger array of abilities. Perhaps, in certain cases, this visual or spatial bent
can be seen as a compensation, where a relatively preserved ability has

Spatial Intelligence
199
been accentuated by the child and his family. In the most extreme cases,
such as young Nadia, however, no such explanation sufﬁces. Nadia was
drawing like a skilled adolescent by the time she was four or ﬁve, and her
parents seem not even to have been aware of her talent (which was ﬁrst
noted by her therapist). Nadia had an ability to look at objects, to remem-
ber their size, shape, and contour, and to translate these into the appro-
priate motor pattern, which was quite apart from that found in even the
most gifted normal child. Probably one component was eidetic imagery—
that photographic ability to retain in one’s mind’s eye the appearance of
objects once seen directly. (Comparison of some of Nadia’s drawings with
models previously available to her conﬁrms that she had an ability akin to
eidetic imagery.) But the capacity to translate these patterns into the ap-
propriate motor sequences, and to combine images in diverse and unex-
pected ways, clearly goes beyond sheer eidetic skill. In fact, her graphic
ability was so agile that she had no need to draw elements in the same
order; instead, she could proceed, almost at will, from one corner of a
drawing to another, apparently conﬁdent that she would eventually render
the desired form in the correct way.
At the same time, it seems clear that Nadia’s gift was established at a
cost. She lacked the conceptual knowledge requisite to her drawing skills.
She could not perform sorting tasks where she had to put together items
of the same category. Moreover, in her own drawings, she would show lit-
tle regard for the particular object being depicted. Sometimes she would
cease to draw an object right in the middle of its contour or continue to
draw right off the page, as if slavishly transcribing a form that she had com-
mitted to memory. In addition, she was unable to draw simpler versions of
an object and seemed compelled to include every detail in every drawing.
Whether Nadia’s proﬁle of abilities is unique to one hapless prodigy is
a question that science is unlikely to be able to answer. The requisite ex-
periments cannot be done. But her drawings stand as an eloquent demon-
stration of the dissociability of spatial intelligence from other intellectual
strengths and of its potential for a singularly high degree of development.
The Uses of Spatial Intelligence
A keenly honed spatial intelligence proves an invaluable asset in our soci-
ety. In some pursuits, this intelligence is of the essence—for example, for

a sculptor or a mathematical topologist. Without a developed spatial intel-
ligence, progress in these domains is difﬁcult to envisage: and there are
many other pursuits where spatial intelligence alone might not sufﬁce to
produce competence, but where it provides much of the necessary intel-
lectual impetus.
In the sciences, the contribution of spatial intelligence is readily ap-
parent. Einstein had an especially well-developed set of capacities. Like
Russell, he became mesmerized in ﬁrst reading Euclid; and it was to the
visual and spatial forms, and their correspondence, that Einstein was most
strongly drawn: “His intuitions were deeply rooted in classical geometry.
He had a very visual mind. He thought in terms of images—gedanken ex-
periments, or experiments carried out in the mind.” It can even be con-
jectured that his most fundamental insights were derived from spatial
models rather than from a purely mathematical line of reasoning. As he
put it:
The words of the language, as they are written and spoken, do not seem to
play any role in my mechanisms of thought. The psychical entities which
seem to serve as elements in thought are certain signs and more or less
clear images which can be voluntarily reproduced or combined. . . . The
above mentioned elements are, in my case, of visual and some of mus-
cular type. 
The vivid role of imagery in the solution of problems has often been
recounted by scientists and inventors. In one of the most famous of such
accounts, the chemist Friedrich Kekulé came across the structure of the
benzene ring. He fell asleep and
again the atoms were gamboling before my eyes. . . . My mental eye . . .
could not distinguish larger structures . . . all twining and twisting in
snake-like motion. But look! What was that? One of the snakes had
seized hold of its own tail and the form whirled mockingly before my
eyes. As if by a ﬂash of lightning I awoke.
These insights had suggested to Kekulé that organic compounds like
benzene are not open structures, but closed rings. And in a moment closer
to our own times, the structure of the DNA molecule, as ferreted out by
James Watson and Francis Crick, depended critically upon the ability to
200
The Theory

sketch the various ways in which molecules might be bound with one an-
other. These experiments—sometimes constructed in the scientists’ heads,
sometimes on paper, and sometimes using an actual three-dimensional
model—led in the end to the correct reconstruction of the double helix.
Spatial thinking of the sorts sketched at the beginning of this chapter
can participate in the scientiﬁc process. Sometimes the actual problem is
spatial—as in the case of the building of the DNA models—and so the an-
swer involves thinking (or even direct modeling) in this medium. Some-
times the spatial gift can provide a helpful, though perhaps not a necessary,
metaphor or model for the process—as happened when Darwin came to
think of the origin of species as an ever-branching tree and of the survival
of the ﬁttest as a race among species members.
Progress in science may, in fact, be closely yoked to the development
of certain spatial displays. According to E. Ferguson, many of the prob-
lems in which scientists and engineers are engaged cannot be described
in verbal form. The scientiﬁc progress in the Renaissance may have been
intimately tied to the recording and conveying of a vast body of knowledge
in drawings—as, for instance, in the renowned sketches of Leonardo da
Vinci. Instead of memorizing lists of objects or parts (as medieval workers
often had to do), aspiring scientists could now study the actual organization
of machines and organisms that were not available for inspection. The in-
vention of printing proved as important for the dissemination of these pic-
tures as it had been for the spread of texts. In general, the widespread
availability of manuscripts played an important role in the teaching of sci-
ence and in the promotion of scientiﬁc ways of thinking.
Clearly, spatial knowledge can serve a variety of scientiﬁc ends, as a
useful tool, an aid to thinking, a way of capturing information, a way of for-
mulating problems, or the very means of solving the problem. Perhaps Mc-
Farlane Smith is right when he suggests that after individuals have attained
a certain minimal verbal facility, it is skill in spatial ability that determines
how far one will progress in the sciences.
It must be stressed that the involvement of spatial reasoning is not uni-
form across various sciences, arts, and branches of mathematics. Topology
exploits spatial thinking to a much greater extent than does algebra. The
physical sciences depend upon spatial ability to a greater extent than do
the traditional biological or social sciences (where verbal abilities are rel-
atively more important). Individuals with exceptional gifts in the spatial
area, such as da Vinci or the contemporary ﬁgures Buckminster Fuller and
201
Spatial Intelligence

Arthur Loeb, have the option of performing not only in one of these
spheres but across a number of them, perhaps excelling in science, engi-
neering, and various of the arts. Ultimately, one who wishes to master these
pursuits must learn the “language of space” and “thinking in the spatial
medium.” Such thinking includes an appreciation that space allows the
coexistence of certain structural features while disallowing others. And,
for many,
thinking in three dimensions is like learning a foreign language. The
number four is no longer a digit larger than three and less than ﬁve, it is
the number of vertices as well as the faces of a tetrahedron. Six is the
number of edges of a tetrahedron, the number of faces of a cube, or 
the number of vertices of an octahedron.
If one had to choose a single area to illustrate the centrality of spatial
intelligence, chess would suggest itself as a strong candidate. The ability to
anticipate moves and their consequences seems closely tied to strong im-
agery. And, indeed, chess masters have generally had outstanding visual
memory—or visual imagination, as they call it. Yet a close examination of
these individuals reveals that they possess a special kind of memory.
In a pioneering study nearly a century ago, Alfred Binet, the founder
of intelligence testing, examined mnemonic virtuosity in blindfolded chess.
This is a form in which, classically, individuals play several games simulta-
neously against an equal number of opponents. The opponents can each
see the relevant board, but the blindfolded chessplayer cannot. His only
cue is a recitation of the last move made by his opponent, and on that basis
he must make his move.
What do the players themselves say? In Binet’s report, we get an initial
clue from a Dr. Tarrasch, who writes, “Some part of every chess game is
played blindfold[ed]. For example, any combination of ﬁve moves is car-
ried out in one’s head—the only difference being that one is sitting in front
of the chess board. The sight of the chessman frequently upsets one’s cal-
culations.” We encounter here evidence that the game is typically repre-
sented at a relatively abstract level: the identities of the pieces, let alone
their physical attributes, are completely extraneous. What is important is
the power of each piece—what it can and cannot do.
In Binet’s view, successful blindfolded chess depends upon physical en-
durance, great powers of concentration, scholarship, memory, and imagi-
202
The Theory

nation. For its practitioners, chess is a completely meaningful enterprise,
and so they strive to capture the essence of an encounter on the board.
Each game has its own character, its own shape, which impresses itself
upon the chess player’s sensibility. Says a Mr. Goetz, “I grasp it as a musi-
cian grasps harmony in his orchestra. . . . I am often carried to sum up the
character of a position in a general epithet. . . . It strikes you as simple and
familiar, or as original, exciting and suggestive.” So Binet comments, “It is
the multitude of suggestions and ideas emanating from a game which
makes it interesting and establishes it in memory.” The blindfolded player
must remember primarily lines of reasoning and strategies. As he tries to
recall a given position, he recollects his reasoning at an earlier time, and
thus gets on the track of a particular move. He does not remember that
move in isolation but remembers rather that he had a particular plan of at-
tack, and that the move was required to carry out that attack. “The move
itself is only the conclusion of an act of thinking; that act itself must ﬁrst
be recaptured.” In fact, one method used by players to help themselves is
to pursue a different strategy of play in each game, a procedure that helps
make each game more distinctive.
What of chess memory? Chess players have fabled memories, particu-
larly of important games in their past. But, again, this memory does not
reduce to sheer rote recall. Rather, for the good player, the game has as
distinctive and individual a character as a particular play read, movie seen,
or trip taken. Binet contrasts this memory with that of an idiot savant. The
idiot savant can remember something slavishly, but once it has played out,
the memory as a whole vanishes because it harbors no intrinsic signiﬁ-
cance. In sharp contrast, the memory of the chessplayer proves far more
lasting, for it encodes plans and ideas, not rote lists.
Nonetheless, the blindfolded master must somehow keep the board in
mind. Here are the introspections of one leading master:
To envision a position, I keep it before me continuously in all its plastic-
ity. I have a very clear picture of the chessboard in mind, and lest the
inner image be disturbed by visual sensations, I close my eyes. Then I
people the board with the chessmen. The ﬁrst of these operations, that
is, the attainment of a mental image of the chessboard, is the prime es-
sential. Once you can see the board clearly before your closed eyes, it is
not difﬁcult to imagine also the pieces, at ﬁrst in their familiar initial
array. Now the game starts. . . . Right away, it begins to evolve on the
203
Spatial Intelligence

chessboard before the mind’s eye; it changes the original picture a bit
and I try to retain it in its altered condition. My opponent responds, 
and again the picture changes. I retain the transformations one after 
the other. 
But in Binet’s view, the better the player, and the more games in which he
is involved, the more abstract is the representation of the game. There is
no need for a vivid recall of each of the pieces, let alone of their shape and
size; what is needed is a more abstract representation, where the general
drift of the game is kept in mind, and an “inner beacon” allows a recon-
struction of as much of the game as is needed in order for it to be faithfully
followed—no more. Shape and color are unimportant. As Tarrasch puts it:
The player absorbed in the strategy of the game does not see a piece of
wood with a horse head, but a piece that follows the course prescribed
for the knight, that is worth approximately three pawns, that is perhaps
at that moment badly placed at the edge of the board, or about to wage
a decisive attack, or in danger of being nailed down by an adversary. 
Binet concludes that the best players have a visual memory but that
this memory differs profoundly from that of a painter. It lacks the latter’s
concrete pictorial quality. Though visual, it is abstract; in fact, it is a kind
of geometrical memory. We might compare Binet’s conclusion with Na -
poleon’s view of conﬂict. The commander who enters into battle with a de-
tailed image of his battle plan ﬁnds the image too difﬁcult to modify quickly
to accommodate sudden and unpredictable changes on the battle ﬁeld, and
thus will make a bad commander. Napoleon, in fact, held that individuals
who think only in relation to concrete mental pictures are unﬁt to com-
mand. Here, perhaps, we see a difference between the literal imagery of
an idiot savant or a Nadia at her easel, and the more abstract intelligence
of a chessplayer, a battle commander, or a theoretical physicist. It seems
reasonable to underscore the spatial—rather than the purely visual—
dimensions of this skill.
Binet’s ﬁndings have been reinforced by more recent studies. Adrian de
Groot and his colleagues in the Hague have shown that chess masters have
a remarkable ability to reconstruct a chessboard that they have seen for
just a few seconds—providing only that the chessmen on the board were
set in a meaningful position. If, however, the chessboard has randomly lo-
204
The Theory

cated ﬁgures positioned upon it, the chess master performs no more ac-
curately than a rank novice. This ﬁnding indicates precisely that the chess
master does not differ qualitatively from other individuals in sheer visual
memory for rote conﬁgurations; he differs rather in his ability to relate a
pattern to one that he has previously encountered, to encode it meaning-
fully, and to reconstruct it upon that basis. Herbert Simon, a pioneer in ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence who has collaborated with the de Groot group, believes
that chess masters may have mastered ﬁfty thousand or more patterns: it
is this remarkable store that allows them to proceed so effectively when
they have been exposed to a new board for but a few seconds. But whether
the individuals who eventually become chess masters have from the ﬁrst a
special proclivity for appreciating such patterns and then “chunking them”
has not been addressed by these researches.
In my own view, the extremely rapid advance made by these few indi-
viduals who become chess masters in the ﬁrst decade of their lives is dif-
ﬁcult to explain in any terms other than that of precocious intelligence in
one or more relevant spheres. Contrary to Capablanca’s whimsical remark,
quoted at the beginning of this chapter, spatial and logical-mathematical 
intelligences are probably the twin contributors, with their relative im-
portance differing across individual situation. What the lore about chess
masters reminds us, however, is that sheer visual imaging capacity in itself
will not a master make: it is the ability to relate a perceived pattern to past
patterns, and to envelop the present position into an overall game plan,
that is the true sign of talent at chess.
The Visual-Spatial Arts
While one might underestimate the component of spatial thinking in the
sciences, the centrality of spatial thinking in the visual arts is self-evident.
The enterprises of painting and sculpture involve an exquisite sensitivity to
the visual and spatial world as well as an ability to recreate it in fashioning
a work of art. Certain other intellectual competences, such as facility in
the control of ﬁne motor movement, contribute as well; but the sine qua
non of graphic artistry inheres in the spatial realm.
It is not surprising, then, that the shop talk of artists dwells on the qual-
ities of the perceptual world and on how these can best be captured on
canvas. In his revealing letters to his brother Theo, Vincent Van Gogh 
205
Spatial Intelligence

returns repeatedly to his efforts to master these properties. Talking of color,
for example, Van Gogh states:
There are effects of color which I but rarely ﬁnd painted in the Dutch
pictures. Yesterday evening, I was busy painting a rather sloping ground
in the wood, covered with moldered and dry beech leaves. You cannot
imagine any carpet so splendid as that deep brownish-red, in the glow
of an autumn evening sun, tempered by the trees. The question was—
and I found it very difﬁcult—how to get the depth of color, the enor-
mous force and solidness of that ground. And while painting it I
perceived for the ﬁrst time how much light there was in that darkness,
how was one to keep that light and at the same time retain the glow and
depth of that rich color.
Elsewhere he talks about more general challenges which he must con-
front in his work:
There are laws of proportion, of light and shadow, of perspective which
one must know in order to be able to draw well; without that knowledge
it always remains a fruitless struggle and one never brings forth anything.
I shall try this winter to store some capital of anatomy: I may not push it
off longer and in the end it would prove expensive, for it would be loss
of time.
The twentieth-century architect and artist Le Corbusier talks about the
struggle the artist faces in capturing objects:
Our concept of the object comes from a total knowledge of it, a knowl-
edge acquired by the experience of our senses, tactile knowledge,
knowledge of its materials, its volume, its proﬁle, of all its properties.
And the usual perspective view only acts as the shutter release for the
memory of these experiences. 
Artists typically begin by mastering techniques developed by their
predecessors; and if a technique is not already available, they will try to
devise one. Dürer and his contemporaries of the Renaissance were deter-
mined to master the perspective that had eluded earlier generations. In a
famous woodcut, Dürer presented one beguiling solution. The artist de-
206
The Theory

picted in the woodcut marked a square grid on a window and a similar grid
on a drawing surface, thereby making it possible to transpose the per-
spective image as seen through the window square by square directly onto
the paper.
Artists must attend as well to the world of individuals. The Renais-
sance historian of painting Giorgio Vasari said of da Vinci: “Leonardo was
so pleased whenever he saw a strange head or beard, or hair of unusual
appearance that he would follow such a person a whole day and so learn
him by heart, that when he reached home he could draw him as if he
were present.”
In his description of Michelangelo, Vasari helps us to understand the
way in which Leonardo’s fellow master attained his skills:
He had a most tenacious memory; he could remember and make use of
the works of others when he had only once seen them; while he never re-
peated anything of his own because he remembered all he had done. . . .
In his youth . . . it was proposed that [his friends] should try who could
make a ﬁgure without any drawing in it, like those things that ignorant
fellows draw on the walls. . . . He remembered having seen one of these
rude drawings on a wall, and drew it as if he had it in front of him, and
so surpassed all the other painters—a difﬁcult thing for a man to do who
had such knowledge of drawing.
Michelangelo may have been born with such accurate visual recall that
he was able without effort to realize and re-create all prior percepts. We
have evidence, however, from the artist William Hogarth that one can
strive to develop one’s perceptual and recall powers:
I therefore endeavored to habituate myself to the exercise of a sort of
technical memory and by repeating in my own mind the parts of which
objects are composed, I could by degree combine and put them down
with my pencil . . . the early habit I thus acquired of retaining it in my
mind’s eye, without coldly copying it carefully on the spot, whatever I in-
tended to imitate.
And Leonardo himself advised his painting students to contemplate, with
a reﬂective eye, the cracks on an old wall in order to see what pregnant
forms they might discover therein.
207
Spatial Intelligence

In any event, such testimony underscores the extent to which the plas-
tic arts begin with a painstaking observation of the everyday world. How-
ever, artistic achievement cannot end there, if only because so much of
abstract art remains apart from the world of personal experience. And ac-
tually, much of painting takes place at a plane remote from sheer duplica-
tion. Picasso claims, “Painting is poetry and is always written in verse with
plastic rhythms, never in prose. . . . Plastic rhythms are forms that rhyme
with one another or supply assonances either with other forms or with the
space that surrounds them.” According to Rudolf Arnheim, a close student
of artistry, both the representational and the abstract artist are concerned
with the production of forms whose interactions hold signiﬁcant meaning
for them:
Just as a chemist “isolates” a substance from combinations that distort
his view of its nature and effects, so the work of art puriﬁes signiﬁcant ap-
pearance. It presents abstract themes in their generality, but not reduced
to diagrams. The variety of direct experience is reﬂected in highly com-
plex forms. 
Ben Shahn, one of the premier American artists of this century, speaks of
the struggle between idea and image: “The idea has to emerge from an
image. . . . One thinks of Turner, for this great innovator did manipulate
colors and suppress forms to create light.” And Sir Herbert Read de-
scribes the feat involved in seeing forms—beautiful colors and shapes—
rather than physical objects—such as a chair, which is the product of
mundane intelligence.
All this testimony underscores that aspect of spatial intelligence that I
earlier termed sensitivity to composition. Perhaps, indeed, once one is
deeply interested in painting, problems of design, color, and form become
all important, with the particular subject matter a mere point of departure.
In support of this speculation, Picasso stresses the formal element in all
graphic art and declares, “Drawing, design, and color are understood and
practiced in cubism in the spirit and manner that they are understood
and practiced in all other schools.” In the last analysis, there is a deﬁnite
logic in the pursuit of the arts, one that sets it apart from the imitation of
nature and places it close to other areas of rigorous investigation. Nearly
two centuries ago, the English painter John Constable declared, “Painting
208
The Theory

is a science, and should be pursued as an inquiry into the laws of nature.
Why, then, may not landscape be considered a branch of natural philoso-
phy, of which pictures are but experiments?” Cézanne noted, some years
later, “I am going on with my researches.” And Clive Bell has suggested:
Virginia [Woolf] and Picasso belonged to another order of beings: they
were a species different from the common; their mental processes were
different from ours . . . their standards, too, were of their own creation;
yet, spontaneously, we appraised by those standards, which for the mo-
ment we not only accepted, but appropriated, whatever they chose to
offer. Their conclusions were as satisfying as the conclusions of mathe-
matics, though reached by quite other roads.
Achievements of painting masters, marvelous to behold, are as remote
from most of us as the processes used by an outstanding composer or
dancer. Somewhat closer to our world are the activities of the connoisseur,
the individual who looks at and enjoys art, who can make ﬁne discrimi-
nations, recognize style, and render evaluations. My own studies have
shown that such connoisseurship can be acquired in a modest way even by
young children, who can learn to overlook subject matter and attend as
well (or instead) to those qualities of brush stroke and texture that often de-
ﬁne a master’s style.
It would be a grave mistake to assume, however, that connoisseurship
develops automatically, or that it does not require well-developed powers.
Picasso declared in a taunting spirit:
People say, “I have no ear for music” but they never say “I have no eye
for painting.” . . . People must be forced to see painting in spite of na-
ture. We always believe that we’re looking, right? But it’s not true. We’re
always looking through glasses. People don’t like painting. All they want
to know is which paintings will be considered good one hundred years
from now. 
But some individuals do learn the language of connoisseurship; and,
happily for us, the British art historian Kenneth Clark has reﬂected upon
some of the key abilities. Even as a young child, he had a special attraction
to the arts. Upon entering a gallery, he recalls
209
Spatial Intelligence

immediately I was transported. On either side were screens with paint-
ings of ﬂowers of such ravishing beauty that I was not only struck dumb
with delight, I felt that I had entered a new world. In the relationship of
the shapes and colors a new order had been revealed to me, a certainty
established. 
The fact that he was impressed so young is not lost on Clark. He speaks
of the pure aesthetic sensation:
I am not so vain as to compare it to an infant musician’s immediate un-
derstanding of a fugue, or to a youthful mathematician’s joy when he
ﬁrst encounters Euclid’s proof of the inﬁnity of Prime Numbers. . . . Nev-
ertheless, I think it must be reckoned a freak aptitude of the same kind
. . . and in case any psychologist is rash enough to investigate this mys-
terious branch of the human psyche, I will record the sequel. Fifty-ﬁve
years later, I was visiting a temple near Kyoto. . . . As I sat on the ﬂoor I
experienced the clearest recollection of having seen these paintings be-
fore and said so to my companion, the ofﬁcial guide from the Foreign
Ofﬁce. “Nooh, Nooh, not possible” [Clark was told]. 
But, in fact, he was right; they had been exhibited in New York in 1910,
and he had remembered the experience.
Clark notes that from his earliest recollections, he could be moved by
a painting, and he also had supreme conﬁdence in his judgment: “It never
occurred to me that someone else, with more mature judgment, might feel
differently.” Still, he had to undergo a long training in order to get to know
the painters well, so that he could feel in his bones the differences among
them. To look intensely at original drawings by Michelangelo and Raphael,
to decide on one’s own which were authentic and which were false, was
the ﬁnest training for the eye that any young man could have had. One
felt, in I all humility, that one was entering into the artist’s mind and un-
derstanding the implications of his slightest gesture. . . . One could also
recognize that most inexplicable of all attributes in a work of art—a sense
of form. 
Clark describes the task of a connoisseur:
210
The Theory

To say whether a picture is, or is not, by Bellini or Botticelli involves a
combination of memory, analysis, and sensibility, which is an excellent
discipline for both mind and eye. The nearest analogy is the textual crit-
icism which was considered the ultimate end of classical scholarship. . . .
In connoisseurship memory of facts and documents is replaced by visual
memory . . . of spatial and compositional elements, tone and color. . . . It
is an exacting discipline. Also involved is a feeling for the almost inde-
scribable way in which a line evokes a form and for the equally mysteri-
ous relationship of tone and color. A serious judgment of authenticity
involves one’s whole faculties.
Here is a use of spatial intelligence that seems in no way less worthy of
awe and emulation than that displayed by the scientist, the architect, the
sculptor, or the painter.
The Cultural Perspective
As an intelligence that reaches far back into the past, spatial competence
can be readily observed in all known human cultures. To be sure, spe-
cific inventions, like geometry or physics, kinetic sculpture or impres-
sionist painting, are restricted to certain societies; but the capacity to
make one’s way around an intricate environment, to engage in complex
arts and crafts, and to play sports and games of various types seems to
be found everywhere.
What seems particularly intriguing are the types of spatial intelligence
that have been developed in cultures remote from our own. The ability to
notice ﬁne details has been brought to an apogee by the Gikwe bushmen
of the Kalahari, who can deduce from the spoor of an antelope its size, sex,
build, and mood. In the several hundred square miles area where they
travel, they know “every bush and stone, every convolution of the ground,
and have usually named every place in it where a certain kind of veldt food
may grow, even if that place is only a few yards in diameter, or where there
is only a patch of tall grass or a bee tree.” A keen visual memory is equally
highly prized among the Kikuyu in Kenya. As a young child, Jomo Ken -
yatta was taught how to recognize every head of livestock in his family’s
herd from its color, markings, and size and type of its horns. Then he was
211
Spatial Intelligence

tested: “Two or three herds were mixed, and he [was] expected to select the
animals belonging to his own family. Or several animals [were] hidden and
[he was] asked to inspect the herd and report the missing members.”
Just as they exploit logical-mathematical skills, many games around the
world also tap spatial intelligence. Tanzanian children play a game heavily
dependent on this ability. Forty-ﬁve beans are arranged in nine rows to
form a triangle. The beans are numbered in order. While the challenger is
not looking, other players remove one bean at a time, working their way up
from the base to the apex by taking beans from alternate edges of each
row. The challenger has to call out the number name of each bean as it is
removed, but remains silent when the ﬁrst bean in a row is taken. Thus, he
is in the position of the blindfolded chess player who must be able to vi-
sualize the absent board. The Shongo people of the Congo play a game
where complex arrays are drawn in the sand, and the player must copy an
array in a single path, without lifting a ﬁnger from the sand or retracing
any line segment. As in certain games in Western culture, what is at stake
here is the ability to use images to plan alternate sets of actions—quite
possibly that union of spatial and logical-mathematical skills that we saw at
work in chess.
The exploitation of spatial competence for more pragmatic ends is also
striking. As I noted earlier, Eskimos have developed a high degree of spa-
tial ability, possibly because of the difﬁculty of ﬁnding their way around
their environment. They must be able to detect slight cracks in the ice, be-
cause a breaking ice pack could set one adrift in the ocean. Also, to ﬁnd
one’s way back to a few houses in the tundra, the hunter must attend to
the angle and shape of small drifts of snow; he must be able to judge
weather conditions by carefully observing subtle patterns of dark and light
on the clouds.
Examples of spatial acuity on the part of certain Eskimos are legendary.
For example, Eskimos are said to be able to read as well upside-down as
right side up, and they can carve complexly designed ﬁgures without hav-
ing to orient them correctly. Eskimos who have never before seen certain
equipment are sometimes able to repair it when none of its customary
users can: this ability presumably calls for a union of spatial skills with other
forms of intelligence.
It might be thought that the Eskimo males would perform particularly
well in spatial tasks; but, in fact, skilled performances are found among Es-
212
The Theory

kimo females as well. This ﬁnding demonstrates that the sex differences
in spatial abilities reported regularly in our Western culture can be over-
come in certain environments (or, conversely, that the biases in our own
environments are producing apparent spatial deﬁcits in females). At least
60 percent of Eskimo youngsters reach as high a score on tests of spatial
ability as the top 10 percent of Caucasian children. This heightened abil-
ity also generalizes to tests of conceptual ability and to tests measuring vi-
sual details.
But I am not dealing here with a feature of climate. Highly developed
spatial abilities are also found among a radically different population—the
Puluwat people of the Caroline Islands in the South Seas. In the case of 
the Puluwats, the highly developed skill is that of navigation, one found in
a minority of individuals who are allowed to sail canoes. Within this well-
trained population there occurs a ﬂowering of skills that has ﬁlled Western-
trained navigators with awe.
The key to Puluwat navigation can be found in the arrangement of stars
in the sky. To navigate among the many islands in their vicinity, the Pu-
luwats must recall the points or directions where certain stars rise and set
around the horizon. This knowledge is ﬁrst committed to memory by rote,
but then becomes absorbed into the intuition of the sailor as he spends
many months traveling back and forth. Ultimately, the knowledge must be
integrated with a variety of factors including the location of the sun; the
feeling one experiences in passing over the waves; the alteration of waves
with changes in course, wind, and weather; skills in steering and handling
the sheet; ability to detect reefs many fathoms down by sudden changes in
the color of the water; and the appearance of the waves on the surface.
Thomas Gladwin, who studied the system under the guidance of a master
sailor, concludes,
No one set of observed phenomena will sufﬁce to guide a sailing craft
under all the conditions it will encounter at sea. Many categories of in-
formation must be integrated into a system whose diverse elements sup-
plement each other to achieve a satisfactory level of accuracy and
reliability. 
To achieve this knowledge, the chosen Puluwats must learn much se-
cret lore and negotiate a long series of tests:
213
Spatial Intelligence

The learning job is not complete until the student at his instructor’s re-
quest can start with any island in the known ocean and rattle off the stars
both going and returning between that island and all the others. . . .
Armed with this knowledge, the sailor can then start off in a direction so
that he will know he will end up in the vicinity of where he wants to go;
will be able to keep the canoe steady on its course; and when near the
goal have the techniques for locating the distinct island and heading to-
ward it. . . . [The skilled navigator] can also use a star off to one side, ad-
just his sitting position so that when he is on course the star he has chosen
rides near a stay, or perhaps just above an end of the outrigger ﬂoat. In this
way he can sail almost indeﬁnitely without attending to his actual course. 
While this sailing appears to be a seamless operation, the journey is ac-
tually divided conceptually into a series of segments. The number of star
positions that lie between the bearing of the reference island as seen from
the island of origin and its bearing as seen from the island of destination
determines the number of segments to be negotiated. When the navigator
envisions in his mind’s eye that the reference island is passing under a par-
ticular star, he notes that a certain number of segments have been com-
pleted, and that a certain proportion of the voyage has therefore been
accomplished. Like the blind individual, the navigator cannot see the is-
lands, but he has learned where they are and how to keep their locations
and relations in his mind. Asked where an island is, he can point to it—
immediately and accurately.
How do the Puluwat Islanders themselves regard this skill? Apparently
they respect their navigators not because they are “intelligent” but just be-
cause of what they can do, because of their ability to guide a canoe safely
from one island to another. Asked whom they consider “intelligent,” the
natives are likely to mention statesmen or others who have good judgment.
As Gladwin expresses it, “We in the Western world value intelligence
highly. For this reason we respect the Puluwat navigator. Puluwatans also
respect their navigators, but not primarily because they are intelligent.
They respect them because they can navigate.” Gladwin warns us, how-
ever, not to dismiss these abilities as concrete, primitive, or prerational. In
his view, “abstract thinking is a pervasive characteristic of Puluwat naviga-
tion.” In our terms, these Puluwatan navigators exhibit spatial intelligence
to a high degree.
214
The Theory

The individuals who hold the key to sailing in the Puluwats are the eld-
ers, who train the youngsters and who possess the greatest mastery of the
navigating art. Similarly, among the Eskimos and numerous other tradi-
tional groups, elder individuals are often the repository of knowledge. It is
striking that in the Western context as well, high achievements in the spa-
tial realm are often found among older individuals. In the case of paint-
ing, for example, Picasso and Titian painted until their nineties; and most
of the greatest Western artists were painting as well as ever during the ﬁnal
years of their life. The contemporary sculptor Henry Moore, now in his
eighties and a ﬁne exemplar of this longevity, declares:
One does ﬁnd the greatest artists doing their greatest work as they get
older. I think that unlike most arts or sciences, the visual arts are more
connected with actual human experience. Painting and sculpture have
more to do with the outside world and they are never ending. 
We encounter here a paradox. As it happens, on routine tests of visual-
spatial thinking, normal adults as they age often exhibit a falling off in their
performance, one that has even led to speculation that the right hemi-
sphere is more vulnerable to aging. Yet, at the same time, individuals in
whom spatial abilities are prized often perform very well until the end of
their lives. My own view is that each form of intelligence has a natural life
course: while logical-mathematical thought proves fragile later in life across
all individuals, and bodily-kinesthetic intelligence is also “at risk,” at least
certain aspects of visual and spatial knowledge prove robust, especially in
individuals who have practiced them regularly throughout their lives.
There is a sense of the whole, a gestalt sensitivity, which is central in spa-
tial intelligence, and which seems to be a reward for aging—a continuing
or perhaps even an enhanced capacity to appreciate the whole, to discern
patterns even when certain details or ﬁne points may be lost. Perhaps wis-
dom draws on this sensitivity to patterns, forms, and whole.
With this view of spatial intelligence, we have now encountered a second
form of intelligence involved with objects. In contradistinction to logical-
mathematical knowledge, which concludes its developmental trajectory
with increasing abstraction, spatial intelligence remains tied fundamen-
tally to the concrete world, to the world of objects and their location in a
215
Spatial Intelligence

The Theory
216
world. Perhaps, indeed, we ﬁnd here another reason for the “staying power”
of this intelligence. There is yet a third form of object-based intelligence,
however, to be considered—a form that remains even closer to the indi-
vidual, in that it inheres in the use of one’s body, and one’s actions upon the
world. We turn in the next chapter to bodily-kinesthetic intelligence.

217
9
Bodily-Kinesthetic 
Intelligence
O
ur Hero Bip hauls his suitcase onto the platform, climbs aboard the
train, locates a seat, and then, with considerable strain, shoves his
heavy suitcase onto the overhead rack. As the train gathers speed, Bip is
tossed about on his seat even as his precariously rested suitcase is thrown
out of the overhead rack. Bip manages to catch it and then carefully re-
places it upon the shelf. The conductor arrives to gather his ticket. Bip
goes through his pockets and, with increasing frustration, turns them inside
out, as all the while the moving train continues to toss him about. When
he still cannot ﬁnd his ticket, his search becomes frantic, and he goes
through all the compartments of his suitcase.
Next our hero takes lunch out of his suitcase. He unscrews the cap of his
thermos bottle, lifts the cork, and pours coffee from the open thermos into
the cup, which has earlier served as the cap of the bottle. But, due to the
sway of the train, the coffee being poured from the mouth of the thermos
never reaches the cup. Instead, the liquid ﬂows in a straight line downward
to where the cup was but no longer is. The hapless Bip eventually falls
asleep. As the train slows down and comes to a rather abrupt halt, Bip is
rudely awakened, apparently jolted by the cessation of the train’s movement.
Delineating Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence
This little set of events could be a scene spied upon a train or, more likely,
a comic skit enacted upon a stage or in a movie house. In actuality, how-
ever, it is a mime performance by the great French artist Marcel Marceau,

as described by psychologist Marianne Simmel. As Simmel points out,
Marceau seems on a superﬁcial level merely to be doing what “real indi-
viduals” do all the time, “but he’s so funny when he does it.” In fact, how-
ever, the representation of actors, objects, events, and actions in the
absence of the actual physical props amounts to a considerable departure
from daily activities. It is up to the mime to create the appearance of an ob-
ject, a person, or an action; and this task requires artful caricature, an ex-
aggeration of movements and reactions, if the components are to be
unambiguously recognized and stitched together into a seamless per-
formance. To depict an object, for example, the mime has to delimit, by
means of gestures, the shape of an object and to denote, by means of fa-
cial expressions and bodily actions, what that object is doing and its effects
upon him. An especially talented mime like Marceau is able to create not
only personalities (like a bully) and actions (like climbing) but also animals
(butterﬂies), natural phenomena (waves cresting), and even abstract con-
cepts such as freedom or bondage, good or evil, ugliness or beauty. More
amazingly, still, he often creates a number of these illusions simultaneously.
The mime is a performer, and an exceedingly rare one, indeed. The
intelligences upon which he draws are not widely developed in our cul-
ture. Yet, perhaps for that very reason, he indicates in particularly striking
form the actions and capacities associated with a highly evolved bodily-
kinesthetic (or, for short, bodily) intelligence. Characteristic of such an in-
telligence is the ability to use one’s body in highly differentiated and skilled
ways, for expressive as well as goal-directed purposes: these we see as
Marceau pretends to run, climb, or prop up a heavy suitcase. Characteris-
tic as well is the capacity to work skillfully with objects, both those that in-
volve the ﬁne motor movements of one’s ﬁngers and hands and those that
exploit gross motor movements of the body. Again, these can be observed
in a Marceau performance, as he delicately unscrews the cap of the ther-
mos or lurches from side to side in the hurtling train. In this chapter, I
treat these two capacities—control of one’s bodily motions and capacity to
handle objects skillfully—as the cores of bodily intelligence. As I have
noted in the case of other intelligences, it is possible for these two core el-
ements to exist separately; but in the typical case, skill in the use of the
body for functional or expressive purposes tends to go hand in hand with
skill in the manipulation of objects.
Given these core components, I will focus on those individuals—like
dancers and swimmers—who develop keen mastery over the motions of
218
The Theory

their bodies, as well as those individuals—like artisans, ballplayers, and in-
strumentalists—who are able to manipulate objects with ﬁnesse. But I will
also consider other individuals in whom use of the body proves central,
such as inventors or actors. It is important to stress that in these latter oc-
cupations, other intelligences ordinarily play an important role. For instance,
in the case of the actor or the performer, skill in personal intelligences—
and also in many cases in musical or linguistic intelligence—is part and
parcel of successful performance. Nearly all cultural roles exploit more
than one intelligence; at the same time, no performance can come about
simply through the exercise of a single intelligence. In fact, even Marcel
Marceau’s capacity to use his body with such precision may well involve
contributions from several intellectual domains.
Skilled use of one’s body has been important in the history of the
species for thousands, if not millions, of years. In speaking of masterful use
of the body, it is natural to think of the Greeks, and there is a sense in
which this form of intelligence reached its apogee in the West during the
Classical Era. The Greeks revered the beauty of the human form and, by
means of their artistic and athletic activities, sought to develop a body that
was perfectly proportioned and graceful in movement, balance, and tone.
More generally, they sought a harmony between mind and body, with the
mind trained to use the body properly, and the body trained to respond to
the expressive powers of the mind. But intelligent use of the body can be
discerned in other pursuits as well. Turning his attention to physical com-
bat, the novelist Norman Mailer indicates:
There are languages other than words, language of symbol and languages
of nature. There are languages of the body. And prize-ﬁghting is one of
them. A prizeﬁghter . . . speaks with a command of the body which is as
detached, subtle, and comprehensive in its intelligence as any exercise of
the mind. [He expresses] himself with wit, style, and an aesthetic ﬂair
for surprise when he boxes with his body. Boxing is a dialogue between
bodies, [it] is a rapid debate between two sets of intelligences. 
A description of use of the body as a form of intelligence may at ﬁrst jar.
There has been a radical disjunction in our recent cultural tradition be-
tween the activities of reasoning, on the one hand, and the activities of
the manifestly physical part of our nature, as epitomized by our bodies, on
the other. This divorce between the “mental” and the “physical” has not
219
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

infrequently been coupled with a notion that what we do with our bod-
ies is somehow less privileged, less special, than those problem-solving
routines carried out chieﬂy through the use of language, logic, or some
other relatively abstract symbolic system.
This sharp distinction between the “reﬂective” and the “active” is not,
however, drawn in many other cultures. This fact should at least give us
pause before we conclude that a particular legacy of Western Cartesian
thought is a universal imperative. It is also worthy of note that psycholo-
gists in recent years have discerned and stressed a close link between the
use of the body and the deployment of other cognitive powers. There is a
discernible tendency to focus on the cognitive facets as well as the neuro -
psychological basis of skilled body use, and a clear trend to analogize
thought processes with “sheer” physical skills. The insightful British psy-
chologist Sir Frederic Bartlett drew an analogy among various kinds of
skills where diverse receptive and performing functions were linked:
This essential requirement of any performance that can be called skilled
becomes much more plain if we look at a few actual instances. The
player in a quick ball game; the operator, engaged at his work bench,
directing his machine, and using his tools; the surgeon conducting an
operation; the physician arriving at a clinical decision—in all these in-
stances and in innumerable other ones that could just as well be used,
there is the continuing ﬂow from signals occurring outside the per-
former and interpreted by him to actions carried out; then on to further
signals and more action, up to the culminating point of the achievement
of the task, or whatever part of the task is the immediate objective. . . .
Skilled performance must all the time submit to receptor control, and
must be initiated and directed by the signals which the performer must
pick up from his environment, in combination with other signals, inter-
nal to his own body, which tell him about his own movements as he
makes them.
According to Bartlett’s analysis, all skilled performances include a well-
honed sense of timing, where each bit of a sequence ﬁts into the stream in
an exquisitely placed and elegant way; points of repose or shift, where one
phase of the behavior is at an end, and some calibration is necessary before
the second one comes into play; a sense of direction, a clear goal to which
220
The Theory

the sequence has been heading, and a point of no return, where further
input of signals no longer produces a result because the ﬁnal phase of the
sequence has already been activated. Bartlett goes beyond the sheer analy-
sis of bodily skill in his intriguing claim that much of what we ordinarily
call thinking—routine as well as innovative—partakes of the same princi-
ples that have been uncovered in overtly physical manifestations of skill.
From related analyses by other psychologists, we can identify other sta-
ples of highly skilled performance. Over the years the highly skilled per-
former has evolved a family of procedures for translating intention into
action. Knowledge of what is coming next allows that overall smoothness
of performance that is virtually the hallmark of expertise. The periods of
hovering or halting, which call for keen attention to environmental factors,
alternate with periods of seamless ﬂuency, where numerous component
parts fall readily into place. Programming of actions at a relatively abstract
level allows the choice of those particular units of performance that will
result in the smoothest possible sequence of activity. It is just because of
this mastery of the possible alternatives, the ability to enact the sequence
most effective for present purposes, that the expert looks as though he has
all the time in the world to do what he wants.
As I have noted, bodily use can itself be differentiated into a variety of
forms. Like Marcel Marceau, one may use one’s whole body to represent
a certain kind of activity—for example, running or falling—chieﬂy for ex-
pressive ends. (In a sport like football or boxing, one tends to use one’s
whole body or grosser motor actions). Of equal (if not greater) importance
in human activity is the elaboration of ﬁne motor movements, the ability
to use one’s hands and ﬁngers, to carry out delicate movements involving
precise control. The act of grasping a small object precisely with opposed
thumb and ﬁnger—which prosimians cannot execute at all, and which
higher primates can do with only modest skill—has been carried to an ex-
quisitely and qualitatively higher level by human beings. A good pianist
can produce independent patterns of movement in each hand, sustain dif-
ferent rhythms in each hand, while also using the two hands together to
“speak to one another” or to produce a fugal effect. In typing or in shoot-
ing, a ﬁnger can be moved for just a few milliseconds, or an eye just a few
degrees, in order to allow precise attacks or adjustments. And in dance,
even the tiniest quiver of a ﬁnger may assume importance. As Suzanne
Farrell, master ballerina of the New York City Ballet, has declared:
221
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

In a performance, when I look and see my little ﬁnger out there, I say to
myself, “That’s for Mr. B.” [the noted choreographer George Balan-
chine]. Maybe nobody in the audience notices it, but he’s seen it and ap-
preciates it.
The Brain’s Role in Bodily Movement
While studies of perception and language have dominated published treat-
ments in neuropsychology, the saga of the brain’s role in physical activity
proves to be as intriguing as reports about the aphasias or as accounts of
the detection of edges, lines, colors, and objects. And, indeed, even as bod-
ily intelligence may have been taken for granted, or minimized in impor-
tance by many researchers, motor activity has been considered as a less
“high” cortical function than functions subserving “pure” thought. Yet, as
Roger Sperry, the doyen of American neuropsychologists, has shrewdly
pointed out, one should look upon mental activity as a means to the end
of executing actions. Rather than motor activity as a subsidiary form de-
signed to satisfy the demands of the higher centers, one should instead
conceptualize cerebration as a means of bringing “into motor behavior ad-
ditional reﬁnement, increased direction toward distant, future goals and
greater overall adaptiveness and survival value.”
It is hardly an exaggeration to say that most segments of the body (and
the nervous system) participate in one or another way in the execution of
motor actions. The various agonist and antagonist muscles, joints, and ten-
dons are involved in the most direct ways. Our kinesthetic sense, which
monitors the activity of these regions, allows us to judge the timing, force,
and extent of our movements and to make necessary adjustments in the
wake of this information. Within the nervous system, large portions of
the cerebral cortex, as well as the thalamus, the basal ganglia, and the cere-
bellum, all feed information to the spinal cord, the way station en route to
the execution of action. Paradoxically, whereas the cortex serves as the
“highest” center in most forms of human activity, it is the relatively lowly
basal ganglia and the cerebellum that contain the most abstract and com-
plex forms of “representation of movements”; the motor cortex is more
directly tied to the spinal cord and the actual execution of speciﬁc mus-
cular movements.
222
The Theory

For my purposes it is not necessary to review the mass of information
that has been secured about the physical operation of the bodily-kinesthetic
systems in human beings, but it is germane to call attention to some gen-
eral principles that have emerged. To begin with, the operation of the
movement system is tremendously complex, calling upon the coordination
of a dizzying variety of neural and muscular components in a highly dif-
ferentiated and integrated fashion. For example, in the movement of the
hand to retrieve an element or to throw or catch an object, there is ex-
tremely intricate interaction between the eye and the hand, with the feed-
back from each particular movement allowing more precisely governed
subsequent motion. Feedback mechanisms are highly articulated, so that
motor movements are subjected to continuous reﬁnement and regulation
on the basis of a comparison of the intended goal state and the actual po-
sition of the limbs or body parts at a particular moment in time.
In fact, voluntary movements require perpetual comparison of in-
tended actions with the effects actually achieved: there is a continuous
feedback of signals from the performance of movements, and this feed-
back is compared with the visual or the linguistic image that is directing the
activity. By the same token, the individual’s perception of the world is it-
self affected by the status of his motor activities: information concerning
the position and status of the body itself regulates the way in which sub-
sequent perception of the world takes place. In fact, in the absence of such
feedback from motor activity, perception cannot develop in a normal way.
Much voluntary motor activity thus features the subtle interaction be-
tween perceptual and motor systems. At least some activity, however, pro-
ceeds at so rapid a clip that feedback from perceptual or kinesthetic
systems cannot be used. Particularly in the case of overlearned, automatic,
highly skilled, or involuntary activities, the whole sequence may be “pre-
programmed” so that it can unfold as a seamless unit with only the slight-
est modiﬁcations possible in light of information from the sensory systems.
Only such highly programmed sequences will allow activities of the pianist,
the typist, or the athlete, each of whom depends upon lengthy sequences
of movement that unfold at great speed. Manfred Clynes, a neuroscientist
interested in musical performance, points out:
One may decide to move a ﬁnger a distance corresponding to one inch
or two inches, or to turn the eyes to look at an object say twenty degrees
223
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

or thirty degrees to the left. In each case, the muscles start, complete
and stop the motion in a fraction of a second. . . . The movement is pre-
programmed by the brain before it begins. Once such a short movement
has begun the decision is merely executed. Within that fraction of a sec-
ond it takes to execute there is no feedback that can permit one to mod-
ify the programmed decision.
Moreover, some of these motor programs may not need to be developed:
Many motor programs are part of a primate’s genetic endowment. No
sensory feedback or spinal reﬂex loops are necessary for learning the
repertoire of movements. . . . Perceptual and motor systems are no doubt
in part “set” by the shaping effect of some aspects of the environment,
but the systems that emerge seem to be highly specialized, intrinsically
programmed in quite different ways. In short, what is taken for granted
without direct evidence in the case of physical growth on the basis of an
implicit argument from poverty of the stimulus is also being found in the
study of the brain and the nervous system. 
While much of the operation of the motor system occurs in similar fash-
ion throughout the primate order, at least one dimension of human motor
activity—and perhaps the most important—seems restricted to our
species. That is the capacity for dominance—the potential for one half of
the body (and one half of the brain) to assume the ascendancy across a
range of motor and perceptual activities. There are traces of brain lateral-
ity in higher primates: as baboons learn to carry out activities with a high
degree of ﬁnesse, one limb will tend to become dominant, playing the lead-
ing role in both gross and delicate movements, while the other assumes a
supporting role. Moreover, this division of labor will be reﬂected after brain
damage, where the “supporting hand” becomes unable to carry out what
were formerly “executive roles.” But there are apparently no tendencies
in baboons or other primates for one speciﬁc side of the brain (and the
contralateral body side) to become generally dominant. The tendency for
left hemisphere dominance in motor activity seems to be a proclivity of
human beings, no doubt at least partially under genetic control, and one
that in all likelihood is linked to language. Just as most normal individuals
will have their language capacities housed in the left hemisphere, so, too,
will the left halves of their brains be dominant for motor activity. And, again
224
The Theory

supporting the genetic argument, left-handedness (or right-brainedness for
motor activities) seems to run in families.
Buttressing my claim for a separate bodily intelligence, it turns out that
injuries to those zones of the left hemisphere that are dominant for motor
activity can produce selective impairment. Neurologists speak of the aprax-
ias, a set of related disorders in which an individual who is physically capa-
ble of carrying out a set of motor sequences, and cognitively capable of
understanding a request to do so, is nonetheless unable to carry them out
in the proper order or in a proper manner. Some apraxias of great speci-
ﬁcity have been described: for instance, there are cases of isolated dressing
apraxia (impairment in putting on a suit of clothes). More commonly, indi-
viduals exhibit limb-kinetic apraxia, where they cannot carry out a command
with either hand; ideomotor apraxia, where they clumsily execute actions
and use the body part itself as an object (for example, when pretending to
pound a nail, they will ram a ﬁst against a surface rather than represent the
absent implement in their grip); or ideational apraxia, where individuals
exhibit a special difﬁculty in running through a sequence of actions smoothly
and in the correct order. It is of some interest that these various lapses—
an inappropriate execution or an omitted action—are also found in normal
individuals, particularly when they are operating under pressure.
While these apraxias often occur in conjunction with aphasia, there is
considerable evidence that apraxia is not simply a linguistic or a symbolic
disorder. Individuals who fail to carry out commands can understand what
is called for, even as individuals with severe linguistic comprehension dis-
orders exhibit amazing preservation of the ability to execute certain kinds
of command (for example, those involving the movement of the whole
torso); moreover, a number of studies have conﬁrmed that the degree of
impairment in understanding various symbols does not correlate highly
with the ability to carry out voluntary motor actions. Finally, several re-
searchers have documented that individuals who have completely lost their
verbal memories nonetheless remain capable of learning and remember-
ing complex motor sequences and patterns of behavior (even when they
vehemently deny that they ever have encountered the sequence in ques-
tion)! All of which adds up to a picture of bodily intelligence as a realm
discrete from linguistic, logical, and other so-called higher forms of intel-
lect. There are even occasional patients, otherwise normal, who can carry
out virtually no actions at all: these are the isolated apraxics who exhibit,
in essentially pure form, an absence of bodily intelligence.
225
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

Can intelligence of the body be spared in isolated form as well? Cer-
tainly there are neuropsychological patients whose linguistic and logical
capacities have been devastated but who show little or no difﬁculty in car-
rying out highly skilled motor activities. These patients have not been
much studied, perhaps because this symptomatic picture is—to the West-
ern mind—much less surprising than the contrasting capacity to speak or
reason in the absence of motor skills. While selective preservation of motor
activities has not been much commented upon, one form of preservation
related to bodily intelligence is remarkable. Some exceptional youngsters,
such as idiots savants or autistic children, may be totally cut off from their
fellows yet show a preserved interest in, and knowledge of, bodily activi-
ties and mechanical devices. In order to evince these forms of under-
standing, it is probably essential to have preserved bodily and spatial
knowledge. The idiot savant literature includes the cases of Earl, who on
his own ﬁgured out how to make a windmill out of a clock; of Mr. A., who
was able to wire his stereo, lights, and television to a single switch; and of
another similarly impaired youth who designed and built a functional
merry-go-round. The clinical psychologist Bernard Rimland relates the
story of an autistic youth named Joe, who draws on theories of electronics
to build devices:
He recently put together a tape recorder, ﬂuorescent light and a small
transistor radio with some other components so that music from the tape
was changed to light energy in the light and then back to music in the
radio. By passing his hand between the recorder and the light, he could
stop the music. He understands the concepts of electronics, astronomy,
music, navigation, and mechanics. He knows how things work and is fa-
miliar with technical terms. By the age of 12 he could ﬁnd his way all
over the city on his bike with a map and compass. He reads Bowditch on
navigation. Joe is supposed to have an IQ of 80. He does assembly work
in a Goodwill store.
Perhaps the most famous case of this type is Joey, the “Mechanical
Boy,” described some years ago by psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim. Ac-
cording to Bettelheim’s report, Joey was an otherwise hapless autistic
youngster who displayed a special interest in machines. Not only did he
like to play with machines—taking them apart, putting them together, ma-
nipulating all manner of screws, wires, cords—but, most phenomenally,
226
The Theory

young Joey liked to pretend that he was a machine. Indeed, his reality was
one of machines. As Bettelheim describes it,
During Joey’s ﬁrst weeks with us, we watched absorbedly, for example,
as he entered the dining room. Laying down an imaginary wire he con-
nected himself with his source of electrical energy. Then he strung the
wire from an imaginary outlet to the dining room table to insulate him-
self, and then plugged himself in. (He had tried to use real wire but
this we could not allow.)
These imaginary electrical connections he had to establish before he
could eat, because only the current ran his ingestive apparatus. He per-
formed the ritual with such skill that one had to look twice to be sure
there was neither wire nor outlet nor plug. His pantomime was so
skilled, and his concentration so contagious, that those who watched
him seemed to suspend their own existence and become observers of
another reality.
By virtue of his pathetic story (happily Joey eventually improved), this
youngster demonstrates that the ability to enact and mime can exist de-
spite a profound communicative deﬁcit. He also underscores the link that
I have imputed between the capacity to use one’s body in highly skilled
ways and the understanding of machinery—for, as suggested, Joey pos-
sessed considerable understanding of the nature and operation of a vari-
ety of machines, particularly ones that feature whirling motion and
climactic destruction. Here, bodily intelligence may well be supplemented
by spatial and logical-mathematical forms of understanding.
The Evolution of Bodily Skill
How might reﬁned bodily and mechanical intelligence come about? One
set of clues derives from a study of the evolution of cognitive skills. There
is essentially no ﬂexible tool use found in animals below the primate order:
that is, lower organisms do not use different objects ﬂexibly for the pur-
pose of manipulating the environment. Rather, there is a tendency for
each species to use one or two tools, in a highly stereotypical way, with
only the appendages of the body—claws, teeth, beaks—used in an in-
strumental fashion.
227
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

Even in the lower primate orders, tool use is infrequent and not par-
ticularly generative or innovative. Often objects are thrown around during
periods of great excitement, but they are not directed toward any utilitar-
ian ends. They are, in fact, simply random components of loud and ag-
gressive agonistic displays whose purpose is to intimidate others.
Yet, evolutionary sources document that higher primates have been
using simple tools for several million years, and that chimpanzees can
achieve some impressive results. A much studied and highly suggestive ex-
ample of sophisticated primate tool use is termite ﬁshing in chimpanzees.
As described by Geza Teleki, this is an activity in which the chimpanzee
ﬁrst uses a ﬁnger or a thumb to scrape away a thin layer of soil covering the
entrance to a tunnel; then pokes an object into the mouth of the tunnel;
pauses while holding the end of the object in one hand; extracts the object
with its attached termites; and then picks off the desired termites with lips
and teeth while holding the probe in one hand and stabilizing the free end
on the other wrist.
Such termite ﬁshing is by no means an easy task. Initially the chim-
panzee must ﬁnd a tunnel. (That one is not easy to ﬁnd is conﬁrmed by
Teleki, who himself engaged in weeks of futile searching for a tunnel until
he ﬁnally opened one inadvertently.) Next the chimpanzee must select a
tool for probing. Again, it may try a number of twigs, vines, or grass stalks
before selecting an appropriate probe and, if necessary, modifying it. Mod-
iﬁcation can consist of trimming away leaves or other projections, or break-
ing or biting the probe down to suitable size. Again Teleki found that
despite months of observation and imitation, he could never reach the pro-
ﬁciency of a young chimp. In his own view:
selection proﬁciency is a learned skill which must, like tunnel-locating,
entail a considerable amount of trial-and-error behavior backed by long
term retention of the results. The retention span may actually cover the
lifetime of an individual.
In the ﬁshing stage, the chimpanzee must insert the probe to the right
depth (8 to 16 centimeters) with appropriate turns of the wrist so that the
probe can navigate the curves of the tunnel. Then the probe must be gen-
tly vibrated with the ﬁngers, enough so that the termites will bite onto the
probe, but not so much that they will bite right through it. Once they are
228
The Theory

hooked on, the probe can be extracted from the tunnel, but not too rap-
idly or clumsily lest the termites be scraped off by the tunnel wall.
Termite ﬁshing is performed differently across diverse chimpanzee
groups. Because these groups are close genetically, it is likely that the con-
trasting practices reﬂect different social customs. For example, one popu-
lation uses probes to ﬁsh inside the mound, so its probes are relatively short
and thin; a second group uses the probe to perforate the mound surface,
and so its probes must be relatively strong and rigid. Other “cultural dif-
ferences” involve the kind of material selected for the probes, whether the
tools are obtained near or far from the mound, whether one or both ends
of the probe are used, and whether the chimpanzees use a power or a pre-
cision grip on the tool.
W. C. McGrew has described the acquisition of the skills for termite
ﬁshing in the Gombe chimpanzee population in Tanzania. According to
his account, infants under the age of two will exhibit all elements of the
technique in rudimentary form; they will eat termites, poke on the mound’s
surface, modify raw materials, and the like. Between two and four years of
age, the young chimps spend considerable time climbing about termite
mounds, poking into mounds or holes, and snatching their mother’s tools.
Their sequential integration gradually improves over the period. By the age
of four, some individuals may exhibit the polished adult form of the be-
havior but still will not persist in long feeding bouts. This latter capacity de-
velops by the age of ﬁve or six.
As I have noted, it is important for the young primate to sustain a rela-
tionship with an adult ﬁgure throughout such a learning process. The young
chimpanzee or monkey observes and gains knowledge about the process
from seeing others engage in it. By contrast, primates raised with surro-
gate parents exhibit a different approach to problem solving. While wild
monkeys view the situation as a problem where some solution is possible,
surrogate-raised monkeys behave as if they lack any consistent strategy
or plan. Only naturally reared monkeys apparently understand that their
behavior has an effect on the environment, and that they can, to some ex-
tent, control events: lack of efﬁcacious models results in learned helpless-
ness. More generally, primates are much more likely to learn use of a tool
if they are situated (and play) in proximity to other individuals that are al-
ready able to accomplish desirable goals. Primates are much more likely to
emit a behavior if they have observed a conspeciﬁc carry it out, if a reward
229
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

(like food) has been obtained, or if the primate just happens to imitate the
response and ﬁnds that it leads to a desired outcome.
Authorities speculate that at least three sets of factors determine
whether a primate will be able to learn to use a tool. First of all, there is
sensory-motor maturation, necessary for skill and precision of muscle
movement. Second, there is play with environmental objects in casual or
problem-solving settings: during play, for example, the chimpanzee learns
to use a stick as a functional extension of its arm. Finally, there is response-
contingent stimulation, which teaches the young organism that its own be-
havior can, at least to some extent, control the environment.
Termite ﬁshing is among the most complex form of tool use found
among organisms outside the hominoid stock. Other forms of tool use
found among primates include the following categories: extension of the
user’s reach (for example, using a stick to reach food), ampliﬁcations of
mechanical force that the user exerts on the environment (pounding stones
to open nuts or fruits), enhancing of the user’s display behavior (for exam-
ple, brandishing a stick during displays of aggression), and increasing the
efﬁciency with which users can control ﬂuids (for example, using leaves to
sponge up water or wipe off blood). While each of these forms has deﬁnite
adaptive value, most can be arrived at largely through trial-and-error on
the part of the organism. Moreover, according to the archaeologist Alexan-
der Marshack, these activities are largely one-handed: rather than featur-
ing genuine integration of a more and a less dominant hand, they require
essentially one dominant hand, with the secondary hand being used merely
to hold or to grasp. There is little of that highly orchestrated alternation in
spacing, action, and orientation that characterizes skilled two-hand use in
human beings. Impressive as primate tool use is, it still exhibits severe lim-
itations.
Evolution of human beings over the past three or four million years can
be described in terms of the increasingly sophisticated use of tools. Two
to three million years ago, the tool use by Homo habilis represented only
a modest advance over what primates had been doing for millions of years
before. The basic tool kit at this time consisted of rounded stones that were
used to bash objects, and rough stones used for chopping. At this time,
prehistoric humans began to use stones to bash crude ﬂakes from a peb-
ble. The bashing of stones against one another—with force being trans-
mitted through such object contact—produced stone tools like scrapers
with a sharp edge that could be used for cutting. Such tools represented a
230
The Theory

genuine innovation, for early hominids could use these sharp edges to chop
hides and to butcher a carcass.
Such choppers and ﬂakes constituted the basis of tool making until
about one and one-half million years ago, when large bifaces or hand axes
began to appear. The wielder was Homo erectus, who employed these
axes for ﬁner, more powerful, and more accurate kinds of cutting and split-
ting. Over the next million years, possibly until forty or ﬁfty thousand years
ago, changes in tool use proceeded slowly and gradually. Presumably, the
procedures for making tools were passed on through visual observation
and gestural imitation, with but slight changes occurring from one gener-
ation to another. Perhaps one-half million years ago, men began to ham-
mer stone in order to make ﬁner implements; two-hundred thousand years
ago, during the Acheulian period, there was soft hammering of bone for
ﬂaking and retouching; and one hundred thousand years ago, during the
Levallois period, there was the ﬁrst striking of ﬂakes from a prepared core
stone, followed by working or touching up the ﬂakes. During this one-
million-year period, other changes were taking place in humans, as re-
ﬂected in the steadily increasing size of the brain. Fire came under
hominid control; there was collective and brutal big-game hunting, in-
cluding the massacre of large herds of elephants; and individuals erected
settlements, including not only hearths but also houses and sitting and
working areas. Still, men were probably communicating through gesture
and, possibly, simple vocalizations of an emotional sort.
By one hundred thousand years ago, Neanderthal man, fully human in
physique, had appeared in Europe. This powerful and robust individual
engaged in running and much combat, as witnessed by the large number
of broken bones and healed fractures, presumably received from spear
points during close ﬁghting. But there was a tender side to Neanderthal
as well. Skulls were placed in niches; individuals were buried, possibly in
family plots; and most poignantly, ﬂowers were placed in the graves. Here
we see what may well be the ﬁrst intimations of symbolic behavior oriented
toward speciﬁc other individuals.
The major explosion in human evolution occurred sometime in the last
fifty thousand years, probably thirty-five to forty thousand years ago at
the time of Cro-Magnon man. It is difﬁcult to avoid the speculation that
the use of productive oral-auditory languages were somehow linked to
this explosion, though whether as cause or effect (or both) it is impossible to
know. At that time, there emerged clear signs of human symbolic capacities,
231
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

including pictures (as in the splendid animals and female ﬁgures in the Pa-
leolithic caves of southern Europe), notations (as in the calendrical systems
found across Europe and Siberia), and, in all likelihood, the ritualistic dances
that are sketched on the walls of many of the caves. There was a correlative
revolution in the degree of precision of tools, as bone and stone technol-
ogy was marshaled with increasing effectiveness. In addition to utilitarian
purposes, tools were now used to decorate and, most important, to make
other tools. By this time, men had knowledge not only of a wide variety of
materials but also of diverse types and classes of tools to be made and used
for different purposes, including lances, knives, chisels, needles, and tools
for scraping, performing, whittling, serving, and pounding. The produc-
tive cycle between greater brain size (which allowed better planning and
more precise use of tools) and the devising of still better tools conferred a
decisive adaptive advantage on individuals who could fashion physical tools
and, eventually, those abstract and versatile tools called symbols.
It is almost irresistible to compare the slow evolution of tool use in pri-
mates and in hominids with the analogous though far more rapid increase
in sophistication found in normal children everywhere: provided such com-
parison is done cautiously, it can be informative. Susan Parker suggests
that the common ancestor of the great apes and humans apparently ex-
hibited those forms of intelligence, found in children aged one to four, that
allow the extraction of food with foraging tools; the descendants of the ﬁrst
hominids displayed a higher level of intelligence, found in children of four
to six, and could handle more complex tools, such as missiles for throwing
and stone tools to be manufactured, and such tasks as animal butchery,
food division, and shelter construction. One can discern a progression,
then, from the manipulation of objects, associated with the simple circular
reactions of the early sensori-motor period, to the use of tools for the at-
tainment of goals, which reﬂects the heights of sensori-motor intelligence,
to still more sophisticated capacities to use tools that produce nondirect
effects on objects, or to design new tools to meet fresh challenges.
Such a progression, observable in children and to some extent in present-
day primates, can in part be inferred from the fossil record. And it is in the
light of this recurring sequence that authorities speculate about the role
of greater overall brain size and newly emerging brain regions in produc-
ing the breakthroughs that made our species what it is. One clear differ-
ence must be noted, however. Language use begins relatively early in the
life of the young child, long before tool use has achieved a sophisticated
232
The Theory

level; this is the point where divergence from the evolutionary record is
most likely, since most authorities see the evolution of language as fol-
lowing a period characterized by considerable sophistication with tools
and by the use of gesturing and “emotional” sounds as the principal means
of communication.
The Development of 
Bodily Intelligence in the Individual
The prehistoric origins of bodily intelligence, and its relation to language
and other cognitive functions, may forever be wrapped in uncertainty; but
the development of these skills in the human beings of today is a subject
on which scientiﬁc progress can be made. Though Piaget did not himself
view his work in relation to bodily intelligence (he was interested in “head-
ier” issues!), his description of the unfolding of sensori-motor intelligence,
in fact, illuminates its initial evolution. One can see in Piaget’s description
how individuals progress from the simplest reﬂexes—such as those in-
volved in sucking and looking—to behavioral acts that fall increasingly
under the control of environmental variation and individual intentions.
One can see formerly isolated events yoked together—such as sucking and
looking, or looking and reaching—in order to obtain familiar goals. One
can see separate acts combined in novel ways in order to achieve fresh
goals—earmarks of the height of object permanence. Finally, as the child
begins to operate upon mental representations such as symbols, one can
note the same sequence of acts and operations recapitulated in a less pub-
lic arena. Tool use has now invaded the realm of “pure thought.”
A number of students of child development, among them Jerome
Bruner and Kurt Fischer, have embraced the idea that the development of
skills ought to be conceived of generally, not merely with reference to the
bodily activities of infancy but rather with respect to all manners of cogni-
tive operations. These researchers construe the development of knowledge
as a building up of more elaborated and increasingly ﬂexible skills: smoothed-
out acts themselves become the subcomponents or constituent acts of ever
higher and more complex skills. Thus, for example, the child ﬁrst combines
reaching and looking into grasping; the grasping of single objects evolves
into the passing of objects from one hand to the other; the use of sets of
objects for daily tasks is transformed into the building of simple structures;
233
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

such simple structures become combined into more elaborated displays;
and so on. Scholars who pursue the idea of knowledge-as-skill recognize
the increasing internalization of public action into private thought but in-
sist that every new skill sequence must nonetheless pass through a paral-
lel developmental sequence. In this way, they recall the approach of
Frederic Bartlett, who brooked no sharp distinction between physical ac-
tions and thinking skills; and they align themselves with contemporary stu-
dents of human performance, who focus on the development of skills like
typing, chess playing, or computer programming, and see each as mani-
festing increasing mastery of, and smoother coordination among, various
types and levels of skill.
There may well be signiﬁcant continuities between the earliest circu-
lar reactions of the infant and the much more elaborated forms of activity
that characterize the skilled juggler, typist, chess player, reader, or pro-
grammer. Yet the question must be raised whether the acquisition of sym-
bolic competence may, in fact, affect the development of bodily skill in
profound ways. When one can state a goal in words, convey instructions
verbally, criticize one’s own performance, or coach another individual, the
methods whereby skills are acquired and combined may take on a differ-
ent cast. By the same token, mastery of such symbolic functions as repre-
sentation (denoting an entity, like a person or an object) and expression
(communicating a mood, like gaiety or tragedy) provides individuals with
the option of mobilizing bodily capacities in order to communicate diverse
messages. Perhaps activities of the body operate to some degree inde-
pendently of these symbolic functions; the fact that symbolic capacities
and motor activities can be dissociated from one another as a consequence
of neurological disorders is at least suggestive evidence in this regard.
Nonetheless, it is my guess that once human symbolic functioning has be-
come a reality, the motor system becomes forever altered: the ﬂowering
of symbolization forges a major chasm between bodily intelligence as it is
practiced in humans and bodily intelligence as deployed by other animals.
An anecdote related by the neuropsychologist Edith Kaplan proves rel-
evant to this issue. As part of a test of apraxia, Kaplan asked an apraxic pa-
tient to pretend “to saw.” Afﬂicted with ideomotor apraxia, this individual
proved unable to enact the sawing motion through the representation of
the absent implement (holding his clenched hand as if there were a saw in
it): instead, in classic apraxic fashion, he treated the hand itself like a saw
(moving the edge of the open hand back and forth as if it were itself a
234
The Theory

saw blade). As Kaplan wanted to ascertain whether the patient could, in
fact, carry out the desired motion, she simply asked him to imitate a non-
representative act—in this case, that is, to oscillate his hand back and forth
as though he were holding an implement, but she did not specify what the
implement might be. The patient performed the apparently arbitrary action
in an adequate manner. Pleased with this demonstration, Kaplan declared,
“See, you’re sawing”—only to ﬁnd that the instant the morpheme “saw”
left her lips, the patient’s ﬁst opened and reverted to the edge-as-a-blade
position. Clearly, in this instance, the symbolic code (“saw”) had triumphed
over a sheer perceptual-bodily link.
Mature Forms of Bodily Expression
The Dance
Of all the uses of the body, none has reached greater heights, or has been
more variably deployed by cultures, than the dance. Following the help-
ful discussion of Judith Hanna, a careful student of this medium, we can
deﬁne dancing as culturally patterned sequences of nonverbal body move-
ments that are purposeful, intentionally rhythmic, and have aesthetic value
in the eyes of those for whom the dancer is performing. Dance goes back
many thousand of years, in all probability to Paleolithic times, for masked
dancing sorcerers and hunters are depicted in the ancient caves of Europe
and in the mountain ranges of South Africa. In fact, of all the human ac-
tivities depicted in the caves, dancing is the second most prominent, right
after hunting, with which it may well have been associated.
We do not know all the uses to which dancing has been put, but the
anthropological evidence suggests at least the following. Dance can reﬂect
and validate social organization. It can serve as a vehicle of secular or re-
ligious expression; as a social diversion or recreational activity; as a psy-
chological outlet and release; as a statement of aesthetic values or an
aesthetic value in itself; as a reﬂection of an economic subsistence pattern,
or an economic activity in itself. Dance can serve an educational purpose,
in an initiation rite, by acting out transformation through which an indi-
vidual will eventually pass; it can be used to embody the supernatural, as
when medicine men dance to invoke the spirits; it can even be used for
sexual selection, in cases where women can discriminate among men in
235
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

terms of their dance performance and endurance (in the Nuba Tira tribe
of the Sudan, young women will “throw themselves against the partners
they have chosen”). And in many cultures, dance can serve several of these
functions, either simultaneously, at different times, or in different milieus.
A feeling for some of the diverse uses of dance can be gained by com-
paring dance among the Hopi Indians of the American Southwest with
dance among Samoans in Polynesia. In both cultures, dance is important,
the extent of motion is limited, and supernatural powers are involved.
However, the aims and the character of the dance differ across these two
cultures. Among the Hopi, dance serves to maintain tribal unity, to placate
the gods, and to preserve cultural values. Men are the primary performers:
for them, dance is a duty, an obligation to the tribe. A good performer is
one who remembers the steps, dances energetically, but does not covet in-
dividual praise. In contrast, in Polynesia the dances are personalized, less
conservative, more open to improvisation. Polynesians dance to com-
memorate events, to entertain, to increase mana, and to propitiate the
gods. Both men and women, as well as children, dance; and whether some-
one becomes a dancer depends upon personal interest, skill, and family
tradition. Good performers are those who have individual style and move
well. Dance is an area where, in the face of much societal conformity, in-
dividualism is tolerated and even encouraged. One might say that among
the Hopi, dance serves as a primary area in which the culture’s values are
expressed, whereas among the Samoans, it provides a kind of counterpoint
to the customary rigor of the culture.
Given the great variety of purposes that dance can serve, it is difﬁcult
to generalize about its canonical form. Sometimes, indeed, the formal fea-
tures are less important than the surrounding ambiance or the explicit ref-
erential content. Nonetheless, certain features do appear to characterize
dance in a range of settings, and these prove most germane to a consider-
ation of how skills are embodied in this form of intelligence.
According to the American dancer and choreographer Paul Taylor, a
dancer must learn to execute a dance movement precisely in shape and
time. The dancer is concerned with placement, stage spacing, the quality
of a leap, the softness of a foot—whether a movement goes out to an au-
dience or spirals into itself. Many movements are possible, ranging from
swaying ones to those that are like a piston, from percussive ones to those
that are sustained. It is from the combination of these qualities—varied in
speed, direction, distance, intensity, spatial relations, and force—that one
236
The Theory

can discover or constitute a dance vocabulary. In addition to these rela-
tively objective features, the personality of the dancer will inevitably come
across in a performance. Traditionally, dance has dealt with the extreme
emotions, like joy and grief: but in modern dance it is now customary to at-
tempt to convey more complex emotions like guilt, anguish, or remorse,
though, as George Balanchine once remarked wittily, “It is still not possi-
ble to depict a mother-in-law in a dance.” Music is the most important part-
ner in dance, and the structure of a musical composition will strongly affect
the technique in a dance; but inasmuch as dance can also proceed without
music, the latter’s presence cannot deﬁne the dance.
So described, dance may seem a dry and relatively abstract form of
communication and expression. And indeed, it is difﬁcult to get dancers
(or even dance critics) to characterize their activity in a straightforward
and concrete way. Pioneer dancer Isadora Duncan summed it up in her
well-known remark, “If I could tell you what it is, I would not have danced
it.” Martha Graham, perhaps the premier modern dancer of the twentieth
century, has made an intriguing observation:
I have often remarked on the extreme difﬁculty of having any kind of con-
versation with most dancers which has any kind of logical cohesiveness—
their minds just jump around (maybe like my body)—the logic—such as
it is—occurs on the level of motor activity.
Nonetheless, it is typically the concrete and physical aspects of dancing,
the use of the body in all kinds of unusual but satisfying ways, that serve
initially to attract an individual to the dance. The American dancer and
choreographer José Limón recalls:
As a child in Mexico I had been fascinated—as any child would be—by
Spanish jotas, Mexican jarabes, and Indian bailes. Later, across the bor-
der, I had seen tap dancers and ballet dancers. Then pure accident
brought me to a performance by [the modern dancer] Harald Kreutz -
berg. I saw the dance as a vision of ineffable power. A man could, with
dignity and a towering majesty, dance.
Sometimes the sheer properties of one’s body serve as seducer. Nijin-
sky, arguably the greatest dancer of the twentieth century, already stood
out as a ballet student, displaying a technical virtuosity that was completely
237
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

out of the ordinary. And sometimes it is the mystery of the patterns that are
produced. Amy Greenﬁeld, a contemporary dancer, says that when she at-
tended the ballet as a child, she used to shut her eyes and imagine what
would come next. If she opened her eyes, and the dancers were where she
had imagined them to be, she won.
With males in the West, interest in dance may only emerge much later,
presumably because of the cultural taboo with respect to men dancing (Ni-
jinsky was teased for being like a girl: thus, the taboo was not absent in
Czarist Russia either!). Perhaps because of this taboo the contemporary
choreographers Eric Hawkins and Remy Charlip did not even begin to be-
come involved in dance until they were in college.
Atavistic forces underlie the creation of dance. Dancer and choreogra-
pher Alwin Nikolai gives an appealing description of how an idea becomes
a dance:
I prefer to drop a simple, single idea into my brain and let it rummage
around for several months, with no particular efforts toward conscious-
ness on my part. Then two or three weeks before I begin to choreograph,
I attempt to cast up the result of this Rorschach process. Then I like to
choreograph swiftly and within a short span of time; I feel that in this
outpouring I keep the channels of my subject open.
Another artistic performer, Donald McKayle, recalls that a childhood
memory triggered his ﬁrst dance: a street, a playground of tenement chil-
dren, ringing with calls and cries, the happy shouts of the young; then a large
and looming shadow thrown by a street lamp—the constant specter of
fear—“Chickee the cop,” and the game became a sordid dance of terror.
At an extreme, dance becomes sheer pattern. It has been said that, just
as the ballet-master Balanchine cut the bond between dance and narra-
tive, the contemporary choreographer of modern dance Merce Cunning-
ham has cut the knot between music and dance. Cunningham, in fact, is
interested in movement pure and simple; he likes to observe insects under
microscopes and animals in zoos. He is one of the prime formalists of the
dance, an inveterate investigator of how weight and force interact with
time and space, a champion of the idea that dance is an independent art
that requires no support from music, no visual background, and no plot.
His dances therefore provide an opportunity for one to observe bodily in-
telligence in its purest form, uncontaminated with representational over-
238
The Theory

lay. But dance can come in many forms. As Mikhail Baryshnikov has com-
mented: “Dancing is like many new languages, all of which expand one’s
ﬂexibility and range. The dancer, just like the language scholar, needs as
many as possible; there are never enough.”
Other Performing Roles
The Actor. While the major training in dance is the disciplined use of the
body, other roles that also exploit knowledge of the body require additional
or different skills. Ron Jenkins describes steps through which one passes
(and through which he himself passed) in becoming a Balinese clown.
First, it is necessary to achieve high technical proﬁciency in the dance and
in the wearing of the masks. These skills are usually handed down di-
rectly and personally from generation to generation, with older perform-
ers selecting apprentice-pupils as young as six-year-olds. In learning to be
a dancer, one is ﬁrst grabbed from behind and moved through the proper
shapes; in fact, one’s limbs are forcibly molded into the canonical stances.
Jenkins comments, “I was an awkward student, not nearly as supple as the
Balinese children who know the movements before studying dance as a
result of watching countless performances since infancy.” He was told,
“Don’t lift your legs so high . . . keep your elbows closer to your chest.”
Next, the newly trained dancer turns his attention to other requirements:
he must increase his knowledge of texts, of current events, drama, and of
the making and wearing of masks. Beyond these performing prerequisites,
the aspiring performer must master personal relationships, getting along
with the other individuals in the troupe, so that they can cast one in a
proper and ﬂattering role. Jenkins was ultimately given the role of an old
man, in which he could exploit his knowledge of comedy and dramatic tim-
ing while minimizing his meager movement technique—and ﬁnally, after
several months of performing, he was allowed to fashion and dramatize his
own stories. 
In all forms of performance, but particularly in acting, one’s ability to
observe carefully and then to re-create scenes in detail is at a premium.
Such mimetic ability begins very early, perhaps even in the ﬁrst days or
weeks of life; and by the age of two, every normal child is able to observe
scenes or performances by other individuals and re-create on a subsequent
occasion at least some of the highlights of the display. It is clear that some
239
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

children are much better at imitating than are others. These “born mim-
ics,” who are perhaps gifted with a high potential in the area of bodily in-
telligence, can watch a scene but once or twice and pick up the most
salient and most individuating features, while other individuals who be-
hold the same scene numerous times still prove far less accurate and acute
in their re-creations.
A strong proclivity to imitate and remember displays well may be a 
desirable or even a necessary stock-in-trade for a future performer but, in
itself, does not sufﬁce to produce memorable performances. Other intel-
lectual powers are also at a premium. The acting teacher Richard Bo -
leslavsky stresses the importance of absolute concentration, where one
directs all one’s attention, as long as one’s strength endures, toward deﬁn-
ing the desired object. The actor must try to re-create feelings with the aid
of unconscious memory:
We have a special memory for feelings which works unconsciously for
itself and by itself. . . . It is in every artist. It is that which makes expe-
rience an essential part of our life and craft. All we have to know is how
to use it. 
Boleslavsky goes on to counsel, “The gift of observation must be culti-
vated in every part of your body, not only in your sight and memory. . . .
Everything registers anatomically somewhere in my brain, and through the
practice of recalling and reenacting, I am ten times as alert as I was.”
Another master acting teacher, Constantin Stanislavski, also under-
scores the crucial role of emotions in the performance of the actor. The
actor must feel the emotion not merely at the time when he is studying
the part, but at every time that he is performing it. Stanislavski sees training
as a technique for putting the performer into a creative state where the
subconscious can function naturally. In his view, such technique bears 
the same relation to our subconscious creative nature as grammar does to
the composition of poetry. As he puts it:
Some musicians have a power to reconstruct sounds inwardly. They play
over in their minds an entire symphony they have just heard. . . . Some
painters possess the power of inner vision to such a degree that they can
paint portraits of people they have seen but who are no longer alive. . . .
Actors have this same kind of power of sight and sound.
240
The Theory

On the other hand, some acting techniques deemphasize the need to
re-create the felt mood, and stress instead attention to surface details. In
the terms of this study, I might suggest that an “emotion-centered” acting
technique highlights the intrapersonal intelligence while the latter “sur-
face” form mobilizes interpersonal intelligence.
For many analysts, the ability to watch, to observe keenly, to imitate, and
re-create is central in all performing arts. According to John Martin, a stu-
dent of performance, we are all equipped with a sixth sense of kinesthesis—
the capacity to act gracefully and to apprehend directly the actions or the
dynamic abilities of other people or objects. Martin claims that this process
comes to occur automatically. Thus, when we pick up an object that we
have not lifted before, we draw on muscle memories of lifting objects of
similar bulk and density as a natural mode of anticipating what our body
will have to perform. Past experiences of lifting are symbolized in a kines-
thetic language, which is drawn on directly by the body, without the need
for any other symbolic intervention. By the same token, when we see
someone sucking a lemon, we are likely to feel a distinct activity in the
mouth and throat as if we were tasting the acid; or when someone cries,
we frequently feel a lump rising in our throats.
Martin believes that it is our capacity involuntarily to mimic, to go
through the experiences and feelings of others, which allows us to under-
stand and also to participate in art forms. He declares:
It is the dancer’s whole function to lead us into imitating his actions with
our faculty for inner mimicry in order that we may experience his feel-
ings. Facts he could tell us, but feelings he cannot convey in any other
way than by arousing them in us through sympathetic action.
By the same token, in looking at architecture, we decide whether a pro-
portion is acceptable according to whether we feel in our bodies the mass
is supportable by the columns in question or is too heavy for them: “The
building becomes for the moment a kind of replica of ourselves and we
feel any undue strains as if they were in our bodies.”
If Martin is right, and imitation is the central component of kinesthetic
thought, then imitative teaching and learning may be the most appropri-
ate way to impart skill in this domain. As we have seen, such methods are
sometimes used directly, as in the training of Balinese clowns. Cultural an-
thropologist Ruth Benedict noted that, in Japan,
241
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

in the traditional teaching of writing . . . the instructor took the child’s
hand and made the ideographs. It was to “give him the feel.” The child
learned to experience the controlled, rhythmic movements before he
could recognize the characters, much less write them. . . . The bow, 
the handling of the chopsticks, shooting an arrow, or tying a pillow on
the back in lieu of a baby may all be taught by moving the child’s hand
and physically placing his body in the correct position.
Similarly, at Balinese cockﬁghts, the spectators’ hands often mimic the
movements of the ﬁght so closely that one can follow the action just by
watching the hands in the air. The fact that some individuals prove skilled
at this kind of learning, but that it is accorded a low priority, may help ex-
plain why many promising young performers and dancers in our culture
become alienated from school at an early age. If anything, the ability to
mimic, to imitate faithfully, is often considered a kind of arrogance or a
failure to understand, rather than the exercise of another form of cognition
that can be highly adaptive.
The interpretation of keen mimetic skill as a failure to understand is,
however, not necessarily entirely wrong. A number of comedians who later
went on to achieve great success have indicated that their initial impetus
for imitating (and making fun of) the teacher came from their genuine dif-
ﬁculties in understanding the point of lessons that they were supposed 
to be mastering. To be sure, such actors and humorists eventually go on to
create full-bodied characters. They do so by ﬁlling in superﬁcial outlines
of a character; by developing the various situations in which the character
customarily ﬁnds himself; by touching on the various proclivities, abilities,
and deﬁcits of that particular persona himself and, in its highest realiza-
tion, of all humans. It is through such a process that the great silent clowns
of the past—Chaplin, Lloyd, and Keaton—may have passed; and this process
may also characterize such contemporary masters of humorous character-
izations as Lily Tomlin, Johnny Carson, or Woody Allen.
As we encroach on this fascinating and still dimly understood area, it is
worth reminding ourselves that humor and jokes are the exclusive property
of human beings. While it is certainly possible to make nonverbal jokes
and to act out humorous scenes without words, there is so far no convinc-
ing evidence that this sensibility is shared with any other animals. It is
tempting to relate humor in part to the mimetic activity on which it fre-
quently (and successfully) draws. Yet this cannot be the whole story, since
242
The Theory

other primates are certainly able to imitate behavioral sequences; and, in
fact, humans often ﬁnd chimpanzee and other primate imitations very
funny. Perhaps it is in the perception (rather than the creation) of these
mimetic sequences, and in the perception of their afﬁnity to (and depar-
ture from) the original model display, that a key component of the humor
response lies. While other primates are horriﬁed by events or scenes that
imitate the familiar but are in some way deviant, they do not—so far as we
are aware—become amused by our imitating aspects of their experiences,
nor do they ﬁnd such mimicry by conspeciﬁcs to be funny. Possibly the
fact that the previous experience is being commented upon makes it alien
to animals other than the human being—sometimes called, seriously, the
laughing animal.
The Athlete. The dancer and the actor are but two roles in our culture that
highlight the intelligence of the body. Others have also been greatly valued
by the society. The athlete’s ability to excel in grace, power, speed, accu-
racy, and teamwork not only provides a source of pleasure to the athlete
himself but also serves, for countless observers, as a means of entertain-
ment, stimulation, and release. 
According to B. Lowe, an observer of sports, certain features typically
characterize the talented baseball pitcher. There is control—the ability to
throw the ball just where one wants it. There is craft—the knowledge that
comes with experience, analytic power, skillful observation, and resource-
fulness. There is poise—the ability to apply craft under great pressure and
to produce when the need is most pronounced. And there is “stuff”—
Stuff is the physical element: how hard can he throw, how big is the break
on his curve? Stuff is the product of strength and exceptional hair-trigger
coordination and seems to be an innate quality, perhaps improvable by
practice and technique but not acquirable.
Obviously, bodily endowment is important in these areas. In baseball,
for example, the pitcher should be tall, weigh about 240 pounds, and have
the speed of a sprinter; an ideal hitter should be cross-dominant, having the
dominant eye on the opposite side of the body from the dominant hand to
obtain a view of the pitch unobstructed by his nose. Athletes in other sports
also beneﬁt from optimal sizes and physical prowess. Less likely to be a
part of one’s birthright is a well-developed sense of timing: the sense of
243
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

coordination and rhythm that leads to well-executed and powerful mo-
tions. The champion golfer Jack Nicklaus describes this kinesthetic sense:
Feeling the weight of the clubhead against the tension of the shaft helps
me to swing rhythmically. As the backswing progresses I like to feel that
clubhead’s weight pulling my hands and arms back and up. Starting down
I like to feel the weight of the clubhead lagging back—resisting, as my
thrusting legs and hips pull my arms and hands down. When I can “wait”
for these feelings, I am almost certainly swinging in proper tempo. I am
giving myself enough elapsed time to make all the various moves in
rhythmical sequence.
While one’s sense of timing may seem a direct consequence of one’s
bodily intelligence, craft may well draw on other intellectual strengths.
There is the logical ability to plot a good strategy, the capacity to recog-
nize familiar spatial patterns and to exploit them on the spot, and an in-
terpersonal sense of the personality and the motivation of other players in
a game. A description of the hockey player Wayne Gretzky conveys some
of these components of craft:
In front of the net, eyeball to eyeball with the goalie, he will . . . hold the
puck one . . . extra instant, upsetting the rhythm of the game and of the
goalie’s anticipation. . . . Or, in the heat of play, he will release a pass be-
fore he appears ready to do so, threading it through a maze of players
who are a beat behind him. . . . If there is such a thing as sleight of body
he performed it. . . . He sends a pass into a spot behind Goring. Nobody
is there yet to receive the puck—but suddenly a teammate arrives to ac-
cept it. What seems like either luck or magic is neither. Given the prob-
able movements of the other players, Gretzky knows exactly where his
teammate is supposed to be.
While some commentators might think that Gretzky’s achievements
were effortlessly attained, he himself disagrees:
Nine out of ten people think what I do is instinct. . . . It isn’t. Nobody
would ever say a doctor had learned his profession by instinct: yet in my
own way I’ve spent almost as much time studying hockey as a med stu-
dent puts in studying medicine.
244
The Theory

In our culture, the professional athlete is trained in much the same way
as an artistic performer and is, in fact, subjected to many of the same pres-
sures and opportunities. Given the highly competitive environment, the
achievement of excellence in athletics proves sufﬁciently elusive that most
individuals end up as spectators.
The Inventor. Our discussion of bodily intelligence has focused on capac-
ities that highlight the use of the body per se, with relatively little empha-
sis on the use of the body, and particularly of the hands, with other
materials. Yet, as we have seen, the development of the capacity to manu-
facture and transform objects, both directly with one’s body and through
the use of tools, has been especially characteristic of the human species. 
Work with relatively small physical objects constitutes a major part of
the occupational roles of a great variety of individuals. Most workers deal
with one or another kind of object, whether they are hunting, planting,
farming, cooking, or toiling in a factory. Sometimes such manipulation
of objects becomes routine, while at other times a considerable amount of
creativity may be involved. In fact, the engineer, the technician, or the in-
ventor does not merely use materials in culturally established ways but ac-
tually rearranges materials in order to create an object better ﬁtted to the
task that he is confronting.
We return to a question I raised earlier. Do such uses of objects and
tools in general, and the devising of new inventions in particular, fall within
the purview of bodily intelligence, or are they better viewed through the
lens of some other intellectual competence or, perhaps, as an amalgam of
several intelligences? In my own view, ﬁne motor bodily intelligence, in
combination with spatial capacities, is most strongly entailed in the use of
objects and tools. Particularly during the initial use of an object or a tool,
the individual should carefully coordinate the information that he can as-
similate through his spatial intelligence with the capacities that he has elab-
orated through his bodily intelligence. Conﬁned to spatial intelligence, he
may understand a mechanism reasonably well and yet have no idea of how
actually to manipulate or operate the object in which it is housed; restricted
to bodily intelligence, he may be able to execute the appropriate motions
yet fail to appreciate the way in which the apparatus or the procedure
works and therefore be stymied should he encounter it in a somewhat dif-
ferent setting, format, or situation. Conceptualizing how an object should
work is most likely to succeed if the individual has a feeling for the activity
245
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

of each of its parts and the capacity to envision how they will coordinate
within a single mechanism.
When it comes not merely to understanding complex tools or machin-
ery but also to the devising of new inventions, a combination of several in-
telligences is clearly desirable. In addition to that fusion of bodily and
spatial intelligences that may sufﬁce for understanding a common appara-
tus, the individual will have to use as well his logical-mathematical capac-
ities in order to ﬁgure out the precise demands of the task, the procedures
that could in principle work, and the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
for the desired product. To the extent that the individual relies on trial and
error or approaches the task as an improvising handyman or, to use Lévi-
Strauss’s term, bricoleur, the use of logical-mathematical reasoning will be
less crucial.
One can see the role of sheer deduction in invention by considering
how John Arnold of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology goes about
making a new kind of printing device. Rather than simply building up from
printing devices that already exist, he tries to ﬁgure out the strictest set of
constraints on his product. He concludes that what is basic to any printing
device is that it conveys information, transfers it from one form or place to
another, renders it visual, and makes multiple copies of the rendering. This
analysis is pertinent whether one employs electronic means, photostatic
copying, or more traditional ink-type plates and roller. Certainly such an
approach, which is remote from that of the handyman, relies heavily on
logical-mathematical capacities.
And what of the developmental links between a child’s early preoccu-
pations and eventual inventiveness in a highly valued contemporary occu-
pation like engineering? An intriguing set of clues can be found in Tracy
Kidder’s account of those “whiz-kids” who build new computer hardware.
In the case of several of these talented inventors, much time during child-
hood was spent in the taking apart of mechanical objects. Describing one
such worker, Kidder notes, “Like practically everyone else on the team, he
started becoming an engineer at about the age of four, picking on ordinary
household items such as lamps and clocks and radios. He took them apart
whenever his parents weren’t looking.” This future engineer did not do
well in high school or college until he took a course in basic electronics. “I
totally crushed [did extremely well in] the course,” he remembered. An-
other member of the computer team was very depressed in school until
he discovered that he could take a telephone apart: “This was a fantastic
246
The Theory

high, something I could get absorbed in and forget that I had other social
problems.” Such biographical accounts indicate that an interest in manip-
ulation, in putting together (or taking apart), and in the eventual reassem-
bly of objects may play an important formative role in the development of
an engineer; such activity may also provide a needed island of reinforce-
ment for an individual who shows scant interest (or skill) in other domains
of experience.
Bodily Intelligence in Other Cultures
In our own cultural history, we must go back to Greek times to ﬁnd a mo-
ment “where the human body was considered beautiful, a worthy and
loved and equal partner with the soul-mind.” In many other cultures, how-
ever, the whole area of bodily expression and knowledge continues to as-
sume great importance. Among the Ibo peoples in Nigeria, the strong
bodies needed for arduous dancing develop because all individuals travel
long distances in great heat, bend to fetch water, wash in a stream, culti-
vate crops, squat to defecate, and carry heavy loads on the head. Already
at an early age, young children begin to participate in such family chores
as yam pounding, wood chopping, and transporting heavy burdens. An in-
dividual’s dance practice begins in his mother’s womb, then on her back as
she dances. Even before he can walk, the child is encouraged to dance,
and youngsters regularly practice. Among the Anang peoples in Nigeria,
every individual is expected to be able to dance and sing well, to carve and
to weave. The Anang recognize that a very few individuals may have tal-
ents superior to their fellows, but they ﬁrmly believe that no one lacks the
requisite abilities to achieve in these aesthetic domains. As anthropologist
John Messenger indicates, “It is obvious that, to the Anang, talent implies
the possession of certain capabilities which anyone can develop if he sets
out to do so.”
Dissemination of demanding bodily skills occurs quite widely in other
societies. In Growing Up in New Guinea, Margaret Mead relates that
every young Manus baby is taken out in a canoe by its mother. If a sudden
wind comes, the canoe may swerve and eject mother and child into the
sea. The baby has learned how to grip tight, however, and so will not be lost
in the sea. By the age of ﬁve or six, the child will be able to balance him-
self and punt the canoe with accuracy, paddle enough to steer through a
247
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence

mild gale, run the canoe accurately under a house without jamming the
outrigger, extricate a canoe from a large group of canoes huddled closely
together, and bale out a canoe by dipping the bow and stern alternately.
Understanding of the sea also includes swimming, diving, proceeding
under water, and knowing how to get water out of the nose and throat. The
kind of prowess that is possessed by only a tiny minority of seafaring West-
ern children is considered within the competence of the average child in
this tribal society.
Bali is perhaps the most outstanding example of a society where indi-
viduals devote care to their bodies and end up as graceful, artful individ-
uals. Everyone in this society learns to focus attention on bodily features:
Learning to walk, learning the ﬁrst appropriate gestures of playing mu-
sical instruments, learning to eat and to dance are all accomplished with
the teacher behind the pupil, conveying directly by pressure, and almost
always with a minimum of words, the gesture to be performed. Under
such a system of learning, one can only learn if one is completely relaxed.
The Balinese learn virtually nothing from verbal instruction.
Out of this kinesthetic awareness eventually emerges a well-developed
sense of balance and ﬁne motor control:
Balinese children spend a great deal of time playing with the joints of
their ﬁngers. . . . Where an American or a New Guinea native will in-
volve almost every muscle in his body to pick up a pin, the Balinese
merely uses the muscle immediately relevant to the act, leaving the rest
of the body undisturbed. . . . The involved muscle does not draw all the
others into a uniﬁed act but smoothly and simply a few small units are
moved—the ﬁngers alone, the hand and forearm alone, or the eyes
alone as in the characteristic Balinese habit of slewing the eyes to one
side without turning the head. . . . [The Balinese] body ﬂawlessly and
quickly attends to the job in hand.
This concern with grace can be found in other contemporary lands—
for instance, in India, where awkwardness is virtually a sign of immaturity;
in Japan, where the tea ceremony or ﬂower arrangement reﬂect a perva-
sive concern with delicate form and patterning; and perhaps most fully in
Zen Buddhist enclaves, where the reigning desire is to exceed the ordi-
248
The Theory

nary limits of one’s bodily potential. Whatever the reason, the fact that a
Zen master can break bricks barehand or walk on burning coals—more
broadly, the master’s belief that he can translate an intention directly into
action—deserves to be marveled at, even if (or just because) it deﬁes the
canons of current scientiﬁc explanation.
The Body as Subject and Object
While I have considered a variety of uses to which individuals put their
bodily intelligence, the focus in this chapter has been on the body as an
object. We have seen how dancers and athletes use their entire bodies as
“mere” objects, and noted how inventors and other workers use parts of the
body—particularly hands—in order to manipulate, arrange, and transform
objects in the world. Described in this vein, bodily intelligence completes
a trio of object-related intelligences: logical-mathematical intelligence,
which grows out of the patterning of objects into numerical arrays; spatial
intelligence, which focuses on the individual’s ability to transform objects
within his environment and to make his way amidst a world of objects in
space; and, bodily intelligence, which, focusing inward, is limited to the
exercise of one’s own body and, facing outward, entails physical actions on
the objects in the world.
But the body is more than simply another machine, indistinguishable
from the artiﬁcial objects of the world. It is also the vessel of the individ-
ual’s sense of self, his most personal feelings and aspirations, as well as that
entity to which others respond in a special way because of their uniquely
human qualities. From the very ﬁrst, an individual’s existence as a human
being affects the way that others will treat him; and very soon, the indi-
vidual comes to think of his own body as special. He comes to form a sense
of self that he will perpetually modify, and that will in turn come to inﬂu-
ence his thoughts and behavior as he comes to respond to others in his en-
vironment in terms of their special traits and behavior. While still poorly
understood, the realm of the personal intelligences is clearly of utmost im-
portance to humans, the site of our most awesome accomplishments as
well as of our most terrifying tendencies. To this Janus-headed variety of
intelligence—partly mired within the inner emotional-affective sphere,
partly peering outward to the circle of other people—we must now shift
our gaze.
249
Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence


251
10
The Personal 
Intelligences
Introduction: The Sense of Self
In 1909, G. Stanley Hall, the psychologist-president of Clark University,
invited Sigmund Freud and a few of his colleagues to the United States to
deliver some introductory lectures on the recently devised theory of psy-
choanalysis. It was the ﬁrst (and, as it turned out, the only) time that Freud
traveled to America, and interest in his new theory and method of treat-
ment was keen. Freud presented a masterful set of lectures on the Ori-
gins and Development of Psychoanalysis, a series that introduced his then
controversial theory of the human personality and helped to further the
cause of psychoanalysis in the United States, though it left the mainstream
psychological establishment, which was about to take a radical behaviorist
turn, completely unmoved. With one exception. From Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, William James, dean of American psychologists and philoso-
phers, already elderly and ill, made the day-long journey to Worcester to
hear Freud and to meet the younger scholar from Austria. After the lec-
ture, James went up to Freud and said simply, “The future of psychology
belongs to your work.” Historian of social science H. Stuart Hughes has
commented, “There is no more dramatic moment in the intellectual his-
tory of our time.”
Freud and James represented different historical movements, different
philosophical traditions, different programs for psychology. Freud, the pes-
simistic European intellectual, had chosen to focus on the development
of the individual psyche, its battles within the individual’s immediate 

family, the struggle for independence, and the manifold anxieties and de-
fenses that attend the human condition. For Freud the key to health was
self-knowledge and a willingness to confront the inevitable pains and para-
doxes of human existence.
James had considerable sympathy with this analysis, for his own life had
featured many of the strains and tensions that Freud graphically described.
Yet James also sensed a difference in the emphasis in their respective
worldviews. While praising Freud, he had also pointed out to a conﬁdant,
“I hope that Freud and his pupils will push their ideas to the utmost lim-
its, so that we can learn what they are. . . . It reveals an entirely unsus-
pected peculiarity in the constitution of human nature.” James, in fact, had
chosen to embrace a more positively oriented form of psychology, one less
circumscribed by the biological imperatives of behavior, more open to the
possibilities of change and growth. More so than his Austrian counterpart,
the American thinker stressed the importance of relationships with other
individuals, as a means of gaining ends, of effecting progress, and of know-
ing oneself. In a famous phrase, he had commented, “A man has as many
social selves as there are individuals who recognize him and carry an image
around of him in their mind.” Perhaps most important, James was a po-
tent inﬂuence on the succeeding generation of social scientists, including
James Mark Baldwin and George Herbert Mead, who came to focus on
the social origins of knowledge and on the interpersonal nature of an in-
dividual’s sense of self.
But what united Freud and James, and what set them apart from the
mainstream of psychology both on the Continent and in the United States,
was a belief in the importance, the centrality, of the individual self—a con-
viction that psychology must be built around the concept of the person,
his personality, his growth, his fate. Moreover, both scholars deemed the
capacity for self-growth to be an important one, upon which depended
the possibility of coping with one’s surroundings. While neither would have
used the phrase, I ﬁnd it reasonable to say that both of these redoubtable
psychologists were sympathetic to the idea of “personal intelligences.” At
the same time, however, their orientations toward such intelligences would
have differed. Freud was interested in the self as located in the individual
and, as a clinician, was preoccupied with an individual’s own knowledge of
himself; given this bias, a person’s interest in other individuals was justiﬁed
chieﬂy as a better means of gaining further understanding of one’s own
problems, wishes, and anxieties and, ultimately, of achieving one’s goals.
252
The Theory

In contrast, James’s interest, and, even more so, the interests of the
American social psychologists who succeeded him, fell much more on
the individual’s relationship to the outside community. Not only did one’s
knowledge of self come largely from an ever-increasing appreciation of
how others thought about the individual, but the purpose of self-knowledge
was less to promote one’s personal agenda and more to ensure the smooth
functioning of the wider community.
In this chapter, I shall examine the development of both of these as-
pects of human nature. On the one side, there is the development of the
internal aspects of a person. The core capacity at work here is access to
one’s own feeling life—one’s range of affects or emotions: the capacity in-
stantly to effect discriminations among these feelings and, eventually, to
label them, to enmesh them in symbolic codes, to draw upon them as a
means of understanding and guiding one’s behavior. In its most primitive
form, the intrapersonal intelligence amounts to little more than the ca-
pacity to distinguish a feeling of pleasure from one of pain and, on the basis
of such discrimination, to become more involved in or to withdraw from a
situation. At its most advanced level, intrapersonal knowledge allows one
to detect and to symbolize complex and highly differentiated sets of feel-
ings. One ﬁnds this form of intelligence developed in the novelist (like
Proust) who can write introspectively about feelings, in the patient (or the
therapist) who comes to attain a deep knowledge of his own feeling life,
and in the wise elder who draws upon his own wealth of inner experiences
in order to advise members of his community.
The other personal intelligence turns outward, to other individuals. The
core capacity here is the ability to notice and make distinctions among
other individuals and, in particular, among their moods, temperaments,
motivations, and intentions. Examined in its most elementary form, the in-
terpersonal intelligence entails the capacity of the young child to discrim-
inate among the individuals around him and to detect their various moods.
In an advanced form, interpersonal knowledge permits a skilled adult to
read the intentions and desires—even when these have been hidden—of
many other individuals and, potentially, to act upon this knowledge—for
example, by inﬂuencing a group of disparate individuals to behave along
desired lines. We see highly developed forms of interpersonal intelligence
in political and religious leaders (a Mahatma Gandhi or a Lyndon John-
son), in skilled parents and teachers, and in individuals enrolled in the
helping professions, be they therapists, counselors, or shamans.
253
The Personal Intelligences

More so than in other realms, one encounters a tremendous variety of
forms of interpersonal and intrapersonal intelligence. Indeed, just because
each culture has its own symbol systems, its own means for interpreting
experiences, the “raw materials” of the personal intelligences quickly get
marshaled by systems of meaning that may be quite distinct from one an-
other. Accordingly, while the forms of spatial or bodily-kinesthetic intelli-
gence are readily identiﬁed and compared across diverse cultures, the
varieties of personal intelligence prove much more distinctive, less com-
parable, perhaps even unknowable to someone from an alien society.
Even as the symbolization and enculturation of personal intelligences
takes many forms, there are also numerous varieties of breakdowns and
pathologies. Indeed, breakdown of the personal intelligences necessarily
takes different forms, depending on the “normal blend” within each cul-
ture: what might be pathological in one setting can be deemed normal in
another. Moreover, rather than simply declining in acuity, an intelligence
often assumes aberrant and pathological forms, as inappropriate distinc-
tions are made and acted upon. In one sense, this is analogous to what hap-
pens in the language domain when individuals suffer from different
aphasias: yet for the analogy to be completely valid, the forms of aphasia
would have to differ strikingly across cultures.
In view of such distinctions between personal and other forms of in-
telligence, a question may appropriately be raised: Are the intrapersonal
and interpersonal forms of knowing comparable to those faculties of mu-
sical, linguistic, or spatial intelligence that have been reviewed in earlier
chapters, or has some classiﬁcatory error been committed?
In tackling this question, it is important not to gloss over differences
between the personal and other forms of intelligence. We have already in-
dicated some. The “natural course” of the personal intelligences is more at-
tenuated than that of other forms, inasmuch as the particular symbolic and
interpretive systems of each culture soon come to impose a decisive col-
oring on these latter forms of information processing. Also, as I have noted,
the patterns of development and of breakdown in the personal intelli-
gences turn out to be far more varied than in other intelligences; and there
is an especially wide range of end-states.
I have also intimated another difference. Whereas each of our other
intelligences has been comfortably discussed independently of the others, I
have here linked two forms of intelligence. To be sure, each form has its
own pull, with the intrapersonal intelligence involved chieﬂy in an indi-
254
The Theory

* But not by all: the redoubtable student of intelligence David Wechsler wrote many
years ago about social intelligence.
vidual’s examination and knowledge of his own feelings while the inter-
personal intelligence looks outward, toward the behavior, feelings, and 
motivations of others. Moreover, as we shall see, each form has its charac-
teristic neurological representation and pattern of breakdown. The reason,
then, for treating these together is chieﬂy expositional. In the course of de-
velopment, these two forms of knowledge are intimately intermingled in
any culture, with knowledge of one’s own person perennially dependent
upon the ability to apply lessons learned from the observation of other peo-
ple, while knowledge of others draws upon the internal discriminations the
individual routinely makes. Our two forms of personal intelligence could,
in fact, be described separately; but to do so would involve unnecessary
duplication as well as artiﬁcial separation. Under ordinary circumstances,
neither form of intelligence can develop without the other.
Other differences surrounding the personal intelligences should be
mentioned. For one thing, the sanctions surrounding pathologies in these
areas tend to be far stronger than those that greet disorders of the other
intelligences. For another, the premium for acting upon one’s particular
personal intelligence is far greater. While the decision to employ (or not to
employ) one’s musical or spatial intelligence is not heavily charged, the
pressures to employ one’s personal intelligences are acute: it is the unusual
individual who does not try to deploy his understanding of the personal
realm in order to improve his own well-being or his relationship to the
community. There is, of course, no guarantee that his form of personal in-
telligence will prove adequate to this task, or that he will be able to achieve
what he wants. Forms of personal intelligences, no less than forms of other
intelligences, can misﬁre or fail in their intent, and “know-that” does not
readily or reliably translate into “know-how.”
Given such differences, why have I incorporated personal intelligences
in my survey? Chieﬂy because I feel that these forms of knowledge are of
tremendous importance in many, if not all, societies in the world—forms
that have, however, tended to be ignored or minimized by nearly all stu-
dents of cognition.* It is not relevant to my inquiry to explore the reasons
for this omission. But whatever the reasons, this omission has spawned a
view of intellect that is all too partial and makes it difﬁcult to understand
the goals of many cultures and the ways in which these goals are achieved.
255
The Personal Intelligences

Moreover, according to our original list of criteria, the personal intelli-
gences pass muster rather well. As I have already intimated, there is an
identiﬁable core to each, a characteristic pattern of development, and a
number of speciﬁable end-states, as well as impressive evidence for neu-
rological representation and for discernible patterns of breakdown. Evo-
lutionary evidence is beginning to come forth, and there is good reason to
anticipate that we will eventually understand a great deal about the phy-
logenetic origins of these intelligences. Evidence for exceptional individ-
uals—prodigies or freaks in the personal realms—is less persuasive but by
no means lacking. There is less of relevance in the realms of experimental
psychology and psychological testing than would be desirable, but this lack
is more likely due to the reluctance of “hard-nosed” psychologists to in-
vestigate this area than it is due to insuperable difﬁculties in assessing these
forms of knowledge. Last, while one does not ordinarily think of forms of
personal knowledge as being encoded in public symbol systems, I deem
symbolization to be of the essence in the personal intelligences. Without
a symbolic code supplied by the culture, the individual is confronted with
only his most elementary and unorganized discrimination of feelings: but
armed with such a scheme of interpretation, he has the potential to make
sense of the full range of experiences that he and others in his community
can undergo. In addition, it seems legitimate to construe rituals, religious
codes, and mythic and totemic systems as symbolic codes that capture and
convey crucial aspects of personal intelligence.
As we shall see, an emerging sense of self proves to be a key element
in the realm of the personal intelligences, one of overriding importance to
individuals the world over. While a developed sense of self is ordinarily
viewed as a quintessential manifestation of intrapersonal intelligence, my
own inquiry has led to a different conclusion. The wide variety of “selves”
encountered throughout the world suggests that this “sense” is better
thought of as an amalgam, one that emerges from a combination or fusion
of one’s intrapersonal and one’s interpersonal knowledge. The over-
whelming differences in senses of self around the world reﬂect the fact
that the merger can come about in widely divergent ways, depending on
those aspects of the person (and of persons) that happen to be accentu-
ated in different cultures. Accordingly, in what follows, I shall use the term
sense of self to refer to the balance struck by every individual—and every
culture—between the promptings of “inner feelings” and the pressures of
“other persons.”
256
The Theory

Allusion to sense of self suggests a reason that researchers may have
hesitated to construe the personal intelligences in cognitive form. A de-
veloped sense of self often appears as the highest achievement of human
beings, a crowning capacity that supersedes and presides over other more
mundane and partial forms of intelligence. It is also that capacity about
which individuals have the strongest and most intimate views; thus it be-
comes a sensitive (as well as an elusive) target to examine. Difﬁculty of
study and a high degree of personal involvement are not, of course, valid
reasons to avert the scrutiny of scientiﬁc investigation. And it is my hope
that, through the kinds of investigation launched in this chapter, one can
see that the sense of self, while marvelous, is not immune from study. In-
stead, it can be traced to two forms of intelligence that every human being
has the opportunity to develop and to merge.
In the last analysis, the personal intelligences amount to information-
processing capacities—one directed inward, the other outward—that are
available to every human infant as part of its species birthright. This fact
of life dictates an examination of personal intelligences. The capacity to
know oneself and to know others is as inalienable a part of the human con-
dition as is the capacity to know objects or sounds, and it deserves to be in-
vestigated no less than these other “less charged” forms. Personal
intelligences may not prove completely cognate with the forms of intelli-
gence we have already encountered—but as I pointed out at the start of
this inquiry, there is no reason to expect that any pair of intelligences will
be completely comparable. What is important is that they should be part
of the human intellectual repertoire, and that their origins should take
roughly comparable form the world over.
The Development of the Personal Intelligences
Various forms of personal intelligence clearly arise, in the ﬁrst instance,
from the bond between the infant and its caretaker—in almost all cases,
the infant and its mother. Evolutionary and cultural history have combined
to make this attachment link an indispensable component of normal
growth. During the ﬁrst year of life, the child comes to form a potent tie
to the mother, aided by the equally strong attraction that the mother feels
toward her offspring. And it is in these strong ties—and the feelings that
accompany them—that the origins of personal knowledge can be found.
257
The Personal Intelligences

For a year or so, the tie is at maximum strength, so that the child be-
comes disturbed when he is suddenly separated from his mother, or when
a strange adult is seen as threatening the bond. The child seeks to main-
tain the positive feeling of well-being and to avoid situations of pain or anx-
iety. Then gradually the link becomes looser and more ﬂexible, as the child
ventures forth from home base, now secure in the knowledge that he can
return to ﬁnd the mother there (and thereby regain feelings of belonging).
If for some reason the bond is not permitted to form properly, or if it is
broken abruptly and not soon repaired, profound difﬁculties are signaled
for the child. We know both from Harry Harlow’s work with motherless
monkeys and from John Bowlby’s studies of institutionalized infants that
the lack of an attachment bond can wreak devastating effects on normal
development in the present and in succeeding generations. Especially im-
portant for our purposes, the absence of such a bond signals difﬁculty for
an individual’s eventual ability to know other persons, to rear offspring,
and to draw upon this knowledge as he comes to know himself. Thus, the
initial tie between infant and caretaker may be looked on as Nature’s effort
to ensure that the personal intelligences are properly launched.
One can divide the growth of personal knowledge into a number of
steps or stages. At each step, it is possible to identify certain features that
are important for the development of intrapersonal intelligence, as well as
other factors that prove crucial for the growth of interpersonal intelligence.
The portrait to be given here necessarily focuses on the development of
personal intelligences within the context of our own society, for it is chieﬂy
this trajectory that has so far been studied. Only later will I be able to touch
on some of the features that may characterize personal intelligences in
other cultures.
The Infant
Though there is no way to place oneself within the infant’s skin, it seems
likely that, from the earliest days of life, all normal infants experience a
range of feelings, a gamut of affects. Observation of infants within and
across cultures and comparison of their facial expressions with those of
other primates conﬁrm that there is a set of universal facial expressions,
displayed by all normal children. The most reasonable inference is that
there are bodily (and brain) states associated with these expressions, with
258
The Theory

infants experiencing phenomenally a range of states of excitement and of
pleasure or pain. To be sure, these states are initially uninterpreted: the
infant has no way of labeling to himself how he is feeling or why he is feel-
ing this way. But the range of bodily states experienced by the infant—the
fact that he feels, that he may feel differently on different occasions, and
that he can come to correlate feelings with speciﬁc experiences—serves to
introduce the child to the realm of intrapersonal knowledge. Moreover,
these discriminations also constitute the necessary point of departure for
the eventual discovery that he is a distinct entity with his own experiences
and his unique identity.
Even as the infant is coming to know his own bodily reactions, and to
differentiate them one from another, he is also coming to form prelimi-
nary distinctions among other individuals and even among the moods dis-
played by “familiar” others. By two months of age, and perhaps even at
birth, the child is already able to discriminate among, and imitate the fa-
cial expressions of, other individuals. This capacity suggests a degree of
“pre-tunedness” to the feelings and behavior of other individuals that is
extraordinary. The child soon distinguishes mother from father, parents
from strangers, happy expressions from sad or angry ones. (Indeed, by the
age of ten months, the infant’s ability to discriminate among different af-
fective expressions already yields distinctive patterns of brain waves.) In
addition, the child comes to associate various feelings with particular in-
dividuals, experiences, and circumstances. There are already the ﬁrst signs
of empathy. The young child will respond sympathetically when he hears
the cry of another infant or sees someone in pain: even though the child
may not yet appreciate just how the other is feeling, he seems to have a
sense that something is not right in the world of the other person. A link
among familiarity, caring, and altruism has already begun to form.
Thanks to a clever experimental technique devised by Gordon Gallup
for studies with primates, we have a way of ascertaining when the human
infant ﬁrst comes to view himself as a separate entity, an incipient person.
It is possible, unbeknownst to the child, to place a tiny marker—for ex-
ample, a daub of rouge—upon his nose and then to study his reactions as
he peers at himself in the mirror. During the ﬁrst year of life, the infant is
amused by the rouge marking but apparently simply regards it as an in-
teresting decoration on some other organism that he happens to be exam-
ining in the mirror. But, during the second year of life, the child comes to
react differently when he beholds the alien coloring. Children will touch
259
The Personal Intelligences

* I use the locution sense of person to avoid confusion with the sense of self as de-
fined on page 256.
their own noses and act silly or coy when they encounter this unexpected
redness on what they perceive to be their very own anatomy. Awareness of
physical separateness and identity are not, of course, the only components
of beginning self-knowledge. The child also is starting to react to his own
name, to refer to himself by name, to have deﬁnite programs and plans
that he seeks to carry out, to feel efﬁcacious when he is successful, to ex-
perience distress when he violates certain standards that others have set
for him or that he has set for himself. All of these components of the ini-
tial sense of person* make their initial appearance during the second year
of life.
The Child of Age Two to Five
During the period spanning the ages two to five the child undergoes a
major intellectual revolution, as he becomes able to use various symbols
to refer to himself (“me,” “my”), to other individuals (“you,” “him,”
“Mum”), (“you afraid,” “you sad”), and to his own experiences (“my
birthday,” “my idea”). Words, pictures, gestures, and numbers are among
the multifarious vehicles marshaled in service of coming to know the
world symbolically, as well as through direct physical actions upon it and
sensory discriminations of it. Even in cultures where there are no per-
sonal pronouns, the same kinds of symbolic discrimination are readily
made. By the conclusion of this period, the child is in fact a symboliz-
ing creature, able to create and extract meanings on the level of symbol
use alone.
The advent of symbol use has enormous implications for the develop-
ment of the personal intelligences. The child makes an irrevocable transi-
tion from the kinds of simple discrimination of his own moods, and those
of others that have been possible on an unmediated basis, to a far richer
and more elaborated set of discriminations guided by the terminology and
the interpretive system of his entire society. No longer must the child rely
on preprogrammed discriminations and on his idiosyncratic inferences (if
260
The Theory

any); instead, the culture makes available to him an entire system of in-
terpretation on which he can draw as he attempts to make sense of the ex-
periences he himself undergoes as well as of those involving others.
One way in which this emerging symbolizing ability is turned toward
personal development is through the exploration of different roles visible
(and viable) in the community. Through talk, pretend play, gestures, draw-
ing, and the like, the young child tries out facets of the roles of mother and
child, doctor and patient, policeman and robber, teacher and pupil, astro-
naut and Martian. In experimenting with these role fragments, the child
comes to know not only which behavior is associated with these individu-
als but also something about how it feels to occupy their characteristic
niches. At the same time, children come to correlate the behavior and the
states of other persons with their own personal experiences: by identify-
ing what is positive or negative, anxiety provoking or relaxing, powerful or
impotent, youngsters effect an important step in deﬁning what they are
and what they are not, what they wish to be and what they’d rather avoid.
One’s sexual identity is an especially important form of self-discrimination
that becomes conﬁrmed during this time.
In examining major theoretical accounts of this period of life, we can
discern the different paths and patterns associated with the two lines of
personal intelligence. Following those authorities who focus primarily
on the isolated individual, we see the child as a creature apart, one in the
course of delineating his own roles and feeling himself different from
others. In the Freudian account, for example, the young child is engaged
in battles with others—with his parents, his siblings, his other peers, and
even the protagonists of fairy tales—all in an effort to establish his own
unique presence and powers. In the suggestive language of Erik Erik-
son, this is a time marked by struggle between feelings of autonomy and
shame and between impulses of initiative and guilt. In Piaget’s less affect-
laden language, this is a phase of egocentrism when the child is still
locked in his own personal conception of the world: not yet able fully
to put himself into the place of others, he is restricted to his own self-
centered views. He may have knowledge of himself, but it is still rigid
and frozen: he can state his name and perhaps recount his physical at-
tributes, but he is not yet sensitive to psychological dimensions, to wants
or needs, to the possibility of changing roles or expectations—he re-
mains a singularly one-dimensional creature. Troubled or not, the child
261
The Personal Intelligences

of this age is described as an individual apart, one striving to establish
his autonomy from others, one relatively insensitive to the world of other
individuals.
An instructively different slant can be found in the American “symbolic-
interactionist” school of George Herbert Mead and Charles Cooley as well
in the Russian “mediationist” accounts of Lev Vygotsky and Alexander
Luria. From the perspective of these observers of childhood, the child can
come to know himself during this period only through coming to know
other individuals. There is, in fact, no knowledge and no sense of person
that can be separated from one’s ability to know others—what they are like,
and how they view you. Thus, according to this account, the young child
is an inherently social creature: as such, he looks to others for their inter-
pretive schemes and draws upon these schemes as the preferred—
indeed, the sole—means of discovering and gaining an initial understanding
of that person within his own skin. Where an intrapersonal-centered view
of early childhood begins with an isolated individual who gradually comes
to know (and perhaps care) about other persons, the interpersonal view
assumes an orientation toward, and a gradual knowledge of, other indi-
viduals as the only available means for eventually discovering the nature of
one’s own person.
While it is conceivable that only one of these views is correct, it ap-
pears far more likely that the two approaches are simply stressing differ-
ent aspects of personal development. The individual-centered approach
recognizes that the child at this stage is beset with strong and often con-
ﬂicting feelings; these impel him to focus on his own condition and stim-
ulate the emerging discovery that he is a separate individual. These
dawning insights constitute an important model for that introspecting ca-
pacity that lies at the core of intrapersonal knowledge. The socially ori-
ented approach recognizes that the child does not develop in isolation: he
is inevitably a member of a community, and his notion of what individu-
als are like cannot develop in a vacuum. True, he has his own affective ex-
periences, but it is the community that provides an essential point of
reference and the necessary interpretive schemes for these affects. Ac-
cordingly, knowledge of one’s place among others can come only from the
external community: the child is inextricably impelled to focus on others,
as a clue to himself. Stated most strongly, without a community to pro-
vide the relevant categories, individuals (like feral children) would never
discover that they are “persons.”
262
The Theory

The School-Age Child
Differentiation between self and others has been pretty well consolidated
by the start of school in our society. The child now has attained a ﬁrst-level
social knowledge. He has attained some mastery of a number of different
roles adopted by other individuals, as well as an increasingly clear under-
standing that he is a discrete individual with his own needs, desires, pro -
jects, and goals. With the advent of concrete mental operations, the child
can also relate in a more ﬂexible manner to other individuals. He has some
understanding of reciprocity: he ought to behave toward others in certain
ways, so that they are likely to return the favor; he sees things in a certain way
because of his own perspective, but he has the potential to don the lens of
others and to apprehend both material and personal matters from their
points of view. To be sure, the suddenness of these insights should not be
overdrawn. Clear signs of the decline of egocentrism can be detected dur-
ing the preschool years, even as other aspects of egocentrism persist
throughout life. But it does seem that by the time of entry to school, a clear
line between self and other, between one’s perspective and that of other in-
dividuals, can already be drawn.
Even as (or perhaps because) features of one’s own person become
more ﬁxed, the child now has the option of becoming more of a genuinely
social creature. He can step beyond his family circle and forge friendships
and peer relations with others. He can appreciate how to treat others in a
fair manner: in fact, if anything, he pursues justice to a fault, not yet being
able to modulate between the individualizing exigencies of different situ-
ations. He also is able to acknowledge the simple intentions and motiva-
tions of others, less frequently making the mistake of simply projecting his
own wishes onto everyone else. In all, the child at this age comes off as an
excessively social and norm-governed creature—as one who wants above
all else to be a representative (rather than a specially favored or unfairly
mistreated) member of the communities in which he lives.
During this latency period (as the psychoanalysts have dubbed it), per-
sonal feelings, lusts, and anxieties may for a while appear quiescent. But
growth of self-interest and self-knowledge is scarcely stilled. Rather, at this
time, the child becomes especially concerned with the acquisition of ob-
jective skills, knowledge, and competences. In fact, his own deﬁnition of
self is no longer mired in physical attributes, though it has not yet become
263
The Personal Intelligences

focused on psychological features either. For the child of six, seven, or eight,
it is the things he can do—and the degree of success with which he can ex-
ecute them—that constitute a chief locus of self-knowledge. This is the age
of the acquisition of competence, the building up of industry: the child is
colored by a fear of feeling inadequate, of appearing to be an unskilled self.
Middle Childhood
During middle childhood, that ﬁve-year period between the start of school
and the beginning of adolescence, there are continuing trends toward greater
social sensitivity, toward a keener sense of another’s motivations, and toward
a fuller sense of one’s own competences and lacks. Children become more
deeply invested in friendships and will go to considerable lengths to main-
tain a personal relationship; loss of treasured chums proves much more
painful. A great deal of energy is devoted toward cementing one’s place
within a friendship network. These groups or cliques may be structured in-
formally, but sometimes (particularly in the case of boys) they will be as for-
mally ordered as a primate dominance hierarchy. Life is “heady” for those
fortunate enough to be included and correspondingly bleak for those who
have lowly places in the group or are excluded altogether.
As children invest much effort into maintaining their friendship pat-
terns, they also devote much time to thinking about the interpersonal
realm. With this heightened capacity to place oneself into the skin of spe-
ciﬁc other individuals, as well as of unfamiliar “generalized others,” there
is the beginning of intriguing recursive forms of personal knowledge. The
child can carry on a set of mental manipulations about possible interac-
tions with other individuals: “He thinks that I think that he thinks. . . .” No
wonder that such preadolescents are able to appreciate more subtle forms
of literature and to make (and appreciate) more sophisticated jokes.
Risks at this time include premature judgments of inadequacy or un-
realistic assessments of efﬁcacy. Children of this age may acquire feelings
of learned helplessness, as they become convinced that there are certain
pursuits that they cannot carry out. (For instance, many young girls come
to feel that they cannot solve mathematics problems, thus launching a vi-
cious cycle of diminishing expectations and diminishing achievements.)
The child may also come to feel quite alone if he is unable to forge effec-
tive friendships with other individuals. For the ﬁrst time, this inability to
264
The Theory

relate to others may be felt as a distinct failing, one that lowers one’s image
of oneself. Personal feelings are less transient; and if they are genuinely
troubling, they may well come to dominate the child’s introspections.
Adolescence
With the onset of adolescence, personal forms of knowledge take a num-
ber of important turns. Moving away somewhat from the frenetic (and
somewhat unexamined) social orientation of earlier years, individuals (at
least in our society) become far more psychologically attuned. They prove
more sensitive to underlying motivations of other individuals, to their hid-
den desires and fears. Relationships with others are no longer based pri-
marily on the physical rewards that others may supply but rather on the
psychological support and understanding that a sensitive individual can
provide. By the same token, the adolescent seeks friends who value him for
his own insights, knowledge, and sensitivity rather than for his strength or
material possessions.
Understanding of the social world also becomes much more differen-
tiated. The youth appreciates that any society must have laws in order to
function properly, but that these laws should not be blindly obeyed, and
that mitigating circumstances should be taken into account. Similarly, jus-
tice remains important but cannot be dispensed without taking into ac-
count the individualizing factors in a particular dispute or dilemma.
Individuals continue to have a desire to be appreciated and loved by oth-
ers, but there is increasing recognition that total sharing is not possible,
and that certain matters must—and perhaps ought to—be kept private.
We see, then, during the turbulent years of adolescence a maturation
of knowledge of one’s own person as well as of knowledge of other per-
sons. But at the same time, within many cultures, an even more crucial
event is taking place. Adolescence turns out to be that period of life in
which individuals must bring together these two forms of personal knowl-
edge into a larger and more organized sense, a sense of identity or (to use
the term I shall favor hereafter) a sense of self. As formulated by the psy-
choanalyst Erik Erikson, an emerging identity entails a complex deﬁnition
of self, of the sort that might have pleased both Freud and James: the in-
dividual arrives at a delineation of roles with which he himself is comfort-
able in terms of his own feelings and aspirations, and at a formulation that
265
The Personal Intelligences

makes sense in terms of the community’s overall needs and its speciﬁc ex-
pectations regarding the individual in question.
This formation of a sense of self is a project—and a process—of the ut-
most importance. The manner of its execution will determine whether the
individual can function effectively within the social context in which he has
chosen—or must choose—to live. It is necessary for the individual to come
to terms with his own personal feelings, motivations, and desires—including
the powerful sexual ones that are his lot for having passed puberty; and so
there may well be pressures with which to contend during this stressful
period of the life cycle. There may also be considerable pressure—and 
desire—to think about one’s emerging sense of self; and so propositional
knowledge about the self becomes an option valued in some cultural set-
tings. Perhaps paradoxically, the pressures surrounding the formation of
sense of self will be less acute in cultural milieus where the options facing
the individual are fewer: where external social expectations prove to be de-
terminant, and the individual’s cherished aspirations may well be relegated
to marginal status.
A Mature Sense of Self
A number of researchers have attempted to describe the later phases of
the maturing self. At times, these accounts have centered on the decisions
or the points of tension that must occur in every life. Erikson, for example,
speaks of a crisis of intimacy that follows the crisis of identity, as well as of
subsequent struggles involved in the issue of generativity in middle age
(transmitting values, knowledge, and the possibility of life to the following
generation) and in the issue of integrity in old age (Does one’s life make
sense and cohere? Is one prepared to face death?). Some researchers speak
of periods of renewed stress in middle age—when it may be too late to
change one’s life plan—and in old age—when one must come to grips with
declining powers as well as with growing fears and uncertainties. In con-
trast, other researchers stress processes of continued development, where
an individual has the option of becoming increasingly autonomous, inte-
grated, or self-actualized, provided that he can make the correct “moves”
and arrive at a suitable stance of accepting what cannot be altered. The
end-goal of these developing processes is a self that is highly developed
266
The Theory

and fully differentiated from others: desirable models would include
Socrates, Jesus Christ, Mahatma Gandhi, Eleanor Roosevelt—individuals
who appear to have understood much about themselves and about their
societies and to have come to terms successfully with the frailties of the
human condition while at the same time inspiring others around them to
lead more productive lives.
These views of maturity all highlight a relatively autonomous sense of
self, one that places a heavy accent on intrapersonal features, even when
they are marshaled in the service of others. But there is another view that
places a far greater emphasis on the formative role of other persons in the
sense of self and, consequently, affords little credence to the notion of an
autonomous self. According to this point of view, an individual is always
and necessarily a set of selves, a group of persons, who perennially reﬂect
the context they happen to inhabit at any particular moment. Rather than
a central “core self” that organizes one’s thoughts, behavior, and goals, the
person is better thought of as a collection of relatively diverse masks, none
of which takes precedence over the others, and each of which is simply
called into service as needed and retired when the situation no longer re-
quires it and the “scene” moves elsewhere. Here the accent in the “sense
of self” falls much more heavily on interpersonal knowledge and know-how.
This point of view, relatively prominent in the disciplines of social psy-
chology and sociology (as against depth psychology), sees as the ultimate
determinant of behavior the situation or context in which one is found and
the roles that are accordingly demanded. From this point of view, the abil-
ity to manipulate the situation to one’s own purposes becomes important:
notions of achieving an integrated personality or of being true to one’s
deepest values and standards tend to take a back seat. Other perspectives,
developed in other cultures, concede that individuals may have the po-
tential to develop in individualistic ways and to evolve an autonomous
sense of self, but explicitly reject this line of development as inimical to a
sense of community and to the virtue of selﬂessness. Given prevailing
Western ideals, these may seem less attractive or complete views of human
nature; but they are not, therefore, by any means proven false or illegiti-
mate. After all, the purpose of social science is not to prove that one’s prej-
udices are well founded, but rather to come up with that model (or those
models) of human behavior that most clearly approximates the actual state
of affairs across time and cultural settings.
267
The Personal Intelligences

Tutelage in Personal Knowledge
Until this point, I have spoken of the development of personal knowledge
as a relatively natural process, in which our ingrained proclivities to make
discriminations among our own feelings, or to reﬁne our perceptions of
others, are gently prodded along one or another path by the prevailing in-
terpretations of our society. In many cases, in fact, the development of per-
sonal knowledge can take place without explicit tutelage: one does not
need to show an individual overtly how to make such discriminations; one
simply allows them to emerge.
But there are cases where far more explicit instruction in the personal
realm may appear necessary or advisable. At times, such instruction is at
the behest of the society. Through formal tutoring, or through literature,
rituals, and other symbolic forms, the culture helps the growing individual
to make discriminations about his own feelings or about the other persons
in his milieu. As T. S. Eliot once pointed out, “in developing the language,
enriching the meaning of words, the [poet] is making possible a much
wider range of emotion and perception for other men, because he gives
them the speech in which more can be expressed.” At other times, the in-
dividual himself, desirous of more skills in the personal realm, will seek
help in effecting the proper kinds of discrimination. The recourse to ther-
apy in the West may certainly be seen as an effort to train one’s ability to
make ﬁner and more appropriate discriminations within one’s realm of per-
sonal feelings and with respect to “reading” the signals of other individu-
als. By the same token, the enduring popularity of self-help books—not
excluding that perennial favorite How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence Peo-
ple—represents a widely felt need within an “other-directed” society for
those skills that will enable one to interpret a social situation correctly and
then to initiate the proper moves with respect to it.
Just how instruction in the personal realm should ideally take place is
not known. Nor are there reliable measures for determining the extent to
which training of personal intelligences has been successful. But it is worth
underscoring the point that the education of such emotions and such dis-
criminations clearly involves a cognitive process. To feel a certain way—
paranoid, envious, jubilant—is to construe a situation in a certain way, to
see something as having a possible effect upon oneself or upon other in-
dividuals. One may develop appropriate appraisals, ﬁnely honed discrim-
268
The Theory

inations, accurate categorizations and classiﬁcations of situations; or, less
happily, one can make excessively gross discriminations, inappropriate la-
belings, incorrect inferences, and thus fundamentally misinterpret situa-
tions. The less a person understands his own feelings, the more he will
fall prey to them. The less a person understands the feelings, the re-
sponses, and the behavior of others, the more likely he will interact inap-
propriately with them and therefore fail to secure his proper place within
the larger community.
Certainly societies have differed in the extent to which they highlight
these various views and end-states of human growth, in their relative em-
phases on the individual as against the social self, in their espousals of ex-
plicit modes for training personal intelligences. I shall be examining some
of these variations more closely when I consider personal knowledge across
cultural boundaries. What needs to be stressed at this point is that one can
discern the main features of both faces of development—the focus on oth-
ers and the mastery of the social role, as well as the focus on self and the
mastery of one’s own personal life—in every normal individual. Emphases
may differ, but the fact that one is a unique individual, who still must grow
up in a social context—an individual of feelings and striving, who must rely
on others to furnish the tasks and to judge one’s achievements—is an in-
eluctable aspect of the human condition and one ﬁrmly rooted in our
species membership.
The Biological Bases of Personhood
Evolutionary Considerations
Comparative psychologists are sympathetic to the possibility that even the
most treasured facets of human nature may be found, if in somewhat sim-
pler forms, in other animals. In addition to claims for some linguistic abil-
ity in chimpanzees, we know that chimpanzees can also recognize that
daub of rouge as being on their nose (as monkeys cannot). And there is a
growing belief that at least primitive forms of consciousness, if not of self-
awareness, may be found among higher mammals. Yet all but the most ar-
dent animal lovers would concede that the forms of personal knowledge
under discussion here are still restricted to human beings. In any case, the
question arises: Which factors in the evolution of our species have spawned
269
The Personal Intelligences

the remarkable focus on the person and on other persons that character-
izes Homo sapiens?
Of the numerous factors that have been cited as contributing to
human uniqueness, two seem especially closely tied to the rise of per-
sonal knowledge—both the individual and the social varieties. The ﬁrst
factor is the prolonged childhood of the primate and, in particular, its close
tie to its mother. We know that chimpanzees spend the ﬁrst ﬁve years 
of their lives in close proximity to their mothers, and that vast amounts of
learning take place during this period. The mother provides models that
the young offspring can observe, imitate, and retain in memory for subse-
quent simulation. Equally important, the mother indicates by her behav-
ior which sorts of things and events ought to be noted by the young animal,
and thereby deﬁnes a universe of signiﬁcant activities and individuals. The
mother is the initial, and remains the principal, teacher: she can even in-
struct the youngster in carrying out novel patterns of behavior—for exam-
ple, foraging for potatoes—which have only made a recent appearance in
certain pockets of the species. So important is this “signiﬁcant other” dur-
ing the opening years of life that when she is injured or otherwise removed
from the scene, the normal development of the individual is placed in jeop-
ardy. The focus on a single other individual for so lengthy a time, the fact
that one can learn so much from that individual and eventually pass on that
acquired knowledge to the next generation, may well constitute a power-
ful source of the emphasis on the person found in the human species.
A second factor in the evolutionary past of the species is the emergence
several million years ago of a culture in which hunting assumed great im-
portance. Whereas foraging, gathering, or the killing of small animals can
be carried out alone or informally in the company of one or two others,
the hunting, tracking, killing, sharing, and preparation of the meat of larger
animals is an activity that inevitably involves the participation and cooper-
ation of a large number of individuals. Groups of humans or of prehumans—
presumably males—must learn to work together, to plan, to communicate,
and to cooperate, all in order to snare and share the meats of the hunt.
Young males must be trained so that they can participate in the hunt; for
instance, the boys must learn to track, to distinguish different smells and
cries, to control their gestures and synchronize them with speciﬁc part-
ners, to build up certain muscles, to aim accurately, to ﬁnd their ways
around strange locales, and to return to designated spots at the appointed
hour. More generally, the existence of the human group becomes closely
270
The Theory

tied to the lives of the nearby animals on whom the humans become de-
pendent for food, shelter, clothing, and even religious activity.
In light of these requirements for effective hunting, the needs for group
cohesion, leadership, organization, and solidarity become relatively easy
to understand. Why there should be the emergence of a nuclear family,
with the aforementioned strong tie between mother and child, and ties of
a different sort between father and child (particularly the young male), is
perhaps less evident. It is certainly conceivable that other social arrange-
ments, distinct from a nuclear family with strong parent-offspring ties,
could have evolved in societies where hunting was a pivotal activity. Per-
haps, in this extremely speculative area, it sufﬁces to point out that the nu-
clear family provides one highly adaptive solution to a number of issues:
the building of strong interpersonal bonds that bolster the solidarity of the
wider community; the training of young males to be hunters; the training
of females to be householders and future mothers; the guarantee of some
stability as far as mating patterns are concerned; the prevention of possi-
bly injurious incest; and the preservation and transmission of various forms
of knowledge and wisdom.
Evolutionary clues to the origins of intrapersonal facets of intelligence
are more elusive, in part because these forms of knowledge are less read-
ily identiﬁed and documented by scientiﬁc observers. One factor that may
promote a recognition of oneself as a separate entity is the capacity to tran-
scend the mere satisfaction of instinctual drives. Such an option becomes
increasingly available to animals that are not perennially involved in the
struggle for survival, have a relatively long life, and engage regularly in ex-
ploratory activities. Certainly the use of any kind of symbol system—and
of language, the preeminent symbol system—also promotes this personal
variety of intelligence. Intimations of “personhood” become more proba-
ble in those animals with proto-symbolic capacities.
The evolutionary origin of the personal intelligences has engaged the
speculative powers of some of our leading students of human prehistory.
The paleontologist Harry Jerison makes a sharp distinction between the
perception of other individuals and the perception of self. In this view,
“the perception of others in social roles can often be handled at the level
of organization of fixed action patterns”—in other words, as high-level
reﬂexive actions built into the repertoire of the organism. And, indeed, the
recognition of conspeciﬁcs, including particular relatives, occurs readily in
many animal groups. In contrast, Jerison sees the perception of self “as a
271
The Personal Intelligences

peculiarly human development of the capacity for creating ‘objects’ in the
real world.” Jerison goes on to maintain that knowledge of self may build
on our imagery and imaginative powers, which allow us to create models
of ourselves.
The British psychologist N. K. Humphrey stresses the creative capac-
ities involved in knowledge of the social world. In fact, he makes the bold
claim that the chief creative use of human intellect lies not in the tradi-
tional areas of art and science but rather in holding society together. He
points out that social primates are required to be calculating beings, to take
into account the consequences of their own behavior, to calculate the likely
behavior of others, to calculate beneﬁts and losses—all in a context where
the relevant evidence is ephemeral, likely to change, even as a conse-
quence of their own actions. Only an organism with highly developed cog-
nitive skills can make do in such a context. The requisite abilities have been
worked out over the millennia by human beings and passed on with great
care and skill from the elder to the younger individuals:
The outcome has been the gifting of members of the human species with
remarkable powers of social foresight and understanding. This social 
intelligence, developed initially to cope with local problems of inter-
personal relationships, has in time found expression in the institutional
creations of the “savage mind”—the highly rational structures of kinship,
totemism, myth, and religion which characterize primitive societies.
Feelings in Animals
Elusive as the perceptual basis of the personal intelligences may be, the ques-
tion whether animals experience—and are able to discriminate among—
various feeling states is shrouded in even greater mystery. To my mind, im-
pressive evidence that discrete feeling states may exist in neurally bounded
forms comes from the work of John Flynn. This investigator has shown
that it is possible to trigger in cats a complex form of affect-laden behavior
by direct electrical stimulation of the brain. For instance, even in cats who
do not under ordinary circumstances attack mice, one can produce full-
blown attack behavior and associated facial expressions simply by stimu-
lating certain brain regions. This means that the “attack system” has
evolved to function as a unit; neither experience nor training or learning
272
The Theory

is required for full and proper ﬁring. We see here evidence that a whole
set of behavior patterns, ones presumably accompanied (or even triggered)
by speciﬁc affective states, can be set off by endogenous (internal) as well
as by conventional environmental triggers. Studies inducing (and then sup-
pressing) profound depression in rats by injecting chemicals into the brain
provide another line of supporting evidence. Possibly, such “prepackaged”
reactive programs are exploited in higher species in more varied, less canal-
ized situations.
In a species closer to human beings, one can see evidence for the ori-
gins of a particular emotion. Donald Hebb has demonstrated that a full-
blown fear state can be evoked in the chimpanzee, without any need for
training or speciﬁc prior experience, simply by the presentation of a display
signiﬁcantly at variance from what the animal has previously perceived. In
this case, a chimpanzee will become extremely frightened, excited, or anx-
ious when it beholds an inert, mutilated, or dismembered body of another
chimpanzee. The precipitating object must be sufﬁciently divergent from
other members of a class to command attention, while still exhibiting
enough of its properties to be perceived as a member of the same class.
According to Hebb’s formulation, the fear originates in the disruption of
cerebral activities usually involved in perception: it is distinctive from other
emotions by virtue of its accompanying physiological reactions as well as of
the processes that tend to restore cerebral equilibrium—for example, ﬂight
from the threatening object. Thus, even as young human infants have emo-
tional reactions tied to speciﬁc precipitating events, so, too, we ﬁnd in a
closely related species a set of event-related reactions that signal an incip-
ient awareness of the category of individual to which one belongs. That
the category is another “person,” and that the response is so “severe,” pro-
vides further suggestive evidence that the origins of personal intelligences
can be discerned in species other than our own.
It is important to stress that such organized reactive programs can also
be undermined, given certain environmental manipulations. In the mon-
key, for example, there exists a complex set of affectual systems that sur-
round the development of the attachment link between mother and infant.
Under normal rearing conditions, these systems will evolve without a hitch.
Yet, thanks to Harry Harlow’s pioneering studies of motherless monkeys,
we know that the absence of certain stimulating conditions will yield a
monkey that is grossly abnormal in the “personal” domain. These monkeys
are not able to react appropriately to other monkeys; they cannot assume
273
The Personal Intelligences

their proper role in the dominance hierarchies; they cower in fear or ag-
gressively attack in inappropriate situations; and, most tellingly, they prove
unable to raise their own offspring, if they are even able to conceive at all.
To a certain extent, the effects of motherless rearing are reversible—for
example, if younger organisms are allowed to play with and otherwise sub-
stitute for the maternal ﬁgure; but even such substitution encounters a
“statute of limitations,” beyond which time the monkey’s knowledge of
how to relate to conspeciﬁcs has been permanently devastated. It is worth
underscoring that, while maternal deprivation exerts irrevocable effects on
the personal intelligences of the monkeys, it does not exert comparable ef-
fects upon other cognitive capacities such as those measured in routine
problem-solving tasks. Apparently, even among infra-humans, intellectual
competences enjoy a certain autonomy from one another.
Abnormal social reactions can also be caused by surgical interventions
in monkeys. In the light of studies by Ronald Myers and his colleagues at
the National Institutes of Health, we know that a number of sites in the pri-
mate nervous system play crucial roles in the kinds of adequate social be-
havior that are part and parcel of interpersonal intelligence. Speciﬁcally,
removal of the prefrontal cortex in juvenile primates causes decreased use
of face and voice for communication, alteration in aggressiveness and pat-
terns of grooming, decreased participation in play activity, and frequent
sessions of hyperactivity of an aimless variety. Signiﬁcant social maturation
must have occurred for the adverse effects of the prefrontal lobectomy to
be felt; this ﬁnding suggests that the requisite modulating structures de-
velop gradually during the period of social growth that Harlow and his col-
leagues have illuminated.
Many of the effects wrought by damage to the prefrontal cortex are
also mimicked by lesions in the anterior temporal areas of the cortex. Fol-
lowing lesions in this area, operated animals failed to rejoin their family
groups and did not attempt to reestablish their preoperative dominance
status. They also showed a decreased patterning of facial expressions, ges-
tures, and vocalizations. Unlike the frontally injured monkeys, those with
temporal lesions were prone to exhibit inappropriate aggressive behavior.
In general, Myers concludes, the most readily apparent change in the be-
havior of the animals with the prefrontal or the anterior temporal lesions
was a reduction in those activities that maintain social bonds.
Myers has put forth the provocative suggestion that there may be two
distinct neural mechanisms that serve, respectively, the “actual inner feel-
274
The Theory

ings” of the monkeys and their abilities to express (or convey) these emo-
tions facially, whether they are actually felt. According to Myers, lesions at
the base of the brain can produce a paralysis of the volitional use of the
face while leaving intact spontaneous facial expression of an emotional na-
ture. This ﬁnding suggests that we may be able to ﬁnd in infra-human 
organisms a preliminary and biologically based intimation of the difference
between intrapersonal access to feelings (one’s inner state) and the ability
to express them voluntarily to others (interpersonal communication). Stud-
ies conducted by Ross Buck with human beings conﬁrm the existence of
distinct neurological systems in human beings for dealing with volitional as
opposed to spontaneous expression of emotions: apparently, like other pri-
mates, our ability to convey emotions deliberately to others proceeds along
a separate track from our spontaneous and involuntary experiencing and
expression of emotions.
The Pathology of Personhood
We see, then, that even in as patent a human domain as the knowledge of
self and other individuals, it is possible to ﬁnd antecedents among our pri-
mate brethren. Of the analogies between human interpersonal knowledge
and that displayed by other primates, there seems to be little doubt; and
while the development of knowledge of one’s self seems more peculiarly
human, research with chimpanzees provides a helpful perspective on the
origins of this most human of capacities. Nonetheless, given the incompa-
rably greater development in human beings of personal forms of knowl-
edge, researchers have naturally been concerned about the fate of personal
knowledge—both inner and social—under various conditions of damage to
the human brain.
Once again, all indices point to the frontal lobes as the structures of
greatest importance in various forms of personal knowledge. Defects in
the frontal lobe can interfere with the development of personal forms of
knowledge and can cause various pathological forms of intrapersonal and
interpersonal knowledge. It has been known for well over a century that
destruction of the frontal lobes in an adult exerts only relatively minor ef-
fects on that individual’s ability to solve problems (such as those featured
on a standard intelligence test) but can wreak severe damage on his per-
sonality. In brief, the individual who has had major frontal lobe pathology,
275
The Personal Intelligences

particularly if it is bilateral, emerges no longer recognizable as the “same
person” by those who had known him before.
There may well be more than one syndrome of personal change fol-
lowing injury to the frontal lobes. Frank Benson and Dietrich Blumer sug-
gest that injury to the orbital (lower) area of the frontal lobes is likely to
produce hyperactivity, irritability, insouciance, and euphoria; while injury
to the convexity (higher regions) of the frontal lobe is more likely to pro-
duce indifference, listlessness, slowness, and apathy—a kind of depressive
(as opposed to psychopathic) personality. Indeed, among different indi-
viduals, one will ﬁnd varying mixes of these symptoms, quite possibly cor-
relating with the exact site of damage. But what must be stressed is that in
individuals whose cognitive performance—whose other intelligences—
seems relatively preserved in a computational sense, a sense of the “same
person” is uniformly felt to be absent. No longer does the individual ex-
press his earlier sense of purpose, motivation, goals, and desire for contact
with others; the individual’s reaction to others has been profoundly altered,
and his own sense of self seems to have been suspended.
But since this symptom picture might result from signiﬁcant damage to
the brain, independent of the precise site of the lesion, it becomes important
to determine whether, in the face of massive brain injury at other sites, the
individual might still display a preserved personality, an enduring sense of
self. Pertinent to this issue, the Russian neuropsychologist Alexander Luria
reported several years ago the fascinating case of “the man with the shat-
tered world.” As a young soldier in the Second World War, Zasetsky had
suffered a severe battle wound in the left parietal-occipital area of his
head—an injury that drastically crippled him across a distressingly full
range of conceptual and symbolic faculties. His speech was reduced to the
most elementary forms of expression; he could not write a single word or
even a single letter; he could not perceive in his right visual ﬁeld; he could
not hammer a nail, carry out simple chores, play a game, ﬁnd his way out-
side; he was confused about the order of the seasons, unable to add two
numbers, or even to describe a picture.
Yet, according to Luria, Zasetsky maintained something far more pre-
cious than these standard intellectual capacities: those person-related
functions associated with the frontal lobes. He continued to possess will,
desire, sensitivity to experience, and the treasured ability to form and sus-
tain plans and carry actions through as effectively as his condition permit-
ted. Thus, over a twenty-ﬁve-year period, Zasetsky worked steadily to
276
The Theory

improve his own performance. Under Luria’s guidance he was able to re -
educate himself to read and write. He kept a notebook in which he
painstakingly recorded his daily progress. He even proved able to intro-
spect about his condition:
Words have lost meaning for me or have a meaning that is incomplete
and unformed. Every word I hear seems vaguely familiar. . . . As far as
my memory is concerned I know a particular word exists, except that it
has lost meaning . . . so I have to limit myself to words that “feel” famil-
iar to me, that have some deﬁnite meaning for me.
In contrast to the frontal lobe patients described by Benson and Blumer,
one feels that Zasetsky remained fundamentally the same person, who
could continue to relate in normal fashion to other individuals.
Why should the frontal lobes have this special status for the individual’s
sense of person, such that an individual with a spared frontal lobe can con-
tinue to have access to his own views of himself, while other individuals
with less extensive damage may have totally lost this presence of mind?
According to Walle Nauta, a leading neuroanatomist and long-time student
of the frontal lobes, the frontal lobes constitute the meeting place par ex-
cellence for information from the two great functional realms of the brain:
the posterior regions, which are involved in the processing of all sensory
information (including perception of others); and the limbic systems,
where individual motivational and emotional functions are housed, and
whence one’s internal states are generated. The frontal cortex turns out to
be the realm where neural networks representing the individual’s inner
milieu—his personal feelings, motivations, and subjective knowledge—
converge with the system representing the external milieu—the sights,
sounds, tastes, and mores of the world as transmitted through diverse sen-
sory modalities. Thus, by virtue of their strategic anatomical location and
connections, the frontal lobes have the potential to serve as the major in-
tegrating station—and this they do.
At the core of personal knowledge, as represented in the brain and par-
ticularly in the frontal lobes, seems to be two kinds of information. One is
our ability to know other people—to recognize their faces, their voices,
and their persons; to react appropriately to them; to engage in activities
with them. The other kind is our sensitivity to our own feelings, our own
wants and fears, our own personal histories. As we have seen, intimations
277
The Personal Intelligences

of these abilities can be found in the animal kingdom and certainly within
the primate order: the recognition of faces and voices, the formation of
close ties to other organisms, and the experience of a range of feelings are
certainly not the exclusive property of human beings. Moreover, each of
these forms can be compromised by experimental surgery. But the ability
to link these forms of knowing to symbols, so that we can conceptualize
our intuitive knowledge of our self and our more public knowledge of oth-
ers, emerges as a unique human function. It allows us to formulate theories
and beliefs about other individuals and to develop a propositional account
of our own person, which I have elsewhere dubbed a “metaphor of the
self.” In all probability, many areas of the brain (subcortical as well as cor-
tical) participate in the development and elaboration of these forms of
personal intelligence; but because of their unique role as an integrating
juncture, and because of their relatively late development in the history
of the species and of the individual, the frontal lobes play a privileged
and irreplaceable role in the forms of intelligence with which we are here
concerned.
The status of personal knowledge has also been studied in other patho-
logical populations. Some pathologies may block the development of
knowledge of self and others. With respect to young human beings, we
ﬁnd the occasional individual who is autistic: a child who may well have
spared computational capacities, particularly in areas like music or math-
ematics, but whose pathological condition is in fact deﬁned by an inability
to communicate with others and by so impaired a sense of self that the
child has singular difﬁculties in deploying the words I and me. Whatever
the problem that devastates the autistic child, it clearly involves difﬁcul-
ties in knowing others and in using this knowledge to know oneself. The
aversion of eyes from other individuals serves as an especially poignant
symptom of this disorder.
To my knowledge, one does not ﬁnd idiots savants of an opposite type,
individuals with an excessively highly developed sense of self. Such knowl-
edge and maturation of self appear to require so extensive an integration of
other capacities that the individual would have to be an essentially normal
person. Yet is may be worth remarking that in certain forms of retardation
such as Down’s syndrome, the ability to forge effective social relationships
with others seems relatively well preserved, at least in comparison with
more “straightforward” cognitive capacities like language or logic. Whether
this form of interpersonal “savvy” translates to insights into one’s own con-
278
The Theory

dition, to a kind of intrapersonal knowledge, seems highly doubtful. More-
over, in the case of certain disorders, such as that found in the psycho-
pathic personality, the individual may be extremely keenly attuned to the
intentions and motivations of others without displaying comparable sensi-
tivity to his own feelings or motives. Finally, it is also possible that some in-
dividuals may have excessively precocious or keen knowledge of their own
feelings without being able to indicate, or act upon, this knowledge in the
presence of others. By deﬁnition, this condition would be most difﬁcult
for an observer to identify!
One may examine the fate of personal knowledge in individuals who
have sustained various focal injuries—for instance, in persons once normal
who have become aphasic as a result of damage to the dominant cerebral
hemisphere. It might seem that language holds the key to self-knowledge;
and that, in the absence of this form of symbolization, the ability to con-
ceive of oneself or to cooperate with other individuals would be seriously,
if not fatally, compromised. In fact, however, severe aphasia can be sus-
tained without equally devastating implications for personal knowledge.
Among those who have been aphasic but have recovered sufﬁciently to de-
scribe their experiences, we ﬁnd consistent testimony: while there may
have been a diminution of general alertness and considerable depression
about his condition, the individual in no way felt himself to be a different
person. He recognized his own needs, wants, and desires and tried as best
he could to achieve them. Family members (and physicians) generally con-
cur that given the severity of the impairment, the aphasic’s ability to relate
to other individuals and to reﬂect upon his own condition survives sur-
prisingly well.
As if to reinforce this point, an instructively different symptomatic pic-
ture is found among individuals who have sustained unilateral damage to
the right (nondominant or minor) hemisphere. In these patients, language
is ostensibly intact, and so one might expect an unimpaired ability to make
discriminations with respect to oneself and other persons. In fact, in sheer
capacity to banter, such patients may superﬁcially appear to have remained
the same person. But it generally takes merely a few minutes of discussion
to conﬁrm that the ability to deal with others has been maintained chieﬂy,
if not exclusively, at a verbal level, and that there exists a large, perhaps in-
surmountable gap between the former personality and the present modes
of relating to others. Ties to others appear very superﬁcial, and remarks
do not seem to emerge from the same individual that had thrived prior to
279
The Personal Intelligences

the onset of the brain insult. There are, moreover, little sense of drive,
meager signs of plans for recovery, scant eagerness to form or to reafﬁrm
personal relationships. The patient may announce that he is ﬁne (reﬂect-
ing the denial of illness often associated with the condition), and that he is
going to return to work the next day; but he will, in fact, sit for hours near
a doorway without moving. Perhaps, indeed, the lack of awareness of their
actual condition is a major factor in the poor recovery typically found in
patients with injury to the right hemisphere—even as the often surpris-
ingly good recovery of skills in the aphasic patient reﬂects the preserved
sense of self and initiative, along with a concomitant awareness of linger-
ing deﬁcits.
Further perspectives on personal knowledge can be obtained from stud-
ies of other patient populations. In patients with Alzheimer’s disease—a
form of presenile dementia—the breakdown of computational capacities—
particularly in the spatial, the logical, and the linguistic realms—is often
severe. Yet, at the same time, the patient will remain well groomed, so-
cially appropriate, and continually apologetic about errors that he makes.
It is as if the patient felt his powers waning, was aware of this decline, and
was distraught at the failure to circumvent his difﬁculties but would not
vent his frustration in a publicly hostile way. My interpretation of this
strange and disquieting set of affairs is that the patient’s frontal lobes re-
main relatively preserved during the early stages of this form of presenile
dementia: Alzheimer’s disease actually attacks the posterior brain zones
with special ferocity. In contrast, patients with Pick’s disease—another va-
riety of presenile dementia, which is much more frontally oriented—show
a rapid loss of social appropriateness, a symptom picture more reminis-
cent of the irascible forms of frontal lobe pathology.
Alterations in Personal Knowledge
So far, I have considered pathologies that in some way diminish personal
knowledge. It is also possible to look at individuals whose personal knowl-
edge has been altered—rather than actually reduced—by a neurological
disorder. Patients who suffer from temporal lobe epilepsy prove particu-
larly instructive in this regard. Such patients come to exhibit somewhat dif-
ferent personalities: their own view of the world changes, often profoundly.
Whatever their previous personal orientation, they tend to become intro-
280
The Theory

spective, given to writing extensive tracts, increasingly tending toward the
study of philosophy and religion and the relentless pondering of deep ques-
tions. There may be considerable rage, which can erupt at any time, but in
the same individual, there is an intensiﬁcation of ethical and religious feel-
ing that may give rise to a desire to be excessively good, careful, and God
fearing. In addition, there may be a viscosity in these patients, in that they
seek to form excessively close ties to others and prove unable to “let go” in
a personal encounter. It is risky to compare epilepsy directly with de-
struction of brain tissue, because the condition entails an abnormal ﬁring
of nervous tissue rather than the massive destruction of neurons. Yet the
fact that the individual’s personality constellation and his way of relating
to others may be signiﬁcantly affected by this condition—even as per-
formances on measures of language and other standard cognitive meas-
ures may remain just as before—provides additional suggestive evidence
that personal intelligences are a domain apart.
Perhaps even two domains apart. Based on extensive work with tem-
poral lobe epileptic patients, David Bear has recently put forth some in-
triguing notions about two forms of behavioral breakdown and their
neuroanatomical substrates. One set of cortical regions, located in the dor-
sal (parietal) region of the cortex, seems critical for surveillance, attention,
and arousal: its injury results in indifference and in the loss of a sense of car-
ing about one’s own person. A contrasting set of cortical regions, located in
the ventral (temporal) regions of the cortex, seems critical for the identi-
ﬁcation of stimuli, for new learning, and for appropriate emotional re-
sponding. Lesions in this latter area produce a lack of concern with external
stimuli and, accordingly, inappropriate emission of sexual or aggressive re-
sponses toward other individuals, with scant consideration of the previ-
ously learned consequences of such ﬂagrant displays. While Bear’s scheme
has not been developed speciﬁcally to deal with the varieties of personal
intelligence introduced here, one can readily draw suggestive parallels be-
tween these forms of impairment and our pair of personal intelligences.
Probably the most dramatic discovery in neuroscience of the past gen-
eration also proves relevant to my topic. As is known by virtually every
scanner of the Sunday supplements (and by readers of Chapter 3 as well),
it is now possible through surgical procedures to disconnect the two halves
of the brain and to test each separately. In addition to providing further
conﬁrmatory evidence that the left hemisphere is dominant for linguistic
functioning, and the right for spatial functioning, research with “split-brain
281
The Personal Intelligences

patients” has provided suggestive evidence that an individual possesses (at
least potentially) more than a single consciousness. Indeed, the individual
may harbor two—or even more—consciousnesses, or selves, which, in the
wake of the surgical intervention, have become alienated from one another.
Considerable effort is now being invested in characterizing these forms
of consciousness, in seeking to discover whether they are both equally sub-
jective or objective, and whether one has some kind of existential or epis-
temological priority over the other. It may well be that both are involved
in emotional processing, with the left hemisphere somewhat more ori-
ented toward euphoria, happiness, and optimism, the right hemisphere to-
ward pessimism, reaction, hostility (this is why destruction of either
hemisphere tends to produce the opposite “spared” conﬁguration of traits).
It may also be that the consciousness of the left hemisphere is simply more
oriented toward words and other discrete symbols and analytic categories,
while the right hemisphere is correlatively primed for the emotional, spa-
tial, and interpersonal realms. Perhaps we can ﬁnd intimations of these
two cognitive styles in normal individuals, with individuals who exploit right
hemisphere processes being somewhat more humanistically oriented,
while those who favor left hemisphere processes being somewhat more
sober, scientiﬁc, or “straight.” Even though these pictures are caricatured,
and the brain is far more than two “little selves,” one should not minimize
the purchase on human intelligences that may eventually be obtained from
studies of the sundered hemispheres.
As I have elsewhere criticized those who would too readily dub each
hemisphere with a single epithet, I want to underscore the dangers of bas-
ing excessive claims about personal intelligence on such a smattering of
cues from different patient populations. In candor, the amount of knowl-
edge available about personal intelligences is less, and certainly less com-
pelling, than that available for other, more conventionally computational
forms of intelligence, ones less susceptible to cultural canalization. The ev-
idence from different brain-damaged populations can be read in a number
of ways, and it is by no means certain whether a contrast between left and
right hemisphere lesions, between cortical and subcortical damage, be-
tween dorsal and ventral injuries will come closest to cutting the personal
intelligences at their proper joints. Still, our discussion clearly suggests that
forms of personal intelligence can be destroyed, or spared, in relative iso-
lation from other varieties of cognition: there are highly suggestive hints,
in both the evolutionary and the pathological literature, that intrapersonal
282
The Theory

and interpersonal intelligences can be discriminated from one another. More
decisive ﬁndings must await the devising of more sensitive measures and the
advent of more satisfying descriptions of each form of personal intelligence.
Persons in Other Cultures
Personal intelligences may be rooted in biology, but vast and highly in-
structive differences in their constitutions can be discerned across cultures.
Anthropological explorations have been of fundamental importance in lay-
ing out some of the alternatives, in showing how a different balance can be
struck between intrapersonal and interpersonal knowledge in various
“selves.” To convey an initial ﬂavor of the variety, I can do no better than
to review Clifford Geertz’s sketch of three contrasting concepts of the per-
son, which he encountered in a quarter century of ﬁeldwork.
In Java where he worked in the 1950s, Geertz found as lively and per-
sistent a concern with the concept of self as one might encounter among
a collection of European intellectuals. As part of a general concern with
philosophical issues, even the least prosperous Javanese displays interest in
what constitutes a person. In the Javanese view, a person harbors two kinds
of contrast. The ﬁrst obtains between “inside” and “outside.” In a manner
familiar to Westerners, Javanese isolate the inside “felt realm” of human 
experience—the ﬂow of subjective feeling that is perceived directly. They
contrast this phenomenological immediacy with the “outside world”—the
external actions, movements, postures, and speech that in our culture
would warm the analytic hearts of strict behaviorists. Rather than being
functions of one another, these inside and outside facets are regarded as
realms that need to be ordered independently.
The second kind of contrast obtains between “pure” or “civilized,” on
the one hand, and “rough,” “uncivilized,” or “vulgar,” on the other. The Ja-
vanese strive to achieve the pure or civilized form both in the inner realm,
through religious discipline, and in the outer realm, through proper eti-
quette. The ultimate result is a divided conception of the self, “half unges-
tured feeling and half unfelt gesture.” An inner world of quiet emotion and
an outer world of shaped behavior confront one another as two distinct
realms, which the Javanese must somehow negotiate successfully within a
single body and a single life. Certainly, the tension between the two “faces”
of personal knowledge is directly confronted in the Javanese context.
283
The Personal Intelligences

What has a philosophical tinge in Java is handled in theatrical terms in
Bali. In this enduring Hindu culture, one observes a perpetual attempt to
stylize all aspects of personal existence to the point where anything idio-
syncratic is muted in favor of the assumption of one’s assigned place in the
drama of Balinese life. Individuals are conceived of in terms of the masks
they wear, the roles that they play in this continuing pageant. People are
identiﬁed through their roles in a perpetual cast of characters, with cur-
rent accidental factors subjugated in order to highlight a permanent set of
status relations. The big risk, and fear, in such a “presentation of self” is
that one’s public performance will come apart and one’s own personality (as
we would call it) will assert itself. As Geertz describes it, “When this occurs,
as it sometimes does, the immediacy of the moment is felt with excruciat-
ing intensity and men become suddenly and unwillingly creatural.” All ef-
forts are maintained vigilantly to protect the stylized self against the threat
of immediacy, spontaneity, and brutishness. In this culture, a clear deci-
sion has been made to accentuate the interpersonal, and to mute the in-
trapersonal, forms of self.
The Moroccans whom Geertz came to know in the mid-1960s lived in
Sefrou, a small city about twenty miles south of Fez. The town consists of
an astounding variety of individuals from different backgrounds (Arabs,
Berbers, and Jews) and different professions (tailors, horsemen, and soldiers)
reﬂecting wide differences in wealth, modernity, and migrant status—a
swell of humanity reminiscent of a medieval pageant. Perhaps to counter
the dangers of anonymity in this variegated assemblage, the Moroccans
have adopted a practice, a symbolic means, for identifying one another,
called the nisba. One’s nisba is one’s attribution—a short label attached to
one’s name that indicates the region or the group from which one comes.
By this mode of identiﬁcation—“Umar of the Bugadu tribe,” “Muhammed
from the Sus region”—one becomes known to other individuals. The pre-
cise labeling used at any one time may depend upon the context—the
smaller the group in which one is presently located, the more precise the la-
beling; but the practice of identifying an individual in this manner is uni-
versal among the denizens of Sefrou.
A nisba must be seen as part of a total life picture. One of the most piv-
otal characteristics of Moroccan society is a strict distinction between the
public and the private person. The lively and ﬂuid mosaic of casbah life is
carefully segregated from the guarded privacy of the individual’s personal
concerns. Rather than dividing its diverse society into castes, the Moroc-
284
The Theory

cans distinguish the contexts where men are strictly separated from one
another (marriage, worship, law, and education) from those more public
contexts (work, friendship, trade) where they are variously connected to
other individuals. People interact with one another in terms of public cat-
egories whose meanings refer to geographical sites, and leave the more
personally experienced forms of life to be savored in the privacy of their
tents and their temples. Thus, the nisba system creates a framework in
which persons can be identiﬁed in terms of supposedly immanent charac-
teristics (speech, blood, faith) and yet be allowed considerable latitude in
their practical relations in public places: what turns out to be permitted is
a kind of hyperindividualism in public relations, where almost everything
speciﬁc can be ﬁlled in by the processes of interaction. At the same time,
one does not risk the loss of self, which has been carefully set off in the more
intimate and insulated activities of procreation and prayer. In the Moroc-
can setting, then, there is room for cultivation of both intrapersonal and
interpersonal intelligences, but the two are never melded into a single in-
tegrated self.
Though Geertz’s careful and caring descriptions were devoted to an-
other end—an explication of how an anthropologist may understand other
peoples through an examination of their symbolic forms—these portraits
provide a validation of the distinctions that I have introduced in this chap-
ter. We see here three disparate cultures, spanning half the world, and
many centuries of historical evolution, each coping with the same set of
constraints: how to confront the feelings, the exigencies, and the idiosyn-
cracies of each individual, on the one hand, and still allow smooth and pro-
ductive functioning with other members of the community, on the other.
Each of the cultures deals with this tension in characteristically distinctive
ways: the Javanese, by explicitly positing two distinct realms of existence
that each individual must somehow keep in balance; the Balinese, by veer-
ing sharply toward the public pole and trying desperately to prevent the
“raw” aspects of personality from coming out (except perhaps in the rela-
tively ritualized setting of the cockﬁght); and the Moroccans, by relegating
certain portions of one’s life exclusively to private expression, thus allowing
considerable freedom for the remaining interactions in the public arena.
By these diverse routes, each of these cultures ultimately engenders a
person, a sense of self, an idiosyncratic but adaptive amalgam of those as-
pects of experience that are most purely personal and internal, and of those
that govern and maintain one’s relation to the outside community. Just how
285
The Personal Intelligences

the self will be expressed, just how the balance will be struck, depends on
a host of factors, including the history and the values of the culture and,
quite possibly, the nature of the ecology and the economy. It is scarcely
possible to anticipate the particular forms that conceptions of persons and
selves will take in disparate corners of the world. What one can predict,
however, is that every culture must somehow come to grips with this en-
semble of concerns, and that some nexus between interpersonal and in-
trapersonal issues will always have to be forged. It follows that the sense of
self developed within a given cultural matrix will reﬂect the synthesis
wrought therein between intrapersonal and interpersonal facets of existence.
As one surveys the cultures of the world, one encounters fascinating
variations in both interpersonal and intrapersonal forms of intelligence. One
also ﬁnds varying amounts of emphasis on the personal forms of intelligence
per se: while, for example, in the Western context, logical-mathematical and
linguistic intelligences receive heavy stress, forms of personal intelligence
are correlatively emphasized in traditional societies and, even today, in de-
veloped societies outside of the West (such as Japan). Short of a Cook’s
tour of the world’s cultures, there is no way fully to portray the range of so-
lutions that have been devised with respect to forms of personal intelli-
gence and to senses of self. It is possible, however, to classify and
characterize the various solutions along a number of different dimensions.
Borrowing a distinction from my colleague Harry Lasker, I can begin
this survey by distinguishing between two ideal types of society. In a par-
ticle society like our own, the locus of the self inheres primarily in the spe-
ciﬁc individual. The individual is seen as having considerable autonomy
and as essentially in control of his own fate, which may range from unalloyed
triumph to disastrous defeat. There is an associated interest, even a fasci-
nation, with the isolated individual person, even as the external environ-
ment is seen as providing mere background support or interference. The
Western notion of the solitary hero, struggling against the hostile environ-
ment and against inimical others, symbolizes a particle existence. It is
vividly realized in the French literary tradition:
The great national literary project . . . the enterprise construes the self
as the locus of all possibilities, avid, unafraid of contradiction (nothing
need be lost, everything may be gained) and the exercise of conscious-
ness as a life’s highest aim, because only through becoming fully con-
scious may one be free.
286
The Theory

Poaching an analogy from physics, we may contrast the particle with
the ﬁeld society. In the latter, the locus of attention, power, and control is
placed in the hands of other people or even of the society as a whole. Far
from accentuating the individual person, with his own goals, wants, and
fears, the focus in a ﬁeld society falls almost entirely on the environment
in which one ﬁnds oneself. This surrounding context is seen as the deter-
mining force in an individual’s life, the locus where decisions are actually
made; even in cases where an individual comes to stand out, he is seen as
being “selected,” or as “moved” into a niche, without having a particular say
(or even any wish to have a say) concerning his own peculiar fate. For Jean-
Paul Sartre, an apostle of the French literary tradition, “Hell is other peo-
ple.” For individuals in a ﬁeld society, “One’s self is other people”—and
when one’s fellows have been shorn away, there is hardly an irreducible
core of “self” left.
Nearly all traditional societies and even modern non-Western societies
place a much greater weight on “ﬁeld” factors and are far less likely to at-
tribute signiﬁcant decisiveness or free will to the individual “particle.”
Among the Maori of New Zealand, for example, a man’s identity is deter-
mined by his inherited status and his relationship with his group. Outside
of his group, a Maori is no one. Neither suffering nor pleasure come from
the inside: instead, they are seen as the result of external forces. Analo-
gously, among the Dinka of Southern Sudan, there is no conception of a
mind that stores up one’s own experience. Instead, the person is always the
object acted upon—for example, by a place. Rather than being an object
of study, the world is an active subject whose impact is felt by the passive
individual. How different this perspective is from that customarily assumed
in a Western particle society. The emphasis on the self as a single atomized
particle is a peculiar legacy of Western political, philosophical, and literary
traditions, dating back perhaps to Greek times and apparently unrivaled
elsewhere in the world. We must be careful not to confuse “our” sense of
the person with those senses entertained by other cultures; and we must
recognize that even in Western societies, there are vast individual differ-
ences in “ﬁeld independence” and in judged “loci of control.”
In their concern with the realm of the person, the cultures of the world
can be arrayed along other instructive dimensions as well. A ﬁrst consid-
eration is the extent to which these cultures have elaborated an explicit
theory of the person. Some societies, such as the Maori of New Zealand,
make distinctions only in the language of everyday life. Other groups, such
287
The Personal Intelligences

as the Yogas of India, posit a theory of the development of self that is far
more complex and differentiated than any embraced in the West. The way
in which the realm of the person is carved serves as another useful point
of comparison. In traditional China, the mind and physical objects were
not set apart. In contrast, among the Ojibwa of the Lake Superior area,
the realm of the person is extended to a far wider range of entities, in-
cluding animals, rocks, and one’s own grandmother. Cultures also differ in
an instructive manner in those aspects of the person that they choose to
value. Among the Japanese, a style of “minimum message communication”
is cultivated. Spurning the “maximum message” of spoken language, the
Japanese depend upon subtle nonverbal cues to provide the key to one’s
true feelings, motivation, and message. The Japanese also cherish and dig-
nify jikkan—“real and direct” feelings—and revere the person attuned to
his own jikkan. Proceeding along a rather different path, the Navajos place
a special premium on the ability to be a good listener. Keen listening is
seen as the key to proper decision making; those who can listen well are
considered to have special gifts.
While cultures differ appreciably in their relative emphasis on the in-
trapersonal or interpersonal intelligences, one encounters social roles that
require a maximum development of both. A particularly stunning exam-
ple in this regard comes from the Ixils in Guatemala, who consult a
shaman, or “daykeeper,” for advice and counsel. As described by Benjamin
N. and Lore M. Colby, the role of the daykeeper entails an extensive de-
velopment of both forms of personal knowledge:
He must assess [his patients’] situations, their behavior, their concerns. He
must also himself lead an exemplary life, or at least try to. Doing all this
requires self analysis as well as an empathic viewpoint for understand-
ing others: it requires an updating, a revising, and a repairing of one’s
self image: it requires a conceptualization of others which is added to
and revised—a conceptualization that includes attributes and relations
which one’s clients and their families and friends maintain with each
other; it requires an understanding of the goals and values that motivate
people and of the way in which the context or situation can modify these
goals and intentions.
A full consideration of the various roles cherished in diverse societies
would doubtless clarify the emphases placed upon differentiated forms of
288
The Theory

interpersonal and intrapersonal intelligence. Even as the therapist, the re-
ligious leader, or the artist in our culture exploits various forms of personal
understanding, it is likely that shamans, sorcerers, magicians, fortune
tellers, and others of this ilk have a highly differentiated knowledge of the
personal realm. In Western society, we have our Rousseau and our Proust,
who have cultivated knowledge of self, even as we have artists like Shake-
speare, Balzac, and Keats whose knowledge of other persons, whose “neg-
ative capability,” has been exemplary, and whose ability to place themselves
into the skin of others is inspiring. There is every reason to believe that a
similar range of skills and roles will be found elsewhere. In any event, it
seems parsimonious to assume that in cultures where social connections
are even more important than in our own, the ability to understand other
persons and ferret out their motives is certainly at a premium.
Conclusion
In considering those forms of knowledge that revolve about other per-
sons, we have entered a realm where the role of the culture and of his-
torical forces proves especially salient and pervasive. It makes sense to
think of some forms of intelligence—for example, those involved in spatial
processing—as operating in essentially similar form across diverse cultures,
and as relatively resistant to cultural molding; but it is patent that when it
comes to personal knowledge, the culture assumes a determining role. In-
deed, it is through the learning—and use—of the symbol system of one’s
culture that personal intelligences come to assume their characteristic form.
We here encounter factors that have a long evolution. As a species we
have reached a unique degree of individualization, one that has culminated
in the possibility of a sense of personal identity. As sociologist Thomas
Luckmann has pointed out, the emergence of a sense of personal identity
is possible only because of the detachment of our species from the situa-
tional here-and-now and also from complete absorption in the immediacy
of experiences. Owing to this enhanced sense of perspective, we become
able to experience our environment through a rich and reasonably stable
structure of objects and events. We can go on to integrate sequences of
situations into a history of typical events. We can attend to other individuals
and recognize the reﬂection of ourselves in the their behavior and actions.
Ultimately, the emerging sense of personal identity mediates between the
289
The Personal Intelligences

phylogenetic determinants of human existence and that particular pattern
of history that has been made by earlier generations of humans. Because
each culture has its own history, its sense of self and of others will neces-
sarily be unique.
In the light of these special circumstances, it is appropriate to question
whether personal intelligences—knowledge of self and others—should be
conceived of as being at the same level of speciﬁcity (and generality) as
the other intelligences that we have considered in earlier chapters. Per-
haps it makes more sense to think of knowledge of self and others as being
a higher level, a more integrated form of intelligence, one more at the be-
hest of the culture and of historical factors, one more truly emergent, one
that ultimately comes to control and to regulate more “primary orders” 
of intelligence.
I doubt that the question of the “specialness” of personal intelligences
permits a sharp and decisive response. In some ways, the personal intelli-
gences are as basic and biological as any intelligences considered here:
their origins can be discerned in the directly experienced feelings of the in-
dividual, in the case of the intrapersonal form, and in the direct perception
of signiﬁcant other individuals, in the case of the interpersonal variety. In
these senses, the personal intelligences conform to our working notions of
a basic intelligence. Yet it is undoubtedly true that the diverse forms that
personal intelligences can eventually assume are among their most out-
standing features. And, particularly in the West, it seems reasonable to
deem the individual’s sense of self as a kind of second-level regulator, an
overall metaphor for the rest of the person, and one that can, as part of its
“duties,” come to understand and to modulate an individual’s other capac-
ities. In this sense, then, the personal intelligences may not be directly com-
mensurate with those intelligences that I have treated in earlier chapters.
But it is equally important to stress that this “gloriﬁcation of the self”
is a cultural option, one that has been taken up in contemporary Western
circles, but that is in no sense a human imperative. Cultures confront the
choice of selecting, as a primary unit of analysis, the individual self, the nu-
clear family, or a much larger entity (the community or the nation):
through this choice, cultures determine (nay, dictate) the extent to which
the individual peers inward to himself or gazes outward to others. One rea-
son why we in the West tend to focus, even perseverate, on the individual
self is because this aspect of existence has—for historical reasons—
achieved increasing prominence within our own society. Were we living in
290
The Theory

a culture in which the focus fell chieﬂy on other individuals, on interper-
sonal relations, on the group, or even on the supernatural, we might well
not be impaled on the dilemma of the self-as-special. For as we have al-
ready seen, any consideration of the “specialness of the self” cannot be un-
dertaken apart from an analysis of the values and interpretive scheme of a
particular society.
Nonetheless, if compelled to present a “transcultural” statement about
the self, I would offer these remarks. I see the sense of self as an emerg-
ing capacity. From one vantage point, it is the natural result of the evolu-
tion of intrapersonal knowledge; but this evolution necessarily takes place
within an interpreting cultural context, even as it is necessarily channeled
by representational capacities that draw on the full gamut of human intel-
ligences. In other words, in my view, every society offers at least a tacit
sense of a person or a self, rooted in the individual’s own personal knowl-
edge and feelings. However, this sense will inevitably be interpreted and
possibly be remade by the individual’s relationship to, and knowledge of,
other persons and, more generally, by the interpretive schemes supplied by
the encompassing culture. Every culture will also engender a mature sense
of the person, which will involve some balance between intrapersonal and
interpersonal factors. In certain cultures, such as our own, the emphasis on
the individual self may become sufﬁciently extreme that it leads to the ap-
pearance of a second-order capacity, which presides over and mediates
among the other forms and lines of intelligence. This, then, is a possible
outcome of cultural evolution—but an outcome, it must be stressed, that is
difﬁcult for us to judge and may be based, at least in part, on an illusory view
of the primacy of our own powers and the degree of our own autonomy.
Having now reviewed at considerable length our family of seven intelligences,
we might perhaps conceptualize them in broad strokes in the following way.
The “object-related” forms of intelligence—spatial, logical-mathematical,
bodily-kinesthetic—are subject to one kind of control: that actually exerted
by the structure and the functions of the particular objects with which in-
dividuals come into contact. Were our physical universe structured differ-
ently, these intelligences would presumably assume different forms. Our
“object-free” forms of intelligence—language and music—are not fash-
ioned or channeled by the physical world but, instead, reﬂect the struc-
tures of particular languages and musics. They may also reﬂect features of
the auditory and oral systems, though (as we have seen) language and
291
The Personal Intelligences

music may each develop, at least to some extent, in the absence of these
sensory modalities. Finally, the personal forms of intelligence reﬂect a set
of powerful and competing constraints: the existence of one’s own person;
the existence of other persons; the culture’s presentations and interpreta-
tions of selves. There will be universal features of any sense of person or
self, but also considerably cultural nuances, reﬂecting a host of historical
and individuating factors.
In reﬂecting upon the place of personal knowledge in this set of intel-
ligences, I broach the issue of the status of the theory as a scientiﬁc en-
terprise. There are questions to deal with about the particular intelligences
as well as about the viability of the enterprise as a whole. While the ﬁnal
critique must be left to others, it seems appropriate at this point for me to
articulate some of the most salient difﬁculties with the theory as well as
my own thoughts on how these might best be handled.
292
The Theory

11
A Critique of the Theory 
of Multiple Intelligences
Introduction
In Part II, I have put forth a novel theory of intelligences, one designed to
provide a positive model of the different intellectual strengths displayed
by human beings. For the most part I have proceeded by demonstration:
that is, I have introduced each of the intelligences through examples, and
have sought to indicate their utility by reviewing the various ways in which
these intelligences have been deployed in diverse cultural settings. Many
details concerning these intelligences, and their manner of operation, re-
main to be ﬁlled in. Moreover, most of the limitations of the theory have
been glossed over or ignored altogether.
In this chapter, I begin the task of examining this new theory with a more
critical eye. It is important to consider how the theory stacks up with other
competing theories of human cognition: Is it too extreme or too eclectic?
What does it accomplish, and what does it omit? How could the theory be
expanded to incorporate other facets of our knowledge of human beings?
And how could it be made more useful to practitioners and policy makers?
This cluster of questions will concern us for the remainder of the book, as I
attempt to place the theory of multiple intelligences in a wider context. My
concern in this and the next chapter is primarily critical; though in Chapter
12, I begin to build a bridge connecting the main lines of this theory to those
aspects of education and practice that occupy central stage in the ﬁnal chap-
ters of the book. For those individuals who are interested chieﬂy in the ap-
plication of the theory, it is possible to proceed directly to Chapter 13.
293

In its strong form, multiple intelligence theory posits a small set of
human intellectual potentials, perhaps as few as seven in number, of which
all individuals are capable by virtue of their membership in the human
species. Owing to heredity, early training, or, in all probability, a constant in-
teraction between these factors, some individuals will develop certain in-
telligences far more than others; but every normal individual should develop
each intelligence to some extent, given but a modest opportunity to do so.
In the normal course of events, the intelligences actually interact with,
and build upon, one another from the beginning of life. Moreover, as I
shall demonstrate in some detail in Chapter 12, they are eventually mobi-
lized in the service of diverse social roles and functions. Nonetheless, I be-
lieve that at the core of each intelligence there exists a computational
capacity, or information-processing device, that is unique to that particu-
lar intelligence, and upon which are based the more complex realizations
and embodiments of that intelligence. Throughout I have tried to suggest
what these “core” components might be: phonological and grammatical
processing in the case of language; tonal and rhythmic processing in the
case of music. For present purposes, however, the idea that each intelli-
gence has one or more “raw” computational cores is more important than
the precise delineation of these cores.
I would not wish any reader to take this metaphor of a computational
device, or computer, more seriously than it is intended. Certainly, I have
no reason to believe that the neural mechanisms in the brain work identi-
cally to the electromechanical components of a computer; nor do I have
any wish to suggest that my computational devices are engaged in com-
plex decisional processes, about whether a certain signal is (or is not) mu-
sical, or grammatical, or personal. Rather, what I want to convey is that the
normal human being is so constituted as to be sensitive to certain infor-
mational content: when a particular form of information is presented, var-
ious mechanisms in the nervous system are triggered to carry out speciﬁc
operations upon it. And from the repeated use of, elaboration of, and in-
teraction among these various computational devices, eventually ﬂow
forms of knowledge that we would readily term “intelligent.”
It may seem odd that so venerated a concept as intelligence be thought
of as composed of “dumb” mechanisms (that is, ones insensitive to larger
meanings, ones that simply operate in quasi-reﬂexive fashion when stimu-
lated by certain contents or inputs). The philosopher Robert Nozick offers
a helpful discussion of this point:
294
The Theory

It is no illuminating explanation of our possession of a trait to attribute
it to a little person within us, a psychological homonculus who exercises
that very same trait. If there is to be an explanation of how our intelli-
gence functions, it will have to be in terms of factors that, taken individ-
ually, themselves are dumb, for example, in terms of a concatenation of
simple operations that can be done by a machine. A psychological ex-
planation of creativity will be in terms of parts or processes which aren’t
themselves creative. . . . The explanation of any valuable trait, feature, or
function of the self will be in terms of some other trait, one which does
not have precisely that value and probably is not valued . . . so it is not
surprising that the explanations are reductionistic, presenting a picture
of us as less valuable.
Nonetheless, it is a burden of the following chapters to indicate the ways
in which, building upon “dumb” computational capacities, we may still end
up with intelligent and even highly creative behavior.
It is best, then, to think of the various intellectual competences intro-
duced here as a set of “natural kinds” of building blocks, out of which pro-
ductive lines of thought and action are built. Not to push the analogy too
far, we might think of the intelligences as elements in a chemical system,
basic constituents that can enter into compounds of various sorts and into
equations that yield a plethora of processes and products. These intelli-
gences, while initially raw and unmediated, have the potential to be involved
in symbol systems, to be enculturated through their implementation in cul-
tural tasks. (Here they differ decisively from their counterparts in other
animals.) We can see them operating in isolated fashion, in certain unusual
populations and atypical situations; and it is the opportunity to examine
these special circumstances systematically that has permitted us to identify
the core operations in each domain. But in normal human intercourse, one
typically encounters complexes of intelligences functioning together
smoothly, even seamlessly in order to execute intricate human activities.
Related Theories
As I noted in the introductory chapters, the idea of multiple intelligences
is an old one. Different facets of the mind were recognized even in Greek
times; and “faculty psychology” reached its heyday in the early nineteenth
295
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

century, well before scientiﬁc psychology had even gotten underway. It is
a further matter of historical record that faculty psychology became almost
completely discredited, so much so that it is more likely to appear in a com-
pendium of curiosities than in a textbook of psychological theories. Yet, re-
cently, this approach has experienced a sort of comeback: a number of
theorists have put forth points of view that bear at least a family resemblance
to the present formulation. Before considering a few of these rejuvenated
faculty theories, it is worth considering the factors that have engendered
the renaissance of this “modular” view of intellectual capacities.
In its ardor to follow the physical sciences, psychology has searched for
the most general laws and processes—capacities that can cut across any
manner of content and that can therefore be considered truly fundamen-
tal. The most honored ﬁgures of the previous generation of psychologists—
Clark Hull, Kenneth Spence, B. F. Skinner—epitomized this trend.
Typically, they searched for the basic laws of sensation, perception, mem-
ory, attention, and learning, which, once discovered, were assumed to work
equivalently across language and music, across visual and auditory stimuli,
across elementary and complex patterns and problems. In its strong “uni-
formist” version, this search had as its goal a single set of principles—usually
laws of association—that were assumed to underlie all of the aforemen-
tioned faculties. Under such an analysis, memory was faint perception;
learning was enhanced or differentiated perception; and the like.
It is generally agreed that this program of psychology—well motivated
though it may have been—has not been notably successful. One rarely
hears nowadays of the search for basic all-encompassing psychological laws.
Traces of this approach nonetheless are discernible in certain dominant
schools of cognitive psychology, those that rely heavily on the model of a
general-purpose serial computer. Here one encounters faith in a set of re-
lated concepts: general problem-solving skills, which can be mobilized for
any problem that can be clearly stated; frame, script, or schema analysis, a
way of making sense of seemingly diverse elements by viewing them within
a structured context, such as the “script” for a familiar set of events; an
overall planning or TOTE unit, which uses feedback to determine whether
an intended task has in fact been carried out: a limited short-term memory
capacity, which can be “used up” by any content; a central processor, which
initially receives all input; and an executive, which determines how the or-
ganism should deploy its various capacities in pursuit of a goal. These ap-
proaches have, to my mind, been more successful than those of the earlier
296
The Theory

generation of learning theorists; but they have also proved inadequate and,
oftentimes, wrong-headed in their analysis of key psychological processes.
Sharing some of these misgivings, a number of theorists have recently
put forth points of view that question the centrality—or, at any rate, the
hegemony—of a model that posits general all-purpose mechanisms of mind.
The British experimental psychologist D. Alan Allport has proposed that
the human mind (following the human brain) is best thought of as a large
number of independent production systems: these computational units op-
erate in parallel (rather than serially) and are each speciﬁcally keyed to and
activated by a certain kind of information. As he puts it, “Overwhelming ev-
idence has accumulated for the existence of specialized neurones, re-
sponding selectively to particular (often quite abstract) invariant properties
of the sensory input, as a major design feature of the central nervous sys-
tem.” Key to Allport’s formulation is the claim that every production sys-
tem is content-dependent: our cognitive activities are related not to the
quantity of information to be processed but, rather, to the presence of par-
ticular patterns to which speciﬁc neural structures must (and do) resonate.
Allport rejects the need for a central processor in charge of these units.
As he sees it, these production systems simply work in parallel, with the
ones that ﬁre the most carrying the day. He notes, metaphorically, that con-
trol simply passes among systems as the result of something like a discus-
sion among experts (that is, among the various highly sensitized production
systems). He ﬁnds no need for—not even a rational account of—a central
homonculus that would decide what to do. As he asks, “What would the
central processor do?”
For the most part, Allport’s specialized production systems (and their
associated neurons) deal with much ﬁner units of information than do the
particular intelligences I posit. Yet, in sympathy with my account, Allport
indicates that the modular principle of functionally separable subsystems
appears to hold also at a molar level of analysis, one that maps onto such
behaviorally relevant systems as language or visual perception. In fact, All-
port cites evidence of the breakdown of mental abilities following brain
damage as the ﬁrmest foundation for the existence of intellectual modules
along the lines that I have sketched. Thus, although the theory was put
forth for quite separate reasons, the Allport model agrees in major partic-
ulars with my own point of view.
In a more extensive discussion, Jerry Fodor, philosopher and psycholo-
gist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has eloquently defended
297
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

the modularity of mind. Drawing most heavily on recent empirical studies
of linguistic competence and of visual processing, some of them inspired
by his colleague Noam Chomsky, Fodor argues that mental processes are
best thought of as independent or “encapsulated” modules, with each op-
erating according to its own rules and exhibiting its own processes. Siding
clearly with the faculty psychology views of Franz Joseph Gall (see Chap-
ter 2), (and against more recent generations of theorists), Fodor rejects
“horizontal processes” like general perception, memory, and judgment, in
favor of “vertical modules” like language, visual analysis, or musical pro-
cessing, each with its characteristic mode of operation. Fodor is not par-
ticularly concerned with the precise identity of each module—that is an
empirical question; but he puts forth his own hunch that the modules will
tend to reﬂect the different sensory systems, with language constituting a
separate module of its own.
Thus far, I sense no fundamental disagreement with Fodor, who in fact
posits modules at a level of analysis close to that with which we have been
dealing here. But Fodor contends further that only certain portions of cog-
nition can be explained through these relatively encapsulated modules. He
sees the need for positing a central unencapsulated region of mind, one
concerned with the “ﬁxing of beliefs.” The central processor has access to
the information from the different modules, can compare the various in-
puts with one another, and can draw on this wealth of data ﬂexibly in order
to make decisions and solve problems and do many other things that hu-
mans are skilled at doing. The comparisons effected by the central proces-
sor allow individuals to make the best hypotheses of what the world is like.
In adopting this point of view, Fodor deviates from a pure modular per-
spective. Indeed, he indicates that even as the modular point of view ac-
cords with the localized view of the nervous system, the central-processing
perspective reﬂects a more equipotential view of the brain, with diverse
areas of the nervous system participating in a wide range of activities and
being (at least potentially) in constant communication with one another.
Yet Fodor ultimately reaches a conclusion that, though pessimistic from a
scientiﬁc point of view, aligns his position somewhat closer to my own.
Fodor concludes that scientiﬁc investigation should be able to illuminate
the modules, because they are relatively distinct and so can be subject to
controlled experiment, but that the central processor is most probably im-
mune to such study because its lines of information are at once unlimited
and totally interconnected. As a practical matter, then, the science of cog-
298
The Theory

nition reduces to the study of the individual modules. Even if the central-
processing view is valid, says Fodor, we will not be able to incorporate it
meaningfully into our science of cognition.
Whether there is the need to posit some central processing mechanism
is a complex question that, all agree, cannot yet be adequately resolved.
Some authorities sympathetic to a modular point of view, like Zenon
Pylyshyn, feel that it is important to make a principled distinction between
impenetrable processes (which are impervious to information from other
systems) and penetrable processes, which can be inﬂuenced by goals, be-
liefs, inferences, and other forms of knowledge and information. Other re-
searchers, such as Geoffrey Hinton and James Anderson, who have been
inﬂuenced by a “parallel” model of the operations of the nervous system,
see neither the reason nor the use for a hypothetical central processor. Still
other researchers equivocate. Michael Gazzaniga and his colleagues main-
tain, “there are multiple mental systems in the brain, each with the ca-
pacity to produce behavior, and each with its own impulses for action, that
are not necessarily conversant internally” but go on to propose that the
natural language system may eventually exert some kind of control over
the other modules. In my own view, which I shall discuss in detail, it is
preferable as a research ploy to determine the extent to which all human
activities can be thought of as involving the development of, and varied in-
teraction among, the several individual intelligences. In the end, it may
even turn out that one can explain high-level processes in either way—that
is, through intricate combinations of intelligences or through the positing
of some kind of supramodular capacity (with its own genesis and history);
but even this ecumenical resolution seems premature.
That points of view similar to multiple intelligence (or MI) theory are “in
the air” is a source of some encouragement for my own efforts. (There are
many competing theories concerning intelligence as well, and some of these
will be discussed in Chapter 12, following my review of the present theory.)
At the same time, it makes it more important to justify some of the partic-
ular moves that I have made in putting forth my own theory. It is evident,
for example, that the size of the candidate modules can vary widely, from
extremely delimited production systems—such as those involved in the
perception of a phoneme or the detection of a line—to far more general
modules—such as those involved in language or spatial perception. My own
feeling is that both the mini- and the maxi-module efforts are equally cor-
rect and can be equally justiﬁed, but that they serve different purposes.
299
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

To the extent that one wants to model faithfully what the nervous sys-
tem is doing, it is appropriate to focus on the smallest possible modules
that can be related to speciﬁc behavior. Here the course favored by All-
port (or Hinton and Anderson) makes the most sense. On the other hand,
if one seeks a framework relevant to educators or policy makers in the ﬁeld
of human development, then it is important to posit modules at the levels
of analysis employed in everyday discussion. In this latter instance, the
Fodor or Gazzaniga position seems preferable. However, such common-
sense categories can only be adopted if they actually emerge, during the
course of investigations, as “natural kinds,” as legitimate groupings of ﬁner-
grained modules; otherwise, arbitrary merging of mini-modules into maxi-
modules is simply not justiﬁed. Thus, it is of the highest importance that
the various mini-modules investigated by researchers like Allport or Hin-
ton in fact seem to coalesce in terms of broader domains; in other words,
that various speciﬁc perceptual capacities do seem to become part of a
more wide-ranging spatial system, even as the various speciﬁc linguistic
analyzers can validly be spoken of as part of a more general linguistic sys-
tem. It seems plausible that over the course of millions of years of evolu-
tion, such individual production systems have evolved to become part of far
wider-ranging and highly intermeshed modules. This happy circumstance
can be exploited by those of us interested in positing mental domains that
will be useful to practitioners concerned with education.
And what of my use of the loaded term intelligence? As hinted at ear-
lier, part of the motivation for using this term is my desire to put forth a
more viable model of intelligence: I seek to replace the current, largely
discredited notion of intelligence as a single inherited trait (or set of traits)
that can be reliably assessed through an hour-long interview or a paper-
and-pencil test. But it should be said here as well that nothing much hangs
on the particular use of this term, and I would be satisﬁed to substitute
such phrases as “intellectual competences,” “thought processes,” “cogni-
tive capacities,” “cognitive skills,” “forms of knowledge,” or other cognate
mentalistic terminology. What is crucial is not the label but, rather, the
conception: that individuals have a number of domains of potential intel-
lectual competence that they are in the position to develop, if they are nor-
mal and if the appropriate stimulating factors are available. As normal
human beings, we exploit these potentials in dealing with a range of ma-
terials and objects, which are given meaning by the situations in which they
are employed. In the framework proposed by my colleague Israel Schef-
300
The Theory

ﬂer, intellectual potentials can be realized if preventive circumstances are
absent, if the appropriate sequences of experiences are forthcoming, and
if there is determination to pursue these lines of growth.
I should note that in the preceding chapters, I have tended to use ex-
amples of the highest forms of realization of an intellectual potential. Ac-
cordingly, I have focused on those who “produce” in a realm, and have
dwelled upon high forms of production, such as musical composition or
poetic creation. However, the analysis extends readily to perception and
appreciation as well as to production, and to diverse forms of art, science,
or sense making, be they traditional or innovative, folk culture or high cul-
ture. Indeed, these intelligences are routinely seen at work in ordinary ac-
tivities of nonspecialized individuals, but their most illustrious realizations
will be properly noted in those gifted in artistic or scientiﬁc production.
Psychological Constructs Not Addressed
There is a ﬁnal point that should be made before I turn to some of the
questions raised by the theory of multiple intelligences. Even if the the-
ory proves well motivated as far as it goes, there are numerous areas of
human psychology that it cannot encompass. Included here would be such
chapters—or entire textbooks in themselves—that treat social psychology,
personality psychology, the psychology of temperament, the psychology of
affect or feeling, the development of character. In no sense is the theory
of multiple intelligences designed to do away with or supplant these proper
subjects of inquiry.
Yet it would be equally misleading to suggest that MI theory proceeds
on a plane completely removed from these traditional concerns. In fact,
the theory cuts across them in at least two ways. First of all, MI theory
seeks to underscore the extent to which ways of knowing—forms of
knowledge—are present in virtually every realm of human existence. Thus,
far from being divorced from cognition, our capacities to interact with
other individuals, to enjoy works of art, or to participate in athletics or
dance each involve highly developed forms of cognition. MI theory seeks
to establish the pervasiveness of intellectual activities in areas where it has
hitherto often been excluded.
MI theory may also contribute by suggesting that certain facets of tradi-
tional psychology will be properly subsumed within a particular intelligence.
301
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

According to my analysis, many aspects of social development and social
behavior fall under the purview of interpersonal intelligence, just as vari-
ous aspects of the development of personality, character, and affect can be
treated within the purview of intrapersonal intelligence. Just how the lines
among these ﬁelds could be redrawn—and which aspects of these tradi-
tional ﬁelds continue to fall outside MI theory—is a task that can properly
be saved for another day.
Two other perennial concerns of psychology—motivation and attention—
have also escaped treatment in my presentation. I have no doubt that these
are extremely pivotal aspects of human existence, and that attempts to train
any—indeed, all—of the intelligences are likely to come to naught in the
absence of proper motivation and sufﬁciently focused attention. Moreover,
my own guess is that mechanisms of motivation and attention will turn out
to be rather general: in other words, proper theories of motivation and at-
tention will turn out to have applicability across the several intellectual
spheres. Yet it should be evident, even to casual observation, that com-
mitment in one or another intellectual sphere may entail high degrees of
motivation or attention, without similar investments being evident in other
areas. A youngster may be highly motivated to become a musician and dis-
play superb attentional capacities with regard to instrumental practice
while exhibiting neither motivation nor attention in other spheres of life.
Thus, even if a general theory of attention or motivation should be forth-
coming, it would still have to account for evident differences in the extent
to which these vaunted capacities are mobilized in activities representing
different intellectual realms.
“Higher-Level” Cognitive Operations
Thus far, in my survey of other areas of psychology, I have been concerned
with concepts, and lines of explanation, that may poach upon the intelli-
gences but are not regularly thought of as cognitive in nature. It has
seemed possible to discuss these summarily, without placing MI theory in
serious jeopardy. But more volatile issues arise when we consider certain
other aspects of human behavior, more frankly cognitive in nature, which
also appear, at ﬁrst blush, to elude my analytic framework. These are cog-
nitive capacities that seem to be “higher-level”—capacities like common
sense, originality, or metaphoric capacity—which clearly make use of men-
302
The Theory

tal skills but because of their seemingly broad and general nature seem in-
explicable within terms of individual intelligences. In truth, it is by no
means evident how each of these terms can be explained within multiple
intelligence theory, and, if they cannot, how the theory must be modiﬁed
if they are to be adequately accounted for. Yet, in a work on this topic, it
seems incumbent upon the author to at least reveal his intuitions with 
respect to these key intellectual functions. I do so here with the under-
standing that further analyses might well lead in quite different directions.
Common Sense
Perhaps the least problematic “general” cognitive term is common sense,
which I deﬁne as the ability to deal with problems in an intuitive, rapid,
and perhaps unexpectedly accurate manner. What has struck me in the
analysis of the term common sense is that it is customarily invoked with
reference to two kinds of individuals: those skillful in the interpersonal do-
main, and those gifted in the mechanical realm (bodily and spatial in my
terms). In contrast, the term common sense seems rarely if ever invoked in
discussions of individuals skilled in music, math, or purely spatial concerns.
One point about common sense, then, is that, far from being common coin,
it seems to be applied preferentially to individuals with highly developed
skills in one or two areas of intelligence and not in the kind of “across-the-
board” manner implied by the term. Common sense, in other words, seems
cognate to the practical application of a small minority of intelligences.
Nonetheless, I recognize that the term may apply as well to individu-
als who seem able to plan ahead, to exploit opportunities, to guide their
destinies and those of others in a prudent way, uncontaminated by jargon,
ideology, or elaborate but possibly irrelevant theories. Such an ability
seems less readily accounted for simply as highly developed mechanical or
social abilities. Such an individual would seem to be distinguished by the
capacity to bring together a wide amount of information and to make it
part of a general and effective plan of action.
In order to account for this highly desirable form of competence, it
proves necessary to bring to bear a number of other considerations. To
begin with, the ability to engage in calculations about the proper ordering
and orchestration of multiple lines of activity involves logical-mathematical
intelligence. Then, if an individual is to engage in considerable planning
303
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

about his life (or the lives of others), it is necessary to posit a highly de-
veloped intrapersonal intelligence or, more simply, a mature sense of self.
Finally, the movement from the ability to plan a line of action to the ac-
tual achievement of actions (from dreams to deeds) transports us away
from the realm of cognition, in a strict sense, to the arena of practice, or
effective action. Here we impinge on the sphere of will—certainly a cru-
cial component in the ways in which we actually lead our lives, but one
that I have also elected to skirt in this study of human intelligences.
Originality
A second cognitive capacity that may elude our theory of intelligences is
that of originality, or novelty—the skill of fashioning an unfamiliar and yet
worthy product within a particular realm, be it an innovative story or dance,
the solution of a personal conﬂict, or a mathematical paradox. To my own
way of thinking, originality or novelty does in fact occur principally, if not
exclusively, within single domains: one rarely if ever encounters individu-
als who are original or novel across the intellectual board, though clearly
some individuals have attained skills of a highly creative sort in more than
one domain—the Leonardo phenomenon. Thus, the need to explain this
capacity may reduce to the need to explain novelty within those particular
domains where it is in fact found—and to explain why a few individuals
succeed in more than one.
As in other facets of this work, I ﬁnd it useful to take a developmental
perspective on the issue of novelty. Early in life, most children give the ap-
pearance of engaging in original or novel behavior. I think that they do so
because of two related factors. First of all, the young child is not keenly
aware of boundaries between domains, and so more readily transgresses
them, thereby arriving oftentimes at unusual and appealing juxtapositions
and associations. Second, the young child does not have an affective stake
in arriving at a single literal interpretation of a situation or a problem: he
is not bothered by inconsistencies, departures from convention, or non-
 literalness. This insouciance, too, contributes to the apparently higher in-
cidence of novel products, though it by no means ensures that these
products will be cherished—or even properly interpreted—by others.
Early originality and novelty, however compelling they may be to the
analyst or the parent, are distant from those original and novel creations
304
The Theory

that we can await—though not necessarily expect—from highly skilled
practitioners in a ﬁeld. It is worth noting that such originality and novelty,
while often accepted as an unalloyed good in contemporary Western soci-
ety, is in fact deemed undesirable in many cultures, in which adherence
to an earlier consolidated tradition is the unquestioned goal. However, ac-
cording to my own analysis, genuinely original or novel activities can come
about only when an individual has achieved mastery in the ﬁeld where he
has been working. Only such an individual possesses the necessary skills
and sufﬁcient understanding of the structure of the ﬁeld to be able to sense
where a genuine innovation will lie and how best to achieve it.
But we do not actually know at which point in development such orig-
inality or novelty can come about, and whether it is, in fact, an option for
every individual who has worked his way through an intellectual domain to
its highest levels. If he has done so, it is up to the skilled practitioner him-
self whether he in fact produces original work or is simply satisﬁed with
realizing a prior tradition. Perhaps, however, the seeds for originality date
back far earlier and reﬂect basic temperament, personality, or cognitive
style: on this analysis, individuals would be marked early on as potential
creators of original works. These specially earmarked individuals would
then become likely candidates for original productions even if they have
not reached the top of their ﬁeld; in contrast, others who lack these per-
sonal attributes will never be original, even if they attain superlative tech-
nical skills.
Modest empirical support for the latter position comes from an infor-
mal study that some colleagues and I conducted a few years ago. We in-
terviewed several individuals who had become highly original musical
composers. In each case, we found that at as early as ten or eleven years
of age, these future composers were not satisﬁed simply to perform the
pieces of music presented to them but had already begun to experiment in
various ways, searching for variations that were more appealing. In other
words, as we saw in the case of Igor Stravinsky at an even younger age,
certain gifted young musicians were already composing and decompos-
ing. So far as I have been able to determine, this experimentation at an
early age is not common among those individuals who become superla-
tive performers but do not regularly compose. Individuals do not begin
as Menuhins and end up as Mozarts. Further support for this point of
view comes from numerous studies of the “creative” personality. These
studies document that certain personality traits—such as ego strength
305
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

and willingness to defy tradition—characterize the outstanding creative
individuals within a particular domain; they also help to explain the lack
of a relationship between scores on creativity measures and scores on more
conventional tests of intellectual strengths, at least above a certain level 
of IQ.
Metaphorical Capacity
Capacities that prove more challenging to account for in terms of MI the-
ory include the abilities to make metaphors, to perceive analogies, and to
cut across various intellectual domains in the process of forging such illu-
minating connections. In fact, this family of capacities seems at odds with
the whole notion of separate intelligences, for the metaphoric intelligence
(if we may so tentatively label this set of capacities) is deﬁned by the very
capacity to integrate diverse intelligences. It is this sort of realization that
apparently encouraged Jerry Fodor to posit a central processor that could
integrate the inputs from separate modules. Nor is a proponent of MI the-
ory made more conﬁdent in his claims by the knowledge that Aristotle sin-
gled out the capacity to create metaphors as the very mark for genius: it
would be an inadequate cognitive theory indeed that would allow genius
to slip through its analytic ﬁngers.
But MI theory does offer some ways of approaching the issue 
of metaphoric ability. To begin with, it may be the particular hallmark of
logical-mathematical intelligence to perceive patterns wherever they may
be: thus an individual with strong logical-mathematical abilities may be in
a favorable position to discern metaphors, though not necessarily to judge
their worth. Some modest support for this speculation comes from the fact
that scores on the widely used Miller Analogies Test (MAT) correlate
highly with other measures of logical power. It is also possible—in fact,
highly likely—that the capacity to discern metaphors and analogies exists
within particular domains. As I noted earlier, the capacity to contrive spa-
tial images or metaphors has been of great usefulness to scientists who are
trying to discover new relationships or to convey to a wider audience those
relationships that they have uncovered. Moreover, it is quite possible that
practitioners become skilled at discovering relationships within their cho-
sen domains. Thus, within the language domain, the poet will discern many
analogies and metaphors across semantic categories, even as the painter,
306
The Theory

the architect, or the engineer may discover numerous metaphors and
analogies within the particular symbol systems favored in their respective
domains. Thus, at least within particular domains, individuals with well-
honed skills may well be the prime candidates to become effective
metaphorizers.
But this line of explanation still circumvents that genius ﬁgure, the in-
dividual whose abilities extend across various domains, and who, indeed,
is marked by the capacity to ﬁnd connections between language and music,
dance and social communion, the spatial and the personal realms. One
could argue that these individuals have a highly developed metaphoric ca-
pacity in one domain (say logical-mathematical or spatial) that they are
simply importing to other domains. But I myself do not ﬁnd this explana-
tion fully convincing. While it seems to me that any domain might serve as
the principal vehicle (in a technical sense) for the forging of metaphors,
it is unlikely to constitute the entire explanation for a highly skilled
metaphoric ability.
Fortunately, there is evidence on the general development of
metaphoric capacities, much of it courtesy of our own laboratory at Har-
vard Project Zero. We can detect at least three forms of analogic or
metaphoric capacity in all normal children. To begin with perhaps the most
remarkable form, young infants seem to be born with the capacity to note
similarities across sensory domains—such as parallels in intensity or in
rhythms—that are detectable in the auditory and visual realms. Thus, the
six-month-old child can associate an auditory rhythm appropriately with a
set of dots or a silent ﬁlm that exhibits the same rhythm. There is a primi-
tive but nonetheless accurate capacity in the young infant to effect domain-
connections—a capacity that seems to fall outside the development of
speciﬁc intelligences as I have described them in earlier chapters.
In the preschool years, after the child has become a symbol user, we
encounter a second metaphoric capacity. This is the aforementioned time
when the child ﬁnds it easy—and perhaps appealing—to effect connec-
tions among disparate realms: to note similarities among different forms
within or across sensory modalities and to capture these in words (or other
symbols); to make unusual combinations of words, or colors, or dance
movements, and to gain pleasure in doing so. Thus the three- or four-year-
old can note and describe the resemblances between a glass of ginger ale
and a foot that has fallen asleep; or between a passage played on the piano
and a set of colors; or between a dance and the movement of an airplane.
307
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

As just suggested in the discussion of novelty, this metaphorizing procliv-
ity gives rise to an early form of originality, one that may not be entirely
conscious on the child’s part but that (as my colleagues have shown) is by
no means totally accidental either.
The early school years are a period where overt metaphorizing is less
likely. At this time, the child is striving to understand the structure of each
domain and to master domain-relevant skills, and so any excursion to the
realm of metaphorizing or analogizing may be unsettling. But once these
domains have solidiﬁed satisfactorily, and once the child has achieved the
requisite skills within desired domains, the possibility for metaphoric con-
nection once again comes to the fore. Here, however, one begins to en-
counter wide individual differences, with some individuals rarely engaging
in adventurous (or even routine) connections across domains, and with
others proving more likely to effect these connections, wherever they
might be.
My own belief is that these various early forms of metaphorizing rep-
resent a universal phenomenon, one that lies somewhat apart from the de-
velopment of speciﬁc intelligences but that constitutes part of the natural
developmental process. Infants are so constituted that they can make certain
cross-modal connections, just as they are wired to be able to imitate cer-
tain behavior patterns of adults. Preschoolers are similarly designed to note
similarities and differences as part of their effort to make sense of the
world. These are simply facts of development, and any comprehensive ac-
count of human development must allow for them. But whether they are
directly involved in later, higher levels of intelligence, and if they are,
whether the various “child” forms are all involved, is far from certain: thus
the analyst is perhaps excused if he does not posit a possibly short-lived
metaphoric intelligence or a set of intelligences that can be glimpsed dur-
ing the ﬁrst years of life.
When it comes to mature forms of metaphorizing, however, a crucial
question arises: Is there an adult form of metaphoric capacity, apart from
the separate intelligences, that some individuals have developed to a high
degree, so that they can bring it to bear upon particular intellectual do-
mains? And, if there is, what are the developmental origins of this much-
prized adult activity? At present, I do not ﬁnd sufﬁcient evidence to decree
a separate form of intelligence. Except for the indisputable existence of a
developed end-state, metaphoric intelligence fails to exhibit those signs
that have proved central in the identiﬁcation of other intelligences. My
308
The Theory

own “fall-back position” is that individuals who are skilled metaphorizers
have developed this ability in one or more domains, as part of their general
learning process, but now feel sufﬁciently secure with this skill that they
can apply it in the domains in which they happen to be involved. At his
best, the superb metaphorizer will discern connections virtually everywhere
and can censor those that appear unproductive or uncommunicative. Still,
there will be a preferred locus for his metaphorizing capacities—namely,
those ﬁelds in which he is most deeply knowledgeable and in which his
metaphorizing ability has found its most fertile grounds. Thus, a skilled
metaphorizer like the scientiﬁc essayist Lewis Thomas will be able to dis-
cern and exploit resemblances in the areas of music or dance; but his chief
mode of operation will still be in logical-mathematical areas. Similarly, the
redoubtable poet W. H. Auden, another insightful (and inveterate)
metaphorizer, will comb the world through his poems, but his principal
metaphoric point of departure will remain the linguistic realm. Metaphor
may spread to many localities, in other words, but it retains a favored
“home intelligence” all the same.
Wisdom
A yet more general form of intelligence, somewhat akin to but broader
than metaphorizing, has been variously called general synthesizing power
or, even, wisdom. This intelligence is what one comes to expect from an
older individual who has had a wide range of critical experiences in his ear-
lier life and can now apply them appropriately and judiciously, in the
proper circumstances.
On the surface, no capacity would seem further removed from the de-
ployment of a single intelligence, or even of a pair of intelligences. Wis-
dom or synthesis offers by its very nature the widest view: to the extent
that it is parochial or domain-speciﬁc, it seems inappropriate to call it “wis-
dom.” My own hunch is that these terms are applied to individuals who
have some combination of the abilities I have just reviewed: considerable
common sense and originality in one or more domains, coupled with a sea-
soned metaphorizing or analogizing capacity. The individual can draw upon
these abilities, at least in given circumstances, in order to make sage com-
ments and to propose well-motivated lines of action. If this hunch is cor-
rect, then any explanation that can account for common sense, originality,
309
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

and metaphorizing capacity ought to suggest the constituents of ultimate
wisdom. Unfortunately, it will take a very wise person indeed to come up
with a convincing formulation!
The preceding discussion indicates that, at least for some “higher-level”
operations, it should be possible to offer an explanation in terms of the
theory of multiple intelligences. These operations sometimes reduce to ca-
pacities in but a single domain (for example, interpersonal common sense
or originality in sculpture); sometimes can be seen as the combination of
an individual personality trait and an impressive ability in a given intellec-
tual domain (as in the case of an original novelist); sometimes are better
viewed as an emergent capacity that begins in one domain but spreads out-
ward (as in certain metaphorizing abilities); and sometimes are best seen
as an amalgam of different intellectual strengths (as in the case of wisdom).
All of these moves are frankly reductive: they are understandable, and
perhaps permissible if one wants to salvage MI theory, but are certainly
not necessary and perhaps unwise. The fact that the theory of multiple in-
telligences cannot explain everything does not invalidate the whole theory.
At some point in the future course of this theory, it may make sense to add
more general abilities or capacities (as Fodor has done) and to use them
to garnish the competences that arise from individual capacities.
The Sense of Self Revisited
It is appropriate to insert a few supplementary remarks at this point about
the cognitive capacity that has already placed the greatest strain on the
theory of multiple intelligences. I refer here to the sense of self—that prime
candidate for status as a “second-order ability” that presides over the sep-
arate intelligences. In the previous chapter I viewed the development of
self in terms of the personal intelligences. According to my analysis there,
the roots of a sense of self lie in the individual’s exploration of his own feel-
ings and in his emerging ability to view his own feelings and experiences
in terms of the interpretive schemes and symbol systems provided by the
culture. Some cultures will tend to minimize a focus on the self; and ac-
cordingly, the individual encased in such a culture will not allocate much
active agency to his own efforts and will place a correlative emphasis on
the behavior and the needs of others. But in other cultures, such as our
310
The Theory

own, there is a far greater emphasis on the self as an active decision-mak-
ing agent possessing considerable autonomy, including the capacity to
make pivotal decisions about one’s own future existence. Every culture
must, of course, strike a balance between the interpersonal and the intra -
personal aspects of knowledge—it is in this modulation that an ultimate
sense of self consists; but those societies that are biased toward the intra -
personal, and hence toward an assertive sense of self, pose the gravest
threat to any view of the intelligences as a simple conversation among
equal elements.
As already mentioned in the preceding chapters, one may adopt a num-
ber of different strategic approaches to this problem. The ﬁrst is simply to
declare the development of the sense of self as a separate domain of 
intelligence—one growing out of that core ability to perceive oneself that
we encountered in discussing the personal intelligences, but one that be-
comes fully on a par with the other intelligences that have been treated
here. On this analysis, the sense of self would either become a new (eighth)
intelligence or would become the mature form of intrapersonal intelli-
gence. The second, more radical move is to declare the intelligence of the
self as a separate domain, one inherently privileged from the start, since it
serves as a kind of central processor, or reﬂector, upon the other capacities.
This is the kind of move made by many developmental psychologists who
have studied the growth of self. A third move, one that I currently favor,
is to view the individual’s sense of self as an emergent capacity. It is a ca-
pacity that grows initially out of the intrapersonal and the interpersonal in-
telligences but that has the option, in certain social settings, of exploiting
the other intelligences as a means to a novel end. That novel end is the de-
vising of a special kind of explanatory model encompassing everything that
the individual is and everything that the individual does.
Let me try to explain in somewhat greater detail what I have in mind.
Because human beings have at their disposal a range of symbol systems—
such as language, gesturing, mathematics, and the like—they are able to
take the inchoate understanding that lies at the core of intrapersonal in-
telligence and make it public and accessible to themselves (and, for that
matter, to interested others). These representational systems enable the
individual ultimately to create what is essentially an invented ﬁgure of
speech—a ﬁctional entity of the mind—a model of what that person is like,
what he has done, what his strengths and weaknesses are, how he feels
about himself, and the like. The individual can then operate upon this
311
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

model, even as he can operate upon other models presented in other sym-
bol systems. The fact that this model refers to that entity in life that is most
sacred to him confers upon the model a special ﬂavor and feeling; but the
intellectual operations the individual brings to bear upon that model are
not by their very nature different from those one imposes upon the model
of a solar system, a biological organism, or another social creature. It just
feels different—and more important.
Rather than viewing a sense of self as a domain apart, or as a second-
order domain that has some inherent ontological priority over the others,
I prefer at this juncture to think of the sense of self as explicable in terms
of the existing multiple intelligences. I see this sense of self as the result
of the natural evolution of intrapersonal intelligence within an interpret-
ing cultural context, as aided by the representational capacities that emerge
in the other forms of intelligence. In the end, the individual can offer an
account of himself—one couched in language (or, more rarely, in other
symbol systems) that puts forth in logically acceptable fashion all those
properties of himself, and all of his own experiences, that seem worthy of
note. And he can continue to edit this description of himself as events tran-
spire over the years, and as his own “self-concept” alters. The particular
account that is offered may or may not be valid, but that is not of the
essence here. Crucial, rather, is that through a combination of one’s own
intellectual competences, and through the interpretive schemes furnished
by the rest of one’s own culture, it is possible to put forth a description of
oneself that appears to summarize, and regulate, the remainder of one’s
existence. Working together, the intelligences may give birth to an entity
that seems larger than them all.
Disconfirming the Theory
Before bringing to a close this critical discussion of MI theory, it seems op-
portune to indicate the conditions under which the theory could be dis-
proved. After all, if MI theory can explain (or explain away) all potentially
disconﬁrming evidence, it is not a valid theory in the scientiﬁc sense of
that term.
One might distinguish between two kinds of alterations of the theory.
In the happier event, the general line of the theory will continue to be ac-
cepted, but minor or major revisions will be made regarding speciﬁc
312
The Theory

claims. For example, it may turn out that certain of the candidate intelli-
gences violate major criteria and so are dropped from consideration; or,
alternatively, ones that have been ignored or rejected might themselves
earn a position among the select few. In another more substantial revision,
it might turn out that the theory of multiple intelligences can account for
a signiﬁcant portion of human intellectual activity, but that it is also advis-
able to add some other components not presently included. Such would
be added if the desirability of some horizontal component—such as per-
ception or memory—was convincingly demonstrated, or if some other 
capacity—such as metaphor, wisdom, or a sense of self—could be shown
to exist apart from the apparatus of multiple intelligence theory.
I can readily live with such revision. But it is also possible that the the-
ory will be found deﬁcient in some more fundamental way. If it turns out
that the most signiﬁcant human intellectual activities cannot be explained
in terms of MI theory or can be better explained in terms of some com-
peting theory, then the theory will deservedly be rejected. If it turns out
that the kinds of evidence heavily weighted here—for example, neuro -
psychological and cross-cultural ﬁndings—are fundamentally ﬂawed, then
the whole line of inquiry forged here will have to be reevaluated. It is also
possible that further studies of the nervous system—or of other cultures—
will suggest a vastly different picture of human intellective processes; and
thus, there would also have to be a radical revamping of the theory. Finally,
it might turn out that the whole Western inclination to pick out intelli-
gence—or intelligences—as a “natural kind” may not be the best (or even
a proper) way to slice up the human psyche or human behavior. And, in
such a case, the present theory, like all those it purports to replace, will go
the way of phlogiston. Being so discarded would give me little pleasure—
but I would be far less disappointed than if I had put forth a theory whose
very nature made it immune to refutation.
Conclusion
Even if my original list of intelligences can be salvaged by moves such as
the ones just proposed, it is evident that the intelligences cannot be viewed
merely as a group of raw computational capacities. The world is enwrapped
in meanings, and intelligences can be implemented only to the extent that
they partake of these meanings, that they enable the individual to develop
313
A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences

into a functioning, symbol-using member of his community. As the earlier
quotation from Robert Nozick reminds us, there may be “dumb” capaci-
ties at the center of intelligence; but it is equally true that these capacities
must be made “smarter” if one is successfully to interact with the sur-
rounding society.
It is the burden of the next chapter to begin the task of building from
raw intellectual capacities to intelligences that can function in a complex
and meaning-laden world. These meanings come to ﬁgure early on in the
story, for the initial percepts and actions of the infant—and all that follow—
are suffused with signiﬁcance: from the very ﬁrst, pleasures and pains are
associated with them, and interpretations are imposed upon them. Even
more important, what characterizes human intelligences, as against those
of other species, is their potential for being involved in all manner of sym-
bolic activity—the perception of symbols, the creation of symbols, the in-
volvement with meaningful symbolic systems of all sorts. This is another,
and perhaps the most crucial, part of the story of human development
in a world of meaning. Finally, with increasing age and experience, each
individual comes to learn not only the particular consequences attached
to individual acts and symbols, but the most general interpretive schemes
of the culture—the way in which the worlds of persons and objects, phys-
ical forces and man-made artifacts are interpreted in the particular culture
in which he happens to live. This immersion in the culture’s Weltanschau-
ung constitutes a ﬁnal decisive aspect of the life of the human, deﬁning
the arena in which his several mature intelligences will be deployed in
combination.
Talk of speciﬁc analyzers, of computers, of production systems, or even
of modules no longer sufﬁces once one encroaches upon this level of analy-
sis. We must begin to think in terms of more encompassing categories—
the individual’s experiences, his frames of reference, his means of sense
making, his overall worldview. All of these would not be possible without
speciﬁc intellectual computational capacities, but they would never come
into being without human symbolic activity. Thus, the development of
human symbol systems and symbolizing capacities becomes the next es-
sential part of the story to be related if we are to construct a bridge from
intelligences to educational practice.
314
The Theory

12
The Socialization of Human 
Intelligences Through Symbols
The Central Role of Symbols
Findings from biology and from anthropology stand at opposite extremes in
any theory of human cognition. From study of the structures and functions
of the nervous system, we should ultimately be able to specify certain limits
on all human cognitive activities. From study of all known human cultures,
we should eventually gain the fullest possible notion of the range of abili-
ties, including thought processes, that have evolved over human history. By
culling insights from these domains, we should receive a composite picture
of the nature, the range, and the limitations of human intellectual prowess.
But from the perspective of interdisciplinary synthesis, biology and an-
thropology are too remote from one another. In other words, our two prin-
cipal perspectives in this book do not partake of the same language. Biology
furnishes a picture of human genetic potential as well as an account of the
structure of cells, the synaptic connections, and the relatively molar re-
gions of the brain. Anthropology ferrets out the different roles that exist in
various societies, the various functions that individuals perform, the cir-
cumstances under which these functions are carried out, the goals that in-
dividuals set, and the problems that they pose and attempt to solve. So far
as I can see, there is no ready way to build a bridge directly between these
two bodies of information: their vocabularies, their frames of reference are
too disparate. It is as if one were asked to build a connecting link between
the structure of a harpsichord and the sound of Bach’s music: these enti-
ties are incommensurate.
315

Enter symbols, symbolic products, and symbolic systems. The domain
of symbols, as it has been constituted by scholars, is ideally suited to help
span the gap between the aforementioned entities—the nervous system
with its structures and functions and the culture with its roles and activi-
ties. In dealing with symbols like words or pictures, with symbolic systems
like mathematics or language, with symbolic products like scientiﬁc theo-
ries or literary narratives, we have commerce with entities and levels of
analysis that can “address” both biology and anthropology. Speciﬁcally, the
nervous system is so constituted that, provided with certain kinds of expe-
rience, the organism is able to learn to apprehend and deal with such sym-
bolic entities as words, sentences, and stories. For whereas the nervous
system knows nothing of culture, its various regions are constituted to
know a great deal about language. On the other hand, a culture—viewed
here as the collectivity of inhabitants—is indeed able to examine the words,
stories, theories, and the like that issue forth from its members. Thus an-
thropomorphized, the culture can evaluate these products, determine
whether they are adequate, observe or advise changes, opt for tradition or
for revolution. Those individuals most directly charged with the mainte-
nance of cultural knowledge and tradition may know nothing of brain cells
(or even of the role of the brain in cognition), but they are well equipped
to know, and to evaluate, the dances, dramas, and designs fashioned by
members. The realm of the symbol does indeed provide an indispensable
level of analysis, an essential tertium quid, between the constraints of bi-
ology and the range of culture (or, if one prefers, between the range of 
biology and the constraints of culture).
It is through symbols and symbol systems that our present framework,
rooted in the psychology of intelligences, can be effectively linked with
the concerns of culture, including the rearing of children and their ulti-
mate placement in niches of responsibility and competence. Symbols pave
the royal route from raw intelligences to ﬁnished cultures. It is therefore
necessary to comment on how one might envision this realm.
I take a catholic view of symbols. Following my mentor Nelson Good-
man and other authorities, I conceive of a symbol as any entity (material
or abstract) that can denote or refer to any other entity. On this deﬁnition,
words, pictures, diagrams, numbers, and a host of other entities are read-
ily considered symbols. So, indeed, is any element—a line no less than a
rock—so long as it is used (and interpreted) as representing some kind 
of information.
316
The Theory

In addition to denoting or representing, symbols convey meanings in
another equally important but less often appreciated way. A symbol can
convey some mood, feeling, or tone—once again, just so long as the rele-
vant community chooses to interpret a particular symbol in a particular
way. Thus, a painting, whether abstract or representational, can convey
moods of sadness, triumph, anger, or “blueness” (even if the painting it-
self is red!). By including this important expressive function within the ar-
mament of a symbol, we are able to talk about the full range of artistic
symbols, from symphonies to square dances, from sculpture to squiggles,
all of which have potential for expressing such connotative meanings.
Symbols can function alone as meaningful entities; but very commonly,
they enter as components or elements in a more highly elaborated system.
Thus, words ﬁgure in spoken or written language; numbers and other ab-
stract symbols in mathematical languages; gestures and other movement
patterns within dance systems; and the like. And a considerable range of
meanings can be effectively conveyed when entire symbolic systems are
used; mastering the deployment and the interpretation (the “reading” and
the “writing”) of such symbol systems constitutes a major task for every
growing child.
Finally, symbols and symbol systems gain their greatest utility as they
enter into the fashioning of full-ﬂedged symbolic products: stories and son-
nets, plays and poetry, mathematical proofs and problem solutions, rituals,
and reviews—all manner of symbolic entities that individuals create in
order to convey a set of meanings, and that other individuals imbued in the
culture are able to understand, interpret, appreciate, criticize, or trans-
form. These symbolic products are the ultimate raison d’être for symbol
systems—the reasons they have come to evolve, and the reasons that
human individuals go to the trouble of mastering diverse symbol systems.
Is there any limit on symbol systems, or can any conceivable set of 
elements be organized into systems, thereby yielding interpretable sym-
bolic products? This is a difﬁcult question. It seems almost self-defeating
to posit a priori a ﬁxed number of symbol systems, which cannot be al-
tered: this stricture constitutes a challenge that is almost too inviting, and
doubtless a clever individual (or an enterprising culture) can invent an ef-
fective new symbol system. On the other hand, one risks opening a Pan-
dora’s box in arguing the opposite—in claiming that there can be an
indeﬁnite number of symbol systems. One would then have to explain why
cultures the world over have tended to devise and favor the same kinds of
317
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

symbol system, and why it is headline news in the anthropological com-
munity when effective new symbol systems are uncovered.
If one has indeed speciﬁed the nature of human intelligences—the raw
materials for cognition—on the one hand, and the range of human cultural
roles and functions, on the other, one ought to be able to generate a list of
all possible symbol systems and, if you like, all the domains in which human
beings can become intellectually engaged. It would be a long list, because
the number of cultural roles is large indeed and may continually be ex-
panded with the invention of new technologies. But, at least in principle,
it should be possible to come up with an exhaustive list of symbolic sys-
tems. Such a list—or even a sketch of such a list—would be suggestive to
educators, for it would indicate something of the possible systems of mean-
ings that individuals growing up in a culture might be expected to master.
Of course, the introduction and mastering of symbolic systems is not
just a matter of theoretical speculation. It is a major burden of childhood
and might even be regarded as the principal mission of modern educa-
tional systems. It is therefore important to consider what is known about
the way in which human beings become accomplished in the symbolic
realm. Accordingly, I shall summarize the story of symbolic development,
as I have come to view it, based in part on the ﬁndings of other workers,
in part on the results of a decade of research by Dennie Wolf and other col-
laborators at Harvard Project Zero. Such a survey will serve a double func-
tion. On the theoretical plane, it will point the way toward an integration
of a biologically based view of intelligence, on the one hand, with an an-
thropological inventory of various cultural roles, on the other. Then, turn-
ing to more practical concerns, a discussion of the normal course of
symbolic development should introduce some of the challenges that face
educators. These steps should place us in a better position to consider
various pedagogical suggestions put forth in the concluding chapters of
this work.
The Emergence of Symbolic Competence
Introduction
According to my analysis, it is useful to think of the development of com-
petence with symbol systems as entailing four distinct phases. During in-
318
The Theory

fancy, the child acquires certain basic understandings, on which later sym-
bol use will piggy-back, and comes to evince capacities for certain mun-
dane symbolic activities. During early childhood, a period of incredibly
rapid advance spanning the ages from two to ﬁve, the child acquires basic
competence in a range of symbol systems: this is also the time when there
are at work two parallel aspects of symbolic development, which my col-
leagues and I have termed, respectively, the “waves” and the “streams” of
development. During school age, having achieved some basic competence
in symbolization, the child goes on to acquire higher levels of skill in cer-
tain culturally valued domains or “channels” of symbolization. This is also
the time when he masters various notational or “second-order” symbol sys-
tems, those that prove extremely useful in carrying out complex cultural
tasks. Finally, during adolescence and adulthood, the individual can be-
come a fully competent user of symbols, one who is able to transmit sym-
bolic knowledge to younger individuals and who has at least the potential
for fashioning original symbolic products.
Infancy. Aided by various examples drawn from my own work, I can now
take a closer look at these steps of symbol development and begin to consider
how they relate to the major themes of this essay. Starting with infancy, we
know that the newborn child has available a relatively circumscribed set
of skills and abilities through which he comes to know the world: “schemas”
like sucking and looking. At ﬁrst, these are brought to bear upon every
available object; but very soon the child learns to direct certain activities
to certain objects (sucking nipples and shaking rattles) while avoiding those
activities in cases where they are less productive. Here we see the ﬁrst ex-
amples of “meaning” becoming attached to behavior. The child pursues
those activities that, for him, have come to be connected with pleasurable
experiences, as well as those activities that lead to outcomes that he de-
sires. In this, he is regularly aided by the interpretations adults confer upon
his behavior and by the situations toward which he is guided (or away from
which he is warned) by adults.
The child achieves certain basic forms of understanding during the ﬁrst
year of life. He comes to appreciate that individuals can carry out certain
roles with associated behavior (like shopping or feeding); that events have
consequences (if you throw the bottle, it will fall on the ground); that there
exist categories of objects, like dolls or ﬂowers, that should not be confused
with one another; and the like. These understandings are important for
319
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

negotiating one’s way around the world of persons and objects. In addi-
tion, they constitute an initial introduction to many facets of experience
that will ultimately be expressed via diverse symbolic means.
A history of the ﬁrst year of life can also be written in terms of the ini-
tial operations of speciﬁc intelligences. As we have already seen, the child
is able to carry out numerous operations speciﬁc to each intellectual do-
main: he can recognize differences in pitches and tonal sequences, com-
monalities among tokens of the same phoneme type, the numerosity of
small sets of objects; he comes to appreciate the structure of the space
around him, the use of his body to gain desired objects, the characteristic
behavior patterns of other individuals, and his own set of customary reac-
tions and feelings. Indeed, considerable progress occurs within each of
these separate intellectual domains during the ﬁrst year of life.
Yet just as important are the ways in which these intelligences come
to interact with one another. Smooth reaching requires the intercalation
of spatial abilities with bodily activities: searching for hidden objects re-
quires the linking of logical-mathematical, spatial, and bodily capacities;
a feeling of anxiety when the mother leaves or a stranger comes upon the
scene involves the connection of intrapersonal and interpersonal forms
of intelligence.
Finally, we see a combination of intelligences at work in the ﬁrst forms
of proto-symbolic behavior detected toward the end of the ﬁrst year of life:
the ability to appreciate the meanings of single words and the ability to
“read” pictorial depictions of objects in the real world. The child of one is
able to respond appropriately to words like mother, cookie, or doggie be-
cause he can both make the proper linguistic discriminations and link these
envelopes of sound to objects perceived in the world and to actions or feel-
ings characteristically associated with those objects. By the same token,
the child is able to appreciate the linkage between a depicted form and an
object in the real world, an object that again features a whole range of per-
ceptual, motor, and affective associations. By virtue of these capacities, the
child is able to enter for the ﬁrst time into the world of public meanings—
and he will build upon this baptism into the symbolic realm in the many
additional symbol-using tasks that lie ahead.
The Child from Two to Five. During the following several years of life,
epoch-making events occur in the child’s symbolic development. The ages
320
The Theory

of two to ﬁve mark the time when basic symbolization develops, when the
child becomes able to appreciate and to create instances of language (sen-
tences and stories), two-dimensional symbolization (pictures), three-
dimensional symbolization (clay and blocks), gestural symbolization
(dance), music (songs), drama (pretend play), and certain kinds of mathe-
matical and logical understanding, including an appreciation of basic nu-
merical operations and simple causal explanations. By the close of the
period, the time when children in our society enter school, they possess
an initial or “ﬁrst-draft” knowledge of symbolization; they may then go on
in the years that follow to achieve fuller symbolic mastery.
An intuition for the several steps involved in the acquisition of such
“ﬁrst-draft” knowledge of symbolization can be gained from the follow-
ing example of the child at play with blocks. Given a block, the one-year-
old will simply place it in his mouth, knock it against a surface, or throw
it down—nothing symbolic is going on here. Symbolic activity of a mun-
dane variety begins in the perceptual realm, as the child can relate the
block to a picture of a block or can hand over a block when requested to
do so (“Give Mommy the block”). An important next step in block use oc-
curs around the age of two, when the child is able to pick up two blocks,
to announce one block as the “mommy” and the other as the “baby,” and
then to have the two blocks “take a walk.” At age three, the child can take
a number of blocks, place the smaller ones atop the bigger ones, and de-
clare, “This is a snowman,” or “This is a pyramid.” At age four, the child
is able to use the blocks in a numerically precise way—for example, build-
ing a staircase in which each column has one more (or one less) block than
the abutting column. Finally at age ﬁve or six, the child can, for the ﬁrst
time, exploit the various squiggles on the side of the blocks, in order to
compose simple words like C A T or conﬁrm simple number facts like 
2 + 4 = 6.
Streams of Symbolization
Our analysis of such events that occur predictably during early childhood
has turned up a number of factors at work: these are, respectively, the
streams, waves, and channels of symbolization. In their manner of opera-
tion lies the key to symbolic development during the preschool years.
321
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

First of all, there occurs a progression that is unique to each particular
symbolic system. In language, for example, there is a lengthy evolution of
syntactic capacities, from the ability to concatenate a pair of words (at the
age of eighteen months) to the ability to speak in complex sentences, to
pose “why” questions, and to utter passive constructions (by the age of four
or ﬁve). This progression occurs exclusively within language and has few,
if any, direct ramiﬁcations in other symbol systems—hence, it can be
thought of as a separate stream in the child’s evolving family of compe-
tences. In music, much of the activity involves working out the basic relations
to pitch that obtain within a scale. In blocks, the basic streamlike challenge
entails an understanding of the dimensions of extent, contour, and conti-
nuity that enter into and regulate the construction of buildings and other
architectonic structures. In number, the core activities involve an under-
standing of the operations of plus 1 and minus 1, and the growing capac-
ity to coordinate these operations with the knowledge of basic numerical
sets. And so on, for each remaining symbol system.
It seems legitimate to think of this streamlike development as the ar-
ticulation of a particular intelligence once that intellectual capacity has be-
come susceptible to involvement in (or appropriation by) appropriate
symbol systems of the culture. Thus, the core aspects of musical intelli-
gence (pitch and rhythm) are marshaled by the symbolic aspects of music,
such as expression (this is a happy piece) and reference (this alludes to an
earlier section of the song). In the case of language, the core syntactic and
phonological aspects come to express certain kinds of meaning (for exam-
ple, a string of words describes an agent carrying out an action that has
consequences) and to create certain kinds of effect (for example, a certain
plot conveys a scary aura). In drawing, the working out of spatial relations
in two and three dimensions enters into the depiction of objects and sets
of objects in the world, including ones that are farther from, overlap, or
are smaller than another object. Here, in each case, a once “raw” and un-
mediated intellectual competence is being marshaled by an available sym-
bolic vehicle in order to allow the realization of the symbolic potential of
that particular competence. An intelligence developing properly after the
ﬁrst year of life necessarily intermeshes increasingly with various symbolic
functions and systems. Indeed, only in brain-injured or autistic individu-
als does the intelligence continue to unfold in “pure” or raw form, un-
touched by a symbolic envelope.
322
The Theory

Waves of Symbolization
But there is another equally intriguing aspect to symbolic development,
an aspect that runs concurrently with its streamlike or encapsulated as-
pect. I refer here to certain psychological processes that we call “waves” of
symbolization: these sprawling processes typically begin within a particu-
lar symbolic realm but, by their very nature, spread rapidly and sometimes
even inappropriately into other symbolic domains.
As an initial example, take the “wave” of role, or event structuring: the
ability of the two-year-old child to indicate that an action has been carried
out or a role occupied by an agent. The normal symbolic means for ex-
pressing such meanings is through words (“Mommy sleep,” “Fido jump”)
or through “pretend” play (the child puts a doll to sleep, the child loops a
toy stethoscope around her neck): language and pretend play are the
“proper loci” of event-structuring knowledge. We ﬁnd, however, that this
psychological process does not remain simply within its proper symbolic
realm. Rather, whatever the symbolic domain of a given task, the child of
this age is likely to import event-structuring means. Hence, given a marker
and asked to draw a truck, the child may instead grab the pen, rub it along-
side the paper, and say, “Vroom Vroom.” He has transformed the marker
into a truck, and his actions serve to re-create the sound and feel of a ve-
hicle in motion. Or, take a task in which the child is asked to select that
block that resembles a toothbrush. Paying scant heed to the long cylindri-
cal block, the child will simply grab the next available block, whatever its
shape, and place it in his mouth, pretending that the block is a brush. Once
again, the structure of the role and the event have taken over.
A second wave, which we call analogical or topological mapping, comes
to the fore about a year later, at approximately the age of three. In ana-
logical mapping, the child’s use of the symbol captures, within the actual
symbolic vehicle itself, some relations originally observed in the ﬁeld of
reference that he is symbolizing. And so, for the ﬁrst time, in drawing, the
child becomes able to extend two appendages from the base of a circular
form and dub the resulting form “person.” Or the child is able to place
several blocks atop one another and declare the resulting form a “snow-
man.” The symbols bear an analogic resemblance to their referents. In a
perhaps related development in the realm of music, the child can capture
323
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

such analogic relations as whether the “target” song goes up or down, be-
comes faster or slower, but cannot capture the exact pitch or the metrical
relations. Given the sprawling nature of a wave of symbolization, the child
also uses a relational form of symbolization even in circumstances where
it is not appropriate. Asked to match the number of elements in an array,
he will note whether there are many or a few, but will not ﬁx the values
with proper precision. Or, asked to retell a story with several characters, he
will reduce the protagonists to two individuals—one representing good,
the other representing evil forces. The proclivity for capturing relative
sizes, shapes, or valences proves an all-encompassing wave at this point.
A succeeding wave, occurring around the age of four, explores the other
side of the coin. Riding this wave of digital, or quantitative, mapping, the
child is now intent on getting the number of elements in an array pre-
cisely correct. No longer does the child settle for rough approximations of
the number of toes on a foot, of characters in a story, of pitches in a song:
the child now gets his quantities just right. However, even this apparently
beneﬁcent advance exacts its cost: rather than capturing the feelings and
mood of a particular form of behavior (the sense of a person running in a
dance or in a drawing), the child may be so intent on depicting the move-
ment exactly correctly that crucial aspects of tone and nuance can be lost.
After all, sometimes the qualities of a referent prove more important to
capture than the quantities (particularly for aesthetic purposes).
There are important points associated with the appearance and the pro-
liferation of these wavelike capacities. First of all, each of these waves goes
on to have a further history, for event structuring, analogical mapping, and
digital mapping each ﬁgure in later life. We might think of the novelist,
the sculptor, and the mathematician as adult “masters” of the three wave
capacities just described. But perhaps more germane to my purposes, the
wide scope of the waves indicates that certain symbolic processes, whatever
their origin, are not inviolably tied to a particular domain of symbolization.
Instead, they become available as more general coin, to be exploited ap-
propriately (or inappropriately) by a much wider range of symbol systems.
I touch here on a crucial aspect of human intellectual powers.
Whereas most animals possess some computational capacities that are
highly developed—consider song in birds or dances in bees—these com-
petences are almost invariably encapsulated: that is, they remain rigidly
restricted to a certain avenue of expression. In contrast, human intelligence
is far more ﬂexible. Given a new and valuable ability, humans have a much
324
The Theory

greater proclivity to deploy that ability widely, to try it out in remote sym-
bolic domains, and to see whether “it ﬂies.” Indeed, we humans may not
be able to resist experimenting with certain newly evolving capacities,
even where they are not entirely appropriate. In the end, human beings
become supple symbol users because of our ability to mobilize those op-
erations that prove peculiar to one symbolic domain as well as certain ver-
satile operations that lend themselves to deployment across a range of
symbolic domains.
The relation of the waves of symbolization to autonomous intelligences
poses a difﬁcult problem. Whereas the streams map comfortably onto our
initial intelligence, the waves by their very nature do not respect the
boundaries that demarcate intellectual domains. My own view is that each
wave of symbolization originates within one intelligence: thus, event-
structuring is most closely tied to linguistic intelligence; analogue map-
ping, to spatial intelligence; digital mapping, to logical-mathematical
intelligence. However, for reasons that are not yet clear, powerful forces
operate to guide these symbolic waves to remote intellectual realms.
Having negotiated the three waves during the period when the indi-
vidual streams of development continue to unfold in several symbolic do-
mains, the child of ﬁve indeed has attained a ﬁrst-draft knowledge of
numerous symbolic products. He knows what a story is and how to spin a
short but suitable one; he exhibits comparable knowledge about songs,
plays, dances, designs, and numerous other symbolic products. Indeed,
this age is often described as a ﬂowering of symbolic activity, for the child
enthusiastically and effortlessly can produce instances in each of these sym-
bolic domains. Moreover, these examples often strike the observer (at least
in our aesthetically permissive era) as novel, charming, creative, and orig-
inal. The child is able to express himself freely without undue critical ap-
prehension and has no commitment to producing just what others have
fashioned. He is willing to transcend boundaries, to link domains, to effect
unusual juxtapositions—in short, to exhibit some of the experimentation
and ﬂavorfulness that we associate with the mature artist. It is a heady time.
Channels of Symbolization
Yet a new ensemble of symbolic processes is also beginning to come to the
fore. These processes emerge spontaneously (at least in our society) when
325
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

the child begins on his own, during a game, to make little “counting” marks
on a piece of paper; or when asked to go to the store and purchase a dozen
items, the child tries to invent a simple notation to aid him in his task. At
around the age of ﬁve, six, or seven, children become capable of nota-
tional symbolization—the capacity to invent or use various notational sys-
tems that, in “second-order” fashion, themselves refer to basic symbol
systems. There is written language that refers to spoken language; the
written numerical system that refers to spoken (or otherwise symbolized)
numbers; there are assorted maps, diagrams, codes, musical, or dance no-
tational systems, each of which has been devised in order to capture salient
points of a symbolic display. We might consider this new development the
ﬁnal and most decisive wave of symbolization.
Notational symbolization differs from earlier waves. First of all, the ca-
pacity to create notations is a second-order capacity: it features a symbol
system that itself refers to other symbol systems. Notationality thereby
opens up possibilities of a most happy, but unanticipated sort: now the
child can continue to invent symbol systems of an ever higher and more
complex order, which take a previously mastered notational system as their
referent. Much of mathematics and science is built upon this recursive
possibility, where a third-order system can refer to a second-order system,
and so forth.
Perhaps most important, the hand of the culture can be seen with crys-
talline clarity at this point of symbolic development. Whereas the streams
and the waves of earlier years have an endogenous quality and may well be
observed in roughly comparable forms across the cultures of the world,
notations clearly come largely from the surrounding culture. Hence, they
constitute channels of symbolization—means of codifying information that
have evolved within a given culture and are now furnished directly to the
younger learner. While the inclination to invent notations might well be
present even in individuals who live in societies with scant notational prac-
tices, it seems probably that only individuals who live in societies with
many channels of notation will go on to use notations regularly in their own
lives. Here may lie one of the principal differences between schooled and
nonschooled societies, and hence, between the kinds of individuals each
characteristically produces.
Once he becomes enwrapped in a world of notations, the child is bent
on mastering new systems and using them in a precise and prescribed way.
The child is now engaged in earnest in obtaining the symbol skills of his
326
The Theory

culture; and, in a sense, the fun is over. The child attends especially to the
symbolic channels favored by his culture, be they the dances in a ritual or
the language in a historical textbook; and, correlatively, he comes to ignore
those symbolic potentials that are neglected within his own culture.
Whereas, until this time, much of the mastery of symbolization has taken
place in an informal, almost invisible manner, the learning of these explicit
notational systems typically occurs within a formal setting and, oftentimes,
in an actual school. It is hardly an exaggeration to assert that education—
as the term is used today—refers to the processes whereby children are
introduced to, and come to master, the principal notational channels of
their culture.
At least within our own society, there is an intriguing, if somewhat
discouraging, cognitive corollary to the advent of notational symboliza-
tion. In his zeal to master certain symbolic systems, the child often becomes
extremely literal-minded. He wants to use the symbol system just in the
proper way and so will brook no deviations or experimentation. In fact, ﬁg-
urative language, unusual juxtapositions, and other departures from the con-
ventional are out. This banishment makes the child’s work seem prosaic and
drab—in contrast to the freer if more idiosyncratic works of earlier years.
But this “literal stage” may well constitute an essential aspect of sym-
bolic development; and it would be a radical pedagogue indeed who would
attempt to circumvent or subvert it altogether. Perhaps one must master
the symbolic system, as it is supposed to be mastered, before one can take
fresh advantage of it. And, indeed, most adults seem content simply to gain
some competence in the major symbol systems of their culture and to
make sure that their youngsters achieve similar (or perhaps greater) com-
petence. There is in most populations little interest in innovative uses of
symbol systems, in departures from the status quo. It is given to only a few
individuals in most cultures to reach the apogee of symbolic competence
and then to move off in unanticipated directions, experimenting with sym-
bol systems, fashioning unusual and innovative symbolic products, perhaps
even attempting to devise a new symbol system.
Overview
Through this rapid survey of the highlights of symbolic development, as
they have emerged in the research at Project Zero, I have attempted to
327
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

suggest the way in which the raw intelligences come to be exploited and
absorbed in the devising and the interpretation of symbolic products. Thus,
in infancy there may be instances of the raw intelligences, but these are
almost immediately enwrapped in meaningful activities, as a result of their
affective consequences for the young child, and in light of the rich inter-
pretations perpetually supplied by the surrounding culture. Then, during
the preschool years, each intelligence is increasingly involved in the mas-
tery and the deployment of diverse symbol systems. During this time, some
aspects of the development of symbolic competences respect the bound-
aries of an intelligence, proceeding along relatively conﬁned streams; while
other aspects are likely to overrun the boundaries between intellectual do-
mains in broad waves. Finally, during the period of notational symboliza-
tion, the culture itself intrudes, as various channels provided by the
culture come to exert an ever greater effect on the child’s symbolic prac-
tices and achievements. By this time, the dynamic within an individual in-
telligence must somehow have become intermeshed with the agenda of
the culture, lest the child engage in activities that, from the culture’s point
of view, are unproductive, if not frankly autistic. Indeed, most individuals
become so caught up in the mastering of the symbol systems—as deﬁned
by the culture—that sparks of original creativity remain in only a small mi-
nority of the population.
The study of the developmental course of human symbolization has
barely begun, and essentially all research has been conducted from the
perspective of behavioral science. Yet, with my interest in the biological
bases of cognition, I shall risk a few speculative remarks. First of all, it
seems apparent that participation in the symbolic process is part of the
human condition. Humans are as “prepared” to engage in symbolic
processes (from language to dreams) as squirrels are prepared to bury nuts:
it would take extraordinary pressures to keep an organism (raised in a cul-
tural setting) from becoming a symbolic creature. As a second point, the
forms and kinds of symbolization in which humans participate may also be
guided by biological processes. While clearly there exists a wide range of
symbolic routes, and cultures can conjure up fascinating and unexpected
symbolic complexes, it seems likely that the main avenues of symboliza-
tion, the main forms of symbol use, and our trio of streams, waves, and
channels are also courtesy of our species membership.
A ﬁnal point concerns the rhythms of symbolic development. In my
view, there is a period of relatively great ﬂexibility or plasticity during the
328
The Theory

ﬁrst years of symbolic development: at that time, one has many options for
the exploration of particular symbolic systems, the devising of unusual sym-
bolic combinations, or the actual transgression of symbolic boundaries.
This period may be likened to the phase of early plasticity found in a range
of biological systems in a range of organisms. At the same time, there may
also be sensitive or critical periods, when involvement with the “stuff” of
particular symbolic systems is particularly crucial, and failure to become in-
volved especially costly. Correlatively (within and across cultures), partic-
ular triggering events or crystallizing experiences may guide individuals
down particular symbolic paths. The growing reluctance to experiment
with symbol systems in late childhood may reﬂect a decline of ﬂexibility
and plasticity, paralleling the increased rigidity found elsewhere in the
processes of biological development. Just why a select group of individu-
als can retain—or recapture—the ﬂexibility of early childhood remains one
of the most puzzling of all dilemmas in the biological domain.
While it has proved possible to indicate certain ways in which the in-
dividual intelligences continue to develop during the periods when sym-
bolization comes to the fore, it is important to underscore once again that
certain aspects of development do not fall easily into the “pure intelli-
gence” mode of analysis. I refer, for example, to various amodal (or cross-
modal) forms of representation, which may not respect the boundaries
among intelligences. From the ﬁrst months of infancy, it will be recalled,
infants display some abilities to link information across diverse sensory
modalities and even to recognize abstract qualities like continuity, inten-
sity, height, and the like, which are encountered across diverse intellectual
domains. Similar kinds of amodal sensitivity may well enable the child dur-
ing the period of basic symbolization to effect mappings across diverse sys-
tems. And, during later childhood, such amodal sensitivities may spur the
development of more general analogic or synthetic powers that can prove
extremely important for creative output. Thus far, for reasons spelled out
in the previous chapter, I have resisted the impulse to label these capaci-
ties as a separate “amodal” or “cross-modal” form of intelligence; but it is
important that they not be omitted from any consideration of the trajectory
of human symbolic development.
Even as we should allow the possibility that symbolic development may
involve abilities that resemble neither streams nor waves, we must keep in
mind the powers of the individual intelligences. As we saw in earlier chap-
ters, linguistic intelligence will emerge even in individuals deprived of the
329
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

normal auditory-oral channels of communication, just as spatial intelli-
gence will emerge even in individuals blinded from birth. Such ﬁndings
provide powerful evidence that intelligences are sufﬁciently canalized (in
the biological sense) as to be manifest even in the absence of normal spurs
to growth. To be sure, intelligences may well be funneled by cultures to
extremely diverse ends, but ultimately it is unlikely that the most basic
human potentials can be altogether distorted or stiﬂed.
Issues in Symbolic Development
I have so far intimated a consensus within the community of developmen-
tal researchers on the issues of symbolic development. In a way, this por-
trait is permissible, because the number of researchers plumbing this area
is very small, and the initial task of charting has itself consumed most of our
energies. Moreover, it is fair to say that most of the researchers have been
strongly inﬂuenced by Piaget and therefore ﬁnd it natural to espouse a
view of development as occurring in stages. Still, it is likely that any dis-
cussion among students of symbolic development would uncover signiﬁ-
cant disagreements and tensions as well. Consistent with my project of
subjecting MI theory to discussion and criticism, it is appropriate to indi-
cate where some of these tensions might lie.
First of all, while many authorities see learning as increasingly canalized
and rigidiﬁed with age, so that the older individual has available fewer av-
enues for ﬂexibility, some investigators have put forth an alternative point
of view. In this latter view the young child is a prisoner of his abilities and
gifts, which may exist in exquisite form but also lie in splendid isolation
from one another, unable to be productively linked; while the mature in-
dividual is able to gain conscious access to his various modular abilities and
to mobilize them for diverse ends. According to Ann Brown and Paul
Rozin, two psychologists who have pondered this issue, once a new ability
has been brought to consciousness, it can then be applied to all kinds of di-
verse programs and ends. Naturally, such a bubbling up to consciousness
is less likely to occur in the two-year-old than in the twenty-year-old. Here,
then, is a view that may account for the striking originality and ﬂexibility
found among at least some adults.
As far as I am concerned, these two positions are not necessarily in con-
ﬂict. Perhaps the ability to master a particular program in a smooth and
330
The Theory

effortless way is easier in earlier life, but the ability to mobilize this ability
and put it to fresh uses may be the prerogative of the developed individ-
ual. In any case, the issue of when abilities are ﬂexible and/or accessible,
as opposed to canalized and/or inaccessible, proves vital for anyone con-
cerned with educational interventions in the symbolic domains.
A second controversial area concerns the existence of stages of devel-
opment, and the extent to which such stages may be linked to certain ages.
As articulated by Piaget, the strongest position here holds that there are in-
deed discrete stages of development, which are qualitatively different from
one another and stipulate characteristic worldviews. Moreover, as part of
this point of view, there is the frequent rider that the stages of develop-
ment are age-linked; and that, if the child does not pass smoothly through
a stage at the appropriate age, his subsequent development will be for-
ever askew.
The past decade has not been friendly to the strong version of the stage
hypothesis. It turns out that young children are capable of many opera-
tions once withheld from them; and that, under certain circumstances,
adults must pass through stages of learning paralleling those realized by
the young child. It is difﬁcult, in the light of these ﬁndings, to adhere to a
rigid view of the stage theory. Nonetheless, in my own view there is still
utility in recognizing different mental organizations associated with dif-
ferent levels of understanding (for example, in the picture of symbolic de-
velopment I have rendered); and it is the foolhardy optimist who, conﬁdent
that certain symbolic skills can be easily acquired by the adult, would with-
hold crucial symbolic experiences from children. To be sure, adults can at-
tain mastery in many areas, sometimes even more quickly than children
can, but mature individuals may well be using different kinds of abilities
and strategies (including ones to which they have conscious access); there
may well be certain facets of the material (such as accent or connotation
in language) that the adult will never be able to negotiate as successfully
as the naïve child.
Returning for a moment to the argument of earlier chapters, I ﬁnd it
most plausible that each domain of intelligence and, by extension, each
symbolic domain harbors its own series of steps through which the indi-
vidual can advance. There is no reason to think that these intelligences or
symbol systems align with complete consistency alongside one another:
that kind of general stage notion has almost surely been discredited. Nor is
it reasonable to assume that the limits and the possibilities of adult learning
331
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

are the same across diverse symbol systems. Rather, it seems more pro-
ductive at this point to look for stagelike sequences, and for age-linked
limitations, in each of the separate intelligences and to see whether any
systematic patterns can be observed. It is equally important to examine
putative stage sequences across different cultures to see, for example,
whether the steps of development in drawing or dance are revealingly dif-
ferent, depending upon the cultural contexts in which they unfold. Only
after such careful empirical work will it be opportune to return to more
general issues such as the utility of stage concepts altogether and the rela-
tionships that may obtain between learning by children and learning 
by adults.
A ﬁnal controversial issue pertains both to the range of abilities or po-
tentials that one can ﬁnd within a population and to the extent to which
that range can be affected by environmental manipulations. This is a clas-
sical dilemma. Scholars of a hereditarian persuasion generally believe in
fairly wide individual differences, which cannot be much affected by en-
vironmental manipulations; those of an empiricist or environmentalist per-
suasion tend to minimize differences among individuals and to feel that
whatever differences may exist lend themselves readily to reduction (or in-
tensiﬁcation). Of course, it is possible to ﬁnd hereditarians who believe in
only small differences among individuals, as well as to ﬁnd empiricists who
are impressed by the large (initial or culturally formed) differences among
individuals as well.
What is striking is that, with the passage of time and the accumulation
of mountains of information, most disputants remain committed to their
original position. Not even the demonstrations that a normal college stu-
dent can increase his short-term memory tenfold, or that most differences
in school performance can be virtually eliminated by tutoring, or that
seemingly average Japanese children can become violin virtuosos, sufﬁce
to convince the committed hereditarian that individual differences can be
fully dissolved by judicious intervention. Indeed, even I myself confess to
being unpersuaded that there are not inborn differences, sometimes ones
of great moment, and that at least some of them can never be erased.
What recent research has shown, virtually incontrovertibly, is that what-
ever differences may initially appear, early intervention and consistent
training can play a decisive role in determining the individual’s ultimate
level of performance. If a particular behavior is considered important by
a culture, if considerable resources are devoted to it, if the individual him-
332
The Theory

self is motivated to achieve in that area, and if proper means of crystalliz-
ing and learning are made available, nearly every normal individual can at-
tain impressive competence in an intellectual or a symbolic domain.
Conversely, and perhaps more obviously, even the most innately talented
individual will founder without some positive supporting environment.
Discovery of an individual’s inherent intellectual proﬁle, which I believe
may be possible, need not serve, then, as a means of pigeonholing the in-
dividual or of consigning him to an intellectual junk heap; rather, such dis-
covery should provide a means for assuring that every individual has
available to him as many options as possible as well as the potential to
achieve competence in whatever ﬁelds he and his society deem important.
Interaction Among Intellectual Competences
In alluding to the roles valued by a society, I approach the question of the
ways in which intelligences are ultimately to be deployed. It is evident that,
with few exceptions, societies are not interested in “pure” intellectual com-
petences: there are few occupational roles that the idiot savant of linguis-
tic, logical, or bodily intelligence can perform. Rather, in nearly all socially
useful roles, one sees at work an amalgam of intellectual and symbolic
competences, working toward the smooth accomplishment of valued goals.
In a sense, then, my description of individual intelligences, and even
of the early stages of symbolic development, is a ﬁction, one chieﬂy useful
for scientiﬁc purposes. Neither the several intelligences nor the various
streams exist in pristine isolation; rather, such “ideal systems” are always
encountered in a cultural setting, one that comes to exert decisive control
of their developmental course. And so, in this present study, I have crossed
a conceptual Rubicon: from this point on, I shall (with rare exceptions) be
concerned with how human proclivities and skills unfold within a sup-
portive cultural context.
Especially in a complex society, there is clearly no one-to-one 
correspondence between intellectual strengths and social roles. To begin
with, the individual with impressive ability in one form of intelligence can
use it to a number of ends. Thus, the individual in our society with well-
developed spatial skills might end up as engineer or architect or, equally,
as artist or sculptor. Likewise, an individual with well-developed interper-
sonal skills could end up as teacher or social worker, minister or magician.
333
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

An intellectual strength opens up possibilities; a combination of intellec-
tual strengths spawns a multiplicity of possibilities.
From the opposite perspective, it is equally evident that a valued cul-
tural role can be ﬁlled by individuals who present distinctive intellectual
proﬁles. Take, for example, the role of lawyer in our society. There is room
in (and at the top of) the legal profession for the individual who has out-
standing linguistic skills: one who can excel in the writing of briefs, the
phrasing of convincing arguments, the recall of facts from hundreds of
cases, and the like. There is room also for the individual with highly de-
veloped interpersonal skills: one who can speak eloquently in the court-
room, skillfully interview witnesses and prospective jurors, and display an
engaging personality—the so-called society lawyer. Finally, there is room
for the individual with highly developed logical skills: one who is able to an-
alyze a situation, to isolate its underlying factors, and to follow a torturous
chain of reasoning to its ultimate conclusion.
Still in the area of legal reasoning, the forms themselves can be differ-
entiated in various ways. Analysts of the legal profession, like Paul Freund
and Edward Levi, designate a variety of reasoning abilities that can be used
by lawyers, including reasoning by analogy, pursuing lengthy syllogistic
chains, engaging in dialectical thinking, ﬁnding the best precedent, over-
looking marginal details, and testing hypotheses (in the manner of a sci-
entist). Lawyers may begin from ﬁrst principles, from earlier cases, or from
the conclusion that a client wants one to reach. They may rely on reﬂec-
tion, authority, or intuition—the recognition of a solution through instan-
taneous, nonreﬂective means. Members of the legal profession also differ
in whether they rely on straight logical deduction, in whether they value
elegance in presentation, and in whether they are preoccupied with ethi-
cal issues or overwhelmed by personal ties to a client.
It is obvious even from this brief excerpt that the mere evocation of
“logical-mathematical reasoning” is too simple to account for the kinds and
the combinations of reasoning skills that are cultivated in lawyers. Doubt-
less, a similar differentiated analysis can be carried out for each of the roles
within a complex society, ranging from performers to physicians, from sci-
entists to salesmen. Moreover, once one begins to consider combinations
of intelligences, one encounters an even larger set of ways in which an in-
dividual can be competent. Thus, it seems evident that a lawyer is well
served if he has highly developed linguistic, logical, and interpersonal in-
telligences (though it is less obvious how musical or kinesthetic intelligence
334
The Theory

would bear on his practice). And the number of ways in which linguistic,
logical, and interpersonal intelligences can be combined in effective legal
practice is staggering even to contemplate.
As we toy with these sets of intelligences, we can readily see how var-
ious combinations might be exploited by different kinds of practitioner
both in our culture and in others. Taking the lawyer as the paradigm of a
combination of logical and linguistic intellectual abilities, we might con-
trast this mix of intelligences with several other couplets. The skilled politi-
cian may combine linguistic and social intelligence to a high degree but
have relatively little need for logical ability; the grace involved in kines-
thetic intelligence might prove an asset as well. As for public ﬁgures in
other, less legalistically oriented societies, it is possible that social factors
might again emerge as more important than logical ones. According to
Stanley Tambiah, for example, advocates in African societies are less con-
cerned with whether their statements can be disproved and more concerned
with their persuasive powers. In the case of the theatrical performer, a pre-
mium may be placed on linguistic and bodily intelligence: on the other
hand, I am not persuaded that interpersonal intelligence per se ﬁgures
prominently in the skillful execution of dramatic roles, though it may be
important for a director who must orchestrate large numbers of individuals.
Other combinations of intelligences lead in yet different directions. The
individual with strongly developed logical-mathematical and spatial abili-
ties has the gifts to become a physical scientist: the logical abilities may
prove relatively more important for the theoretically oriented individual;
the spatial abilities, for the experimental scientist. An individual equipped
with these abilities along with a combination of linguistic and social skills
would make an ideal administrator of a large scientiﬁc laboratory. Para-
doxically, this latter combination of abilities might also be useful for the
sorcerer in a traditional society, for he, too, needs skills in language, inter-
personal relations, and logic, though perhaps in a different mix.
It is tempting to regard the particular intelligences as elements in a
mentalistic chemistry set and to engage in the cocktail-party exercise of
analyzing different social roles in terms of their preferred blend of intel-
lectual ﬂavors. I have myself succumbed to this temptation. But I hope I
have not obscured the serious point: there is always a dialectic at work be-
tween the roles and the functions valued in a culture, on the one hand,
and the individual intellectual skills possessed by its inhabitants on the
other. The purpose of the professional marketplace or of the personnel
335
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

director is to effect the most productive match between the demands of
various roles and the proﬁles of speciﬁc individuals. One might even spec-
ulate that the smoothly functioning society has found a proper mechanism
for effecting this correspondence (or has roles that nearly anyone can ﬁll)
while the dysfunctional society is packed with individuals whose intellec-
tual proﬁles do not jibe with important roles. I would suspect that this kind
of mismatch is most likely to occur during periods of rapid change. At such
times, a new host of roles (for example, those involved in science and tech-
nology) need to be staffed; but the traditional training of individuals has
neglected (or actively rejected) those combinations of intellectual and
symbolic skills essential to the effective execution of these newly emerg-
ing roles.
In this chapter, I have sought to broaden the analyses of earlier parts
of the book by showing how our raw intellectual competences constitute
the basis on which human symbol-using capacities of the most diverse sort
are constructed and then deployed for societal ends. In my view, it is
through an understanding of how individuals obtain competence with var-
ious symbol systems and learn to fashion diverse symbolic products that
we are most likely to gain a better understanding of the means by which
one becomes (or fails to become) a productive member of one’s commu-
nity. To elaborate my position, I have put forth one theory of how symbolic
development occurs and have touched as well upon a number of still con-
troversial issues about the form of symbolic development.
Alternative Approaches to Human Intelligence
In the ﬁnal chapters of this book, I turn to the educational implications of
the theory. I am concerned with the ways in which the theory of multiple
intelligences might be used to inform, and perhaps alter, policies imple-
mented by people who are responsible for education, child care, and
human development. But now, after having outlined the basic features of
the theory, but before leaving the halls of scholarly inquiry for the trenches
of educational policy, I shall revisit some major alternative approaches to
intelligence and indicate how they appear to differ from my own approach.
In no sense is this brief survey meant to be a thorough discussion of how
my theory relates to other extant theories: that task would take another
book. (Indeed, I have cited the names of individual scholars solely for il-
336
The Theory

lustrative purposes.) But some indication of the form that such a critical
document might take would not be inopportune at the present time.
Hedgehogs and Foxes Again
I begin with those views most directly connected to the concept of intelli-
gence as it is ordinarily employed in psychology. Classically, as I mentioned
in Chapter 2, there are two major views concerning the construct of intel-
ligence: one set of “hedgehog” scholars sympathetic to the notion of a gen-
eral intelligence (“g”), like Charles Spearman and Arthur Jensen; and an
opposing set sympathetic to a pluralistic view of intelligence, such as those
“foxes” who take a multifactorial approach to intellect like L. L. Thurstone
and J. P. Guilford. It will be obvious that the conclusions of MI theory
are much closer to those of the foxes and are not compatible with the be-
liefs of those who hold to a strong “g” view of intelligence.
My own analysis suggests that apparent support for “g” comes chieﬂy
from the fact that most tests of intelligence are paper-and-pencil exercises
that rely heavily on linguistic and logical-mathematical abilities. Hence, 
individuals strong in these two areas will perform well on tests of general
intelligence, in contrast to individuals whose strengths lie elsewhere.
Schools cherish these capacities for “mental manipulation,” which is why
“g” can predict success in school with some accuracy.
Where, then, does MI theory depart from the multifactorial point of
view? First of all, the latter does not question the existence of general hor-
izontal abilities, like perception and memory, which may cut across differ-
ent content areas. Indeed, the multifactorial point of view exhibits a
studied indifference to this issue, because some factors are indeed hori-
zontal forms of memory or perception while others reﬂect strict content
areas, like spatial ability. Second, the multifactorial point of view does not
make intellectual contact with biology but is strictly empirical, the result
of correlations among test scores, and of nothing more. Third, and per-
haps most crucial, the multifactorial approach does not allow one to sam-
ple the range of intellectual competences I have considered here. So long
as one is content to use paper-and-pencil or brief interviewing techniques,
lasting minutes rather than hours, there is simply no way to sample an in-
dividual’s competence in such areas as bodily expression, musical ability, or
the forms of personal intelligence. Thus while laudably more pluralistic
337
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

than the “g” school, the multifactorial approach provides only that ex-
tremely partial glimpse of intelligence that reflects the Western scien-
tific ethos.
Piaget and Information Processing
The work of two subsequent schools, the Piagetian and the information-
processing approaches, represents to my mind a step forward in scientiﬁc
power but not necessarily any progress in the analysis of intellectual pro-
ﬁles. The Piagetian school is more closely attuned to the child’s daily ac-
tivities and skills, thereby providing a more holistic and veridical notion of
his intellectual capacities. An interest in strategies, in tell-tale errors, in
the relations among bodies of knowledge is to be applauded, and the clin-
ical interviewing method perfected by Piaget is an innovation of great util-
ity for the student of intellectual growth.
Yet the classical structuralist view of intellect is even narrower than that
held by the intelligence-test makers and, in fact, is restricted almost com-
pletely to logical-mathematical thinking. Perhaps for that reason, it remains
studiously blind to content: the clear assumption obtains that mental op-
erations unfold in the same fashion across diverse materials. In the work
of Piaget’s follower Kurt Fischer, there is a welcome recognition that de-
velopment may not occur at the same rate in diverse domains; that, in fact,
in Piaget’s terminology, décalage (loosely speaking, “variation”) across do-
mains is the rule rather than the exception. Still, there remains the con-
viction that development occurs in the same sequenced fashion across all
domains, and there is insufﬁcient sensitivity to the possibility that the
course of development in various content domains might be decisively dif-
ferent. It is poignant that Piaget, a biologist by training who believed that
he was studying the biology of cognition, should have been so insensitive
to diverse biological proclivities in the cognitive realm.
Information-processing psychology represents an advance over Piaget
in the sense that more careful attention is paid to the actual processes by
which individuals solve problems from moment to moment. The meticu-
lous task analysis that is part and parcel of this approach has helped us to
realize that many of Piaget’s apparent stages and sequences are artifacts of
particular task conﬁgurations, and that younger individuals possess many
abilities that Piaget had mistakenly withheld from them.
338
The Theory

But because information processing is more of an approach than a the-
ory, it has been of little help in forging a coherent picture of human intel-
lectual abilities. One can ﬁnd in this approach some comfort for the notion
that all problems are solved in essentially the same way, but virtually equal
comfort for the notion of total task-speciﬁcity, where every task requires its
own abilities, and there is no interesting transfer. By the same token, one
ﬁnds support for the notion that the child processes information in just the
way that adults do (but simply possesses less knowledge), but virtually
equivalent support for the notion that the child has a less tenacious short-
term memory, a less adequate encoding capacity, and other qualitative di-
vergences from the information-processing machinery of the adult.
The very fact that information-processing psychology can yield such di-
verse conclusions may signify only the immaturity of the ﬁeld. However, to
my mind, it may reﬂect deeper lacks: the absence of a biological perspec-
tive on the nature of the tasks that are employed, as well as the lack of a
theory of what constitutes the domain under scrutiny. Instead, one has the
vague model of the child as a kind of computational device—a model that
has certain advantages but that, like all models, is only partial. And, as Allan
Allport has suggested, depending upon the kind of computer one selects,
and the analysis of the computer one embraces, one will secure a very dif-
ferent picture of what the information processor is like.
Chomsky’s Stance
All the approaches reviewed until now center on the individual, seeing him
in Cartesian fashion, as almost entirely alone, engaged in sophisticated
problem solving in an environment that plays little formative role in his
skills, his attitudes, or his ultimate performance. This perspective is taken
to an extreme in the work of Noam Chomsky (and, to some extent, in that
of his colleague Jerry Fodor). Here the child is regarded as a collection of
separate computational devices, each of which unfolds according to its own
preordained (and preformed) laws, with little inﬂuence of any sort (except
triggering) from the environment. Indeed, Chomsky rejects traditional no-
tions of learning and development: in their stead, he nominates a model of
intellectual unfolding that borrows heavily from embryology.
It should be obvious that I have some sympathy with Chomsky’s point of
view, feeling that it serves as a needed corrective to uncritically empiricist
339
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

accounts of knowledge acquisition spawned during earlier eras. And
Chomsky’s (and Fodor’s) account of domains squares well with mine,
though I fail to locate any attempt in his work to indicate how a domain
might be deﬁned and delimited in a systematic way. Where Chomsky’s
view seems unforgivably weak, however, is in its failure to countenance the
ways in which an intelligence must unfold in an environment ﬁlled with
meanings and interpretations: there is simply no recognition of how various
symbolic capacities develop and interact, or of how the human biological
substrate can be exploited to achieve many different ends, depending upon
the particular values and functions of the society under consideration. By
denying the role of culture—or, at any rate, by failing to confer upon it any
importance—Chomsky fashions a theory that is completely skeletal. We
are left with no way of understanding how a society accomplishes its work,
of how (or even why!) education takes place, of why young children differ
from one another, and of why they differ even more from adults in various
societies. In other words, the superstructure is completely missing, even
though the infrastructure may have been inferred with intuitive brilliance.
Focus on Culture
The superstructure dominates the attention of another group of analysts,
those concerned with the effects of culture on the development of the in-
dividual. Chief representatives of this tradition include Michael Cole,
Sylvia Scribner, Jean Lave, and their psychologically oriented colleagues,
as well as Clifford Geertz, the anthropologist interested in symbolic sys-
tems. These scholars direct almost all of their attention to the components
of the surrounding culture, contending that it is through a careful analysis
of the culture, with its different forms and forces, that the proper account of
the acquisition of cognitive capacities is most likely to be found. Geertz
quotes with approval Gilbert Ryle’s caution that “the mind is not even a
metaphorical ‘place.’ On the contrary, the chessboard, the platform, the
scholar’s desk, the judge’s bench, the lorry driver’s seat, the studio and the
football ﬁeld are among its places”; and he himself adds, “Men without
culture would be monstrosities with some useful instincts, few identiﬁable
feelings, and no intelligence.” No doubt reacting to the perceived exces-
sive mentalism of traditional philosophical approaches, when all mental
abilities were conceded directly to the individual, and also to contemporary
340
The Theory

theorists like Chomsky, who at most pay lip service to culture, these an-
thropologically oriented commentators underscore the extent to which in-
dividuals gain their symbols, their ideas, and their ways of thinking from
those around them and, more generally, from the collected wisdom of
the culture.
In many ways, this anthropological perspective introduces an impor-
tant new element in the understanding of cognition. For instance, Cole
and his colleagues have examined the performances of individuals drawn
from several cultures on standard tests of intelligence and reasoning, and
have concluded that most apparent differences in performances can be ex-
plained by the different previous experiences of the subjects. When these
experiences are taken into account, and suitable alterations are made in
testing procedures, most apparent differences evaporate; and, indeed, in-
dividuals from putatively less developed cultures may even perform at a
superior level. Certainly, there is no need to introduce any notions of in-
herent ethnic differences.
The general argument put forth by these investigators runs as follows:
while the products of reasoning, and the kinds of information to which
individuals are sensitive, may differ signiﬁcantly across cultures, the
processes of thinking are the same everywhere: cultures mobilize these
basic information-processing capacities—these core intelligences—and
fashion them to their own ends. As a further part of this reorientation of
cognitive theories, scholars like Cole stress the extent to which every indi-
vidual’s mental powers are absorbed from the outside—ﬁrst being consti-
tuted in the knowledge and actions of other persons, and only gradually
becoming internalized into one’s own representational capacities. We count
and we write not because we have ourselves developed in certain ways but
because we have seen other individuals make use of these notations. Nor
is this process ever completed: no matter what the society, the individual
always depends on other intellectual contributions by other individuals in
order to carry out his daily tasks and to ensure his own survival. How many
individuals are truly self-sufﬁcient, even in a cognitive sense? The answer
underscores the extent to which even one’s own mind is perennially de-
pendent upon the many other minds around.
Naturally, this anthropologically oriented approach does not display
much sympathy for endogenous developmental trajectories. Nor is there
any need to posit a series of relatively autonomous mental computers: the
individual will perform as required in the culture in which he happens to
341
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols

live. The belief in autonomous mental components would be criticized
from at least two perspectives. First of all, the autonomous theory pro-
ceeds as if initial development were regulated by factors internal to the or-
ganism; whereas in actuality, the culture (and its interpretive mechanisms)
are present from the ﬁrst. Second, the autonomous theory tends to assume
that the range of possible developmental outcomes is sharply canalized, if
not actually ﬁxed in advance. A more culturally oriented approach stresses
the likelihood that certain as yet undiscovered cultures might perform op-
erations that we cannot even envision, or that cultures evolving in the fu-
ture will also mold our intellectual proclivities in unanticipated directions.
Conclusion
All of these insights seem to be well worth absorbing into a comprehensive
account of human cognition. But what is missing from this analysis through
anthropological lenses is a recognition of the ways in which, even treated
in the most appropriate and equivalent ways, individuals within a culture
can still differ signiﬁcantly from one another—in intellectual strengths, in
ability to learn, in ultimate use of their faculties, in originality and creativ-
ity. I see no way—short of a more psychological (and biological) approach—
of dealing with this variable of difference in performance. Such an
environmentally oriented approach also overlooks both the extent to which
the individual may progress in a ﬁeld, using only modest help from the sur-
roundings, and how a few isolated individuals can go on to truly remark-
able accomplishments. In a sense, the approach of these anthropologically
oriented scholars is most suitable for explaining how the average individ-
ual in an average situation functions, and perhaps gives a misleading notion
of how average all of us, in fact, are.
Somewhere between the Chomskian stress on individuals, with their
separate unfolding mental faculties, the Piagetian view of the developing
organism passing through a uniform sequence of stages, and the anthro-
pological attention to the formative effects of the cultural environment, it
ought to be possible to forge a productive middle ground: a position that
takes seriously the nature of innate intellectual proclivities, the heteroge-
neous processes of development in the child, and the ways in which these
are shaped and transformed by the particular practices and values of cul-
ture. It is this effort that I have undertaken in this book. It must be
342
The Theory

stressed, therefore, that I have relied heavily on the aforementioned au-
thors, and on many other psychologists of development who have been in-
terested in educational issues. In an earlier chapter I stated that my own
view on the centrality of symbol systems, and on the need for an analysis
in terms of cultural domains, grows out of collaborative efforts with Gavriel
Salomon, David Olson, and most especially David Feldman. I should un-
derscore again my indebtedness to these contemporary scholars of devel-
opment and education. And I should add to this list the name of Jerome
Bruner, who—more than any other developmental psychologist of our
time—has been interested in education and has proved sensitive to the
range of issues discussed in the latter part of this book: the child’s biolog-
ical heritage, his preferred avenues of development, and the formative ef-
fects of the culture, including the role of tools, symbol systems, media, and
other prostheses in the devising and the transmission of knowledge. I owe
a large debt to Jerome Bruner for attuning me (as he has so many others)
to this nexus of issues.
I have now laid out the major tenets of multiple intelligence theory, in-
dicated some of its major weaknesses as I see them, and related the cur-
rent version of the theory to other competing perspectives on the intellect.
The time has come to see whether this framework can help us to under-
stand better the processes of education as they have taken place in the
past, and as they might possibly be refashioned in the future. This task will
ﬁrst require some consideration of the various ways in which knowledge
has, in fact, been transmitted throughout the course of human history; and
it is to this fascinating, but little understood, issue that I shall next turn.
343
Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols


PART III
IMPLICATIONS AND 
APPLICATIONS


13
The Education 
of 
Intelligences
Introduction
It is time to beckon back to center stage the three ﬁgures whom we ﬁrst
encountered at the opening of this book. There is the Puluwat youth in
the course of acquiring those vaunted navigational skills I have already re-
viewed in the discussion of spatial intelligence. There is the young Islamic
scholar, capable of that facility at memorizing that I noted in treating lin-
guistic intelligence. And there is the Parisian adolescent seated at a com-
puter terminal preparing to compose a work of music—a young person
who is combining, in a way scarcely imaginable some years ago, aspects of
logical-mathematical and musical intelligence.
It was in an effort to understand better the skills involved in these dis-
parate feats, to offer an account of the educational processes that develop
such competences, and to consider how these competences can be as-
sessed in an appropriate way that I initially undertook this inquiry. I have,
in preceding chapters, examined each of the candidate intelligences 
in some detail and have also undertaken a critique of the theory. Then, in
Chapter 12, I began the process of relating the raw and relatively au-
tonomous intellectual competences to the concerns and practices of the
larger society. I described the way in which the use of symbols develops
in normal individuals. And I considered how human intelligences can be
347

marshaled in the service of speciﬁc roles by the symbolic systems, codes,
and interpretative frameworks of the wider culture.
Though arguably valid, this picture still has focused on the developing
individual, qua individual. Consistent with the psychologists’ biases, the
culture has been viewed primarily as a backdrop, with its products and sys-
tems a means of fostering personal development. But one may examine
the same encounters, the same sets of circumstances, from a vastly differ-
ent perspective—that of the society at large. After all, from the point of
view of the culture, numerous individuals are continually being born, each
of whom needs to be socialized according to prevailing norms, values, and
practices. It is the means used by the society—and in particular, the vari-
ous modes of education and training—that will concern us as I consider
here the education of intelligences.
The anthropologist Jules Henry reminds us of the central role played
by education in all societies from the earliest days:
Throughout his historical course, Homo sapiens has been a “status
seeker”; and the way he has had to follow, by compulsion, has been ed-
ucation. Furthermore he has always had to rely on those superior to him
in knowing and social status to enable him to raise his own status. . . . 
Instructing the young in the tribal ways is as natural as breathing; [adults]
have a vital interest in the children they teach, and they often seem to
have even a broader interest in the tribal existence as a whole.
Surely in focusing on the educational process, we are considering a do-
main of utmost importance in all cultures, as well as an optimal area in
which to observe the intelligences at work. And yet, as we shift our per-
spective from the individual to the educational situation as a whole, we
move into largely uncharted waters. The number of variables entailed in
describing educational systems is so enormous that any hope of controlled
experimentation, or of scientiﬁc modeling, must be suspended.
My mode of presentation, accordingly, becomes increasingly descrip-
tive and allusive. Furthermore, in the ﬁnal pages of this book, I become yet
more speculative as I consider the options available to the educational
practitioner, and attempt to lay forth the problems that he or she confronts,
and even to offer some practical suggestions. It is only fair to warn the
reader of this signiﬁcant change in scope and in tone. I trust that the shift
348
Implications and Applications

is justiﬁed by the urgency of the educational problems being faced the
world over and by the need to consider these problems from a perspec-
tive broader than that of the solitary individual.
In this effort to elucidate particular forms of learning as they are found
in the world today, I shall proceed as follows. First, I shall brieﬂy survey the
major components of any educational situation—components including
the kinds of intelligences that are involved, the principal transmitting
agents, and the general context or situation within which such transmis-
sion of knowledge occurs. Taken together, these components constitute a
framework that can be applied to any educational situation and that should
point up similarities and differences among diverse educational situations.
Following the introduction of this framework, I will consider in turn
the three educational situations embodied by our three prototypical
learners—the youthful navigator, the Koranic student, and the young pro-
grammer. Of course, to isolate any trio of instances is radically to reduce
the range of educational variation actually encountered in the world today.
It is important to underscore, then, that these examples are used only for
illustrative purposes. I will actually draw on information about numerous
comparable educational settings as a means of arriving at generalizations
about three prototypical forms of learning: (1) the acquisition of specialized
skills in a nonliterate society (exempliﬁed by the sailor); (2) attainment of
literacy in a traditional religious school (exempliﬁed by the Koranic stu-
dent); and (3) the transmission of a scientiﬁc curriculum in a modern sec-
ular school (exempliﬁed by the programmer).
A principal reason for developing an analytic framework is to explain
why certain contemporary educational efforts have achieved success while
many others have met a less happy fate. I shall turn to this task in the con-
cluding chapter of the book. To aid us in this effort, I have in the ﬁnal pages
of this chapter considered three components that typically occur together
in modern secular education—attendance at a school, acquisition of vari-
ous literacies, and deployment of the scientiﬁc method. It is, after all, the
coincidence of these independent factors that gives the contemporary
Western educational setting its peculiar ﬂavor. And it is through an exam-
ination of these factors (and their consequences) that we may come to un-
derstand better the operation of educational processes quite different from
our own, and the difﬁculties that arise when attempts are made to impose
“our” forms upon other cultures.
349
The Education of Intelligences

A Framework for Analyzing Educational Processes
I begin by listing the various components that should be taken into account
in the analysis of any educational encounter. Given the complexity of any
situation in which one or more individuals are charged with the transmis-
sion of knowledge to another set of individuals, it is essential to consider a
large set of components and thus, unfortunately, to be conﬁned to a sum-
mary account of each. At the conclusion of this section, I have included a
chart that indicates the ways in which the framework might be applied to
our three specimen learning situations. The detailed text of the chart is
likely to become clear only after one has digested the individual sections
on each of the educational encounters. Nonetheless, it may be of aid to
readers to consult this chart, both during the introduction of the speciﬁc
components in the paragraphs that follow and in the course of reading
the more detailed descriptions of each educational encounter in the fol-
lowing sections.
With this brief aside to the potentially perplexed, I shall turn ﬁrst to a
component of special import in this book—the particular intelligences used
in an educational encounter. Even this component turns out to be multi-
faceted: for example, the abilities entailed in an intelligence can be used
as a means of acquiring information. Thus, individuals may learn through
the exploitation of linguistic codes, of kinesthetic or spatial demonstrations,
or of interpersonal bonds. Even as various intelligences can be exploited
as means of transmission, the actual material to be mastered may itself fall
squarely within the domain of a speciﬁc intelligence. If someone learns to
play an instrument, the knowledge to be acquired is musical. If someone
learns how to calculate, the knowledge to be gained is logical-mathematical
(even if the means is linguistic in nature). And so it turns out that our var-
ious intellectual competences can serve both as means and as message, as
form and as content.
Related to, but separate from, the intelligences involved are the actual
ways of learning exploited in one or another setting. Perhaps most basic is
direct or “unmediated” learning: here the learner observes an adult activ-
ity in vivo, as when a Puluwat child watches an elder construct a canoe or
prepare to sail. Closely related to direct observation but involving more
overt participation by the learner are various forms of imitation, where the
350
Implications and Applications

child observes and then imitates (either immediately or subsequently) the
actions performed by the model.
In these forms of observational learning, spatial, bodily, and interper-
sonal forms of knowledge are often at a premium. Linguistic knowledge
may also be involved, but typically in an incidental manner—for example,
to call attention to a feature of the performance. Sometimes, adages or
general propositions are invoked as well: at this point “know-that” is joined
to “know-how.”
But instruction in a speciﬁc skill may also occur outside the context in
which that skill is customarily practiced. Sometimes, a small model is con-
structed so that the learner can practice: for instance, the young Puluwat
sailor learns the star conﬁgurations by setting up pebbles on the ﬂoor of a
canoe house. Sometimes a ceremony or ritual is held, in which the learner
is exposed to secrets or given specialized practice that can be utilized later
on “in context.” And as societies become more complex, and tasks more
intricate and multifaceted, learning takes place increasingly in contexts re-
mote from the actual site of practice—for example, in those special build-
ings called schools. I shall examine such elaborated forms of learning as I
turn to schools, ranging from informal bush schools, to traditional religious
schools, to those contemporary secular schools with which most readers
will have an intimate familiarity.
As we survey these different ways or settings of learning, we encounter
three additional variables that must ﬁnd their place within any equation of
learning. To begin with, various means or media are used to transmit
knowledge. While direct forms of learning are largely unmediated, in-
volving at most a simple verbal description or a line diagram sketched in
the sand, more formal forms of learning rely heavily on discrete media of
transmission. These may include articulated symbol systems, such as lan-
guage or mathematics, as well as an ever-expanding family of media, in-
cluding books, pamphlets, charts, maps, television, computers, and various
combinations of these and other modes of transmission. Naturally, these
media differ in the kinds of intelligence required for their proper use, as
well as the kinds of information that they present most readily.
Next, there are the particular sites or loci where learning takes place.
Much education, particularly in traditional societies, takes place on site:
the learner is simply placed near (or gravitates toward) the model, who is
at the time doing “his thing.” On-site learning can occur at home, when
351
The Education of Intelligences

that is the customary locus of the activity, be it learning how to prepare a
meal or coming to identify with a parent who is always studying. As I have
already noted, when societies become more complex, they are likely to set
up specialized institutions for learning. Schools are the most prominent
instances; but ateliers, shops, and laboratories where apprenticeships are
available are also pertinent examples. And sometimes specialized settings,
such as those used for initiation rites or ceremonies, facilitate the rapid
and effective transmission of pivotal knowledge (and, as often, potent af-
fect). Presumably, almost any kind of information could be transmitted at
any site; but, as I have suggested, linguistic and logical-mathematical forms
of knowing are most likely to be transmitted in settings devised expressly
(and used primarily) for the transmission of knowledge.
A third variable in the equation of knowledge concerns the particular
agents entrusted with this task. Classically, teachers are parents or grand-
parents, generally of the same sex as the learner; other relatives or mem-
bers of one’s caste or clan may also serve as the repository of special
wisdom. Siblings and peers are often transmitters of knowledge as well: in
fact, for some tasks, children learn more readily from their older siblings
than from unrelated teachers. Not infrequently there is a pairing of indi-
viduals within a culture. Youngsters end up being trained by those adults
who possess the skills that are most important for them, the youngsters, to
acquire: this kind of matching may occur because of blood relationships,
proximity, or, less typically, a perceived ﬁt on the part of the community
between the model’s skills and the youngster’s aptitude. (Such matching is
more likely to occur in societies with informal schooling.) Finally, in certain
societies, there emerges a wholly separate class of teachers and leaders—
initially religious, later secular in orientation—whose job it is to teach
some, or perhaps even all, the youngsters in a community a given body of
knowledge. Sometimes the teacher is expected to have an exemplary moral
character; though in secular settings, technical expertise has become the
key requirement. Possibly for the ﬁrst time, a prior relationship between
the child and the adult is no longer a necessary precursor for entering into
an educational relationship: instead, one encounters a contractual situa-
tion where residence in a geographical area or membership in a religious
body sufﬁces as an entry card into an educational relationship.
A word, ﬁnally, about the general context in which learning takes place.
Each of our prototypical instances of learning tends to occur in a particu-
lar cultural context. In a traditional nonliterate society, most learning is
352
Implications and Applications

considered a requirement for survival. The same forms of knowledge are
accordingly found among all, or most, inhabitants. Relatively little knowl-
edge has been drawn up in explicit codes, and most required knowledge
can be accrued simply by observing individuals at practice in their cus-
tomary milieus. As these forms of knowledge are relatively straightforward,
I shall not consider them further here. Instead, I shall turn to those forms
of knowledge within a traditional society that do require a lengthy learn-
ing process, such as engages our young Puluwat sailor or a youth who is
becoming a bard in a nonliterate Yugoslavian circle.
In societies where literacy is transmitted in a traditional religious set-
ting, a somewhat different state of affairs obtains. Here a certain segment
of the society, usually the young males, acquires a skill that will set its mem-
bers apart from those who lack it. There is a gradual winnowing process,
as a result of which some individuals end up with but a smidgeon of this
specialized knowledge while the most knowledgeable persons become the
religious or the secular heads of the community. Outside the school set-
ting, there may be further division of labor; often, however, the relatively
simple technological and economic structure of the society permits most
individuals to possess the same general set of skills and knowledge.
Representing an opposite extreme are modern technological societies
that feature a wide range of roles and skills. As no individual can con-
ceivably master all of them, there is considerable division of labor, with in-
stitutionalized formats for the transmission of knowledge and explicit
standards for assessing success. Nearly all acquisition of skills takes place
in specialized settings, ranging from technical schools to ateliers, from fac-
tories to corporations. Whereas in the traditional society nearly everyone
has some understanding of the knowledge possessed by others, the tech-
nological society features experts, whose particular store of knowledge
proves as mysterious to the average citizen as does literacy to the nonlit-
erate individual.
The kinds of intelligence that are highly valued differ markedly across
these disparate contexts of learning. In the traditional nonliterate societies,
there is a high valuing of interpersonal knowledge. Spatial and bodily forms
of knowledge tend to be heavily exploited, while linguistic and musical
forms of knowledge may also be at a premium in certain specialized cir-
cumstances. In a society that harbors traditional religious schools, linguistic
knowledge comes to be esteemed. There is a continued cultivation of inter-
personal knowledge, accompanied at the highest levels by the fostering of
353
The Education of Intelligences

certain forms of logical-mathematical knowledge. Finally, in modern sec-
ular educational settings, logical-mathematical knowledge is at a premium,
and certain forms of linguistic competence are also of value; in contrast, the
role of interpersonal knowledge is generally reduced, even as intrapersonal
forms of understanding may loom much larger.
I have brieﬂy surveyed an analytic framework and a set of categories
that can be applied to a range of educational settings and experiences. Nat-
urally, any application of this framework must be preliminary and tenta-
tive, pending both close observation of the particular society in question
and the development of means for applying the categories in an unam-
biguous and reliable manner. One can gain a feeling for how the frame-
work might be applied to our three specimen settings, and to others of
comparable scope, by studying the chart on page 355. Of course the chart
samples just three possible cultural settings; a consideration of other edu-
cational settings would no doubt yield many other combinations of features
and might as well bring to the force agents, loci, media of transmissions,
or forms of intelligence that have not been considered here. Indeed, one
virtue of such a framework is that, far from being Procrustean, it can help
bring to our awareness aspects of the educational equation that might
other wise remain invisible.
Skills in the Nonliterate Society
Until a few thousand years ago, nearly all human beings lived in societies
where energies were consumed in providing for basic needs, primarily
through hunting, gathering, farming, and the preparation of food. In such
societies, most forms of knowledge were widely shared, as it was important
for individuals in the society (or, at least, for all members of one sex) to be
able to provide for themselves and others for whom they had responsibil-
ity. By and large, these forms of knowledge were acquired relatively early
in life by the young, usually through simple observation and imitation of
the adults in their families. There was little need for explicit codes, spe-
cialized training, or articulated levels of gradation or skill.
But even in nonliterate societies, one ﬁnds skills that are complex, highly
elaborated, and restricted to individuals with considerable expertise—and
it is these skills that are of particular signiﬁcance for our inquiry. Sailing in
the Puluwat Islands in the Caroline chain of Micronesia is an excellent 
354
Implications and Applications

The Framework for Analyzing Educational Processes Applied to Three Cultural Settings
Type of Learning
Specialized Skill 
Literacy in Traditional
Scientific Curriculum
Component of Education
in Nonliterate Society
Religious School
in Modern Secular School
Examples Mentioned 
in Chapter 13
Intelligences
Media of Transmission
Locus of Learning
Agents Who Transmit 
Knowledge
General Context 
of  Learning
Puluwat sailing 
Yugoslavian oral verse
Linguistic, musical (oral 
verse)
Spatial (sailing) 
Bodily-kinesthetic 
Interpersonal
Mostly unmediated (direct
observation) 
Some oral linguistic 
instruction
On site
Skilled elders, typically 
relatives
Most individuals share some
basic skills, including sailing;
a few may be experts
Koranic school 
Hindu gurukula 
Hebrew cheder 
Medieval cathedral school
Linguistic 
Interpersonal 
Logical-mathematical
(among advanced students)
Oral verse or books
Separate building or inside
religious building
Individuals trained in literacy
and argument; high moral
comportment expected; 
status high except at entry
level positions
Most males start out in reli-
gious school; gradual win-
nowing process; successful
students often enter clergy
or community elect
Elementary and secondary
schools in Europe, North
America, and Japan; Pro-
gramming on microcomputer
Logical-mathematical 
Interpersonal 
Linguistic (less emphasized)
Great variety, including
books, charts, computers,
ﬁlms, etc.
Separate building 
Some learning can be done
in a private home or study
Individuals with training in
education at lower level; 
individuals with specialized
training at higher levels;
moral caliber not germane
Universal primary and 
secondary education; many
individuals have specialized
postsecondary education;
possibility of life-long 
individual-initiated education

example of such a skill. The status of “master navigator,” achieved by only
a handful (perhaps half a dozen) of males in the society, proves ex-
tremely difﬁcult to attain. Indeed, many males do not even attempt to ac-
quire any more than rudimentary knowledge of sailing; and of those who
make the attempt, substantially fewer than half complete the course and
become skilled navigators. By the same token, the building of canoes is
also an elaborate skill, which requires considerable training and is achieved
by only a small minority of the population.
From the study undertaken by Thomas Gladwin, and reported in
Chapter 8, we have obtained considerable understanding of the processes
involved in becoming a Puluwat sailor. Gladwin delineates two distinct
courses of learning that are necessary for eventual success in navigation.
One portion of learning is oral and takes place “off site”: it involves the com-
mitting to memory of vast amounts of factual information, such as the iden-
tities and locations of all of the islands, and the identities and courses of all
the stars, which the navigator could conceivably need to know. Gladwin
points out that there is no need to keep this lore secret because
no one could possibly learn it except through the most painstaking and
lengthy instruction. . . . It is taught and memorized through endless re-
iteration and testing. The learning job is not complete until the student
at his instructor’s request can start with any island in the known ocean
and rattle off the stars both going and returning between that island and
all the others which might conceivably be reached directly from there.
This aspect of Puluwat navigation, which relies on linguistic intelli-
gence, is necessary but scarcely sufﬁcient for the aspiring sailor. The more
important part of his training can be acquired only by considerable prac-
tice at sailing. He needs a ﬁrsthand acquaintance with the currents, with
speciﬁc conditions that obtain in traveling between various groups of is-
lands, with the system used for keeping track of distance traveled, with
the kinds of information that the waves convey, and with the procedures
for navigation in storms, for finding one’s way in the dark, for forecast-
ing the weather, for dealing with sea life, and for using the stars to guide
one’s course. Much of this process involves the building up of “mental
models” so that the navigator can conceive of himself traversing his
course with everything moving past except the stars poised overhead. For
these core aspects of sailing, linguistic knowledge proves of little help; at
356
Implications and Applications

a premium are keen sensory capacities and the deployment of spatial and
bodily-kinesthetic knowledge.
Forming an instructive contrast to the Puluwat navigators are those in-
dividuals in rural Yugoslavia who become singers of oral verse. According
to Millman Parry and Albert Lord, hardly any formal training is involved
in becoming an epic singer—an individual who can sing, for example, a
different song all night for each of the forty nights of the Islamic month of
Ramadan. Rather, the future singer simply listens night after night to the
performances, learning the plot of the story and, more important, the var-
ious linguistic and musical formulae out of which new performances are
constructed. After years of such listening and absorbing, the individual be-
gins to practice the formulae himself, learning how to expand or ornament
songs he hears, or perhaps even to create new songs. According to Lord,
“it is a process of imitation and of assimilation through listening and
much practice on his own.” Finally, the singer has the opportunity to per-
form the song in front of a sympathetic but critical audience. Here at last
he has the chance to see whether the feat that he has mastered, by obser-
vation and solitary practice, can exert the desired effects upon members of
his community.
Both the Puluwat sailor and the Yugoslavian singer attain a high level of
skill, one that sets them apart from others in their society. In both cases, a
capacious linguistic memory, subjected to extensive rehearsal, is an impor-
tant possession of the would-be expert. But whereas the sailor depends on
his spatial and bodily abilities, the singer is reliant on his musical abilities
and also on the interpersonal skill of communicating with an audience.
Nearly all of the learning by the Yugoslavian poet takes place “on site,” with-
out formal instruction: he is, in a strong sense, self-taught. In contrast, ex-
plicit teaching procedures are used for Puluwat sailors, and at least some of
these take place “off site”—for example in a canoe house, where pebbles
signify stars. In the case of learning to build canoes, the offspring almost al-
ways works with his father; but in the case of navigation and oral verse, kin-
ship ties themselves do not sufﬁce. Many members of a family will lack the
abilities (or the inclination) to become skilled practitioners, and it is possi-
ble for an otherwise talented individual to succeed even if his own kin are
not engaged in the aforementioned skilled activities. Nonetheless, as in
most other activities in a traditional society, one is far more likely to engage
in an activity, and to attain high levels of expertise, if that activity has be-
longed to one’s family’s customary pursuits for many generations.
357
The Education of Intelligences

The acquisition of such expertise by a small caste within a traditional
society is, as I have said, something of an anomaly, because most activities 
in the society are within the ken of all normal adults. (Indeed, all adults
in the Puluwat Islands have some rudimentary navigating capacity, even
as all adults in the Yugoslavian society have some knowledge of oral verse.)
As we move toward consideration of a schooled society, we encounter an
environment in which specialized knowledge becomes more common.
Our understanding of such societies may be increased if we consider
brieﬂy three institutions that one may ﬁnd within a traditional society,
each of which stands apart from the normal course of observational learn-
ing and thereby anticipates the more formal processes associated with a
schooled society.
Three Transitional Forms of Education
Initiation Rites. We begin with a more formally organized occasion of
learning—the initiation rite. Much written about, these are ceremonial oc-
casions that can last for hours or for years. Typically, youths of a culture
are subjected to challenging experiences and asked to master particular
behaviors or information as a step—often the decisive one—in effecting
the transition from childhood to adulthood. Sometimes these rites are bru-
tal: a youth may be subjected to harsh physical pain, as among the Thonga
of Africa, or left alone in the wilds for long periods of time, as in the case
of some American Indian tribes. Sometimes, as among the Tikopia of Poly-
nesia, the rites are more benign, as the ceremonies are performed by rel-
atives, and there is much affection, celebration, exchange of gifts, and food.
One might well ask what is learned through these more or less trau-
matic rites of transition—whether they should, in fact, be considered oc-
casions of learning. Answers in terms of sheer volume of information are
probably beside the point. In general, the initiation rite is better viewed as
marking a change of status than as an opportunity for mastering skills
and lore, though in certain cases (for example, during the three-month
circumcision rite in Senegambia), much learning does take place. But com-
ing to understand that one is now a member of the adult society, and that
there are speciﬁc expectations and privileges connected with that role, is
in itself a crucial form of knowledge in traditional societies: one’s beliefs
about oneself constitute a powerful factor and reﬂect an assessment of
358
Implications and Applications

whether one is able (or unable) to perform in the prescribed manner. Here
is a task central to the development of intrapersonal intelligence and of a
sense of self. Moreover, the initiation rite also marks a time of intensive
affective learning—learning about one’s feelings and one’s relationship to
others in one’s group. The tension, thrill, and fear surrounding these ex-
periences probably serve as a model for those affects associated with other
important experiences in life that the youth must learn to handle—for in-
stance, hunting, marriage, childbirth, and death: the individual’s relation-
ship to his community is conﬁrmed as he undergoes these rites (even as it
is undercut if, for some reason, the initiate does not perform adequately).
One might regard the initiation rite as a kind of crystallizing experience in
the personal realm—a critical moment when the child-turned-adult must
come to grips with the range of feelings that he has as a person in his own
right and as a member of the larger society.
Bush Schools. While such affective and personal forms of learning can per-
haps be telescoped into days and months, other skills in a traditional soci-
ety take a longer time to master. This situation has given rise to two other
institutions—neither of them schools in a fully institutionalized sense, but
both lasting for longer periods of time and sharing some of the character-
istics of a formal educational institution. The ﬁrst of these is the so-called
bush school—a separate locus where an individual child can learn how to
perform arts, crafts, and other skills important for the life of the commu-
nity. In traditional West African bush schools, boys and girls are enrolled
for several years and are trained as part of a secret society. The grandmaster
is an individual of high status. The youngsters are divided into groups ac-
cording to ages and aptitudes and receive instruction in the assorted lore
of native life. Included also are tests to determine individual aptitudes.
There are mock battles and skirmishes to test one’s war-making abilities. As
part of involvement in the bush school, there is an initiation rite where the
youth attains a new name; those who do not show sufﬁcient endurance
may simply be allowed to die. In some of these schools, there is a particu-
lar stress on the historical background of the population as a means of stim-
ulating group consciousness, political sophistication, and greater courage.
Apprenticeship Systems. One additional means of training those skills that
are not readily acquired by sheer imitation, or through involvement in an
initiation rite, is the apprenticeship system. In the most familiar form, as
359
The Education of Intelligences

exempliﬁed in the guilds of the late medieval period, a youngster leaves
home during the preadolescent or the adolescent period and goes to dwell
for several years in the home of a master of a particular craft. There he
ﬁrst becomes a member of the household, running errands, watching the
master at work, forming bonds with the other apprentices and those who
have already become journeymen. When the apprentice is judged ready,
he is slowly initiated into the skills of the craft, through the posing of more
difﬁcult tasks, through constant evaluations by the master, and through
sharing of the secrets of effective craftsmanship. If the lessons are well
learned, and the interpersonal tie has been properly maintained, the ap-
prentice has the opportunity to make his way to the higher levels of per-
formance within the particular specialty. Admission to the society of
masters itself depends upon the completion of a task or a piece that is suit-
able for the particular guild. This “masterpiece” is in effect the ﬁnal ex-
amination. Ultimately, the journeyman will be allowed to join the ranks of
the masters, to be privy to all of their secrets, and to take on apprentices
in his own atelier.
The apprenticeship system seems to have evolved in an effective form
in diverse regions of the world, perhaps even independently, including
many places bereft of literacy or schools. For example, the Anang of Nige-
ria have an apprenticeship system for the mastery of carving. While young-
sters often learn from their fathers, a young man can learn to carve by
paying a large stipend to, and serving a year’s apprenticeship with, a mas-
ter carver. There are even carving villages, where numerous individuals
specialize in teaching and practicing this craft. In ancient India, technical
and other craft skills became organized into guilds—a practice that may, in
fact, have given rise to the Jati or caste system. In Egypt, the arabesque
wood workers have long had a lengthy and intricate apprenticeship system
whereby the secrets of that complex trade are slowly meted out to the most
promising young individuals. And, indeed, though not usually labeled as
such, the procedures whereby the adolescent Puluwat gains skills in sail-
ing can be considered a kind of apprenticeship system. Less able students
are dropped during the rigors of oral memorization or of early “trial runs”
at sea, while the most successful students are eventually granted admis-
sion to the small society of master navigators.
The progression I have noted here is worth underlining. Forms of
learning that are direct and unmediated sufﬁce for relatively uncompli-
cated activities but may prove inadequate when a process is lengthier and
360
Implications and Applications

features elements that are not readily observed or comprehended by the
untutored eye. Once skills within a domain have reached a certain level of
complexity, sheer observation or even informed interaction with the in-
structor will rarely sufﬁce to yield a product of quality. Accordingly, it be-
comes advisable for the society to develop formal mechanisms for ensuring
that youths with promise are trained to high levels of proﬁciency. Both the
bush schools and the craft guilds are mechanisms for increasing the prob-
ability that at least the more talented males in a society will achieve the
necessary level of competence. Some division of labor within the society is
essential for this procedure to work.
In these forms of knowledge transmission, the technical skills—be they
bodily, musical, or spatial—are rarely divorced from the interpersonal
facets of life within a culture. The bush schools culminate in initiation rites,
and the guilds themselves may be viewed as a kind of elaborate initiation
rite, complete with secrets that are withheld, sometimes unnecessarily,
simply to prolong the period of indenture. Individuals who do not possess
the requisite interpersonal skills are unlikely to negotiate this series of hur-
dles successfully; indeed, interpersonal sensitivity may prove as important
as personal courage or manual dexterity. And, oftentimes, the very oppor-
tunity to participate in the process depends upon preexisting interpersonal
ties within or between families.
The emergence of bush schools and craft guilds also marks a transition
from the direct methods favored by many traditional societies to the mode
of formal schooling that has arisen in the past thousand years in many parts
of the world. Formal schools arise from a network of reasons, the chief
one of which may be the need for an efﬁcient and effective way of teach-
ing reading and writing to certain of the young in a society. With the rise
of schools, we behold a transition from tacit knowledge to explicit forms of
knowledge, from ceremonial rituals to technical requirements, from oral
preservation of knowledge to written forms of communication, from a re-
ligious orientation to a secularized stance, and, eventually, to the rise of a
scientiﬁc approach to knowledge. All of these are tremendously complex
trends, none identical with any other; and none of them is as yet sufﬁciently
well understood. Still, if we are to probe the educational challenges that
today confront much of the world’s population, it is important to try to un-
derstand the nature of schooling in its various guises and the ways in which
schooling makes use of (and develops) the different intellectual potentials
of individuals.
361
The Education of Intelligences

Varieties of School
Koranic Education
Islam spans one-ﬁfth of the entire world population, covering half of the
globe; and from North Africa to Indonesia, young Islamic males undergo
similar forms of education. At some point between the ages of four and
eight, the young child enters a Koranic school. The word Koran means
“recitation,” and the principal goal of these schools is (as it has been for
centuries) the memorization of the entire Koran. Initial entry to school is
an important and joyous time, marked by prayers and celebration; but soon
attention turns to the serious business at hand. At ﬁrst the young child lis-
tens to the Koran being read and learns a few verses. He is introduced to
the Arabic alphabet as he learns the names of the letters, what they look
like, and how they are written.
From then on, learning proceeds along two parallel tracks. Part of the
curriculum involves regular recitation of the Koran. The child must learn
to recite the Koran using the proper rhythm and intonation, which he ac-
quires by imitating his master slavishly. The emphasis falls on the correct
sound rather than on understanding the meaning, and many individuals
will commit to memory the whole Koran—a process that can take six to
eight years—without comprehending the words they are speaking. Total
recall of the Koran is considered a singular virtue in its own right, irre-
spective of whether its words are understood.
The remainder of the curriculum involves learning to read and write
Arabic, a process achieved chieﬂy through the mastery of the Koran. First,
the student learns how to trace or write the letters. Then he learns to copy
whole lines from the Koran. Later steps involve learning to write from dic-
tation and coming to understand the meaning of the words in what is, to
many of the children, a foreign tongue. While most students do not go be-
yond these elementary literacy skills, the most diligent and successful stu-
dents are eventually allowed to read other texts, to enter into discussion
about the meaning of texts, and to engage in the processes of argument,
analysis, and interpretation.
Of course, the details of Koranic education differ in various schools,
in various parts of the Islamic world. The extent to which other subject
matter—such as arithmetic, astronomy, poetry, or logic—is offered, and
362
Implications and Applications

the extent to which learning of other languages, or reading of secular texts,
is permitted differs widely across nations and social environments. But at
the core of Islamic education everywhere, even today, is the linguistic mas-
tery of a sacred text, a mastery that always entails oral recitation and typi-
cally involves as well the gaining of literacy in the Arabic language.
Traditional Patterns in Traditional Schools
The regimen of the Koranic school, with its emphasis on rote memoriza-
tion of a text in a language unfamiliar to the student, may strike contem-
porary readers as remote and even bizarre. It is therefore important to
underscore that similar procedures and processes have characterized a
range of schools that existed during the past thousand years, including
many in medieval Christian Europe and other pockets of the literate world,
such as the Hebrew cheder and yeshiva, the Islamic Koranic schools and
madrasas, the Japanese terakoyas, the Hindu gurukulas. Following the
work of Michael Fischer and of my colleagues Robert LeVine and Susan
Pollak, I will indicate a number of features that characterize these tradi-
tional schools. Obviously there are instructive differences in these proto-
types, but for the most part, it is remarkable how far similar features arose
in disparate corners of the earth, which were hardly in constant contact
with one another.
As I have already noted, these traditional schools are almost invariably
religious: operated by religious individuals for religious ends. (Of course,
in a society that supports traditional schools, there are few realms not per-
meated by religion.) The teachers are not only religious personages but
are also expected to be individuals of high moral character who are af-
forded considerable liberty to punish wayward students (when necessary)
and who are expected to serve as paragons of virtue in the community. An
immoral teacher is seen almost as a contradiction in terms.
The principal curriculum in the schools, particularly for the ﬁrst years
of education, is simple: the student must learn how to read and write in the
language of the sacred texts. As this is almost always a language other than
the vernacular, the students will be involved for several years in learning a
foreign language. Also, little effort is exerted to make this language famil-
iar and “friendly” to the user; the task is to learn the language through rote
drill and memorization. Typically one starts with letters of the alphabet,
363
The Education of Intelligences

whose strokes are copied and memorized. Words and phrases are then
copied as well, and soon the student is learning to produce and to memo-
rize the sight and the sound of lengthier passages. It is pretty much left up
to the individual to work out (on his own) the elements of grammar and of
the sound structure of the language. (Clearly, linguistic intelligence is at a
premium here: the child so gifted—like our mythical Iranian youth—is
most likely to succeed at this “decoding.”) The sequence generally moves
from mastering of the alphabet, to decoding of the language, to the un-
derstanding of the texts. At the highest levels, individuals are able to move
on to texts other than sacred ones and, eventually, to the public interpre-
tation of and disputation over the meaning of certain texts. But this goal
takes many years to reach, and most students never get beyond the mem-
orization of the more familiar sacred texts.
For the most part, students in these traditional schools are young males.
In some communities, early education is obligatory; whereas in others, it
is limited (or quickly reduced) to an elité group. The ﬁrst day of school is
marked as a special occasion, and the child is given to understand that the
opportunity to learn to read the sacred scripture is wonderful and prop-
erly marked by celebration. But pleasures become infrequent thereafter
as daily drill and memorization take over. Individuals with skills in these
tasks of literacy are rapidly separated from those who show little talent. A
keen linguistic memory is probably the most important feature for ad-
vancement, and thus gifts or techniques for remembering well are at a pre-
mium. While memorization is often not the overt goal of the regimen, it
seems to be a necessary step; after all, much of later interpretation and
disputation presupposes rapid and faithful recollection of the text, which
contains the relevant answers to the principal dilemmas of life, and whose
existence has been the raison d’être for the school in the ﬁrst place. There
may be periodic celebrations as major milestones are passed. Those indi-
viduals who, like our Iranian youth, succeed at their studies and are other-
 wise approved of by their community, are allowed to proceed to the highest
level of studies—the yeshivas, the medieval universities, or the madrasa in
the sacred Islamic cities. These individuals have the option of devoting
their lives to scholarship; and even if they will never become as afﬂuent as
some of their peers, they are honored by their community.
While linguistic and logical abilities have obviously come to the fore in
this mode of training, the interpersonal aspects of traditional education
over the centuries should not be minimized. Except for those relegated to
364
Implications and Applications

teaching the very youngest children, teachers have typically commanded
great respect. In the past, much of the educational process came to cen-
ter on a single magnetic ﬁgure—a guru, a mullah, a rabbi, a Confucian
scholar who took promising students under his wing and helped them to
scale the heights of knowledge. Moreover, a primary purpose of the schools
was to maintain social cohesion in the community, which supported the
schools and took great pride in the success of the best students. While talent
was often recognized and often rewarded, it did not occur in an atmos-
phere free of personal favorites, contacts, and bonds. The secularization
and impersonalization of education had still to come (and may never ar-
rive completely).
It must be underscored that these schools did not arise in a vacuum.
During the medieval period there was considerable contact among the re-
ligious groups that lived in areas surrounding the Middle East, and even
frank borrowing of certain features among these traditional schools. Doc-
trines of competing religions often served as the focus for debate among
those who had entered into the ranks of “higher education.” I must note as
well the existence of deﬁnite differences among the systems—differences
that I have ignored for the purposes of exposition but that must be taken
into account in any consideration of the traditional school. Religious
schools themselves built upon earlier traditions: the training of scribes and
copyists in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia; the scholastic institutions in
China and India some three thousand years ago; the Classical academies
of ancient Athens, where The Iliad and The Odyssey formed the center of
learning, but where music, physical development, arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, philosophy, and political leadership were all featured. Indeed,
with the breakdown of the Classical world, this varied curriculum fell by
the wayside: much ancient knowledge was lost, and the form of schooling
that arose in the early Middle Ages was notably narrower.
There was, indeed, a general feeling in the Middle Ages in Europe that
the amount of information to be learned was ﬁnite. Richard McKeon com-
ments that “if you wanted to know what the culture of the twelfth century
was, you could list, let’s say, three thousand quotations that every intellec-
tual would know . . . you can tabulate it.” The method of teaching, even at
the higher levels of learning, was largely memorization, through set question-
and-answer formats, formalized deﬁnitions, or even whole lectures. In-
deed, only a privileged few were allowed to participate in relatively free
debate. Even at a university, students could not afford books and so had to
365
The Education of Intelligences

memorize many lectures. This remained the case until the Renaissance,
as can be seen by this description of an Italian Renaissance university be-
fore the widespread use of printing:
The students had no notes, grammars, lexicons or dictionaries of antiq-
uities and mythology to help them. It was therefore necessary for the lec-
turer to dictate quotations, to repeat parallel passages at full length, to
explain geographical and historical allusions, to analyze the structure of
sentences in detail. . . . Scores of students, old and young, with nothing
but pen and paper before them, sat patiently recording what the lecturer
said. At the end of his discourses . . . each of them carried away a com-
pendium volume containing a transcript of the author’s text, together
with a miscellaneous mass of notes, critical, explanatory, ethical, aes-
thetical, historical, and biographical. In other words a book had been dic-
tated and as many scores of copies as there were attentive pupils had
been made.
As Michael Fischer points out, in his instructive discussion of such tradi-
tional schools, this description could have applied to schools in Iran as late
as the nineteenth century.
The factors that gave rise to the various traditional schools were diverse
and cannot be considered apart from speciﬁc historical, cultural, and reli-
gious conditions. Nonetheless, the surprising similarity in form in many
parts of the world and over a long time suggests that we are dealing with
a variety of education that was remarkably adaptive and exploited the ways
of knowing of which many individuals are capable. Building on the role of
memorization, which plays so important a role in a nonliterate society,
these schools continued to cultivate the art of memory while embroider-
ing verbal recall skills with the ability to read (and eventually to write) texts
that were not already known to the student. Recognizing the importance
of a central ﬁgure as a transmitter of knowledge, these schools featured 
a respected and often charismatic “master” to whom students would feel
a bond, and whose assessment of their progress would determine whether
they could pass to the next level of achievement. While the institutions of
learning were housed separately from the ongoing economic life of the
community, they were scarcely estranged from the community. Rooted in
religious practice, often located in temple or mosque, they were seen by
all as absolutely central to the life of the community and therefore could
366
Implications and Applications

be considered, in a sense, “on site” or “contextual.” Except for books, there
were few media of transmission: except for the most successful students,
whose participation in disputations invoked logical skills, the featured in-
telligences were those linguistic and interpersonal forms that have always
held sway in a traditional society. Where they differed from traditional non-
literate modes of education was in their relative indifference to spatial
and bodily intelligences. Thus, while the traditional religious schools can-
not be assimilated to the direct on-site learning of a Yugoslavian bard or
a Puluwat sailor, their ties to the less formal institutions of learning are
still apparent.
Writing a few hundred years after the heyday of the medieval tradi-
tional school, the French author Rabelais ridiculed the constraining ele-
ments in this form of education. He wrote of the great doctor of theology,
Master Tubal Holofernes, who succeeded
in making his pupil stupider and stupider by forcing him to spend ﬁve
years on the alphabet until he could recite it backwards, then keeping
him for thirteen years, six months, and two weeks on the worst of the
medieval textbooks, until he knew them backwards, too, and following
that with sixteen years on the crude Late Roman compilers whose work
had been all that was available for the early barbarians.
Francis Bacon, writing at the beginning of the seventeenth century, de-
clared that “the method of discovery and proof according to which the
most general principles are ﬁrst established, and then intermediate axioms
are tried and proved by them, is the parent of error and the curse of all
science.” Yet, these critiques are one-sided: medieval scholastic schooling
was in many ways appropriate to the structure and the goals of the society
of its time and allowed the transmission of the most important skills and
knowledge in an effective way.
The decline of the traditional schools and the rise of the modern sec-
ular school occurred ﬁrst in the West, particularly in England and Ger-
many. Of crucial importance was the development of modern science and
its gradual acceptance throughout Europe and North America. The many
other epochal religious, political, economic, and social changes that oc-
curred in the period from 1400 to 1800 are so well known and have so
often been cited that it is unnecessary to rehearse them again here. But in
their wake there arose a citizenry much more in need of formal education,
367
The Education of Intelligences

much more willing to sacriﬁce so that its children could gain that educa-
tion, much more oriented toward the sciences and toward technology,
much less oriented toward the learning of sacred texts and the reading of
classical literature. As each of the great industrial revolutions occurred—
the revolution of textiles and heavy machinery in the eighteenth century;
the revolution of chemicals, electrical engineering, and steel in the nine-
teenth century; the revolution of computers and information technology
in the twentieth century—further changes have been wrought in the edu-
cational system. By now the modern school in Europe, the United States,
the Soviet Union, Israel or Egypt, India or Japan bears little resemblance
to the prototype that I have just sketched.
The Modern Secular School
Prototypical Features. What features came to distinguish the secular
schools—those modes of transmitting knowledge that will be most famil-
iar to, if not taken for granted by, readers of this book? First of all, secular
schools no longer centered on religious texts and, in fact, began to treat all
accumulated knowledge as equally within their province. Second, they
were no longer staffed exclusively, or even primarily, by members of the
clergy; instead, there arose a set of civil servants, teachers in the employ of
the state, who became the agents of instruction, and who were chosen on
the basis of intellectual credentials rather than of moral ﬁber. Education
began early in life: Erasmus recommended that it commence at age three,
and some modern authorities would favor an even earlier age. The family
sought to contribute to education in whatever ways it could: the use of the
vernacular, of simple and direct forms of expression, of games, puzzles,
and books written just for children became acceptable and eventually
widespread. Females were permitted to study and, eventually, to teach.
Finally, the overall goals of education changed. Education was designed to
foster productive labor and proper citizenship within one’s own country: it
could also stimulate personal development and provide skills that individ-
uals could use however they wished. 
Of course, individual goals differed from one secular society to another,
and the extent to which any were fully realized is debatable. Moreover, the
line between traditional and secular schools must not be overdrawn: not all
traditional schools were, strictly speaking, religious; and many otherwise
368
Implications and Applications

secular schools have maintained some religious ties or moorings. But it is
undeniable that most schools in the industrialized world have come to as-
sume this secular garb.
With a shift in type of schooling have come decided alterations in the
mix of intelligences. Determining for certain just which intelligences were
featured, in which way, is a task for future research, and any such determi-
nation must take into account the fact that shifts affect relative emphases
rather than the absolute presence or absence of a particular intelligence.
Nonetheless, if one bears these caveats in mind, it is instructive to consider
some of the changes that appear to have taken place over the centuries.
To begin with, the relative importance of interpersonal intelligence has
been reduced in the contemporary educational scene: one’s sensitivity to
other individuals as individuals, one’s capacity to form a close tie to a sin-
gle mentor, one’s ability to get along with others, to read their signals and
respond appropriately assumes less importance now than it did in centuries
past. In contrast, intrapersonal skills are continually—even increasingly—
germane, as the individual must monitor his own reactions and plan his
future course of study and, indeed, the rest of his life. Certain purely lin-
guistic skills are less important: with the ready availability of books, it is
important to be able to read quickly and to take good notes, but skills of
sheer memorization and uncritical “parroting” have little importance (and
may even be regarded with suspicion). Rather, a combination of linguistic
and logical skills has been brought to the fore, as individuals are expected
to abstract, synthesize, and criticize the texts they read, and to devise new
arguments and positions to replace the contemporary wisdom. And with
the rise of computers and other contemporary technologies, even the word
itself takes on less importance: the individual can now perform much of
his work purely through the manipulation of logical and numerical sym-
bols. Traditional schools replaced the “direct methods” of spatial and bod-
ily intelligences, with a stress on linguistic facility, while retaining much of
the interpersonal element; the modern school places increasing premium
on logical-mathematical ability and on certain aspects of linguistic intelli-
gence, along with a newly found premium on intrapersonal intelligence.
The remaining intellectual capacities are, for the most part, consigned to
after-school or recreational activities, if they are taken notice of at all. It is
no wonder that individuals living in societies that had only traditional
schooling exhibit severe strain when they are expected to make a rapid
transition to a computer-centered educational system.
369
The Education of Intelligences

An Adolescent Programmer. Let us pause for a moment to consider our
hypothetical Parisian student, who is programming a musical composition
on her home microcomputer. This activity presupposes the evolution of a
highly industrialized and technological society, as well as a degree of af-
ﬂuence that allows an individual to purchase equipment that was the stuff
of science ﬁction a generation or two ago. After all, no one can build a com-
puter society—or a computer—from scratch.
Yet, what is striking is the extent to which our student can proceed on
her own, having remarkably little interaction with other members of her
culture. Equipped with the rudiments of programming, which can be ac-
quired from a manual or a brief course, she is free to go to her terminal at
will, to purchase whatever software she desires, and to produce works that
meet her own desires and speciﬁcations. She is equally at liberty to revise,
reject, or transform the compositions, to share them with others or keep
them for herself. As much depends on her own planning, on her knowl-
edge of what she wants and how best to achieve it, intrapersonal knowledge
assumes a central role in the activities she selects and in the ways in which
she evaluates them. (Similarly, she has greater leverage about important
life decisions—role, mate, place of residence—than do her peers from a
traditional religious culture.) In working with a computer, she is necessar-
ily embracing logical-mathematical abilities to a far greater extent than do
most individuals in most other societies. Life in a computerized society
also involves a combination of logical-mathematical intelligence with other
intellectual forms—most typically linguistic; but, as our Parisian student
exempliﬁes, logical-mathematical intelligence can also be yoked to musi-
cal thinking. One may continue to exercise other intellectual capacities,
such as spatial, kinesthetic, or interpersonal forms; but this pursuit remains
a personal option rather than a societal imperative.
The adolescent at work with her personal computer stands at the op-
posite end of an educational continuum from a youth in a traditional soci-
ety who is learning to hunt, plant, or make a simple tool, and is remote as
well from the student at a cheder or a madrasa who is mastering a religious
text. Still, it is important not to exaggerate the distinctions in the proﬁles of
intelligence favored across different school settings. Certainly interper-
sonal relationships retain importance in some modern educational con-
texts: for example, much of graduate education, in the sciences no less than
in the arts, is based on the forging of a close link between the master pro-
fessor and his promising students. While intellectual strengths of a non-
370
Implications and Applications

personal sort may underlie the initiation of the link, its preservation over
a long period of time constitutes an important ingredient in the younger
colleagues’ eventual success within a ﬁeld. It is also worth noting that
nearly every society with modern secular schools has in some way tried to
preserve aspects of traditional schooling. A society may have after-school
religious education or weekend “Sunday schools.” There are frequently
special schools for Hebrew or Islamic studies that individuals attend in ad-
dition to their secular schools. In Japan, teachers often cultivate certain
traditional values in their regular classrooms, while their students attend
after-school juku designed in secular fashion to prepare them for the rig-
orous college entrance examinations they must eventually pass. In India,
the patashalas exist to provide secular treatment of many disciplines, while
the gurukulas are a throwback to an earlier era. And, even within the mod-
ern West, one can also discern an attempt to maintain the classical orien-
tation of the earlier traditional schools alongside the more scientiﬁc
orientation of the modern secular schools. Thus we have high schools of
the arts and of Latin as opposed to technical high schools, and Humanis-
tische as opposed to Technische Gymnasia. And we can also contrast “ter-
minal” elementary schools, devised to ensure that individuals will have
some rudiments of literacy before they take jobs as laborers or farmers,
with élite private schools, where aspects of classical education continue to
be stressed even as a certain proportion of individuals is introduced to the
lore and the methods of the sciences. Finally, the numerous optional or
extracurricular activities available in developed countries ensure that the
full range of intelligences can be cultivated, given time, desire, and a cer-
tain measure of afﬂuence.
Critiques of Schooling. Because modern secularized schools have been a
reality for many years throughout much of the West, our society has had
the opportunity to reﬂect upon this institution, to identify its weak points
as well as its strengths. We have been able to consider what may have been
lost by an adoption of schooling in general and by an uncritical acceptance,
during the past century, of modern secularized schooling, with its focus on
certain uses of mind and its relative lack of integration with the long-term
spiritual and moral life of the community. This soul-searching has given
rise, in recent decades, to blistering attacks on schooling by the gamut of
educationally oriented scholars. There are Ivan Illich, who has called on us
to “de-school society”; Paolo Freire, who objects to the use of schools as
371
The Education of Intelligences

élite tools for manipulating oppressed people; Ronald Dore, who con-
demns the credentialing function of schooling, where the focus lies on ob-
taining a diploma, when there are few jobs available for the certiﬁed; Ulric
Neisser, who decries the narrow academic skills that reign in the classroom;
Christopher Jencks (along with various other American commentators),
who claims that schools as a whole do not even attain their avowed goals
of helping individuals scale the ladder of success (social class background
and luck prove more important); and nostalgic commentators like Michael
Maccoby and Nancy Modiano who declare:
If the peasant child is not dulled by village life, he will experience the
uniqueness of events, objects, and people. But as the city child grows
older, he may end by exchanging a spontaneous less alienated relation-
ship with the world for a more sophisticated outlook which concentrates
on using, exchanging, or cataloguing. What industrialized urban man
gains in an increased ability to formulate, to reason, and to code the ever
more numerous bits of complex information he requires, he may lose in
a decreased sensitivity to people and to events.
These critics need not necessarily carry the day. A recent inﬂuential
study by Michael Rutter and his colleagues in London indicates that
schools can make a positive difference in the lives of children. If a school
has sufﬁcient resources, a competent principal, an emphasis on teaching by
teachers who are punctual and responsible, and a clear and justly admin-
istered system of rewards and demerits, then children will tend to learn
more, to like school better, and to avoid delinquent behavior. Similar re-
ports come from the challenging environment of New York City. Princi-
pals and principles matter! And for populations who are disadvantaged, a
program of early enrichment that begins to develop intellectual skills in
the ﬁrst years of life can have measurable long-term effects on student at-
titudes and achievement.
It is not my purpose here, however, to take issue (or sides) with the de-
fenders or the critics of schools. Rather, my analytic framework may help
to identify those features of modern schools that are part of their explicit
program, as well as some of the consequences that may be unintended
side-effects of such schooling. Among those observers partial to spatial,
bodily, or musical forms of knowing, as well as those who favor a focus on
the interpersonal aspects of living, an inclination to indict contemporary
372
Implications and Applications

schooling is understandable. The modern secular school has simply—
though it need not have—neglected these aspects of intellectual compe-
tence. In contrast, those commentators who favor the cultivation of
logical-mathematical and intrapersonal skills and the utilization of merito-
cratic rather than subjective measures of quality ﬁnd much to admire in
the modern school. Still, it is worth noting that among the factors that con-
tribute to the effectiveness of schools are the personal qualities of the
principal and the teachers. Despite promises of a microcomputer along-
side (or in place of) every desk, these individuals cannot be replaced, at
least not yet.
While the actual effects and effectiveness of modern schools can (and
will continue to) be debated, the overall impact of a schooled society (as
against one without formal education) is rarely a matter of dispute. It
seems evident to nearly all observers that attendance at school for more
than a few years produces an individual—and, eventually a collectivity—
who differs in important (if not always easy to articulate) ways from mem-
bers of a society that lacks formal schooling. There are, of course, differences
between the traditional and the modern secular schools: in terms of our over-
all framework, a society featuring the traditional school may be thought of
as marking an intermediate point between a society without any formal
schooling and a society dominated by modern secular schools.
Three Features of Modern Education
Whatever its preferred mode of transmitting knowledge, nearly every so-
ciety in the contemporary world has had to confront the accomplishments
of the modern “industrialized” or “developed” world. And few societies,
whatever their doubts about the European, the American, or the Japan-
ese examples, have been able to turn their backs on the educational sys-
tems of these societies and to remain content with their traditional forms
of knowledge transmission.
In order to make informed decisions about which paths to follow and
which to abjure, educational planners have sought to understand better
the effects and implications of the principal features of education in the
developed world—such features as enrollment in a secular school, acqui-
sition of literacy, and mastery of the scientiﬁc method. Each of these areas
is enormous, and none is as yet well understood. Moreover, they tend to
373
The Education of Intelligences

be correlated with one another: most contemporary schools in the devel-
oped world feature several literacies as well as scientiﬁc thought, and so it
is scarcely a straightforward matter to disentangle the effects of each and
to determine the ways in which they typically interact. Nonetheless, given
the importance of these factors in any contemporary educational equation,
it is germane to consider what is known about each form, whenever pos-
sible in isolation, and to see whether its features can be illuminated by the
framework that I have introduced earlier in this chapter.
Schooling
With these caveats in mind, we may consider the features that are gener-
ally believed to accompany this trio of factors. Probably the effects of
schooling have been most often probed. Authorities generally agree that,
outside of schooled settings, children acquire skills through observation
and participation in the contexts in which these skills are customarily in-
voked. In contrast, in the standard classroom, teachers talk, often pre-
senting material in abstract symbolic form and relying on inanimate media
such as books and diagrams in order to convey information. Schooling gen-
erally treats subject matter that one cannot readily see or touch, even as
those sensory modes of taking in information seem singularly inappropri-
ate for most school tasks (except for the visual act of reading). Children
skilled in the ways of school are accustomed to the presentation of prob-
lems and tasks, often out of context, and learn to tackle these assignments
just because they are there. Children learn to look for clues, to devise steps
and strategies, and to search doggedly for answers that are not known.
Some of the skills learned in school prove to be general: once one can read,
one can read a book on any topic; once one can write, one can write on
many topics; skills of calculation, diagram reading, and the like are similarly
versatile. Indeed, dealing with notational systems altogether may be a chief
survival skill inculcated in school.
Surveying a wide range of studies, Michael Cole and Roy D’Andrade
indicate some of the consequences that one can regularly expect following
years of schooling. Individuals who have been to school regularly outper-
form those who have not, on tasks where one must focus on language it-
self, where specialized information-processing strategies (like chunking)
are required, or where one must spontaneously use certain taxonomic clas-
374
Implications and Applications

siﬁcation systems (putting together objects that belong to the same super-
ordinate class). Conversely, one typically ﬁnds little or no difference be-
tween schooled and unschooled populations on tasks where materials are
familiar, where the kinds of relationship sought after are functional, or
where the desired modes of classiﬁcation have been modeled in a familiar
and nonthreatening situation. Such ﬁndings underscore the effectiveness
of school in calling attention to language and in teaching students to clas-
sify in certain ways and to use certain informational approaches. The miss-
ing skills may well be trainable even in unschooled children, but it is
important to stress that they do not arise spontaneously in the course of
tackling tasks typically posed by experimental investigators.
In terms of our framework, then, schooling involves a novel site of
learning (outside of the usual context where skills are deployed for pro-
ductive labor), with specialized agents of transmission and numerous
media of transmission that are not generally featured in a nonschooled en-
vironment. This combination, in turn, cultivates mental skills that are dif-
ﬁcult to acquire when transmission of knowledge occurs only in on-site,
unmediated contexts. A more sophisticated and self-conscious use of lan-
guage may well be a byproduct of most schooling, even as a new set of lit-
eracies and a commitment to logical thinking are frequent concomitants.
The forms of personal knowledge will differ depending upon the kind of
school; in general, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, and musical forms of know-
ing will have only an incidental or an optional status. Differences in schools
will depend chieﬂy on whether they tend toward the traditional religious
model—where linguistic and interpersonal forms are at the fore—or to-
ward the modern secular pole—where logical-mathematical and intraper-
sonal forms of intelligence prove most germane to the goals of the system.
It should be noted that in some societies, such as Japan, strong efforts are
made to foster interpersonal knowledge within the formal school setting.
Furthermore, in some strict traditional schools, such as the Koranic ones
that focus only on reading and writing, some of the cognitive revolutions
associated with secular schooling may not occur.
Literacy
Turning next to the effects of literacy, we ﬁnd discussions of a somewhat
separate, though certainly related, set of skills. Like schooling, literacy
375
The Education of Intelligences

encourages fresh and, in many ways, more reﬂective attention to language.
In a nonliterate society, language tends to be invisible: all that is noticed are
the effects of what has been said. In contrast, in a literate society the indi-
vidual becomes aware that there are elements like words, that they are
combined in certain acceptable ways (grammar), and that these linguistic
elements can themselves be referred to (meta-language). Individuals learn
that it is possible to be precise and unambiguous in articulating what one
means, to have a completely accurate record of what has been said, and to
distinguish between what may have been meant (“Pass the salt”) and what
has actually been said (“Would you mind passing the salt?”). Literate per-
sons become able to relate readily with one another in other than a direct
face-to-face manner: they can even come to know someone whom they
have never met and, if correspondence is possible, establish a relationship
with that individual. Interpersonal relations can take on a new, hitherto al-
most inconceivable ﬂavor.
It may well be that, at least in certain contexts, the ability to read and
write encourages a more abstract form of thinking, for one can now deﬁne
terms with precision, refer back to facts and deﬁnitions that were pre-
sented some time before, and weigh the logical and persuasive elements
of an argument. The capacity to employ various symbolized notations en-
ables one to supplement one’s memory, organize one’s future activities, and
communicate at one time with an indeﬁnite number of individuals (the set
of all potential readers).
Mastery of different literacies—for example, reading musical scores,
mathematical proofs, or intricate diagrams—exposes one to once-
inaccessible bodies of knowledge and allows one to contribute new knowl-
edge within these traditions. And literacy may also have profound social
consequences: the individual who can write may not only place himself in
a powerful situation vis-à-vis his illiterate contemporaries but may also es-
tablish a reputation as a certain kind of person. For instance, if he main-
tains faithful records of public transactions and uses them judiciously, he
can serve as a kind of “honest broker” or judge of the behavior of other in-
dividuals. No wonder that chiefs of nonliterate societies are often observed
to feign literacy as soon as they become aware of its existence!
So much for the alleged consequences of literacy. Even as Michael Cole
and his colleagues have helped us to understand the effects (and the lim-
its) of years spent in school, they have recently added materially to our un-
derstanding of the implications of literacy. Taking advantage of a unique
376
Implications and Applications

experiment in culture, Cole, Sylvia Scribner, and their colleagues spent
several years studying a group of Vai individuals in Liberia. This population
is special because some inhabitants are literate only in English, some are
literate only in Arabic (acquired in the study of the Koran), and about 20
percent of the adult Vai males have learned a special script restricted to
their geographical region: a syllabary devised in the nineteenth century
primarily for writing letters and keeping personal records. Though used
for these valued purposes, the Vai script does not entail any contact with
new knowledge or record scientiﬁc, philosophical, or literary information.
The Cole team uncovered the surprising fact that attaining even a high
degree of literacy in one of these systems does not in itself produce wide-
spread cognitive consequences. In fact, it is the attending of school, rather
than the acquisition of literacy per se, that produces most of the afore-
mentioned differences in problem solving, classiﬁcation and analytic skills,
and even that sensitivity to language that might seem part and parcel of an
immersion in literacy. What mastery of each script does accomplish, how-
ever, is the enhancing of certain skills integral to the practice of that par-
ticular literacy. Thus, Vai literates prove better than other individuals at
integrating syllables into meaningful linguistic units while Arabic literates
have a selective ability to remember a string of words (as they must do in
learning the Koran) but are otherwise not remarkable. On this analysis, lit-
eracy should be seen not as a panacea for various cognitive deﬁciencies
but, rather, as a set of speciﬁc cognitive skills that may have some generality
but do not by any means change a worldview. It is literacy in the context of
schooling that alters a larger family of linguistic and cognitive operations.
We see, then, that a particular languagelike skill need not have the rev-
olutionary effects that typically surround it in a schooled situation. Con-
sistent with the theory of this book, a particular use of linguistic intelligence
does not necessarily implicate other intellectual strands. True, a general
concern with literacies and notations is likely to produce an individual who
is both aware of the possibilities of recoding information and facile in ac-
quiring additional literacies (for example, new programming languages for
the computer). Moreover, occurring as it typically does in a schooled set-
ting, the acquisition of literacies enables the individual to master much ad-
ditional information in a context-free setting. In a sense, reading opens up
the world. But the Scribner-Cole study reminds us that we must be care-
ful before assuming that any new form of education necessarily entails
broad consequences. And indeed, as one considers the vast differences 
377
The Education of Intelligences

between a bush school and a traditional religious school, or between a tra-
ditional religious school and a modern secular school, it seems clear that
the kind of school makes as big an intellectual difference as the fact of
schooling per se.
Science
The chief pretender in our times to an altering of worldviews is our third
factor—science, that body of procedures and ﬁndings that arose in the
Renaissance and its aftermath and has led to many of the most important
innovations of our time. The adoption of scientiﬁc and technological meas-
ures has made possible unprecedented afﬂuence (as well as numerous
unanticipated physical and social upheavals): no corner has escaped its ef-
fects or its appeal.
In the scientiﬁc method, at least two aspects work hand in hand. On
the one side, there is an interest in collecting facts, a desire to be objec-
tively empirical and to ﬁnd out as much as one can about a subject matter,
along with a willingness (or even eagerness) to change one’s mind in the
light of new facts. Complementing this descriptive aspect of science is
the building of an explanatory superstructure—a theoretical framework
that explains the nature of, and the relations among, objects and forces,
how they come about, what can make them change, and under what con-
ditions such changes are likely to take place. The theoretical structure de-
pends upon reasoning: deductive reasoning, where implications are drawn
from general assumptions; and inductive reasoning, where general princi-
ples are arrived at from the examination of individual cases. These ele-
ments existed to some extent in Classical times (certainly in Aristotle’s
vicinity) and also in other corners of the world for many years, but it is the
particular genius of European culture after the Middle Ages to have
brought them together into a “scientiﬁc synthesis” whose results have al-
ready been dramatic and whose ultimate effects are incalculable.
Much discussion of the differences between the modern and the “tra-
ditional,” “preliterate,” or “primitive” mind centers around the role of sci-
entific thinking. Authorities like Claude Lévi-Strauss have argued that
the traditional mind is not fundamentally different from the modern mind:
the same operations are used but applied to different materials. In fact,
primitive science is best viewed simply as a science of the concrete, whose
378
Implications and Applications

operations can be seen at work as individuals classify objects or weave
mythic explanations. Other observers in sympathy with premodern ways
of thinking have criticized Western science for spawning an ethnocentrism
about our current way of making sense of the world, which they see as sim-
ply one of numerous equivalent worldviews.
On the other side, authorities like Robin Horton have argued, to my
mind rather convincingly, that while both scientiﬁc and nonscientiﬁc or
prescientiﬁc ways of thinking are efforts to explain the world, there re-
mains a fundamental difference between them. Speciﬁcally, in its effort to
explain the world, the scientiﬁc mind includes a credo that involves the
positing of hypotheses, the stipulation of the conditions under which a hy-
pothesis can be rejected, and the willingness to abandon the hypothesis
and to entertain a new one should the original one be disconﬁrmed.
Hence, the system is inherently open to change. The premodern or non-
scientiﬁc mind has available all the same thought processes as has the sci-
entiﬁc mind, but the system within which the former works is essentially
closed: all premises have already been stated in advance, all inferences
must follow from them, and the explanatory system is not altered in the
light of the new information that has been procured. Rather, in the man-
ner described in my discussion of traditional religious education, one’s
rhetorical powers are simply mobilized to provide ever more artful justiﬁ-
cations of the conclusions, the worldviews, that were already known in ad-
vance and for all time.
Even if one accepts (as many do not) this difference between scientiﬁc
and nonscientiﬁc thinking, it is important not to exaggerate its pervasive-
ness or decisiveness. When it comes to cosmic matters, individuals in non-
scientiﬁc societies may well reason in a closed manner; yet it seems much
less likely that they adopt this mode of reasoning in everyday matters. Un-
less they use an essentially experimental method in daily life—for example,
rejecting foods that make one sick—they cannot survive. By the same
token, even if Western scientists do indeed employ a method of reasoning
that has allowed them to build the ever-changing structures of science, it
is scarcely the case that they stand, in the rest of their lives, immune from
aspects of closed thinking. In addition to whatever superstitious, mystical,
or religious beliefs many of us hold onto unswervingly, an overall belief in
science can be viewed as a kind of a myth, one that scientists are as loath
to relinquish as our nonscientiﬁc brethren are reluctant to abandon their
own mythic-poetic systems.
379
The Education of Intelligences

Though scientiﬁc thinking may well yield a different worldview, one
fundamentally alien to and even incommensurate with nonscientiﬁc world-
views, it need not entail a new form of intelligence. Rather, I think that
the scientist is characterized by a willingness to use linguistic and logical-
mathematical modes of thought in areas where they have customarily not
been used before (for example, the devising of new notational systems or
the positing of testable theories) and to combine them with careful obser-
vation in ways that have not generally been employed. Put differently, the
components of the scientiﬁc method have existed for thousands of years,
in any number of societies, ranging from ancient China to Classical Greece
to medieval Islamic society. It has been the special genius of modern sci-
ence to combine these sensory, logical, and linguistic approaches in a new
way and to dissociate them from the personal and religious forms of know-
ing in which they have been hitherto embedded.
Just as it is possible to have literacy without the effects of schooling, it is
possible to have schooling without the effects of science. Indeed, both the
informal schools of the nonliterate society and the traditional schools of
the literate society have existed for many years without any involvement
in the scientiﬁc world. It is even possible to feature logical-mathematical
thinking within the traditional school setting: in such instances, sophisti-
cated linguistic and logical-mathematical abilities are harnessed in order
to justify certain predetermined conclusions. What distinguishes contem-
porary science, whether or not it is practiced in a schooled setting, is a par-
ticular use of logical-mathematical thinking in order systematically to
investigate new possibilities, to develop fresh explanatory frameworks, to test
those frameworks, and then to revise or scuttle them in the light of the re-
sults. Interpersonal ties may well be important in the mastery of the sci-
entiﬁc method—particularly for one who wants to collaborate with other
workers; but in practice, much scientiﬁc work involves an immersion in
one’s own thought processes, and achievement of one’s own ensemble of
goals, ranging from the development of a particular computer program to
an entirely novel scientiﬁc explanation. These activities exploit the intra -
personal rather than the interpersonal forms of understanding. In sum,
while scientiﬁc thinking does not in itself entail any new form of intelli-
gence, it represents a combination of intelligences that has hitherto not
been utilized in this particular way. This form of thinking is possible only in
settings with certain goals and values—witness the moving plight of Galileo
380
Implications and Applications

in his struggle with the Church or of contemporary scientists in totalitarian
societies. Like schooling and literacy, science is a social invention to which
human intelligences can be marshaled only if the society is willing to accept
the consequences.
The Three Youths Revisited
I have in this chapter examined, in schematic fashion, a large number of
trends. I have observed that as one effects a transition from “direct” forms
of knowledge to informal forms of schooling, from informal to traditional
schooling, and from traditional to modern schools, there has been a steady
minimization of bodily, spatial, and interpersonal forms of knowledge—
ﬁrst in favor of linguistic forms, and then, increasingly, in favor of logical-
mathematical and intrapersonal forms of thinking.
This shift of emphasis can be seen clearly as one considers the skills
utilized by the three hypothetical students. The Puluwat sailor relies pri-
marily on his bodily and spatial capacities: linguistic abilities assume im-
portance at one point in the learning process, while logical-mathematical
capacities are scarcely at a premium. Both the Puluwat youth and the Iran-
ian adolescent are embedded in an interpersonal situation: each youth’s
relationship to the elders who will instruct him assumes great importance
for the success of the educational encounter. But where the Puluwat youth
learns primarily in the “natural” context of sailing, the Iranian youth is mas-
tering a far less transparent body of knowledge in a setting remote from
signiﬁcant daily activities. He is therefore thrown more squarely upon his
linguistic capacities, which must include not only skills in rote verbal mem-
ory but ultimately the ability to “crack the code” of the Arabic language.
An equally sizable gulf separates the Iranian youth from the Parisian
composer at her computer terminal. While the skills necessary for the mas-
tery of music and computing may well have been acquired in an interper-
sonal setting, this adolescent works chieﬂy alone: she must engage in a
great deal of solitary planning about what she proposes to do and how she
expects to carry it out. Thus, a much greater emphasis is placed on the cul-
tivation of intrapersonal intelligence and an autonomous sense of self. Far
more than her youthful counterparts in other parts of the world, she also
must rely on logical-mathematical skills: successful writing of a program
381
The Education of Intelligences

depends upon cultivated abilities in the numerical and inferential spheres.
Of course, as a composer, she is also dealing with musical elements—
indeed, these will be central to her work. Were she involved in video-
graphics or in spatial reasoning, she would be relying on still other forms
of intelligence. By virtue of her engagement with computers, this youth
must inevitably deal with linguistic codes as well: but since various hand-
books are available, she has no need to rely on the extensive memorization
prized by the Iranian and Puluwat youths. Once she has learned to read,
this skill can serve as an aid to the acquisition of required forms of logical
and mathematical knowledge.
Of course, outside their particular learning settings, these individuals
retain the options of using a much wider set of intelligences, and there is
no reason to think that they do not do so. Life consists of more than the de-
ployment of particular combinations of intelligence for speciﬁc educational
purposes. I must also point out that these intelligences are not mutually
exclusive of one another. Cultivation of one intelligence does not imply that
others cannot be acquired: some individuals (and some cultures) may de-
velop several intelligences to a keen extent, while others may highlight only
one or two. One should not think of intelligences as involved in a zero sum
situation, nor should one treat the theory of multiple intelligences as a hy-
draulic model, where an increase in one intelligence necessarily entails a
decrease in another. Still, on a statistical basis, it seems reasonable to spec-
ulate that different individuals—and different cultures—place their bets
differently in their deployment of intelligences.
It is possible to interpret the transition from the sailor to the Koranic
scholar to the computer programmer as the course of progress; and, in-
deed, from the perspective of Western experience, the ability of an indi-
vidual to create works of art on a computer can be seen as a crowning
achievement. But it is equally possible to see this sequence of episodes as
a systematic devaluation of certain forms of intelligence, such as interper-
sonal, spatial, or bodily intelligence, and as a destruction of certain im-
portant linguistic capacities. No less an authority than Socrates declared
(with respect to the advent of writing):
For this invention of yours will produce forgetfulness in the minds of
those who learn it, by causing them to neglect their memory inasmuch
as, from the conﬁdence in writing they will recollect by the external aid
of foreign symbols and not by the internal use of their own faculty.
382
Implications and Applications

The Education of Intelligences
383
The invention of various technological aids may, paradoxically, leave an in-
dividual less well prepared to rely on his own abilities. And the sequence
witnessed in the Western world is certainly not the only conceivable one
and, quite possibly, not the optimal one.
The evolution from a prescientiﬁc to a scientiﬁc way of thinking, from
observational learning to schooling, and from nonliteracy to literacy may
have worked with some smoothness in the West and in certain other re-
gions of the world. The story of the West is, however, not a universal saga,
and it is a grave mistake to assume that it should be. In my view, many of
the most problematic aspects of modernization have resulted from an un-
critical attempt to apply the model and the history of the West to alien tra-
ditions, with different histories, different traditions of education, and
different favored blends of intelligence. Just how to balance these various
factors to produce effective educational systems is a most vexing question,
which I can hardly pretend to be able to answer. However, in the con-
cluding chapter I want to offer some speculations about how my theoret-
ical framework might prove germane to such an effort.


385
14
The Application 
of Intelligences 
Intelligences in the Air
In April of 1980, I visited the Suzuki Talent Education Center in Mat-
sumoto, Japan. There I met with individuals who administered the pro-
gram and attended a concert by youngsters enrolled in the various classes
at the center. The performances were virtually incredible. Children as
young as seven or eight were playing movements from violin concerti
drawn from the concert repertoire; a preadolescent played a virtuoso piece
of the Romantic era; children hardly old enough to hold a violin performed
in startling unison a number of pieces that any Western schoolchild would
be proud to have mastered. The youngsters performed with style, gusto,
and accuracy, clearly enjoying themselves and clearly giving satisfaction to
the audience—largely mothers of the performers—who were leaning ea-
gerly forward, lest they miss a single bowing. Indeed, the only individual
who seemed discomﬁted was a talented cellist of perhaps eleven, whose
performance was being vigorously—though not unkindly—criticized by a
visiting master cellist from Europe.
Clearly, if I had simply heard one of the Suzuki preschoolers play an
instrument while he remained hidden behind a curtain, I would have
thought the performance to be by a much older child. Indeed, I would
probably have concluded that the child was a prodigy (or a fraud) if I had
been told that he was only three or four years of age. And, in using the
term prodigy, I would probably have been attributing to the luck of
heredity what is actually a talent nurtured through a shrewd educational

intervention. On the other hand, I think it would be equally mistaken to
infer that genetic factors have been invariably absent in other examples of
early musical precocity. Had I the opportunity to listen to the youthful
Mozart, or to an autistic child who is able to sing hundreds of melodies, I
would in all likelihood have been witnessing the fruition of a strong hered-
itary inclination.
I have taken some pains in this book to avoid pitting genetics against
cultural factors. Social scientists need a framework that, while taking into
account genetic predisposition and neurobiological factors, recognizes the
formative role played by the environment. Even if the individuals enrolled
in the Suzuki class are to some extent a selected group, the scions of mu-
sically gifted families, they clearly reached such heights of performance at
a youthful age because of the ingenuity of the program and the dedication
displayed by their parents. More on that later. In this chapter, I shall be
concerned with the ways in which the theory of multiple intelligences
may help us to understand better the reasons for the effectiveness—or
the ineffectiveness—of various programs designed to help individuals re-
alize their potential, And, in conclusion, drawing on the framework intro-
duced in Chapter 13, I will set forth some principles that may help
planners and policy makers think through more effectively the goals and
the means of various contemplated interventions.
As compared with one hundred or even with thirty years ago, talk about
the development of intelligence, the realization of human potential, and
the role of education is very much in the international air. These topics are
being explored not only by the usual lobbying groups but also by such un-
expected (and unexpectedly formidable) institutions as banks for economic
development and national governments. Rightly or wrongly, the powers-
that-be in the worlds of international development and national sovereignty
have become convinced that the ingredients for human progress, success,
and happiness are closely linked to better educational opportunities for
their client citizenry and, particularly, for young individuals. This provides,
to my mind, a rare opportunity for the psychological and the pedagogical
sciences to show that they have some usefulness. If this opportunity is not
exploited, it is unlikely to present itself again for some time.
Judiciously, but clearly audibly, an organization like the World Bank
questions a policy of exclusive funding for agriculture and technological
enterprises and, instead, calls for investment in human development and
education. Robert S. McNamara, then president of the World Bank, de-
386
Implications and Applications

clared in a 1980 speech, “Development is clearly not economic progress
measured in terms of gross national product. It is something much more
basic: it is essentially human development, that is the individual’s realiza-
tion of his or her inherent potential.” He went on to note that human de-
velopment—which he deﬁned as better education, health, nutrition, and
family planning at the local level—promotes economic growth as effec-
tively as does capital investment in physical plans. In Learning to Be, the
prestigious UNESCO report of 1972, Edgar Faure, former prime minis-
ter of France, and his colleagues made the provocative statement that “the
human brain has a very large unused potential which some authorities—
more or less arbitrarily—have assessed at 90 percent.” The job of educa-
tion: to realize this unused potential.
Consistent with these sentiments, the international think tank the Club
of Rome commissioned a report on how education and learning might as-
sume their proper roles in the world of today and tomorrow. As the pres-
ident of the club, Aurelio Peccei, declared:
Any solutions to the human gap as well as any guarantees for the human
future can be sought nowhere else but within ourselves. What is needed
is for all of us to learn [Peccei’s italics] how to stir up our dormant po-
tential and use it from now on purposefully and intelligently.
The authors of the resulting volume, No Limits to Learning, concurred that
“for all practical purposes there appear to be virtually no limits to learning.”
As their chosen vehicle for bridging the various gaps and solving the vexing
problems that plague contemporary societies, they recommended innova-
tive learning: a second-order learning in which individuals plan in concert
for the kind of world that is likely to evolve in the future, and take joint ac-
tions to exploit opportunities and avoid disasters. As they describe it:
Innovative learning is problem formulation and clustering. Its main at-
tributes are integration, synthesis, and the broadening of horizons. It
operates in open . . . situations or open systems. Its meaning derives
from dissonance among contexts. It leads to critical questioning of con-
ventional assumptions behind traditional thoughts and actions, focusing
on necessary changes. Its values are not constant, but rather shifting. In-
novative learning advances our thinking by reconstructing wholes, not
by fragmenting reality.
387
The Application of Intelligences

The tone of this passage reﬂects accurately the ﬂavor of the study as a
whole. Laudable in its aspirations, and hortatory in its exposition, the Club
of Rome report invokes a capacity that would clearly be of greatest utility
to develop both in individuals and in collectivities. The problem with the
report, however, is that it contains little in the way of concrete suggestions
about how anticipatory learning might be inculcated, and equally little
about possible biological and cultural constraints on adopting such an en-
lightened, unselﬁsh, and forward-looking orientation toward particular
problems. The report remains mired at the level of slogans.
Far less circumspect is the astonishing platform on which stands Luis
Alberto Machado, a Venezuelan politician, the ﬁrst and (so far as can be as-
certained) the only minister in the world for the Development of Human
Intelligence. Surveying the world’s philosophical thinkers and the range of
human sciences, Minister Machado has reached the conclusion that every
human being has the potential to become intelligent. Consider some of his
statements:
We all have the same potentialities which throughout life are incarnated
in different ways according to each person’s existence.
Man is offered unlimited possibilities that are materialized through learn-
ing and teaching.
Einstein learned intelligence in the same way that a person learns to play
the piano “by ear.”
Government should be, then, the teaching of intelligence.
The development of man’s intelligence allows him to rationally direct the
biological evolution of his own species and to eradicate chance and need
from the entire process of that evolution.
The free intelligence of every man is also the image and likeness of God’s
intelligence.
Based on this optimistic analysis of the capacity of human beings to be-
come geniuses (in Machado’s phrase), he and his colleagues have em-
388
Implications and Applications

barked on an ambitious program to raise the intelligence of the Venezue-
lan populace:
We [Venezuelans] are going to completely transform our educational
system. We are going to teach how to develop intelligence every day,
from kindergarten to college, and we are going to teach parents, espe-
cially mothers, how to teach their children from the moment of their
birth, and even before, how to develop all of their capabilities. In this
manner we will be offering our people and all the peoples of the world
a real new future.
With the collaboration of scientists from all over the world (but chieﬂy
from the West), the Machado Project features fourteen separate programs,
initially developed elsewhere, which are now being injected into Venezue-
lan contexts, ranging from the nursery and the elementary school to the
work setting and the military.
The grandiosity of the Machado Project is there for all to see and is per-
haps too inviting a target for cynical observers of the world scene. It would
be easy to take potshots at this overly ambitious and perhaps somewhat ill-
conceived undertaking and to show why it is unlikely to succeed in its
avowed terms. After all, we really know little about what intelligence is (or
what intelligences are), about how such capacities can be better developed,
and about how to implant into an alien setting a set of skills that evolved
under one set of historical and cultural circumstances. The same kind of
critique could be initiated with equal facility with reference to other con-
temporary grandiose programs, such as those launched by the Institutes
for the Achievement of Human Potential in Philadelphia. This eccentric
organization claims to be able to teach the whole range of “school skills”
to toddlers, even to those who have suffered brain damage, and it blithely
contends in its workbook of “cardinal facts” that “our genetic potential is
that of Leonardo, Shakespeare, Mozart, Michelangelo, Edison, and Ein-
stein.” Unfortunately, however, this organization has not, to my knowledge,
allowed objective evaluators to assess the success of its interventions.
But such hatchet jobs are more likely to give momentary pleasure to
the wielder of the ax than genuine proﬁt to practitioners earnestly trying
to better the skills and the knowledge base of growing human populations.
The obligation of the pragmatically oriented social scientist is to offer a
389
The Application of Intelligences

better set of tools and to suggest how, when adopted, these would be more
likely to culminate in positive results, less likely to engender another set of
dashed expectations. In what follows, I undertake some modest efforts in
this direction.
Using MI Theory to Elucidate Examples
Introduction
Attempts to think about human intelligence should begin with a con-
frontation of what the human species is like, and with a consideration of the
spheres in which its members are inclined to perform effectively, given ad-
equate resources and timely interventions. From these perspectives, in-
vocations of “no limits to learning” are of little utility: not only is it false to
think that a human being can do anything; but where everything is possi-
ble, there are no guidelines about what ought to be attempted and what
not. My seven core forms of intelligence are an effort to lay out seven in-
tellectual regions in which most human beings have the potential for solid
advancement, and to suggest some of the milestones that will be passed as
these intellectual competences are realized, by gifted individuals and by
individuals who, though entirely normal, apparently possess no special gifts
in a given realm.
We have seen, however, that except perhaps in the case of certain ex-
ceptional individuals, these intellectual competences never develop in a
vacuum. Rather, they become mobilized by symbolizing activities in on-
going cultures where they have practical meaning and tangible conse-
quences. Thus, the inborn capacity to process certain (linguistic) sounds
in certain ways becomes exploited for human communication through
speaking and, in many contexts, through writing. Ultimately, these nur-
tured abilities become central in certain social roles, ranging from the
lawyer or the poet in contemporary Western civilization to an oral story-
teller, shaman, or political leader in a traditional society.
A lengthy educational process is necessary before the raw intellectual
potential—be it linguistic, musical, or logical-mathematical—can be real-
ized in the form of a mature cultural role. Part of this process simply in-
volves certain natural processes of development, whereby a capacity passes
through a predictable set of stages as it matures and is differentiated. I
390
Implications and Applications

have noted some of the developmental milestones that occur in the area of
language and could provide similar portraits of “streamlike” development
in other intellectual realms. But when it comes to the transmission of spe-
ciﬁc skills and knowledge, one beholds a more complex, less natural
process at work. I made an initial effort in the previous chapter to analyze
this process of transmission by noting the kind of knowledge that is to be
transmitted, the agents of transmission, the modes or media by which the
knowledge is to be transmitted, and the locus of transmission. To my mind,
an analogous analysis ought to be conducted whenever a policy maker rec-
ommends that some educational course be followed.
Through such an analysis, it becomes evident that human intellectual
competences can be mobilized in a variety of ways. As I have already
noted, human linguistic competence can become the method whereby
some other nonlinguistic skill is acquired: language is often exploited as an
aid in teaching an individual some bodily process (like a dance) or some
mathematical process (like a proof). Language itself can constitute a subject
matter, as, for instance, when an individual is learning his own language, or
another tongue, or is mastering a subject matter that is in itself highly lin-
guistic in content—like history or political science. Finally, developmental
factors surrounding linguistic competence are also relevant: if, for exam-
ple, individuals exhibit the highest aptitude for learning language during
the ﬁrst ten years of life and a diminished ability to do so after the second
decade; and if, furthermore, young children are especially able to master
materials through rote learning of associations—then, these facts, too, must
enter any equation describing the transmission of knowledge.
This brief aside indicates, I hope, that the adoption of a perspective
like MI theory may permit a more differentiated and precise analysis of
how various educational goals might be viewed and pursued. It should be
pointed out, once again, that even if one’s cognitive mechanisms are in
order, educational progress will not necessarily result. Most contemporary
psychological analyses assume an individual eager to learn; but, in fact,
such factors as proper motivation, an affective state conducive to learning,
a set of values that favors a particular kind of learning, and a supporting
cultural context are indispensable (though often elusive) factors in the ed-
ucational process. Indeed, one of the Venezuelan-supported research pro -
jects has concluded that proper motivation to learn may well be the single
biggest difference between a successful and an unsuccessful educational
program (and learner). Be that as it may, analysis of educational experiments
391
The Application of Intelligences

must attend to such factors as motivation, personality, and value: the fact
that my own analysis focuses heavily on “purely cognitive components”
must be considered a limitation of the present formulation.
The Suzuki Talent Education Method
Returning to the opening example, it should be possible (and certainly de-
sirable) to explain something of the success of the Suzuki music program
through our framework of human intelligences. Before doing so, it is help-
ful to provide some more information about this unusual and unusually ef-
fective experiment. For these details, I draw upon my observations at
Matsumoto and on my own experiences as a Suzuki parent, as well as on
the valuable study of the Suzuki program undertaken by Lois Taniuchi 
at Harvard.
The Talent Education Program, devised just before World War II by a
sensitive Japanese violinist named Shinichi Suzuki, is a carefully structured
technique of music education that begins virtually at birth and has as a
principal goal the training of accomplished musical performance in young
children. Crucial to success in the program is the child’s mother, who, par-
ticularly at the beginning, is the locus of the program and remains through-
out a vital catalyst for child involvement and progress.
In a typical version of the program, as perfected in Japan and recently
adopted in other countries, the child is exposed daily during the ﬁrst year
of life to recordings of great performances. Toward the end of the ﬁrst
year of life, the child begins to hear, on a fairly regular basis, the twenty
short songs that will constitute his curriculum once he begins to study 
an instrument.
Six months before beginning his own lessons, at perhaps the age of two,
the child starts to attend group lessons. These lessons, which last perhaps
an hour and a half, bring together children of different ages and levels of
performance, covering a total age span of perhaps two or three years. The
children attend with their mothers, who participate with the children and
the teacher in a group of games and exercises. The lessons themselves are
divided between general exercises in which all children participate and
from which all children are expected to beneﬁt, and short performances by
each of the students of the pieces on which they have been working. The
future student listens attentively and participates to the extent that he can.
392
Implications and Applications

At these lessons, he has an opportunity to observe what he will be doing
in his own lessons once they have begun. The emphasis always falls on
one’s own progress from one week to the next, never on competition with
the other children.
Meanwhile, back at home, the child’s own interest in playing is being
deliberately aroused. The mother has received a small violin, of the same
size that the child himself will one day play, and begins to perform by her-
self each day. (If she does not know how to play the violin, she takes les-
sons of the same sort that her child will soon be taking.) The child watches
with mounting excitement, and ﬁnally one day the mother allows the child
to touch the instrument himself. This is a thrilling moment. Shortly there-
after, when mother and teacher decide that the child’s interest has reached
a fever pitch, the child is invited to join the group he has been observing,
and is given an individual lesson on his own instrument. Another milestone
has been passed. The mother and child then go home and work very hard
on the lesson in order to surprise the teacher with the youngster’s progress
during the week interval. Over the next months, mother-and-child lessons
and practice continue together: gradually the mother’s involvement as an
active student and ﬁddler stops, and the attention focuses completely on
the child.
Over the next years, the child follows faithfully a curriculum that has
been worked out with painstaking care by Suzuki and his colleagues. The
agents, loci, and media of transmission are all speciﬁed in the program.
Each step in the curriculum is carefully structured so that it advances the
child but does not cause him frustration or undue difﬁculty. Correct per-
formance is constantly modeled through recordings and through the
mother’s and the teacher’s own examples. The child does not proceed to a
new lesson or piece until he has thoroughly mastered the previous one,
and he returns repeatedly to old pieces to make sure that the models and
the lessons have been retained. Much is made of repetition and practice,
and the child strives to duplicate exactly the sounds heard on the record-
ing. This makes for impressive group performances, though it does not
generate interesting variations in performance. (Perhaps these facts ex-
plain why the cello student I witnessed could not readily deal with the vig-
orous criticism offered by the non-Suzuki master.) An avowed goal of the
program is to produce appealing sounds, and children are often asked ex-
plicitly to make a piece sound beautiful. In Suzuki’s classes for advanced
students, one of the most difﬁcult challenges is total mastery of a single
393
The Application of Intelligences

note. In Zen fashion, students are asked to practice a note up to one thou-
sand times a week until they come to understand how it feels to play a
tone perfectly.
Over the next few years, the child continues this daily regimen of prac-
tice, together with weekly individual and group lessons. Naturally children
will progress at different rates, but even the less remarkable pupils will
perform at a level that astonishes Western observers. One of thirty stu-
dents beginning at age two or three will be able to play a Vivaldi concerto
at age six and a Mozart one by nine or ten, and even the average student
will have reached this competence but a few years later. In sharp contrast
to the Western context, children do not have to be cajoled or wheedled
into practicing; in fact, it is the child who comes to request the practicing
time. (If the child does not want to practice, the mother is considered to
be at fault; and she is counseled on how to restore motivation and initia-
tive to the child.)
It is worth emphasizing that the goal of producing outstanding per-
formances, which may seem all-encompassing to outside observers, is in
fact not Suzuki’s avowed aim. He is interested, rather, in forming an indi-
vidual with a strong, positive, and attractive character and regards exqui-
site musical performance as simply as means to that end—a means that
could be achieved by any intensive artistic experience. For this reason, it
is not particularly relevant that many of the Suzuki students stop playing
their instruments when they become adolescents. However, it is worth not-
ing that approximately 5 percent of Suzuki children do go on to become
professional musicians, and that the percentage of Suzuki students is ris-
ing in major Western conservatories, such as the Juilliard School of Music.
A Critique of the Suzuki Approach
How can we make sense of this amazing experiment, in terms of the frame-
work of intellectual competences? Certainly pivotal from this perspective
is the fact that Suzuki has focused on one of the intelligences—that of
music—and has helped individuals of a presumably wide range of native
talents advance rapidly within that domain. Indeed, it is hardly an exag-
geration to say that thanks to Suzuki’s ingenious program, the kind of do-
main proﬁciency that David Feldman has discerned in child prodigies has
been made available to a much wider population. The success of the pro-
394
Implications and Applications

gram is integrally tied, in my judgment, to an intuitive understanding of
the natural milestones of musical development in a young child and of the
manner in which—through pieces that pose successively just the right
amount of difﬁculty—these milestones might be most effectively and most
smoothly negotiated.
Yet the effectiveness of this program depends on more than a shrewd
sense of how musical abilities may unfold. To my mind, Suzuki has per-
formed a superbly keen analysis of a whole range of factors—from the
agents of transmission to the kinds of intelligence—that are relevant to the
attainment of skilled performances. As a start, he has realized the special
importance and heightened sensitivity of the early years of life: not only
does formal instruction begin at the age of three or so, but the ground-
work has been carefully laid in the opening years of life through ample ex-
posure to the materials that will eventually be learned. Musical pieces are
as much “in the air” as the child’s native language.
To the extent that there may be a critical period for the acquisition of
musical competence, and to the extent that the brain of the young child is
especially plastic for this kind of learning, Suzuki has certainly taken ad-
vantage of important neurobiological factors. Second, and perhaps more
important, Suzuki has brilliantly exploited the mother-child relationship,
making it central to the initial acquisition of motivation and competence
in violin playing. Through his sensitivity to interpersonal knowledge—the
mother’s knowledge of her child and the child’s knowledge of his
mother—and his appreciation of the strong affective bonds that define
this mother-child relationship, Suzuki has succeeded in fostering a
tremendous commitment on the part of both individuals to the child’s
mastery of the violin. The instrument becomes a privileged means of
maintaining intimacy between child and parent. Nor should the role of other
children be minimized: the fact that so much of Suzuki instruction and
performance takes place in a “learning context” rich in other children ex-
ploits a youngster’s tendency to imitate the behavior of peers in his vicin-
ity. If one had to reduce the complex Suzuki method to a formula, one
might speak of strong interpersonal knowledge being used as a means to
negotiate a complex musical pathway, in the context of a great deal of cul-
tural support for such an undertaking. It is no accident that a program
clearly built upon the mother’s total involvement with her child, and tak-
ing advantage of the support of other individuals as well, was devised 
in Japan.
395
The Application of Intelligences

All regimens have their costs, and some equivocal aspects of the Suzuki
method should also be noted. The method is very much oriented toward
learning by ear—probably a highly beneﬁcent decision, considering the
age of the children who are enrolled. Much time would be wasted in try-
ing to get preschoolers to read notation, and the insistence in many quar-
ters on beginning with the score often makes many otherwise musically
inclined children hostile to their music lessons. However, because the
learning of notation is devalued in the Suzuki method, children often fail
to master sight reading. Shifting to a notation-based strategy after the ages
of six or seven would seem to be a desirable ploy, if the habits acquired by
ear and hand have not become too completely entrenched by this time.
The very plasticity that initially allowed rapid learning may already have
given way to a rigid and difﬁcult-to-alter style of performance.
A more serious charge against the Suzuki method pertains to the lim-
ited character of the musical skills and knowledge it develops. For one
thing, the music played is exclusively Western music from the Baroque
through the Romantic periods—a circumscribed sample of Western
music and an even smaller proportion of the world’s repertoire. Yet, again,
because the children are so deeply immersed in (or “imprinted upon”)
this common idiom during the most formative and “critical” years of their
musical training, the Suzuki program may engender an unnecessarily
parochial taste.
Much of the method focuses on a slavish and uncritical imitation of a
certain interpretation of the music—for example, a Fritz Kreisler record-
ing of a classical sonata. Children are likely to come away with the notion
that there is but one correct way to interpret a piece of music, rather than
there being a range of equally plausible interpretations. Even more prob-
lematically, children receive the impression that the important thing in
music is to replicate a sound as it has been heard and not to attempt to
change it in any way. No wonder that few, if any, Suzuki-trained children
display any inclination toward composing. The whole notion of doing it an-
other way, of decomposing a piece into one’s own preferred variations, is
bypassed in such a highly mimetic form of learning. In this case, a single
mode of transmission may exact severe costs.
Finally, there are deﬁnite personal costs to this undertaking. From the
point of view of the child, he is devoting many hours each week to a sin-
gle kind of pursuit and to the development of a single intelligence—at the
cost of stimulating and developing other intellectual streams. More dra-
396
Implications and Applications

matically, this regimen makes great demands upon the mother: she is ex-
pected to devote herself unstintingly to the development in her child of a
certain capacity. If she succeeds, plaudits are likely to come to the child; if
she fails, she will probably be blamed. (A mother once complained to
Suzuki that teaching her child took up too much of her time. He immedi-
ately responded, “Then why did you bear him?”) Finally, whether or not
the child ultimately succeeds in musical mastery, he will eventually leave
the home; meanwhile, the mother’s own personal skills and qualities may
not have been signiﬁcantly enhanced, a result that (at least to Western
eyes) is lamentable.
These deﬁcits are perhaps minor in comparison with the pleasures of
skilled playing that the Suzuki method has given to many individuals (in-
cluding mothers!). Nonetheless, it is worth considering which alterations
could minimize these deﬁciencies while still preserving the key points of
the method. According to my analysis, there is no reason for the children
not to acquire a wider repertoire, and little reason for them not to attain
high levels of competence in the notational realm. The media available to
the child could certainly be broadened. More problematic is the tension
between ideal production of someone else’s model and the production of
one’s own pieces of music in one’s own way. The transition from skilled
performance to original composition is difﬁcult to make in any case, and
my own guess is that the Suzuki method makes it nearly impossible. As for
the interpersonal costs, they also seem intrinsic to the program. In soci-
eties where mothers do not invest themselves so completely, the Suzuki
program is not nearly so successful and, in fact, comes to resemble “stan-
dard” musical training.
The Suzuki focus on music is probably apt, because an individual can
advance quite far in that intellectual domain without needing much gen-
eral knowledge about the world. However, as I have indicated, the choice
of the musical domain is not particularly decisive as far as Suzuki himself
is concerned: other arts from ﬂower arrangement to painting could yield
many of the same traits of character, particularly if pursued with the same
rigor, vigor, and faith. There is a preschool and kindergarten in Matsumoto
where a much wider set of curricular materials is used, apparently with
marked success; and in Japan today, the potential of preschool children to
master a range of tasks—including reading, mathematics, and writing—
is estimated to be quite high (even in comparison with child-centered 
middle-class America). The founder of Sony, Masuru Ibuka, has even written
397
The Application of Intelligences

a best-seller, Kindergarten Is Too Late! which articulates the profound be-
lief among Japanese in the primacy of the ﬁrst quinquennium of life.
The Japanese Case: Pro and Con
Success has a thousand fathers, and the phenomenal success of Japan in
the era after World War II naturally has produced numerous candidates
for the “prime cause.” There seems to be little question that the Japanese
are skilled at studying examples in other lands and then absorbing the best
from other individuals and groups. The Japanese also have a strong dedi-
cation to discipline, education, and technological expertise; and each of
these ends has been pursued to a high point during the past thirty years.
Indeed, this success has invaded practically every domain: Japanese youths
today are signiﬁcantly taller and have signiﬁcantly higher IQs than their
counterparts of thirty years ago—the strongest proof (if proof be needed)
that early educational and nutritional experiences can make an enormous
difference. Yet sheer imitation is not enough, for the impulse to imitate
the West has been found in many developing countries that have not in
any way matched the Japanese success story. From all indications, the abil-
ity to learn from other cultures has also been matched by a capacity to
maintain what is suitable and distinctive in the Japanese cultural tradition.
According to my own analysis, and to that of colleagues on the Project
on Human Potential, the Japanese have succeeded in striking an effective
balance between the maintenance of group feeling and solidarity, on the
one hand, and individual attainment of proﬁciency and skill, on the other.
Both forms of personal intelligence seem to be exploited here. This bal-
ance can be seen at a variety of levels of achievement. For example, in pri-
mary school classes, individuals are expected to learn arithmetic. In most
parts of the world, elementary arithmetic is taught principally through rote
learning, with little attention to the underlying concepts, which often per-
plex not only the youngsters but also the teachers. In Japan, however, ac-
cording to recent reports by Jack and Elizabeth Easley, challenging
problems are posed to entire classes, whose members then have the oppor-
tunity to work together over several days in an effort to solve these prob-
lems. The children are encouraged to talk to, and to help, one another and
are allowed to make mistakes; at times, older children visit the classrooms
and aid the younger ones. Thus, what is potentially a tension-building and
398
Implications and Applications

frustrating situation is alleviated through the involvement of children in a
common effort to understand; there is plenty of support for the general
collaborative effort, accompanied by a feeling that it is all right not to come
up with an answer right away, so long as one keeps plugging away at the
problems. Paradoxically, in our much more overtly competitive society, this
risk of not knowing the answer at the end of the class seems too great; nei-
ther teacher nor student can readily handle the tension, and so a potentially
valuable learning opportunity is scuttled.
Even in Japan’s large business corporations, one encounters the same
delicate balance. Much of the competitive urge, of course, is deﬂected to
competition with other societies, where Japan has enjoyed great success,
and toward anticipating future trends in the market, where again, Japan
has displayed far more foresight than have its principal competitors. More-
over, within the Japanese company itself, it is proper for different individ-
uals to make different contributions to problem formulation and problem
solution. An individual identiﬁes strongly with his ﬁrm, with which he ex-
pects to have life-long relations, and has relatively little sense of being in
direct competition with fellow employees. Similarly, no premium is placed
on a single individual’s—particularly a single young individual—possessing
all the requisite competences himself. If anything, such a precocious poly-
math could be deemed inappropriate and somewhat anachronistic. Thus,
we might even say that the Japanese corporation has realized, in an intu-
itive way, that there is a proﬁle of human intelligences, and that individu-
als with different proﬁles can make their own distinctive contributions to
the success of the ﬁrm.
As with the Suzuki Talent Education Program, there are costs to the
Japanese corporate system; and as the successes become better known,
these costs have also become more evident. The opportunity to work in
the corporation rests upon success in the academic system; and this suc-
cess, in turn, depends heavily on the peculiarities and particularities of
the Japanese child-rearing and educational systems. An early key to a
child’s eventual success is believed to lie in the relationship of the young
child (particularly the boy) to his mother. While the strong bond can help
to yield early achievements, it can also exert negative effects as children
feel ensnared in a bargain with their mother to achieve: if they fail to do
so, there may be severe frustration, tension, and even overt aggression
against the mother. The public school system attempts to maintain a friendly
and cooperative spirit among students, but this communal conviviality
399
The Application of Intelligences

overlooks the reality that there are far fewer places in the university than
there are youths intent on occupying them; hence the propagation of the
alternative school, or juku, where youths are trained to do well on their
college-entry examinations. From all reports, the atmosphere in the jukus
is much more frankly competitive; and, again, one encounters severe psy-
chological costs (and sometimes suicides) among those youths who do not
perform satisfactorily on the examinations. Finally, the skill of the Japan-
ese at absorbing appropriate models from other settings is now seen to
have its limits, as the models from elsewhere grow less relevant, and as the
Japanese are thrown more on their own innovative powers. Many Japan-
ese commentators have decried the dearth of original scientists from this
interpersonally oriented culture and have noted, with even greater sad-
ness, that the Japanese scientists (and artists) whose originality turns out to
be the most prized are those who have moved to the West.
Other Educational Experiments
I have dwelled at some length on Japan because in today’s world the Japan-
ese example is particularly striking and because I feel that the analytic
framework developed here ought to be applied in the ﬁrst instance to ed-
ucational experiments that have been successful. It is crucial to note, how-
ever, that Japanese success with a program like Talent Education does not
simply reﬂect expert design. Were that the case, then the Suzuki program
would prove equally successful everywhere (and in every ﬁeld of learning)—
as is decidedly not the case. No, the key to the success of the Suzuki pro-
gram in Japan lies in the comfortable ﬁt between the abilities and
inclinations of the target population (young children) and the particular
values, opportunities, and institutions of the society in which they happen
to be growing up. Such programs can be successfully exported only if sim-
ilar support systems exist in the new host country; or, alternatively, if suit-
able alterations are made so that the educational program meshes with the
dominant values, procedures, and intellectual orientation of the host land.
Here, indeed, may lie some clues to the success of other educational in-
terventions as well. In the case of teaching the fundamentals of literacy,
for example, two notable successes of recent years have both taken
shrewed advantage of the situations as they exist in particular host coun-
tries. One such case is Paolo Freire’s efforts to teach reading to illiterate
400
Implications and Applications

adult Brazilian peasants. Freire has developed a method in which individ-
uals are introduced to key words that have strong personal value and fea-
ture a phonetic and morphological structure relevant to the learning of
future words. This much is skillful linguistic pedagogy. But the Freire pro-
gram is embedded within a much larger program of political action, which
has profound meaning for students and helps to spur them on to heroic
efforts. Here the context of learning makes a critical difference. A totally
different but also highly successful approach to reading instruction can be
found in the television programs Sesame Street and The Electric Company,
which have taught the fundamentals of reading to a generation of Ameri-
can schoolchildren. Once again, these procedures build on tried-and-true
methods of training reading. But through a commercial-style format, as
well as a tempo suited to the medium of television, these programs succeed
in holding the audience’s attention. In both the Brazilian and the Ameri-
can cases, attempts have been made to transplant the reading programs to
very different populations. My own guess is that these efforts will be suc-
cessful to the extent that the particular conditions that obtained in the
countries of origin can also be encountered—or constructed—in novel cul-
tural settings. In my terms, an analysis in terms of the intellectual skills to
be cultivated and of those already valued in the host society should pre-
cede any contemplated intervention.
Alas, the incidence of educational experiments that have not succeeded
is high in the contemporary world. One need only think of the attempts in
Iran to Westernize the educational system during the last thirty years, or of
the various ﬂirtations in the People’s Republic of China with a technologically
oriented education. In each case, attempts were made to impose a more
Western-style curriculum—one organized around scientiﬁc thinking—upon
a society that had previously favored traditional modes of schooling of the
sort considered in the previous chapter. Tremendous stress resulted when
schools that had been largely concerned with teaching one form of liter-
acy were asked to convey “open thinking,” the weighing of conﬂicting the-
ories, and the primacy of logical-mathematical reasoning. The relative
deemphasis of social ties, the dramatic shift in the uses to which language
was put, and the insistence on the application of logical-mathematical
thinking to diverse realms of existence proved too jarring in these en-
trenched cultural contexts.
Not surprisingly, in both the Iranian and the Chinese cases, a dramatic
counterreaction resulted. A reﬂexive opposition to everything Western,
401
The Application of Intelligences

modern, and technological characterized the Cultural Revolution in China,
as well the Islamic Revival in Iran. Clearly, in the absence of continuity
with the past, an educational innovation is unlikely to hold.
Pointers for Policy Makers
General Considerations
Such a review of pedagogical experiments—successful or not—calls upon
a close analysis of educational processes as they have traditionally existed in
a culture, as well as on a careful consideration of how these processes might
be mobilized to meet novel needs in a changing world. I am frankly some-
what uncomfortable, as a neophyte in matters of policy, in recommending
a particular course of action in situations that are exceedingly complex and
ever ﬂuid. Nonetheless, it seems opportune at this concluding point to men-
tion some of the considerations that policy makers might bear in mind as
they attempt to decide about the education—and in a sense the future
lives—of those individuals over whom they have responsibility.
It is always judicious to begin with a review of the goals of a particular
intervention or of a whole educational program. The more speciﬁcally
these goals can be articulated, the more shorn of rhetoric or generalities,
the better. Thus, “educating individuals to achieve their potential” or “to
be an informed citizenry” is not helpful; but “achieving sufﬁcient literacy
to read a newspaper or discuss a current political problem” is instructively
precise. For the latter type of speciﬁc goal, one can analyze the constituent
intellectual skills and devise ways of assessing success (or degrees of suc-
cess or failure); for the former grandiose goal, there is no implied evalua-
tion metric. Statement of explicit goals also brings to the fore potential
conﬂicts or contradictions: for example, a goal of attaining a certain level
of literacy, skill in scientiﬁc thinking, or facility in discussing political is-
sues might well conﬂict with a goal of maintaining traditional religious 
values, political attitudes, or a homogeneous outlook throughout the pop-
ulation. Though such conﬂicts are unfortunate, it is better that they be
confronted explicitly rather than ignored, denied, or swept under a rhetor-
ical rug.
Following the review of goals, a next step entails a sober assessment of
the means currently available for achieving these goals. Some of this analy-
402
Implications and Applications

sis ought to focus on the traditional methods that are available: observation
learning, informal interaction, apprenticeship systems, prevalent media,
varieties of school, and the curriculums (explicit or implicit) that currently
exist. But it is also advisable to cast the net more widely and to consider the
agents and the loci of transmission, as well as the ways in which values,
roles, and procedures have in fact been transmitted across generations.
For every goal currently being pursued, there is presumably a set of in-
telligences that could readily be mobilized for its realization, as well as a
set of intelligences whose mobilization would pose a greater challenge.
Moreover, with different cultures, there appear to be characteristic blends
of intelligences that have been favored over the years. Determining the
exact blend is no easy matter, but it is possible to delineate those conﬁgu-
rations that have been relatively prominent in diverse cultural settings.
Thus, one would expect that in a traditional agrarian society, interpersonal,
bodily-kinesthetic, and linguistic forms of intelligence would be high-
lighted in informal educational settings, which are largely “on site” and fea-
ture considerable observation and imitation. In a society in the early stages
of industrialization, one would anticipate traditional forms of schooling that
focus on rote linguistic learning but where logical-mathematical forms of
intelligence are beginning to be used. In highly industrialized societies, and
in postindustrial society, one would predict a prizing of linguistic, logical-
mathematical, and intrapersonal forms of intelligence: quite probably,
modern secular schools would be yielding to individual computerized in-
struction. The shift from any of these forms to the next one would clearly
involve costs; an attempt to shift directly from agrarian to postindustrial
modes of transmission (as in the aforementioned Iranian case) could be
expected to yield especially severe strains.
In societies with limited resources, it may seem necessary to move di-
rectly from an inventory of goals and means to a decision about the opti-
mal way to proceed with the population as a whole. However, it is a
principal assumption of this study that individuals are not all alike in their
cognitive potentials and their intellectual styles and that education can be
more properly carried out if it is tailored to the abilities and the needs of
the particular individuals involved. Indeed, the cost of attempting to treat
all individuals the same, or of trying to convey knowledge to individuals in
ways uncongenial to their preferred modes of learning, may be great: if at
all possible, it is advisable to devise methods for assessing the intellectual
proﬁles of individuals.
403
The Application of Intelligences

There does not yet exist a technology explicitly designed to test an in-
dividual’s intellectual proﬁle. I am not sure it would be wise to attempt to
set up such an explicit testing program, particularly given the ways in which
such testing programs tend to become standardized and commercialized.
But it is clear from my analyses that certain ways of assessing individual
proﬁles are better than others. I would now like to indicate how one
might—given sufﬁcient resources (and benevolent intentions)—assess an
individual’s proﬁle of intelligences.
Assessing Intellectual Profiles
A ﬁrst point is that intelligences should not be assessed in the same ways
at different ages. The methods used with an infant or a preschooler ought
to be tailored to the particular ways of knowing that typify these individ-
uals and may be different from those employed with older individuals. My
own belief is that one could assess an individual’s intellectual potentials
quite early in life, perhaps even in infancy. At that time, intellectual
strengths and weaknesses would emerge most readily if individuals were
given the opportunity to learn to recognize certain patterns and were tested
on their capacities to remember these from one day to the next. Thus, an
individual with strong abilities in the spatial realm should learn to recog-
nize target patterns quite quickly when exposed to them, to appreciate
their identity even when their arrangement in space has been altered,
and to notice slight deviations from them when they are presented on
subsequent trials or subsequent days. Similarly, one could assess pattern-
recognition abilities in other intellectual domains (like language or num-
ber) as well as the ability to learn motor patterns and to revise and
transform them in adaptive ways. My own hunch about strong intellectual
abilities is that an individual so blessed does not merely have an easy time
learning new patterns; he in fact learns them so readily that it is virtually
impossible for him to forget them. The simple melodies continue to play on
in his mind, the sentences linger there, the spatial or gestural conﬁgura-
tions are readily brought to the fore, although they may not have been
tapped for a while.
Even if such intellectual proﬁles could be drawn up in the ﬁrst year or
two of life, I have little doubt that proﬁles at that early date can be read-
ily shifted. In fact, that is what early neural and functional plasticity is all
404
Implications and Applications

about. A principal reason for early assessment is to allow an individual to
proceed as rapidly as seems warranted in those intellectual channels where
he is talented, even as it affords an opportunity to bolster those intellectual
endowments that seem relatively modest.
At a somewhat later age (all the way up through the preschool years) it
should prove possible to secure a contextually rich and reliable assessment
of an individual’s intellectual proﬁle. The preferred route for assessment at
this age is to involve children in activities they themselves are likely to ﬁnd
motivating: they can then advance with little direct tutelage through the
steps involved in mastering a particular problem or task. Puzzles, games,
and other challenges couched in the symbol system of a single intelligence
(or of a pair of intelligences) are particularly promising means for assess-
ing the relevant intelligence.
Involvement with such inherently engrossing materials provides an
ideal opportunity to observe intelligences at work and to monitor their ad-
vances over a ﬁnite period of time. If one could watch a child as he learns
to build various constructions out of blocks, one would receive insight into
his skills in the areas of spatial and kinesthetic intelligence: similarly, the
child’s capacities to relate a set of stories would reveal facets of his lin-
guistic promise, even as his capacity to operate a simple machine would il-
luminate kinesthetic and logical-mathematical skills. Such involvements in
rich and provocative environments are also most likely to elicit “markers”—
those signs of early giftedness that are readily noticed by adults expert in
a particular intellectual domain. The future musician may be marked by
perfect pitch; the child gifted in personal matters, by his intuitions about
the motives of others; the budding scientist, by his ability to pose provoca-
tive questions and then follow them up with appropriate ones.
Note how this approach to assessment differs from that employed in
traditional intelligence testing. In the conventional test, the child is con-
fronted by an adult who ﬁres at him a rapid series of questions. The child
is expected to give a single answer (or, when somewhat older, to write
down his answer or to select it from a set of choices). A premium is placed
on linguistic facility, on certain logical-mathematical abilities, and on a kind
of social skill at negotiating the situation with an elder in one’s presence.
These factors can all intrude when one is trying to assess another kind of
intelligence—say, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, or spatial. By removing the
experimenter and his paraphernalia from the assessing situation—or, at
least, by placing them ﬁrmly in the background—and by substituting the
405
The Application of Intelligences

actual elements and symbols of the particular realm under consideration,
it should prove possible to obtain a more veridical picture of the child’s
current intellectual abilities—and of his intellectual potential.
Proceeding from some ideas originally put forth by the Soviet psychol-
ogist Vygotsky, it should be possible to devise tests suitable for individuals
who have had little or no prior experience with the particular material or
symbolic elements in question, and to see how rapidly they can progress
in a given area in a limited period of time. Such a mission places a partic-
ularly strong burden on the tester to locate problems that are intrinsically
engaging and serve as “crystallizing experiences” for young and naïve but
possibly talented individuals. In the present study of intelligences, I have
noted some of the experiences that proved catalytic for particular individ-
uals in particular domains: watching folk pageants, for the future dancer;
looking at recurrent alternating visual patterns, for the young mathemati-
cian; learning long and intricate rhymes, for the future poet.
Naturally the speciﬁc experiences favored for the assessment of intel-
lectual potential will differ, given the age, the sophistication, and the cul-
tural background of the individual. Thus, when monitoring the spatial
realm, one might hide an object from the one-year-old, pose a jigsaw puz-
zle to the six-year-old, or provide the preadolescent with a Rubik’s cube.
Analogously, in the musical realm, one might vary a lullaby for the two-
year-old, provide the eight-year-old with a computer on which he can com-
pose simple melodies, or analyze a fugue with an adolescent. In any case,
the general idea of ﬁnding intriguing puzzles and allowing children to “take
off” with them seems to offer a far more valid way of assessing proﬁles of
individuals than the current favorites worldwide: standard measures de-
signed to be given within a half-hour with the aid of paper and pencil.
My own guess is that it should be possible to gain a reasonably accurate
picture of an individual’s intellectual proﬁle—be he three or thirteen—in
the course of a month or so, while that individual is involved in regular
classroom activities. The total time spent might be ﬁve to ten hours of 
observing—a long time given current standards of intelligence testing, but
a very short time in terms of the life of that student. Such a proﬁle should
indicate which lines are already launched in an individual, which lines show
a decided potential for development, which are more modestly endowed
or entail some genuine obstacles (such as tone-deafness, meager visual im-
agery, or clumsiness).
406
Implications and Applications

Educating Intelligences
Now comes the decisive but delicate step in the educational planning
process. Given the curricular ends that one has in mind for an individual,
and the individual’s own intellectual proﬁles, a decision must be made
about which educational regimen to follow. First of all, there must be a
general strategic decision: does one play from strength, does one bolster
weakness, or does one attempt to work along both tracks at the same time?
Naturally this decision must be made in terms of the resources available,
as well as of the overall goals of both the society and the individuals most
directly involved.
Assuming room for developing more than a single faculty along a sin-
gle track, decisions of a far more focused sort must be made as well. In the
case of each individual, those charged with educational planning must de-
cide which means can best be mobilized to help that individual attain a 
desired competence, skill, or role. In the case of the highly talented indi-
vidual, it may be necessary (and sufﬁcient) to enable him to work directly
with an acknowledged master, in a kind of apprenticeship relation; it
should also be possible to provide him with materials that he can explore
(and with which he can advance) on his own. In the case of the individual
with meager abilities, or even frank pathologies, it will probably be neces-
sary to devise special prostheses: machinery, mechanisms, or other means
whereby the information or skills can be presented to him in such a way
as to exploit the intellectual capacities he has, while circumventing (to as
large an extent as possible) his intellectual frailties. In the case of the in-
dividual who does not fall at either extreme of the bell-shaped curve, there
will presumably be a larger set of procedures and curricula from which
one can draw, always acknowledging the limits of resources and the com-
peting demands on the student’s and the teacher’s time.
Surprisingly little work has been done by educational psychologists in
charting the general principles that may govern progress through an in-
tellectual domain. (This lack may be due in part to a lack of concern with
particular domains—as opposed to general learning; in part, to extensive
concern with just how a speciﬁc task is mastered.) Of various efforts in
this direction, I find most suggestive the work by the Soviet school of
psychology—such followers of Lev Vygotsky as V. V. Davydov, D. Elkonin,
407
The Application of Intelligences

and A. K. Markova. These researchers believe that at each age children
exhibit a different set of interests: thus, during infancy, the dominant ac-
tivity involves emotional contact; at age two, the child is absorbed in ma-
nipulation of objects; at ages three to seven, role play and other kinds of
symbolic activity come to the fore; during the ages of seven to eleven, the
feature activity is formal study in school; and in adolescence, the youth
pursues a combination of intimate personal relations and career-oriented
exploration. Any educational program should keep these biases in mind;
though, of course, the speciﬁc proﬁle of interests may differ signiﬁcantly
across cultures.
Working within these broad parameters, the educator searches for ge-
netic primary examples. These are problems or lessons that can be han-
dled by the novice but, at the same time, harbor within them the most
relevant abstractions within that domain. Mastery of a genetic primary ex-
ample serves as an indication that an individual can successfully negotiate
the succeeding steps within the ﬁeld. For the educator, the challenge con-
sists in planning the steps—the hurdles that the child must overcome so
that he can progress satisfactorily through the domain, until he reaches the
next phase and the next genetic primary example. If the kind of analysis put
forth by Soviet psychologists could be merged with the approach being de-
veloped here, it might be possible to chart an optimal path of educational
progress in each of the intellectual domains with which I have been con-
cerned. Such an analysis would reveal the path or the set of paths to be
negotiated by normal children as well as by those with special gifts or par-
ticular difﬁculties.
Given a wide range of cultural goals, and an even greater variety of in-
tellectual proﬁles, the challenge of obtaining a match between student and
method may seem overwhelming. In fact, however, students have managed
to learn even when lessons are in no way tailored for them, presumably be-
cause most curricula are redundant, and because the students themselves
possess an array of intellectual strengths and strategies on which they can
draw. A “matching system” should help ensure that a student can rapidly
and smoothly master what needs to be mastered, and thus be freed to pro-
ceed further along both optional and optimal paths of development.
Of course, the idea of matching individuals with particular subject
matters and/or styles of teaching is familiar and has implicitly guided
much instruction since Classical times. It is therefore disappointing to
note that attempts to document signiﬁcant improvements as a result of
408
Implications and Applications

matching students with appropriate teaching techniques have not met
with much success.
Educational scholars nonetheless cling to the vision of the optimal
match between student and material. In my own view, this tenacity is le-
gitimate: after all, the science of educational psychology is still young; and
in the wake of superior conceptualizations and ﬁner measures, the practice
of matching the individual learner’s proﬁle to the materials and modes of
instruction may still be validated. Moreover, if one adopts MI theory, the
options for such matches increase: as I have already noted, it is possible
that the intelligences can function both as subject matters in themselves
and as the preferred means for inculcating diverse subject matter.
Carrying out relevant research is a task for the future. The most I can
do here is to sketch some expectations. In the case of learning to program
a computer, for example, it seems plausible that a number of intellectual
competences may prove relevant. Logical-mathematical intelligence
seems central, because programming depends upon the deployment of
strict procedures to solve a problem or attain a goal in a ﬁnite number 
of steps. Writing the program requires that the steps be clear, precise, and
organized in a strictly logical order. Linguistic intelligence is also relevant,
at least so long as manuals and computer languages make use of ordinary
language. The metaphor of the program as a story (complete with subplots)
may also help certain budding programmers with a linguistic bent. The in-
tuitions that individuals have about particular domains may well help them
in learning to program. Thus, an individual with a strong musical bent
might best be introduced to programming by attempting to program a sim-
ple musical piece (or to master the use of a program that composes). An
individual with strong spatial abilities might be initiated through some form
of computer graphics—and he might also be aided in the task of pro-
gramming through the use of a ﬂow chart or some other spatial diagram.
Personal intelligences can play important roles. The extensive planning of
steps and goals carried out by the individual as he engages in programming
relies on intrapersonal forms of thinking, even as the cooperation needed
for carrying out a complex task or for learning new computational skills
may rely on an individual’s ability to work with a team. Kinesthetic intelli-
gence may play a role in working with the computer itself, facilitate skill at
the terminal, and be exploited in those cases where the subject matter of
a program involves use of the body (programming a dance or a sequence
of football plays).
409
The Application of Intelligences

Parallel lines of reasoning can be invoked in analyzing the task of learn-
ing to read. Particularly in the case of individuals who have initial difﬁculty
in learning to read text, it may make sense to begin with an introduc-
tion to some other symbolic systems—for example, those used for musical
notation, map making, or mathematics. Moreover, individuals with pro-
nounced reading disabilities sometimes must resort to unusual measures
of learning—for example, mastering the letters through tactile-kinesthetic
exploration. The particular subject matter may also play an important role
in improving reading comprehension: an individual who knows something
about a ﬁeld, or is interested in increasing his knowledge base, may ﬁnd
reading easier and will also be more highly motivated to read. Whether the
actual process of reading involves, in signiﬁcant measure, intelligences other
than linguistic ones is problematic. However, in view of the various reading
systems already invented by human beings (such as pictographic systems) and
the kinds likely to be devised in the future (logical-mathematical systems
for use with computers), it seems clear that one’s facility in reading will de-
pend on more than one’s linguistic capacities.
Even as computers offer a useful way to think about the marshaling of
intelligences to master educational goals, the potential utility of comput-
ers in the process of matching individuals to modes of instruction is sub-
stantial. While effecting a match between a student’s intellectual proﬁle
and the instructional goals can be a highly demanding task for even the
most gifted instructor, the relevant kinds of information could be readily
handled by a computer that can, in a fraction of a second, suggest alterna-
tive pedagogical programs or routes. More important, the computer can
be a vital facilitator in the actual process of instruction, helping individuals
to negotiate sequences at their preferred pace by using a variety of edu-
cational techniques. I should point out, however, that the computer can-
not assume certain roles of an interpersonal sort and seems less relevant
for certain intellectual domains (say, kinesthetic) than for others (logical-
mathematical). There is the risk that the electronic computer—a product
of Western thinking and technology—may prove most useful for perpetu-
ating just those forms of intelligence that led to its devising in the ﬁrst
place. It is also possible, however, that extensions of the computer—
including robots—might eventually be developed that would facilitate
learning and mastery in the full gamut of intellectual domains.
While it is desirable to consider the ﬁne points of the learning process,
it is important for the planner or policy maker not to lose sight of his over-
410
Implications and Applications

all educational agenda. Ultimately, the educational plans that are pursued
need to be orchestrated across various interest groups of the society so that
they can, taken together, help the society to achieve its larger goals. Indi-
vidual proﬁles must be considered in the light of goals pursued by the
wider society; and sometimes, in fact, individuals with gifts in certain di-
rections must nonetheless be guided along other, less favored paths, sim-
ply because the needs of the culture are particularly urgent in that realm
at that time. The synthetic ability entailed in this form of decision making
involves its own blend of intelligences—if not a special form of intelligence.
It is important that a society ﬁnd some way of training, and then using,
those abilities that permit a vision of a large and complex whole.
A Concluding Note
These scattered notes are as far as I feel prepared to go in trying to draw
some educational and policy implications from the framework introduced
in this book. The framework has been taken principally from ﬁndings in
the biological and cognitive sciences, and it ﬁrst needs to be amply discussed
and tested in those circles before it provides a handbook, a red book, or a
white paper for any practitioner. Even good ideas have been ruined by pre-
mature attempts at implementation, and we are not yet certain of the good-
ness of the idea of multiple intelligences.
After the euphoria of the 1960s and early 1970s, when educational
planners felt that they could readily ameliorate the world’s ills, we have
come to the painful realization that the problems dwarf our understanding,
our knowledge, and our ability to act prudently. We have become much
more aware of the roles of history, politics, and culture in circumscribing
or thwarting our ambitious plans and in guiding them down paths that
could not have been anticipated. We are even more keenly aware that par-
ticular historical events and technological developments can mold the fu-
ture in a way that would have been difﬁcult to envision even a decade ago.
For every successful planner and implementer, for every Sesame Street or
Suzuki method, there are dozens, perhaps thousands of failed plans—so
many, in fact, that it is difﬁcult to know whether the few successes are
happy accidents or the fruits of rare genius.
Nonetheless, problems and potentialities will not go away, and people—
teachers of preschoolers no less than ministers of education—will continue
411
The Application of Intelligences

to hold the major responsibility for developing other individuals. This trust
they will exercise wisely or poorly, productively or counterproductively.
That they should do so with some awareness of what they are doing, with
some knowledge of the alternative methods and outcomes would seem to
be preferable to operating completely from intuition or wholly from ide-
ology. In this book, I have urged that educators pay close heed to the bio-
logical and psychological proclivities of human beings and to the particular
historical and cultural context of the locales where they live—a task, of
course, easier said than done. Nonetheless, knowledge is accruing and
will—I hope—continue to accrue about what human beings are like when
considered in relative isolation and as members of a functioning cultural
entity. And because some individuals will continue to assume responsibil-
ity for planning the lives of others, it seems preferable that their efforts be
framed by our growing knowledge of human minds.
412
Implications and Applications

NOTES
[The numbers in brackets following a short title refer to the page num-
ber of its original, complete citation in that chapter.]
Chapter 1: The Idea of Multiple Intelligences
4
On the Suzuki method of violin training, see S. Suzuki, Nurtured by Love (New
York: Exposition Press, 1969); B. Holland, “Among Pros, More Go Suzuki,” 
New York Times, 11 July 1982, E9; and L. Taniuchi, “The Creation of Prodigies
Through Special Early Education: Three Case Studies,” unpublished paper, Har-
vard Project on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
4
On the LOGO method of introducing mathematical thinking, see S. Papert, Mind-
storms (New York: Basic Books, 1980).
5
On programs for the realization of human potential, see World Bank, World Devel-
opment Report (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980); H. Singer, “Put the
People First: Review of World Development Report, 1980,” The Economist, 23
August 1980; J. W. Botkin, M. Elmandjra, and M. Malitza, No Limits to Learn-
ing: Bridging the Human Gap: A Report to the Club of Rome (Oxford: Pergamon
Press, 1979); and W. J. Skrzyniarz, “A Review of Projects to Develop Intelligence
in Venezuela: Developmental, Philosophical, Policy, and Cultural Perspectives
on Intellectual Potential,” unpublished paper, Harvard Project on Human Po-
tential, Cambridge, Mass., November 1981.
5
The authorities on the role of intelligence throughout Western history are quoted in
J. H. Randall, The Making of the Modern Mind: A Survey of the Intellectual Back-
ground of the Present Age (New York: Columbia University Press, 1926, 1940).
6
St. Augustine is quoted on p. 94 of Randall’s Making of the Modern Mind, cited in
previous note.
6
Francis Bacon is quoted on p. 204 of the same book.
6
Dante is quoted on p. 105 of the same book.
7
Archilochus’s distinction between “hedgehogs” and “foxes” is reviewed in I. Berlin,
The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History (London: Wei-
denfeld & Nicolson, 1953; New York: Simon & Schuster, 1966).
7
For a general discussion of faculty psychology, see J. A. Fodor, The Modularity of
Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983).
413

7
On Franz Joseph Gall, see E. G. Boring, A History of Expermental Psychology (New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1950).
7
For an elaboration of Guilford’s views, see J. P. Guilford, “Creativity,” American Psy-
chologist 5 (1950): 444–454; and J. P. Guilford and R. Hoepfner, The Analysis of
Intelligence (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971).
7
On a general factor of intelligence, see. C. Spearman, The Abilities of Man: Their
Nature and Measurement (New York: Macmillan, 1927); and C. Spearman,
“‘General Intelligence’ Objectively Determined and Measured,” American Jour-
nal of Psychology 15 (1904): 201–293.
7
For a discussion of the debate in child development between those who favor
general structures of mind and those who favor a set of specific mental skills,
see H. Gardner, Developmental Psychology, 2nd ed. (Boston: Little, Brown,
1982).
7
On the view that there is a family of primary mental abilities, see L. L. Thurstone,
“Primary Mental Abilities,” Psychometric Monographs, 1938, no. 1; and L.L.
Thurstone, Multiple-Factor Analysis: A Development and Expansion of “The Vec-
tors of the Mind” (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947).
Chapter 2: Intelligence: Earlier Views
13
For a discussion of the theories of Franz Joseph Gall, see. E. G. Boring, A History
of Experimental Psychology (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1950).
13
On phrenology, see H. Gardner’s The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Dam-
age (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1975), pp. 20–21.
14
See M. J. P. Flourens’s critique in Examen de phrénologie (Paris: Hachette, 1842).
14
On Pierre-Paul Broca’s work on aphasia, see Gardner, Shattered Mind [13], p. 21;
P. Broca, “Remarques sur le siège de la faculté de langage articulé,” Bulletin de
la Société d’anthropologie 6 (Paris, 1861); and Boring, History of Experimental
Psychology [13], pp. 28–29.
15
For a discussion of linguistic impairment resulting from lesions in the left hemi-
sphere, see Gardner, Shattered Mind [13], ch. 2.
16
On Francis Galton’s methodology, see F. Galton, Inquiries into Human Faculty 
and Its Development (London: J. M. Dent, 1907; New York: E. P. Dutton, 1907);
and Boring, History of Experimental Psychology [13], pp. 482–488.
16
Binet and Simon’s pioneering efforts are described on pp. 573–575 of Boring’s his-
tory, cited in the previous note.
17
Controversies over the IQ test are discussed in A. Jensen, Bias in Mental Testing
(New York: Free Press, 1980); and N. Block and G. Dworkin, eds., The IQ Con-
troversy (New York: Pantheon, 1976).
17
Eysenck’s statement is quoted in M. P. Friedman, J. P. Das, and N. O’Connor, In-
telligence and Learning (New York: Plenum Press, 1979), p. 84.
17
Thomas Kuhn’s theory is found in The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1970).
17
On C. Spearman, see his The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurement (New
York: Macmillan, 1927); and “‘General Intelligence’ Objectively Determined and
Measured,” American Journal of Psychology 15 (1904): 201–293.
17
On L. L. Thurstone, see his “Primary Mental Abilities,” Psychometric Monographs,
1938, no. 1; and Multiple-Factor Analysis: A Development and Expansion of “The
Vectors of the Mind” (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947).
414
Notes

17
The views of scholars who posit several independent factors of intelligence are dis-
cussed in G. H. Thomson, The Factoral Analysis of Human Ability (London:
University of London Press, 1951).
18
The mathematical problems in interpreting test scores are reviewed in S. J. Gould,
The Mismeasure of Man (New York: W. W. Norton, 1981).
18
On Piaget’s career and theories, see H. Gardner, The Quest for Mind: Piaget, Lévi-
Strauss, and the Structuralist Movement (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1981); J. P. Flavell, The Developmental Psychology of Jean Piaget (Princeton,
N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1963); and H. Gruber and J. Vonèche, eds., The Essential
Piaget (New York: Basic Books, 1977).
19
The example of an individual who loses the frontal lobes and still functions at close
to genius level on IQ tests is described in D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Be-
havior (New York: John Wiley, 1949).
19
On the concept of a zone of proximal development, see L. Vygotsky, Mind in Soci-
ety, M. Cole, ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978); and A. L.
Brown and R. A Ferrara, “Diagnosing Zones of Proximal Development: An Al-
ternative to Standardized Testing?,” paper presented at the Conference on Cul-
ture, Communication, and Cognition: Psychosocial Studies, Chicago, October
1980.
21
I. Kant’s basic categories of time, space, number, and causality are introduced in The
Critique of Pure Reason, Norman Kemp Smith, trans. (New York: Modern Li-
brary, 1958; originally published in 1781).
22
K. Fischer argues that décalage has become the rule in studies of cognitive devel-
opment, in “A Theory of Cognitive Development: The Control of Hierarchies of
Skill,” Psychological Review 87 (1980): 477–531.
22
The often precocious responses obtained when Piaget’s tasks are conveyed nonlin-
guistically are discussed in H. Gardner, Developmental Psychology, 2nd ed.
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), ch. 10. See also P. Bryant, Perception and Under-
standing in Young Children (New York: Basic Books, 1974).
23
On cognitive psychology and information-processing psychology, see R. Lachman,
J. Lachman, and E. C. Butterﬁeld, Cognitive Psychology and Information Pro-
cessing: An Introduction (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1979); and G. R.
Claxton, ed., Cognitive Psychology: New Directions (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1980).
24
R. Sternberg attempts to identify the operations involved in solving standard intel-
ligence test items, in “The Nature of Mental Abilities,” American Psychologist
34 (1979): 214–230.
25
On the “magic number” of seven chunks, see G. A. Miller, “The Magical Number
Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Infor-
mation,” Psychological Research 63 (1956): 81–97.
26
The following works are by philosophers who have taken a special interest in human
symbolic capacities: E. Cassirer, The Philosophy of Symbolic forms, vols. 1–3
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1953–1957); S. Langer, Philosophy in
a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and Art (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1942); and A. N. Whitehead, Modes of Thought
(New York: Capricorn Books, Macmillan, 1938).
26
D. Feldman addresses the problem of reconciling a pluralistic approach to intelli-
gence with Piaget’s developmental scheme, in his Beyond Universals in Cogni-
tive Development (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Publishers, 1980).
415
Notes

27
G. Salomon discusses the media of transmission of symbols in his Interaction of
Media, Cognition, and Learning (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1979).
29
D. Olson’s work on the prostheses that may enable individuals to acquire informa-
tion from alternative media is discussed in his Cognitive Development (New York:
Academic Press, 1970).
29
D. Olson discusses the role of the symbol systems in literacy in “From Utterance to
Text: The Bias of Language in Speech and Writing,” Harvard Educational Re-
view 47 (1977): 257–282.
29
On work at the Harvard Project Zero on the ﬁne structure of development within sym-
bol systems, see D. P. Wolf and H. Gardner, Early Symbolizations, in preparation.
29
Research at the Boston Veterans Administration Medical Center on the breakdown
of symbolic capacities is described in W. Wapner and H. Gardner, “Proﬁles of
Symbol Reading Skills in Organic Patients,” Brain and Language 12 (1981):
303–312.
30
For N. Goodman’s work on symbols, see his Languages of Art: An Approach to a
Theory of Symbols (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1976).
30
On lesions that may cause a disturbance in the ability to read one type of symbols
but leave unharmed the ability to read a different type, see H. Gardner, Art,
Mind, and Brain: A Cognitive Approach to Creativity (New York: Basic Books,
1982), part 4.
Chapter 3: Biological Foundations of Intelligence
35
On the “cracking of the genetic code,” see J. D. Watson, The Double Helix: A Per-
sonal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA (New York: Signet
Books, 1968).
35
Combinations of genes that are correlated with each other are described by L.
Brooks in her paper “Genetics and Human Populations,” a technical report for
the Harvard Project on Human Potential, June 1980.
35
On the controversy over the heritability of intelligence, see S. Scarr-Salapatek, “Ge-
netics and the Development of Intelligence,” in F. Horowitz, ed., Review of Child
Development Research, vol. 4 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975); 
S. Gould, The Mismeasure of Man (New York: W. W. Norton, 1981); and N. Block
and G. Dworkin, eds., The IQ Controversy (New York: Pantheon, 1976).
37
On the Suzuki Violin Talent Education Program, see S. Suzuki, Nurtured by Love
(New York: Exposition Press, 1969); B. Holland, “Among Pros, More Go Suzuki,”
New York Times, 11 July 1982, E9; and L. Taniuchi, “The Creation of Prodigies
Through Special Early Education: Three Case Studies,” unpublished paper, Har-
vard Project on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
37
On “genetic drift” in the South Sea islands, see C. Gajdusek, “The Composition of
Musics for Man: On Decoding from Primitive Cultures the Scores for Human
Behavior,” Pediatrics 34 (1964): 1, 84–91.
39
The pioneering work of D. Hubel and T. Wiesel is concisely summarized in H. B.
Barlow, “David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel: Their Contributions Toward Under-
standing the Visual Cortex,” Trends in Neuroscience (May 1982): 145–152.
39
On the singing capacities of birds, see F. Nottebohm, “Brain Pathways for Vocal Learn-
ing in Birds: A Review of the First 10 Years,” Progress in Psychobiological and
Physiological Psychology 9 (1980): 85–124; M. Konishi in R. A. Hinde, ed., Bird
Vocalization (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969); and P. Marler and 
S. Peters, “Selective Vocal Learning in a Sparrow,” Science 198 (1977): 519–521.
416
Notes

39
On canalization, see C. H. Waddington, The Evolution of an Evolutionist (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1975). See also J. Piaget, Behavior and Evolution
(New York: Pantheon, 1978).
40
C. H. Waddington is quoted in E. S. Gollin, Developmental Plasticity: Behavioral
and Biological Aspects of Variations in Development (New York: Academic Press,
1981), pp. 46–47.
40
On the nervous system’s adaptation to environmental inﬂuences, see Gollin, Devel-
opmental Plasticity [40], p. 236.
40
M. Dennis describes the capacity of the human infant to learn to speak even if one
cerebral hemisphere is lost; see M. Dennis, “Language Acquisition in a Single
Hemisphere: Semantic Organization,” in D. Caplan, ed., Biological Studies of
Mental Processes (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980).
40
On residual plasticity and on the limits of plasticity in cases of early injury or depri-
vation, see the following summaries of D. Hubel and T. Wiesel’s work: J. Lettvin,
“‘Filling out the Forms’: An Appreciation of Hubel and Wiesel,” Science 214
(1981): 518–520; and Barlow, “Hubel and Wiesel: Their Contributions” [39].
41
On the emerging consensus that each species is specially “prepared” to acquire cer-
tain kinds of information, see J. Garcia and M. S. Levine, “Learning Paradigms
and the Structure of the Organism,” in M. R. Rosenzweig and E. L. Bennett,
eds., Neural Mechanisms of Learning and Memory (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1976); M. E. P. Seligman, “On the Generality of the Laws of Learning,”
Psychological Review 77 (1970): 406–418; and P. Rozin, “The Evolution of In-
telligence: An Access to the Cognitive Unconscious,” Progress in Psychology and
Physiological Psychology 6 (1976): 245–280.
41
The work on the songs of female sparrows is reported in M. Baker, “Early Experi-
ence Determines Song Dialect Responsiveness of Female Sparrows,” Science
214 (1981): 819–820.
42
W. M. Cowan’s studies are reviewed in his article “The Development of the Brain,”
Scientiﬁc American 241 (1979): 112–133.
42
Patricia Goldman’s ﬁndings on nervous system adaptation were drawn from P. S.
Goldman and T. W. Galkin, “Prenatal Removal of Frontal Association Cortex in
the Fetal Rhesus Monkey: Anatomical and Functional Consequences in Post-
 natal Life,” Brain Research 152 (1978): 451–485.
42
Concerning “critical periods” in development, see Gollin, Developmental Plasticity
[40].
43
On the high degree of modiﬁability in regions like the corpus callosum, see G. M.
Innocenti, “The Development of Interhemispheric Connections,” Trends in Neu-
roscience 4 (January 1981): 142–144.
43
On the acquisition of speech following removal of an entire hemisphere early in life,
see Dennis, “Language Acquisition” [40].
43
On the cat’s visual system, see D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Brain Mechanisms
of Vision,” Scientiﬁc American 241, 3 (1979): 150–162; and Barlow, “Hubel and
Wiesel: Their Contributions” [39].
43
On the long-term effects of injury to the brain and nervous system, see P. S. Gold-
man-Rakic, A. Isseroff, M. L. Schwartz, and N. M. Bugbee, “Neurobiology of
Cognitive Development in Non-Human Primates,” unpublished paper, Yale Uni-
versity, 1981.
44
The study by M. Rosenzweig and his colleagues on rats in enriched and impoverished
environments: M. R. Rosenzweig, K. Mollgaard, M. C. Diamond, and E. L. Ben-
nett, “Negative as Well as Positive Synaptic Changes May Store Memory,” 
417
Notes

Psychological Review 79, 1 (1972): 93–96. See also E. L. Bennett, “Cerebral Ef-
fects of Differential Experiences and Training,” in Rosenzweig and Bennett, Neu-
ral Mechanisms [00].
45
William Greenough’s ﬁndings on animals raised in complex environments are re-
ported in his “Experience-Induced Changes in Brain Fine Structure: Their Be-
havioral Implications,” in M. E. Hahn, C. Jensen, and B. C. Dudek, eds.,
Development and Evolution of Brain Size: Behavioral Implications (New York:
Academic Press, 1979).
45
F. Nottebohm correlates the size of two nuclei in the canary’s brain with the ap-
pearance of singing, in “Ontogeny of Bird Song,” Science 167 (1970): 950–956.
45
The observations by O. and A. Vogt were reported by Arnold Scheibel in a paper
given at the Academy of Aphasia, London, Ontario, October 1981. See also R. A.
Yeo, et al., “Volumetric Parameters of the Normal Human Brain: Intellectual
Correlates,” unpublished paper, University of Texas at Austin, 1982.
46
On the production of an excess of neuronal ﬁbers, see J. P. Changeux and 
A. Danchin, “Selective Stabilization of Developing Synapses as a Mechanism for
the Speciﬁcation of Neuronal Networks,” Nature 264 (1976): 705–712.
46
On the period of “selective cell death,” see W. M. Cowan, “The Development of the
Brain,” Scientiﬁc American 241 (1979): 112–133. Also see M. Pines, “Baby, You’re
Incredible,” Psychology Today (February 1982): 48–53.
46
The tremendous growth of cell connections after lesions was described by Gary
Lynch in a paper presented at the International Neuropsychology Society, Pitts-
burgh, Penn., February 1982.
46
The reduction in the rate of death of retinal ganglion cells when one eye is removed
at birth is documented in D. R. Sengelaub and B. L. Finlay, “Early Removal of
One Eye Reduces Normally Occurring Cell Death in the Remaining Eye,” Sci-
ence 213 (1981): 573–574.
47
On U-shaped phenomena, see S. Strauss, ed., U-Shaped Behavioral Growth (New
York: Academic Press, 1982).
47
Peter Huttenlocher discusses changes in the density of synapses with age, in “Synap-
tic Density in Human Frontal Cortex: Developmental Changes and the Effects
of Aging,” Brain Research 163 (1979): 195–205.
47
On neural changes in later life, see M. C. Diamond, “Aging and Cell Loss: Calling
for an Honest Count,” Psychology Today (September 1978); S. McConnell,
“Summary of Research on the Effects of Aging on the Brain,” unpublished tech-
nical report, the Harvard Project on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., 1981;
R. D. Terry, “Physical Changes of the Aging Brain,” in J. A. Behnke, C. E. Finch,
and G. B. Moment, eds., The Biology of Aging (New York: Plenum Press, 1979);
M. E. Scheibel and A. B. Scheibel, “Structural Changes in the Aging Brain,” in
H. Brody, D. Harman, and J. M. Ordy, eds., Aging, vol. 1 (New York: Raven
Press, 1975); and J. M. Ordy, B. Kaack, and K. R. Brizzee, “Life-Span Neuro-
chemical Changes in the Human and Nonhuman Primate Brain,” in Brody, Har-
man, and Ordy, Aging, previously cited in this note.
48
On bird song, see Marler and Peters, “Selective Vocal Learning in a Sparrow” [39].
Also see Nottebohm, “Brain Pathways” [00], and “Ontogeny of Bird Song” [39].
49
E. R. Kandel described his work on the simplest forms of learning in aplysia, in
“Steps Toward a Molecular Grammar for Learning: Explorations into the Nature
of Memory,” paper presented at the Bicentennial Symposium of the Harvard
Medical School, 11 October 1982, p. 9.
418
Notes

50
Kandel’s summary is from p. 35 of the paper cited in the previous note.
51
On the link between poor nutrition and unstable emotions in children, see J.
Cravioto and E. R. Delicardie, “Environmental and Nutritional Deprivation in
Children with Learning Disabilities,” in W. Cruickshank and D. Hallahan, eds.,
Perceptual and Learning Disabilities in Children, vol. 2 (Syracuse, N.Y.: Syra-
cuse University Press, 1975).
51
Vernon Mountcastle’s view of the organization of the cerebal cortex may be found
in his “An Organizing Principle for Cerebral Function: The Unit Module and
the Distributed System,” in G. M. Edelman and V. B. Mountcastle, eds., The
Mindful Brain (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1978).
52
David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel’s statement is from their article “Brain Mecha-
nisms of Vision, Scientiﬁc American 241, 3 (1979): 161. On frontal lobe organi-
zation, see W. Nauta, “The Problem of the Frontal Lobe: A Reinterpretation,”
Journal of Psychiatric Research 8 (1971): 167–187; P. S. Goldman-Rakic, A. Isseroff,
M. L. Schwartz, and N. M. Bugbee, “Neurobiology of Cognitive Development
in Non-Human Primates,” unpublished paper, Yale University, 1981.
52
On the responses of cortical cells in the visual system to color, direction of move-
ment, and depth, see Hubel and Wiesel, “Brain Mechanisms” [43], p. 162.
52
On the relaying of information from one cortical area to the next, see Lettvin, “‘Fill-
ing Out the Forms’” [40].
53
For details on the speculations by P. Goldman and M. Constantine-Paton, see 
F. H. C. Crick, “Thinking About the Brain,” Scientiﬁc American 241, 3 (1979):
228.
53
Crick’s remark is from p. 228 of the article cited in the preceding note.
53
Sources on brain laterality include B. Milner, “Hemispheric Specializations: Scope
and Limits,” in F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden, eds., The Neurosciences: Third
Study Program (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1974), pp. 75–89; and M. Kins-
bourne, “Hemisphere Specialization and the Growth of Human Understanding,”
American Psychologist 37, 4 (1982): 411–420.
54
On linguistic disorders resulting from lesions in different areas of the brain, see 
H. Gardner, The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Damage (New York: Al-
fred A. Knopf, 1975).
54
D. Hubel’s statement is from his article “Vision and the Brain,” Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Academy of Arts and Sciences 31, 7 (1978): 7, 17–28.
55
On language zones in the deaf, see H. J. Neville and U. Bellugi, “Patterns of Cere-
bral Specialization in Congenitally Deaf Adults: A Preliminary Report,” in 
P. Siple, ed., Understanding Language Through Sign Language Research (New
York: Academic Press, 1978).
55
The gestural language developed by deaf children is discussed in S. Goldin-Meadow,
“Language Development Without a Language Model,” paper presented at the
Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Boston,
April 1981; to appear in K. Nelson, ed., Children’s Language, vol. 5 (New York:
Gardner Press, forthcoming).
55
The case of Genie, a severely abused child who acquired language through the use
of her right hemisphere, is described by S. Curtiss in Genie: A Linguistic Study
of a Modern-Day Wild Child (New York: Academic Press, 1977).
56
The view of the brain as an “equipotential organ” is put forth by Karl S. Lashley in
his paper “In Search of the Engram,” in Symposia of the Society for Experimen-
tal Biology 4 (1950): 454–482.
419
Notes

56
For ﬂaws in Lashley’s conception of equipotentiality, see R. B. Loucks, “Methods of
Isolating Stimulation Effects with Implanted Barriers,” in D. E. Sheer, ed., Elec-
trical Stimulation of the Brain (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981).
56
The ﬁndings that speciﬁc lesions lead to impairments in the performance of rats
running mazes are reported in J. Garcia and M. S. Levine, “Learning Paradigms
and the Structure of the Organism,” in Rosenzweig and Bennett, Neural Mech-
anisms [41].
57
On the importance of the posterior parietal regions for tasks measuring “raw” in-
telligence, see E. Zaidel, D. W. Zaidel, and R. W. Sperry, “Left and Right Intel-
ligence: Case Studies of Raven’s Progressive Matrices Following Brain Bisection
and Hemidecortication,” Cortex 17 (1981): 167–186.
57
The effects of right and left hemisphere impairments on different aspects of draw-
ing are described in ch. 8 of Gardner, Shattered Mind [54]; see also references
cited therein.
57
The view that human cognition consists of many cognitive devices may be found in
J. A. Fodor, The Modularity of Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983).
58
See also M. Gazzaniga and J. Ledoux, The Integrated Mind (New York: Plenum
Press, 1978); and P. Rozin, “The Evolution of Intelligence and Access to the Cog-
nitive Unconscious,” Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology 6
(1976): 245–280.
58
For Allport’s view on special-purpose cognitive devices, see D. A. Allport, “Patterns
and Actions: Cognitive Mechanisms Are Content Speciﬁc,” in G. L. Claxton, ed.,
Cognitive Psychology: New Directions (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980).
58
P. Rozin discusses the special capacity of becoming aware of the operation of one’s
own information-processing system, in his “The Evolution of Intelligence and
Access to the Cognitive Unconscious,” cited in the previous note.
60
For evidence that the growth by alternative routes, which plasticity permits, is not
always advantageous, see B. T. Woods, “Observations on the Neurological Basis
for Initial Language,” and N. Geschwind, “Some Comments on the Neurology
of Language,” in Caplan, Biological Studies [38].
Chapter 4: What Is an Intelligence? 
65
On the development of the ability to recognize faces, see S. Carey, R. Diamond, and
B. Woods, “Development of Face Recognition—A Maturational Component?”
Developmental Psychology 16 (1980): 257–269.
65
Larry Gross’s ﬁve modes of communication are discussed in his “Modes of Com-
munication and the Acquisition of Symbolic Capacities, in D. Olson, ed., Media
and Symbols (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974).
65
On Paul Hirst’s seven forms of knowledge, see his Knowledge and the Curriculum
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974).
66
On Selfridge’s “demon model” of intelligence, see O. G. Selfridge, “Pandemonium:
A Paradigm for Learning,” in Symposium on the Mechanization of Thought
Processes, vol. 1 (London: H. M. Stationery Ofﬁce, 1959).
67
For a discussion of idiots savants, see chs. 5 and 6 in H. Gardner, The Shattered
Mind: The Person After Brain Damage (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1975).
72
Discussion of the decisional aspects of deploying an intelligence can be found in 
my colleague Israel Schefﬂer’s forthcoming book, tentatively titled Of Human
Potential.
420
Notes

73
The “know-how” versus “know-that” distinction is treated in G. Ryle, The Concept
of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949).
Chapter 5: Linguistic Intelligence
77
The Gilbert Islander’s statement is from R. Finnegan, “Literacy Versus Non-Literacy:
The Great Divide?” in R. Horton and R. Finnegan, eds., Modes of Thought: Es-
says on Thinking in Western and Non-Western Societies (London: Faber &
Faber, 1973).
77
Lillian Hellman’s description of writing is from her autobiography, An Unﬁnished
Woman (New York: Bantam, 1970).
77
Keith Douglas’s correspondence with T. S. Eliot is described in A. Coleman’s arti-
cle “T. S. Eliot and Keith Douglas,” London Times Literary Supplement, 7 Feb-
ruary 1970, p. 731.
78
T. S. Eliot’s search for the right words is detailed in C. Ricks, “Intense Transparen-
cies,” review of The Composition of “Four Quartets,” by Helen Gardner, Lon-
don Times Literary Supplement, 15 September 1978, pp. 1006–1008.
78
Robert Graves’s search for the right word is described in his On Poetry: Selected
Talks and Essays (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969), pp. 417–419.
78
Stephen Spender’s search for the right words is described in B. Ghiselin, ed., The
Creative Process (New York: Mentor, 1952), p. 112.
80
T. S. Eliot’s observation on the logic of the poet is from his preface to St. John Perse’s
Anabasis (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1970).
80
W. H. Auden’s remark is from C. D. Abbott, ed., Poets at Work (New York: Har-
court, Brace, 1948), p. 171.
80
H. Read’s statement on the visual nature of poetic words is from his The Philosophy
of Modern Art (London: Faber & Faber, 1964), p. 147.
81
Helen Vendler discusses Robert Lowell’s poetry classes in her “Listening to Lowell,”
New York Times Book Review, 3 February 1980.
81
N. Frye’s statement is from the “Polemical Introduction” to his book The Well-
Tempered Critic (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1963), p. 5.
81
The importance of sensitivity to the subtle shades of difference in words is discussed
in J. L. Austin, Philosophical Papers, 3rd ed., J. O. Urmson and G. J. Warnock,
eds. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), p. 274.
83
Major points of N. Chomsky’s theory are laid out in his Language and Mind (New
York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1968).
83
On the functions of language, see R. Jakobson, “Closing Statement: Linguistics and
Poetics,” in T. A. Sebeok, ed., Style in Language (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1960).
84
On the development of linguistic ability in children, see H. Gardner, Developmen-
tal Psychology, 2nd ed. (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), ch. 4; and P. Dale, Lan-
guage Development: Structure and Function (Hillsdale, Ill.: Dryden, 1972).
84
Evidence for the claim that certain initial assumptions about the operation of lan-
guage are built into the nervous system may be found in K. Wexler and P. Culi-
cover, Formal Principles of Language Acquisition (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1980). See also D. Osherson, “Thoughts on Learning Functions,” unpublished
paper, University of Pennsylvania, 1978; and N. Chomsky, Rules and Represen-
tations (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980).
85
J. P. Sartre’s statement “By writing I was existing” is from his autobiography, The
Words: The Autobiography of Jean-Paul Sartre (New York: George Braziller,
421
Notes

1964), p. 153. His statement “My pen raced . . .” (describing his activities at the
age of nine) is on p. 181.
86
Auden’s discussion of the pitfalls that threaten to ensnare the young writer, and his
analogy of a young lad courting, are from his Forewords and Afterwords (New
York: Vintage, 1973), p. 13.
86
Stephen Spender’s discussion of his sheer memory for experiences is quoted in Ghis-
elin, Creative Process [78], pp. 120–121.
87
Auden discusses the undeveloped poet, and the worth of writing a dozen rhopalic
hexameters, in his Forewords and Afterwords [86], pp. 224–225.
87
Thornton Wilder’s comment is quoted in M. Cowley, ed., Writers at Work: The Paris
Review Interviews (New York: Viking Press, 1959), p. 117.
87
Walter Jackson Bate’s comment on Keats is from W. J. Bate, John Keats (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1966), p. 438.
88
Igor Stravinsky describes Auden’s ability to write verse on command, in I. Stravin-
sky, Stravinsky in Conversation with Robert Craft (Harmondsworth, UK: Peli-
can Books, 1962), p. 280.
88
Karl Shapiro’s statement on genius in poetry is quoted in Abbott, Poets at Work [80],
p. 94.
88
On Einstein’s life and work, see B. Hoffman, Einstein (Frogmore, St. Albans, Herts,
UK: Paladin, 1975).
89
Language-disturbed children’s simpliﬁcation of sentences was discussed by 
H. Sinclair-de-Zwart in a lecture at Harvard University in May 1976. Also see 
H. Sinclair-de-Zwart, “Language Acquisition and Cognitive Development, in 
T. E. Moore, ed., Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language (New
York: Academic Press, 1973); and A. Sinclair et al., The Child’s Conception of
Language, Springer Series in Language and Communication, vol. 2 (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1979).
89
On hyperlexic children, see C. C. Mehegan and F. E. Dreifuss, “Exceptional Read-
ing Ability in Brain-Damaged Children,” Neurology 22 (1972): 1105–1111; and
D. E. Elliot and R. M. Needleman, “The Syndrome of Hyperlexia,” Brain and
Language 3 (1976): 339–349.
90
On brain laterality and language, see J. M. Ranklin, D. M. Aram, and S. J. Horowitz,
“Language Ability in Right and Left Hemiplegic Children,” Brain and Language
14 (1981): 292–306. Also see M. Dennis, “Language Acquisition in a Single
Hemisphere: Semantic Organization,” in D. Caplan, ed., Biological Studies of
Mental Processes (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980).
91
Genie’s case is documented in S. Curtiss, Genie: A Linguistic Study of a Modern-
Day Wild Child (New York: Academic Press, 1977). On the capacity of deaf 
children with hearing parents to develop a gestural language system, see 
S. Goldin-Meadow, “Language Development Without a Language Model,” paper
presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment, Boston, April 1981, to appear in K. Nelson, ed., Children’s Language,
vol. 5 (New York: Gardner Press, forthcoming).
92
Evidence that language is more strongly focalized in the left hemisphere in males is
cited in M. H. Wittig and A. C. Petersen, eds., Sex-Related Differences in Cog-
nitive Functioning (New York: Academic Press, 1979); A. Kertesz, “Recovery and
Treatment,” in K. M. Heilman and E. Valenstein, eds., Clinical Neuropsychology
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1979); and J. Levy, “Cerebral Asymmetry
and the Psychology of Man,” in Wittig and Peterson, Sex-Related Differences,
previously cited in this note.
422
Notes

92
For evidence from studies of the brain that written language “piggybacks” on oral
language, see H. Gardner, The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Damage
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1975), ch. 3.
93
On the decoding of kana versus kanji symbols, see S. Sasnuma, “Kana and Kanji
Processing in Japanese Aphasics,” Brain and Language 2 (1975): 369–382.
93
On the ability of certain grossly aphasic individuals to perform well on other cogni-
tive tasks, see H. Gardner, “Artistry Following Damage to the Human Brain,” in
A. Ellis, ed., Normality and Pathology in Cognitive Functions (London: Aca-
demic Press, 1982).
94
On idioglossia, anomic aphasia, and the different writing styles produced by differ-
ent lesions, see Gardner, Shattered Mind [92], chs. 2 and 3.
95
On the evolution of the brain, see M. LeMay, “Morphological Cerebral Asymmetries
of Modern Man, Fossil Man, and Nonhuman Primate,” in S. R. Harnad, 
H. D. Steklis, and J. Lancaster, Origins and Evolution of Language and Speech,
vol. 280 (New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1976).
95
For N. Chomsky’s views on the evolution of language, see his Reﬂections on Language
(New York: Pantheon, 1975). I learned of C. Lévi-Strauss’s view that language
evolved in a single moment in time from a personal communication, June 1981.
95
On the evolution of language in man and apes, see G. W. Hewes, “The Current Sta-
tus of the Gestural Theory of Language Origin,” in Harnad, Steklis, and Lan-
caster, Origins and Evolution [95].
96
On the evolution of language in chimpanzees, see T. A. Sebeok and J. Umiker-
Sebeok, eds., Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-Way Communication
with Man (New York: Plenum Press, 1980).
96
The evolution of the human capacity for speech is also discussed in P. Lieberman,
“On the Evolution of Language: A Uniﬁed View,” Cognition 2 (1974): 59–95.
96
On contemporary singers of verse, see A. B. Lord, The Singer of Tales (New York:
Atheneum, 1965).
96
On the mnemonic demands of chess, see W. Chase and H. Simon, “The Mind’s Eye
in Chess,” in W. G. Chase, ed., Visual Information Processing (New York: Aca-
demic Press, 1973).
97
On E. F. Dube’s ﬁnding that illiterate Africans remember stories better than do
schooled Africans or schooled New Yorkers, see “A Cross-Cultural Study of the
Relationship Between ‘Intelligence’ Level and Story Recall,” unpublished PhD
dissertation, Cornell University, 1977. Dube’s ﬁndings are also cited in 
W. W. Lambert’s Introduction to Perspectives, vol. 1 of the Handbook of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, H. C. Triandis and W. W. Lambert, eds. (Boston: Allyn &
Bacon, 1980), p. 29.
97
G. Bateson, Naven (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958), p. 222. The
importance of memory in classical and medieval times is described in F. Yates,
The Art of Memory (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966).
97
Ericcson and Chase’s ﬁndings on the memory of digits can be found in K. A. Ericc-
son, W. G. Chase, and S. Faloon, “Acquisition of a Memory Skill,” Science 208
(1980): 1181–1182.
97
Susanne Langer’s introspection on verbal memory is from the article “A Lady Seek-
ing Answers,” New York Times Book Review, 26 May 1968.
98
A. R. Luria describes his study of a mnemonist in The Mind of the Mnemonist (New
York: Basic Books, 1968).
98
Verbal dueling among the Chamula of Chiapas, Mexico, is discussed by G. Gossen
in his paper “To Speak with a Heated Heart: Chamula Canons of Style and Good
423
Notes

Performance,” in R. Bauman and J. Sherzer, eds., Explorations in the Ethnogra-
phy of Speaking (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1974).
99
The Mayan language, Tzeltal, is described in B. Stress, “Speaking of Speaking: Tene-
japa Tzeltal Metalinguistics,” in the book by Bauman and Sherzer cited in the
previous note.
99
Deep Kpelle is described in M. Cole, J. Gay, J. A. Glick, and D. W. Sharp, The Cul-
tural Context of Learning and Thinking (New York: Basic Books, 1971).
99
J. Comaroff discusses the Tshidi of Botswana in his “Talking Politics: Oratory and Au-
thority in a Tswana Chiefdom,” in M. Bloch, ed., Political Language and Ora-
tory in Traditional Society (London: Academic Press, 1975).
99
E. Havelock discusses Greek oral culture in his Preface to Plato (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1963), p. 126.
102 Henry James’s statement is taken from his The Art of the Novel, R. Blackmur, ed.
(New York: Charles Scribner, 1950; originally published 1934), p. 122.
102 “Of language calling attention to itself”: R. Jakobson is quoted in I. A. Richards,
“Jakobson on the Subliminal Structures of a Sonnet,” London Times Literary
Supplement, 28 May 1980.
Chapter 6: Musical Intelligence
105 Hoene Wronsky’s deﬁnition of music is quoted in D. H. Cope, New Directions in
Music (Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown, 1978), p. 87.
107 R. Sessions’s discussion of composing music is taken from Questions About Music
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1970), p. 89.
107 Sessions’s deﬁnition of “logical musical thinking” may be found on p. 110 of his Ques-
tions About Music, cited in the preceding note.
108 On the task of the composer, also see A. Copland, What to Listen for in Music (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1939). Aaron Copland’s statement on composing as a natu-
ral act is from p. 20.
108 Arnold Schoenberg’s remark is quoted in C. Rosen, “The Possibilities of Disquiet,”
a review of B. Tagebuch’s book Arnold Schoenberg, J. Rufer, ed., London Times
Literary Supplement, 7 November 1975, p. 1336.
108 Harold Shapero’s views are quoted in B. Ghiselin, The Creative Process (New York:
New American Library, 1952), pp. 49–50.
109 Sessions discusses the process of composition in his Questions About Music [107],
pp. 29–30.
109 Igor Stravinsky’s remark occurs in his Conversations with Robert Craft (London:
Pelican Books, 1971), p. 29.
109 Arnold Schoenberg quotes Schopenhauer’s view in Rosen, “The Possibilities of Dis-
quiet,” [108], p. 1335.
109 C. Lévi-Strauss’s phrase “whose minds secrete music” is from his The Raw and the
Cooked: An Introduction to a Science of Mythology (New York: Harper & Row,
1969), p. 18.
110 A. Copland discusses the intelligent listener in his What to Listen for in Music [108],
p. 17.
110 E. T. Cone’s view of “active listening” is taken from his Musical Form and Musical
Performance (New York: W. W. Norton, 1968), p. 21.
110 Cone’s remarks on adequate musical performance are on p. 31 of the previously
cited book.
424
Notes

110 Stravinsky discusses his intended audience in his Conversations with Robert Craft
[104], p. 32.
111 The different musical emphases in different cultures are described by E. May in
Musics of Many Cultures (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980).
111 Sessions’s remark is from his Questions About Music [107], p. 42.
111 Arnold Schoenberg’s deﬁnition of music is taken from his Letters, E. Stein, ed. (New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1965), p. 186.
112 S. Langer discusses the emotional implications of music in her Philosophy in a New
Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and Art (Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1942).
112 Sessions’s statement is from his Questions About Music [107], p. 14.
112 Stravinsky’s remark and his later recantation may be found in R. Craft and 
I. Stravinsky, Expositions and Developments (London: Faber & Faber, 1962),
pp. 101–102.
112 Paul Vitz’s studies are described in P. Vitz and T. Todd, “Preference for Tones as a
Function of Frequency (Hz) and Intensity (db),” Psychological Review 78, 3
(1971): 207–228.
113 The “middle-ground” approach to research on music is taken in C. Krumhansl, “The
Psychological Representation of Musical Pitch in a Tonal Context,” Cognitive
Psychology 11 (1979): 346–374.
114 A review of ﬁndings on the psychology of music can be found in E. Winner, Invented
Worlds (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982).
115 Mechthild and Hanus Papoušek’s studies are described in M. Papoušek, “Musical El-
ements in Mother-Infant Dialogues,” paper presented at the International Con-
ference on Infant Studies, Austin, Texas, March 1982.
115 On the development in children of musical competence, see L. Davidson, P. McKer-
non, and H. Gardner, “The Acquisition of Song: A Developmental Approach,”
in Documentary Report of the Ann Arbor Symposium (Reston, Va.: Music Edu-
cators National Conference, 1981).
116 J. C. Messenger describes music and dance among the Anang of Nigeria in “Re-
ﬂections on Esthetic Talent,” Basic College Quarterly 4, 20–24 (1958): 20–21.
116 A. Merriam describes musical training among the Venda at Northern Transvaal in
A. Merriam, The Anthropology of Music (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press, 1964), p. 148; the Griots in Senegambia are discussed on p. 158. Also
see May, Musics of Many Cultures [111].
117 On J. Bamberger’s work, see E. Winner, Invented Worlds [107]; and J. Bamberger,
“Growing up Prodigies: The Mid-Life Crisis,” New Directions for Child Devel-
opment 17 (1982): 61–78.
119 On the Suzuki Talent Education Program, see S. Suzuki, Nurtured by Love (New
York: Exposition Press, 1969); B. Holland, “Among Pros, More Go Suzuki,” New
York Times, 11 July 1982, E9; and L. Taniuchi, “The Creation of Prodigies
Through Special Early Education: Three Case Studies,” unpublished paper, Har-
vard Project on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
119 On L. Vygotsky’s notion of a zone of proximal development, see his Mind in Soci-
ety, M. Cole, ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978).
120 On A. Rubinstein’s early years, see his My Young Years (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1973). Rubinstein reﬂects on the lack of musical gifts in his family on p. 4.
120 Rubinstein’s description of his musical play in the drawing room is also from p. 4 of
the previously cited book.
425
Notes

120 On Rubinstein’s meeting with Joachim, see p. 7 of the previously cited book.
121 R. Serkin is quoted in M. Meyer, “He Turned the Store Upside Down,” New York
Times, 7 December 1969, D1.
121 Stravinsky’s reﬂection is found in Stravinsky and Craft, Expositions and Develop-
ments [112], p. 21.
122 On music in other cultures, see Merriam, Anthropology of Music [116]; and B. Nettl,
Music in Primitive Culture (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1956).
122 John Lennon is quoted in B. Miles, “The Lennon View,” Boston Globe, 11 Decem-
ber 1980, p. 1.
122 On the evolution of music, see J. Pfeiffer, The Creative Explosion: An Inquiry into
the Origins of Art and Religion (New York: Harper & Row, 1982).
123 On bird song, see F. Nottebohm, “Brain Pathways for Vocal Learning in Birds: A
Review of the First 10 Years,” Progress in Psychobiological and Physiological
Psychology 9 (1980): 85–124; M. Konishi in R. A. Hinde, ed., Bird Vocalization
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969); and P. Marler and S. Peters,
“Selective Vocal Learning in a Sparrow,” Science 198 (1977): 519–521.
123 The statement “bird songs are promise of music . . .” is from I. Stravinsky, The 
Poetics of Music in the Form of Six Lessons (New York: Vintage, 1956), p. 24.
124 On D. Deutsch’s ﬁnding of 40 percent error in recall of tones, see her “The Organ-
ization of Short-Term Memory for a Single Acoustic Attribute,” in D. Deutsch
and J. A. Deutsch, eds., Short-term Memory (New York: Academic Press, 1975),
p. 112; see pp. 108–112 for evidence that verbal material does not interfere with
melodic material.
125 The effects of brain damage on musical abilities are described in M. I. Botez, 
T. Botez, and M. Aube, “Amusia: Clinical and Computerized Scanning (CT) Cor-
relations,” Neurology 30 (April 1980): 359.
125 For a review of the ﬁndings on Ravel, Shebalin, and other composers, as well as for
a survey of the neuropsychology of music, see H. Gardner, “Artistry Following
Damage to the Human Brain,” in A. Ellis, ed., Normality and Pathology in Cog-
nitive Functions (London: Academic Press, 1982).
126 H. Gordon’s ﬁndings are described in his article “Degree of Ear Asymmetries for
Perception of Dichotic Chords and for Illusory Chord Localization in Musicians
of Different Levels of Competence,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 6 (1980): 516–527.
127 On idiots savants with unusual musical skills (Harriet), see B. M. Minogue, “A Case
of Secondary Mental Deﬁciency with Musical Talent,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 7 (1923): 349–357; W. A. Owens and W. Grim, “A Note Regarding Ex-
ceptional Musical Ability in a Low-Grade Imbecile,” Journal of Educational
Psychology 32 (1942): 636–637; and D. S. Viscott, “A Musical Idiot Savant,” Psy-
chiatry 33 (1970): 494–515.
128 Peter F. Ostwald’s statement about a young composer is from his “Musical Behav-
ior in Early Childhood,” Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 15 (3
June 1973): 368.
128 Stravinsky’s reminiscences on the ﬁfe-and-drum marine band are from Stravinsky
and Craft, Expositions and Developments [112], pp. 21, 28.
128 Stravinsky’s recollection of the singing of the countrywomen is from p. 36 of the
book cited in the previous note.
129 On the properties of music valued in Japan, see W. Malm, “Some of Japan’s Musics
and Musical Principles,” in May, Musics of Many Cultures [111], p. 52.
129 G. Bateson, Naven, 2nd ed. (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958).
130 Lévi-Strauss discusses music in The Raw and The Cooked [109], p. 18.
426
Notes

130 Stravinsky states that music must be seen to be properly assimilated, in Poetics of
Music [123].
130 Harris discusses the importance of spatial abilities for composers, in L. J. Harris,
“Sex Differences in Spatial Ability,” in M. Kinsbourne, ed., Asymmetrical Func-
tions of the Brain (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
130 On A. Lintgen’s astonishing ability to recognize musical pieces from the grooves on
the phonograph record, see B. Holland, “A Man Who Sees What Others Hear,”
New York Times, 19 November 1981; also, “Read Any Good Records Lately?”
Time, 4 January 1982.
131 The case of the composer who sustained right hemisphere damage yet remained
able to teach and write books about music is described in H. Gardner, “Artistry
Following Damage to the Human Brain,” in A. Ellis, ed., Language Functions
and Brain Organization (London: Academic Press, 1982). The musician who lost
his aesthetic feeling is described in K. Popper and J. Eccles, The Self and Its
Brain (New York: Springer International, (1977), p. 338.
132 On the search for parallels between music and language, see F. Lerdahl and R. Jack-
endoff, “Toward a Formal Theory of Tonal Music,” Journal of Music Theory
(Spring 1977): 111–171; and J. Sundberg and B. Lindblom, “Generative Theo-
ries in Language and Music Descriptions,” Cognition 4 (1976): 99–122.
132 On the connections between music and math, see E. Rothstein, “Math and Music:
The Deeper Links,” New York Times, 29 August 1982.
133 Stravinsky’s statement on the relationship of music to mathematics is from his Con-
versations with Robert Craft [109], p. 34.
133 Stravinsky’s statement “I know . . . that these discoveries . . .” is from Stravinsky and
Craft, Expositions and Developments [112], p. 99.
134 Stravinsky’s contention that music and mathematics are not alike comes from his
Poetics of Music [123], p. 99.
134 G. H. Hardy’s statement is quoted in Anthony Storr’s article “The Meaning of
Music,” London Times Literary Supplement, 28 November 1970.
Chapter 7: Logical-Mathematical Intelligence
135 Whitehead’s statement is from A. N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World
(New York: New American Library, 1948), p. 26.
135 Piaget relates the anecdote about the childhood of a future mathematician in his
Genetic Epistemology (New York: W. W. Norton, 1971).
135 Piaget’s work on the development of logical-mathematical thought may be found in
his The Child’s Conception of Number (New York: W. W. Norton, 1965); and 
J. Piaget and B. Inhelder, The Psychology of the Child (New York: Basic Books,
1969). Also see H. Gardner, The Quest for Mind: Piaget, Lévi-Strauss, and the
Structuralist Movement (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
1981); J. P. Flavell, The Developmental Psychology of Jean Piaget (Princeton,
N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1963); and H. Gruber and J. Voneche, eds., The Essential
Piaget (New York: Basic Books, 1977).
138 On the child’s numerical development, see R. Gelman and R. Gallistel, The Child’s
Understanding of Number (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978).
141 For a critical treatment of Piaget’s theory, see C. Brainerd, Piaget’s Theory of Intel-
ligence (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1978).
142 B. Rotman’s view is from his book Jean Piaget: The Psychologist of the Real (Ithaca,
N.Y: Cornell University Press, 1977), p. 77.
142 Euler is quoted in G. Polya, How to Solve It (New York: Anchor Books, 1957), p. 3.
427
Notes

142 Quine’s distinction between logic and mathematics may be found in his Methods of
Logic (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1950), p. xvii. See also the article
“You Cannot Be a Twentieth-Century Man Without Maths,” The Economist, 27
October 1979, p. 107.
142 Whitehead and Russell’s views are discussed in J. G. Kemeny, A Philosopher Looks
at Science (New York: D. Van Nostrand, 1959).
142 Russell is quoted on p. 20 of Kemeny, A Philosopher Looks at Science, cited in the
preceding note.
143 Whitehead’s statement is from his Science and the Modern World [135], p. 27.
143 On the scientist and the world of practice, see W. V. Quine, “The Scope and Lan-
guage of Science,” in The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1966).
143 A. M. Gleason’s ﬁgure of speech is from his essay “The Evolution of Differential
Topology,” in COSRIMS, eds., The Mathematical Sciences: A Collection of Essays
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1969), p. 1.
144 The complex sentence is quoted by M. Polanyi in his Personal Knowledge: Towards
a Post-Critical Philosophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958), p. 118.
145 The two quotations of Henri Poincaré are from B. Ghiselin, ed., The Creative
Process (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1952), p. 35.
146 A. Adler’s statement is from his article “Mathematics and Creativity,” New Yorker,
19 February 1972, pp. 39–40.
146 Adler’s statement regarding the qualities of mathematicians is from p. 44 of the ar-
ticle cited in the previous note. Adler’s statement “A great new ediﬁce . . .” is
from p. 45 of the same article.
146 G. H. Hardy’s statement “It is undeniable . . .” is from his A Mathematician’s Apol-
ogy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), p. 70.
147 Hardy’s statement “A mathematician . . .” is from the same source, p. 86.
147 On Andrew Gleason, see COSRIMS, Mathematical Sciences [143], p. 177.
147 S. Ulam’s statement is from his Adventures of a Mathematician (New York: Charles
Scribner, 1976), p. 180.
147 H. Poincaré is quoted in J. Hadamard, An Essay on the Psychology of Invention 
in the Mathematical Field (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1945), 
p. 106.
147 On errors of omission and of commission, see A. N. Whitehead, Science and the
Modern World [135], p. 29.
148 Adler describes the levels of abstraction in mathematics in his article “Mathematics
and Creativity” [146], pp. 43–44.
148 Ulam’s suggestion is from his Adventures [147], p. 120.
149 On the ability to ﬁnd an analogy between analogies, see Ulam, Adventures [147], 
p. 26.
149 Ulam discusses von Neumann on p. 76 of the source cited in the previous note.
150 Bronowski’s exchange with von Neumann is from J. Bronowski, The Ascent of Man
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1973), p. 433.
150 Julian Bigelow on von Neumann, in S. J. Heims, John von Neumann and Norbert
Wiener: From Mathematics to the Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1980), p. 127.
150 The statement “Beyond anyone else . . .” is from p. 129 of the book cited in the pre-
vious note.
151 Ulam’s statements are from his Adventures [147], p. 292.
151 Arthur Rubinstein’s comment that mathematics is impossible for him is from his 
autobiography, My Young Years (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1973).
428
Notes

151 General pointers for mathematical problem solving may be found in A. Newell and
H. Simon, Human Problem-Solving (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1972); and in G. Polya, How to Solve It [142].
153 Newton’s role as one of the inventors of the calculus is described in the Economist
article “You Cannot Be a Twentieth-Century Man Without Maths” [142], p. 108.
154 J. Piaget describes the parallel between the evolution of science and the develop-
ment of logical-mathematical thought in his Logique et Connaissance Scientiﬁque
(Paris: Encyclopédic de la Pléiade, 1967).
154 H. Butterﬁeld’s comment is from his The Origins of Modern Science (New York:
Free Press, 1965), p. 117.
155 Newton’s view of himself as an explorer is quoted in Bronowski, Ascent of Man [150],
p. 237.
155 Bronowski’s statement is from p. 223 of the previous title.
155 A. Einstein’s statement on “Truth in physical matters . . .” is from Jeremy Bernstein’s
proﬁle of Albert Einstein, New Yorker, 5 March 1979, p. 28.
156 Einstein’s discussion of his career decision is from B. Hoffman, Einstein (Frogmore,
St. Albans, Herts, UK: Paladin, 1975), p. 8.
156 Ulam’s statement is from his Adventures [147], p. 447.
156 W. Heisenberg discusses Niels Bohr in his Physics and Beyond (New York: Harper
& Row, 1962), p. 37.
157 Heisenberg relates his conversation with Einstein on p. 68 of the previously cited
book.
158 G. Holton’s views are from his “On the Role of Themata in Scientiﬁc Thought,” Sci-
ence 188 (April 1975): 328–338.
158 Einstein is quoted in Kemeny, A Philosopher Looks at Science [142], p. 62.
158 Holton’s statement “The awareness of themata . . .” is from “On the Role of The-
mata” [158], p. 331.
159 Frank Manuel’s discussion of Newton is from F. Manuel, “Isaac Newton as Theolo-
gian,” London Times Literary Supplement, 29 June 1973, p. 744.
160 Einstein’s recollections of his early years are quoted in Hoffman, Einstein [156], p. 9.
160 Ulam’s recollections of his childhood are from his Adventures [147], p. 10.
160 On patterners and dramatists, see D. Wolf and H. Gardner, “Style and Sequence in
Symbolic Play,” in N. Smith and M. Franklin, eds., Symbolic Functioning 
in Childhood (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Press, 1979).
160 On Pascal’s youth, see C. M. Cox, “The Early Mental Traits of Three Hundred Ge-
niuses,” in L. M. Terman, ed., Genetic Studies of Genius, vol. 2 (Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1926), p. 691.
161 B. Russell’s reminiscence is quoted in R. Dinnage, “Risks and Calculations,” review
of Ronald W. Clark’s “The Life of Bertrand Russell,” London Times Literary Sup-
plement, 31 October 1975, p. 1282.
161 Ulam’s account of the course of development of a passion for mathematics is from
his Adventures [147], p. 19.
161 The anecdote about Saul Kripke is from T. Branch, “New Frontiers in American
Philosophy,” New York Times Sunday Magazine, 14 August 1977.
162 Descartes’s statement is quoted in G. Polya, How to Solve It [142], p. 93.
162 G. H. Hardy’s statement is from his A Mathematician’s Apology (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1967), p. 63.
162 I. I. Rabi’s observation is quoted in Jeremy Bernstein’s proﬁle of I. I. Rabi, New
Yorker, 20 October 1975, p. 47.
163 Adler’s statement that mathematical productivity drops with age is from his article
“Mathematics and Creativity” [146], p. 40.
429
Notes

164 The view that humanistic scholarship gets better with age is discussed in M. W.
Miller, “Unusual Promotion Granted in English,” Harvard Crimson, 29 Sep-
tember 1982, p. 1.
164 On the calculating abilities of the mathematician Gauss and the astronomer Truman
Safford, see K. R. Lewis and H. Plotkin, “Truman Henry Safford, the Remarkable
‘Lightning Calculator,’” Harvard Magazine, September-October 1982, pp. 54–56.
164 On Obadiah and George, mathematical idiots savants, see W. A. Horwitz et al.,
“Identical Twin ‘Idiot Savants’—Calendar Calculators,” American Journal of Psy-
chiatry 121 (1965): 1075–1079; and A. Phillips, “Talented Imbeciles,” Psycho-
logical Clinic 18, 1930: 246–65.
164 The idiot savant L. is described in M. Scheerer, E. Rothmann, and K. Goldstein, “A
Case of ‘Idiot Savant’: An Experimental Study of Personality Organization,” Psy-
chology Monographs 269 (1945): 1–61. Also see B. M. Minogue, “A Case of Sec-
ondary Mental Deﬁciency with Musical Talent,” Journal of Applied Psychology
7 (1923): 349–357; W. A. Owens and W. Grim, “A Note Regarding Exceptional
Musical Ability in a Low-Grade Imbecile,” Journal of Educational Psychology
32 (1942): 636–637; D. S. Viscott, “A Musical Idiot Savant,” Psychiatry 33 (1970):
494–515; A. C. Hill, “Idiot Savants: A Categorization of Abilities,” Mental Re-
tardation 12 (1974): 12–13; E. Hoffman and R. Reeves, “An Idiot Savant with
Unusual Mechanical Ability,” American Journal of Psychiatry 136 (1979): 713–
714; and R. M. Restak, “Islands of Genius,” Science 82 (May 1982): 63.
165 On the Gerstmann syndrome, see H. Gardner, The Shattered Mind: The Person
After Brain Damage (New York: Vintage, 1974), ch. 6.
165 John Holt’s question is raised in How Children Fail (New York: Delta Books, Dell
Publishing, 1964), p. 92.
166 On the precursors to numerical ability in animals, see O. Kohler, in the Society for
Experimental Biology publication Physiological Mechanisms in Animal Behavior,
1950.
166 On the dance language of bees, see K. von Frisch, Dance Language and Orientation
of Bees, L. E. Chadwick, trans. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1967).
166 On the capacity of primates to make probability estimates, see D. Premack, Intelli-
gence in Ape and Man (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1976).
166 The importance of the right hemisphere for understanding numerical relations and
quantities is discussed in N. Dahmen, W. Hartje, A. Bussing, and W. Sturm, “Dis-
orders of Calculation in Aphasic Patients—Spatial and Verbal Components,”
Neuropsychologia 20, 2 (1982): 145–153; A. Basso, A. Berti, E. Capitani, and E.
Fenu, “Aphasia, Acalculia, and Intelligence,” paper presented at the Interna-
tional Neuropsychology Society, June 1981, Bergen, Norway; and E. K. War-
rington, “The Fractionation of Arithmetic Skills: A Single Case Study,” Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 34A (1982): 31–51.
166 On the importance of the left parietal lobes and of certain contiguous areas for logic
and math, see J. Grafman, D. Passaﬁume, P. Faglioni, and F. Boiler, “Calcula-
tion Disturbances in Adults with Focal Hemisphere Damage,” Cortex 18 (1982):
37–50.
167 A. R. Luria discusses the effects of lesions in the area of the angular gyrus in his
Higher Cortical Functions in Man (New York: Basic Books, 1966).
168 A. Gervais’s studies document the involvement of both hemispheres during the so-
lution of mathematical problems; the results are brieﬂy described in “Complex
Math for a Complex Brain,” Science News 121 (23 January 1982): 58. Also see 
430
Notes

R. H. Kraft, O. R. Mitchell, M. L. Langvis, and G. H. Wheatley, “Hemispheric
Asymmetries During Six-to-Eight-Year-Olds’ Performance of Piagetian Conser-
vation and Reading Tasks,” Neuropsychologia 18 (1980): 637–643.
169 Experimental tasks that “primitives” perform better than the investigators are de-
scribed in B. N. Colby, “Folk Science Studies,” El Palacio (Winter 1963): 5–14.
170 On the design and appropriate use of elaborate hierarchically organized systems,
see M. Cole, J. Gay, J. A. Glick, and D. W. Sharp, The Cultural Context of Learn-
ing and Thinking (New York: Basic Books, 1971).
170 On bargaining and trading skills, see M. Quinn, “Do Mfantse Fish Sellers Estimate
Probabilities in Their Heads?” American Ethnologist 5, 2 (1978): 206–226. Also
see H. Gladwin and C. Gladwin, “Estimating Market Conditions and Proﬁt Ex-
pectations of Fish Sellers at Cape Coast, Ghana,” in G. Dalton, ed., Studies in
Economic Anthropology, Anthropological Studies no. 7, P. J. Bohannon, ed.
(Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association, 1971).
170 The statement on the skills of hunters in the African Bush is from Nicholas Blurton-
Jones and Melvin Konner, “!Kung Knowledge of Animal Behavior,” in R. B. Lee
and I. DeVore, eds., Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1976), p. 35.
170 On the estimation abilities of Kpelle adults in Liberia, see J. Gay and M. Cole, The
New Mathematics and an Old Culture (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston,
1967), pp. 43–44.
171 On the arithmetical game kala, see C. Zaslavsky, Africa Counts: Number and Pattern
in African Culture (Boston: Prindle, Weber & Schmidt, 1973), p. 130.
171 Cole’s description of the strategies of winning players is from M. Cole et al., Cultural
Context [170] pp. 182–184.
171 The intertwining of mathematical thinking and religious pursuits is described in 
J. Goody, ed., Introduction to Literacy in Traditional Societies (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1968); see p. 18 on the use of magic squares to ward off
disease. Also see Zaslavsky, Africa Counts [171] p. 138.
171 The statement “Mathematicians were denounced . . .” is from H. W. Smith, Man
and His Gods (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1952), p. 261, cited in Zaslavsky,
Africa Counts [171], p. 274.
172 On the mathematical systems of the medieval Indians, see K. Menninger, Number
Words and Number Symbols: A Cultural History of Numbers, P. Broneer, trans.
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1969), p. 12.
172 The statement that even today elaborate systems of numbers are used by Islamic
scholars to convey messages was made by L. Sanneh in a personal communica-
tion, September 1982.
172 On the controversy over the rational nature of primitive thought, see R. A. Shweder,
“Rationality ‘Goes Without Saying,’” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 5 (4 De-
cember 1981): 348–358. Also see D. Sperber, Rethinking Symbolism, Cambridge
Studies in Social Anthropology, J. Goody, general ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1975).
173 Edwin Hutchins’s study in the Trobriand Islands is described in his Culture and In-
ference: A Trobriand Case Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1980), pp. 117–118.
174 On the urge to challenge established wisdom in “schooled” versus “primitive” soci-
eties, see G. N. Seagrim and R. J. Lendon, Furnishing the Mind: Aboriginal and
White: A Report on the Hemannsburg Project, Behavioral Development: A Se-
ries of Monographs (New York: Academic Press, 1981), p. 297.
431
Notes

174 B. Rotman’s statement on the various attitudes toward mathematics at different
points in history is found in his Jean Piaget [142], p. 73.
175 Thomas Kuhn’s theory is set forth in his The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970).
175 Paul Feyerabend questions the distinction between science and nonscience in his
book Against Method (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.; Humanities Press, 1975).
175 G. H. Hardy’s account of the Indian mathematician Ramanujan is from J. R. New-
man, The World of Mathematics, vol. 1 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1956), pp.
366–367.
176 W. V. Quine’s statement is from his Methods of Logic (New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1950), p. xiv.
178 D. Hofstadter, Godel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Basic
Books, 1979).
Chapter 8: Spatial Intelligence
179 Capablanca is quoted in B. Schechter, “Electronic Masters of Chess,” Discover, De-
cember 1982, p. 110.
180 For examples of spatial problems, see R. H. McKim, Experiences in Visual Think-
ing (Belmont, Calif.: Brooks Cole, 1972); and E. J. Eliot and N. Salkind, Chil-
dren’s Spatial Development (Springﬁeld, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1975).
180 On spatial ability, also see M. I. Smith, Spatial Ability (London: University of Lon-
don Press, 1964).
181 The description of Einstein’s theory of relativity is from p. 118 of Eliot and Salkind’s
Children’s Spatial Development [180].
183 Roger Shepard’s study is described in R. N. Shepard and G. W. Cermak, “Percep-
tual Cognitive Explorations of a Toroidal Set of Free Form Stimuli,” Cognitive
Psychology 4 (1973): 351–357. See also R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, “Mental
Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects,” Science 171 (1971): 701–703, from
which ﬁgure 3 is drawn.
184 On L. L. Thurstone, see his “Primary Mental Abilities,” Psychometric Monographs
1 (1938); and Multiple-Factor Analysis: A Development and Expansion of 
“The Vectors of the Mind” (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947). Also see
M. I. Smith, Spatial Ability [180], p. 85.
184 On El-Koussy’s distinction between two-and three-dimensional spatial aptitude, see
A. A. H. El-Koussy, The Directions of Research in the Domain of Spatial Apti-
tudes (Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, 1955).
185 For a more detailed discussion of spatial abilities and mental imagery, see U. Neisser
and N. Kerr, “Spatial and Mnemonic Properties of Visual Images,” Cognitive
Psychology 5 (1973): 138–150; and Z. Pylyshyn, “What the Mind’s Eye Tells the
Mind’s Brain: A Critique of Mental Imagery,” Psychological Bulletin 80 (1973):
1–24.
186 Lewis Thomas’s analogies are from The Lives of a Cell (New York: Bantam Books,
1975). On images of wide scope, see H. Gruber, Darwin on Man (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1981).
186 On mental models and the role of imagery in mundane problem solving, see P. N.
Johnson-Laird, Mental Models (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1983).
186 R. Arnheim’s statement is from his Visual Thinking (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1969), p. v.
432
Notes

187 Lee R. Brooks describes his studies on imagery in his article “Spatial and Verbal
Components of the Act of Recall,” Canadian Journal of Psychology 22 (1968):
349–350.
188 Piaget’s work on spatial abilities may be found in J. Piaget and B. Inhelder, The
Child’s Conception of Space (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1956). Also see
H. Gardner, The Quest for Mind: Piaget, Lévi-Strauss, and the Structuralist
Movement (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981); J. P. Flavell, The De-
velopmental Psychology of Jean Piaget (Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1963);
and H. Gruber and J. Voneche, eds., The Essential Piaget (New York: Basic
Books, 1977). For a review of other work, see H. Gardner, Developmental Psy-
chology (Boston: Little, Brown, 1972), ch. 10.
190 Effects of damage to the right posterior regions are described in J. Wasserstein, 
R. Zappulla, J. Rosen, and L. Gerstman, “Evidence for Differentiation of Right
Hemisphere Visual-Perceptual Functions,” unpublished paper, New School for
Social Research, New York, 1982.
191 On the effects of lesions to the right parietal regions on visual attention, spatial ori-
entation, imagery production, and memory, see H. Gardner, The Shattered Mind:
The Person After Brain Damage (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1975), ch. 8.
191 The work of Nelson Butters and his colleagues on visual-spatial difﬁculties is de-
scribed in N. Butters, M. Barton, and B. A. Brady, “Role of the Right Parietal
Lobe in the Mediation of Cross-Modal Associations and Reversible Operations
in Space,” Cortex 6, 2 (1970): 174–190.
191 For B. Milner and D. Kimura’s work, see D. Kimura’s article “The Asymmetry of
the Human Brain,” Scientiﬁc American 228, 3 (1973): 70–80.
191 On the difﬁculty that right-hemisphere-injured patients have in making drawings, see
E. K. Warrington and A. M. Taylor, “Two Categorical Stages of Object Recogni-
tion,” Perception 7 (1978): 695–705. Also see Gardner, Shattered Mind [191], ch. 8.
191 Moira Williams’s anecdote is quoted in L. J. Harris, “Sex Differences in Spatial Abil-
ity,” in M. Kinsbourne, ed., Asymmetrical Function of the Brain (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1978), p. 124.
192 On imagery in right-hemisphere-damaged patients, see E. Bisiach, E. Capitani, 
C. Luzzatti, and D. Perani, “Brain and Conscious Representation of Outside 
Reality,” Neuropsychologia 19, 4 (1981): 543–551.
193 On Hubel and Wiesel, see D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Brain Mechanisms of
Vision,” Scientiﬁc American 241, 3 (1979): 150–162; and H. B. Barlow, “David
Hubel and Torsten Wiesel: Their Contributions Towards Understanding the Pri-
mary Visual Cortex,” Trends in Neurosciences 5 (1982): 145–152.
193 For studies of the inferior temporal regions of the primate brain, see C. G. Gross,
C. E. Rocha-Miranda, and D. Bender, “Visual Properties of Neurons in Infer-
otemporal Cortex of the Macaque,” Journal of Neurophysiology 35 (1972): 
96–111; and M. Mishkin, “Visual Mechanisms Beyond the Striate Cortex,” in R.
W. Russell, ed., Frontiers in Physiological Psychology (New York: Academic
Press, 1967). Other aspects of spatial functioning are discussed in J. E. LeDoux,
C. S. Smylie, R. Ruff, and M. S. Gazzaniga, “Left Hemisphere Visual Processes
in a Case of Right Hemisphere Symptomatology: Implications for Theories of
Cerebral Lateralization,” Archives of Neurology 37 (1980): 157–59; and M. Gaz-
zaniga and J. LeDoux, The Integrated Mind (New York: Plenum, 1978).
193 The importance of the frontal lobes for remembering spatial location was described
by Michael Goldberg in a paper presented at the International Neuropsychol-
ogy Symposium, June 1982, Ravello, Italy.
433
Notes

193 The spatial memory of the Eskimos is discussed in J. S. Kleinfeld, “Visual Memory
in Village Eskimo and Urban Caucasian Children,” Arctic 24, 2 (1971): 132–138.
193 On sex differences in spatial skills, see R. L. Holloway, “Sexual Dimorphism in the
Human Corpus Callosum,” Science 216 (1982): 1431–1432, and S. G. Vanden-
berg and A. R. Kuse, “Spatial Ability: A Critical Review of the Sex-Linked Major
Gene Hypothesis,” in M. A. Wittig and A. C. Peterson, eds., Sex-Related Differences
in Cognitive Functioning (New York: Academic Press, 1979).
194 For Wolfgang Köhler’s work with the great apes on Tenerife, see his The Mentality
of Apes, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973).
194 On the spatial abilities of the blind, see J. M. Kennedy, A Psychology of Picture Per-
ception: Images and Information (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1974).
195 See S. Millar, “Visual Experience or Translation Rules? Drawing the Human Figure
by Blind and Sighted Children,” Perception 4 (1975): 363–371; and S. Millar,
“Effects of Input Conditions on Intramodal and Crossmodal Visual and Kines-
thetic Matches by Children,” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 19
(1975): 63–78.
195 G. S. Marmor, “Mental Rotation by the Blind: Does Mental Rotation Depend on
Visual Imagery?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 2, 4 (1976): 515–521; the statement quoted is from p. 520.
195 B. Landau, “Early Map Use by the Congenitally Blind Child,” paper presented at the
American Psychological Association, Los Angeles, August 1982; and B. Landau,
H. Gleitman, and E. Spelke, Spatial Knowledge and Geometric Representation
in a Child Blind from Birth,” Science 213 (1981): 1275–1278.
196 On the effects of Turner’s syndrome on visual perception, see L. J. Harris, “Sex Dif-
ferences in Spatial Ability: Possible Environmental, Genetic, and Neurological
Factors,” in Kinsbourne, Asymmetrical Function of the Brain [191].
196 On the special difﬁculties of brain-damaged children in visual-spatial tasks, see 
R. G. Rudel and H.-L. Teuber, “Spatial Orientation in Normal Children and in
Children with Early Brain Injury,” Neuropsychologia 9 (1971): 401–407; and 
R. G. Rudel and H.-L. Teuber, “Pattern Recognition Within and Across Sensory
Modalities in Normal and Brain-Injured Children,” Neuropsychologia 9 (1971):
389–399.
196 On S. Kosslyn’s work, see his Image and Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1980).
196 Francis Galton’s observation of poor visual imagery in scientists is discussed in his
Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development (London: Dent, 1907).
197 E. B. Titchener is quoted in Arnheim, Visual Thinking [186], p. 107.
197 Aldous Huxley’s statement is from his The Doors of Perception (New York: Harper
& Row, 1970), p. 46.
197 The description of Nikola Tesla’s abilities is found in McKim, Experiences in Visual
Thinking [180], p. 8.
197 Rodin is quoted in H. Read, The Art of Sculpture (New York: Pantheon Books,
1961), p. 73.
197 Henry Moore is discussed on p. ix of Read’s Art of Sculpture, cited in the previous
note.
198 The Japanese Yamashita and Yamamura are discussed in D. Doust, “Still Life,” Lon-
don Sunday Times, 1977.
198 On Nadia, see L. Selfe, Nadia: A Case of Extraordinary Drawing Ability in an Autis-
tic Child (London: Academic Press, 1977).
200 The statement about Einstein is from “The Talk of the Town” section of New Yorker,
5 March 1979, p. 28.
434
Notes

200 Einstein is quoted in McKim, Experiences in Visual Thinking [180], p. 9.
200 Kekulé is quoted on p. 9 in McKim, Experiences in Visual Thinking [180].
201 E. S. Ferguson describes the thinking processes of scientists and engineers in his
article “The Mind’s Eye: Nonverbal Thought in Technology,” Science 197, 4306
(1977): 827–836.
201 M. I. Smith examines the relative importance of spatial ability in the different sci-
ences in his Spatial Ability [180], pp. 236–237.
202 The statement about “thinking in three dimensions” is from G. H. Colt, “The Poly-
hedral Arthur Loeb,” Harvard Magazine, March-April 1982, p. 31.
202 A. Binet’s study of mnemonic virtuosity in blindfolded chess may be found in A.
Binet, “Mnemonic Virtuosity: A Study of Chess Players,” Genetic Psychology
Monographs 74 (1966): 127–162.
202 Dr. Tarrasch’s statement “Some part of every . . .” is quoted in Binet, “Mnemonic
Virtuosity” [202], p. 135.
203 Mr. Goetz’s statement “I grasp it . . .” is quoted on p. 147 of the book cited in the
previous note.
203 Binet’s comments “It is the multitude . . .” and “The move itself . . .” are from p. 147
of the same book.
203 The paragraph beginning “To envision a position . . .” is from Dr. Tarrasch, quoted
on p. 152 of the same book.
204 Tarrasch’s statement “The player absorbed . . .” is quoted on p. 159 of the same book.
204 Binet’s conclusion is on p. 160 of the same book.
204 Napoleon’s view of a battle plan is described in McKim, Experiences in Visual Think-
ing [180], p. 105.
204 Adrian de Groot and his colleagues describe chess masters in A. D. de Groot,
Thought and Choice in Chess (The Hague: Mouton, 1965).
205 W. Chase and H. Simon study the chess master in “The Mind’s Eye in Chess,” in 
W. G. Chase, ed., Visual Information Processing (New York: Academic Press,
1973).
206 Vincent Van Gogh’s statements are from Dear Theo: The Autobiography of Vincent
Van Gogh, I. Stone and J. Stone, eds. (New York: Grove Press, 1960), pp. 176 and
55, respectively.
206 Le Corbusier is quoted in R. L. Herbert, Modern Artists on Art (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964), p. 64.
206 The Dürer woodcut of 1527 is often reprinted; for example in McKim, Experiences
in Visual Thinking [180], p. 72.
207 G. Vasari discusses Leonardo in his Lives of the Artists (New York: Noonday Press,
1957), p. 148; Vasari describes Michelangelo on p. 322 of the same book.
207 W. Hogarth is quoted in H. Gardner, The Arts and Human Development: A Psy-
chological Study of the Artistic Process (New York: John Wiley, 1973), p. 260.
207 Leonardo da Vinci’s advice to his painting students is related in G. Bachelard, The
Poetics of Space (New York: Orion Press, 1964), p. 144.
208 Picasso’s claim is found in Arnheim, Visual Thinking [180], p. 56.
208 Arnheim’s statement is from Arnheim, Visual Thinking [180], p. 273.
208 Ben Shahn’s description is from his The Shape of Content (New York: Vintage, 1960),
pp. 58, 88.
208 Sir Herbert Read’s description is from his The Philosophy of Modern Art (New York:
Meridian Books, 1955), p. 11.
208 Picasso is quoted in Read, Philosophy of Modern Art, p. 30.
208 Constable is quoted in Read, Philosophy of Modern Art, p. 17.
209 Cézanne is quoted in Read, Philosophy of Modern Art, p. 17.
435
Notes

209 Clive Bell’s statement is from C. Bell, Old Friends: Personal Recollections (London:
Chatto & Windus, 1956), p. 95.
209 Picasso is quoted in A. Malraux, “As Picasso Said, ‘Why Assume That to Look Is to
See?’ A Talk Between Malraux and the Master,” New York Times Magazine, 2
November 1975.
210 K. Clark discusses pure aesthetic sensation in his Another Part of the Wood: A Self-
Portrait (New York: Ballantine, 1976), p. 45.
210 K. Clark’s comment “It never occurred . . .” is from p. 46 of his Another Part of the
Wood, cited in the previous note.
210 Clark’s statement “The ﬁnest training . . . “ is from p. 107 of the same book.
210 Clark describes the task of the connoisseur on p. 153 of the same book.
211 On the Gikwe Bushmen of the Kalahari, see Yi-Fu Tuan, Topophilia (Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1974), p. 78.
211 On the Kikuyu in Kenya, see C. Zaslavsky, Africa Counts: Number and Pattern in
African Culture (Boston: Prindle, Weber & Smith, 1973), p. 225.
212 On the Shongo people of the Congo, see Zaslavsky, Africa Counts, cited in previous
note, pp. 111–112.
212 On the visual acuity of Eskimos, see Kleinfeld, “Visual Memory” [193].
213 See also P. R. Dasen, “Piagetian Research in Central Australia,” in G. E. Kearney,
P. R. de Lacy, and G. R. Davidson, eds., The Psychology of Aboriginal Australians
(Sydney: John Wiley, 1973), p. 5.
213 On Puluwat navigation, see T. Gladwin, East Is a Big Bird: Navigation and Logic on
Puluwat Atoll (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1970).
213 Gladwin’s statement “No one set . . .” is from p. 146 of his East Is a Big Bird, cited
in the previous note.
214 Gladwin’s statement “The learning job . . .” is from pp. 131 and 155 of the same book.
214 On the use of reference islands, see p. 186 of the same book.
214 On the ability to point out distant islands, see p. 182 of the same book.
214 Gladwin’s statement “We in the Western world . . .” is from p. 219 of the same book.
215 Henry Moore is quoted in G. Glueck, “Henry Moore,” New York Times, 11 July
1978, section III, p. 5.
Chapter 9: Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence
217 M. Simmel describes Marcel Marceau in her article “Anatomy of a Mime Perform-
ance,” The Justice (Brandeis University), 6 May 1975. Also see M. Simmel,
“Mime and Reason: Notes on the Creation of the Perceptual Object,” Journal of
Aesthetics of Art Criticism 31, 2 (1972): 193–200.
219 The emphasis on harmony between mind and body in ancient Greece is described
in M. N. H’Doubler, Dance: A Creative Art Experience (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1940), p. 9.
219 Norman Mailer is quoted in B. Lowe, The Beauty of Sport: A Cross-Disciplinary
Inquiry (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1977), p. 255.
220 On the recent stress on the link between body use and cognition, see N. Bernstein,
The Coordination and Regulation of Movements (London: Pergamon Press,
1967).
220 Frederic Bartlett’s analogy is presented in his Thinking (New York: Basic Books,
1958), p. 14.
221 On the grasping skills of prosimians and higher primates, see C. Trevarthen, “Ma-
nipulative Strategies of Baboons and the Origins of Cerebral Asymmetry,” in 
436
Notes

M. Kinsbourne, ed., Asymmetrical Function of the Brain (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1978).
221 On the hand movements of expert pianists, see L. H. Shaffer, “Performances of
Chopin, Bach, and Bartok: Studies in Motor Programming,” Cognitive Psychol-
ogy 13 (1981): 370–371.
221 Suzanne Farrell is quoted in W. Goldner, “The Inimitable Balanchine,” New York
Times Magazine, 30 May 1976, p. 35.
222 Roger Sperry is quoted in E. Ewarts, “Brain Mechanisms in Movement,” Scientiﬁc
American 229, 1 (July 1973): 103.
222 For an account of the way the body executes motor actions, see M. Clynes, Sentics:
The Touch of Emotions (New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978).
223 A detailed explanation of hand-eye interaction was given by E. Bizzi in a paper pre-
sented at the International Neuropsychology Symposium, Ravello, Italy, June
1982.
223 On feedback from voluntary movements, see N. Bernstein, The Coordination and
Regulation of Movements (London: Pergamon Press, 1967).
223 On the view that the individual’s perception of the world is affected by the status of
his motor activities, see H. L. Teuber, “Perception,” in J. Field, ed., Handbook
of Physiology: Neurophysiology, vol. 3 (Washington, D.C.: American Physiolog-
ical Society, 1960), pp. 1595–668.
223 Manfred Clynes’s statement is from his Sentics [222], p. 21.
224 Noam Chomsky quotes G. B. Kolata’s statement “Many motor programs . . .” in 
N. Chomsky, Rules and Representations (New York: Columbia University Press,
1980), p. 40. Also see G. B. Kolata, “Primate Neurobiology: Neurosurgery with
Fetuses,” Science 199 (March 1978): 960–961.
224 On the capacity for brain dominance, see “Neural Parallels and Continuities,” part
12, in S. R. Harnad, H. D. Steklis, and J. Lancaster, eds., Prigins and Evolution
of Language and Speech (New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1976).
225 On the selective motor impairments produced by left hemisphere injuries, see E. A.
Roy, “Action and Performance,” in A. W. Ellis, Normality and Pathology in Cog-
nitive Functions (London: Academic Press, 1982), p. 281.
225 Limb-kinetic, ideomotor, and ideational apraxia are described by H. Hécaen and 
M. L. Albert in their Human Neuropsychology (New York: John Wiley, 1978).
225 L. Squire described the retention of motor patterns in patients without verbal mem-
ory in a paper presented at the Conference on Cognition, Education, and the
Brain, Warrenton, Va., March 1982.
226 On the cases of Earl and Mr. A., see A. C. Hill, “Idiots Savants: A Categorization of
Abilities,” Mental Retardation 12 (1974): 12–13; and E. Hoffman and R. Reeves,
“An Idiot Savant with Unusual Mechanical Ability,” American Journal of Psy-
chiatry 136 (1979): 713–714.
226 Bernard Rimland’s story of the autistic youth Joe is quoted in R. M. Restak, “Islands
of Genius,” Science 82 (May 1982), p. 63. Also see B. M. Minogue, “A Case of
Secondary Mental Deﬁciency with Musical Talent,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 7 (1923): 349–357; W. A. Owens and W. Grim, “A Note Regarding Excep-
tional Musical Ability in a Low-Grade Imbecile,” Journal of Educational
Psychology 32 (1942): 636–637; D. W. Viscott, “A Musical Idiot Savant,” Psychi-
atry 33 (1970): 494–515; W. A. Horwitz et al., “Identical Twin Idiot Savants—
Calendar Calculators,” American Journal of Psychiatry 121 (1965): 1075–1079;
A. Phillips, “Talented Imbeciles,” Psychological Clinic 18 (1930): 246–265; and
M. Scheerer, E. Rothmann, and K. Goldstein, “A Case of ‘Idiot Savant’: An 
437
Notes

Experimental Study of Personality Organization,” Psychology Monographs 269
(1945): 1–61.
226 Bettelheim discusses “Joey, the Mechanical Boy” in B. Bettelheim, The Empty
Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the Self (New York: Free Press, 1967),
pp. 233–239; the quotation comes from p. 235.
228 On the lack of tool use in animals below the primate order, and on tool use in lower
primates, see D. Preziosi, Architecture, Language, and Meaning (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1979), p. 20.
228 On the history of tool use in higher primates, see W. C. McGrew, “Socialization 
and Object Manipulation of Wild Chimpanzees,” in S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff and
F. E. Poirier, eds., Primate Bio-social Development: Biological, Social, and Eco-
logical Determinants (New York: Garland Publishing, 1977), p. 269.
228 Geza Teleki’s description of chimpanzee termite ﬁshing is found in his “Chimpanzee
Subsistence Technology: Materials and Skills,” Journal of Human Evolution 3
(1974): 575–594; his statement about selection proﬁciency is from p. 587.
229 On termite ﬁshing in the Gombe chimpanzee population in Tanzania, see W. C. Mc-
Grew, C. E. G. Tutin, and P. J. Baldwin, “Chimpanzees, Tools, and Termites:
Cross-Cultural Comparisons of Senegal, Tanzania, and Rio Muni,” Man (N.S.)
14 (1979): 185–214.
230 On the speculation that three sets of factors determine whether primates will learn
to use a tool, see B. Beck, Animal Tool Behavior (New York: Garland STPM
Press, 1980); and W. A. Mason, “Social Experience and Primate Cognitive De-
velopment,” in G. M. Burghardt and M. Bekoff, eds., The Development of Be-
havior: Comparative and Evolutionary Aspects (New York: Garland STPM Press,
1978).
230 On the evolution of tool use, see A. Marshack, “The Ecology and Brain of Two-
Handed Bipedalism,” paper presented at the Harry Frank Guggenheim Con-
ference on Animal Cognition, 2–4 June 1982, Columbia University; Preziosi,
Architecture, Language and Meaning [228]; and S. L. Washburn, “The Evolu-
tion of Man,” Scientiﬁc American, September 1978.
232 On symbolization by Paleolithic man, see J. Pfeiffer, The Creative Explosion (New
York: Harper & Row, 1982).
232 On the relationship between the development of hominids and the development of
children, see S. Parker and K. R. Gibson, “A Developmental Model for the Evo-
lution of Language and Intelligence in Early Hominids,” The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979).
232 On the role of greater overall brain size and newly emerging brain regions in the
evolution of humans, see H. T. Epstein, “Some Biological Bases of Cognitive De-
velopment,” Bulletin of the Orton Society 30 (1980): 46–62.
233 On the relationship of knowledge to the development of skills, see J. S. Bruner, “The
Growth and Structure of Skill,” paper presented at the Ciba Conference, Lon-
don, November 1968; and K. Fischer, “A Theory of Cognitive Development: The
Control of Hierarchies of Skill, “Psychological Review 87 (1980): 477–531.
234 Edith Kaplan’s anecdote about apraxia was a personal communication, February
1975. On the evolution of dance, see A. Royce, “The Anthropology of Dance
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977).
235 Judith Hanna’s deﬁnition of dance is found in her To Dance Is Human (Austin: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 1979), p. 19.
235 Anthony Shay’s views on the many purposes of dance are describe on p. 79 of Royce’s
Anthropology of Dance, cited in the previous note.
236 The statement on the Nuba Tira tribe is from Hanna, To Dance Is Human [235], p. 183.
438
Notes

236 Margaret Mead describes dance among the Samoans in her Coming of Age in Samoa
(New York: William Morrow, 1928).
236 Dance among the Hopi Indians is described in Royce, Anthropology of Dance [234],
p. 140.
236 Paul Taylor describes the task of the dancer in S. J. Cohen, ed., The Modern Dance
(Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1965), p. 91.
236 The many possible combinations of movement are described in M. N. H’Doubler,
Dance [219].
237 Balanchine’s remark is from p. 97 of Cohen, Modern Dance [236].
237 Isadora Duncan’s statement is quoted in Tamara Comstock, ed., New Directions in
Dance Research: Anthropology and Dance (the American Indian) (New York:
Committee on Research on Dance, 1974), p. 256.
237 Martha Graham’s remark is from her The Notebooks of Martha Graham (New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973).
237 José Limón is quoted in Cohen, Modern Dance [236], p. 23.
237 Nijinsky’s promise as a young ballet student is described in J. Russell, “Pas de Deux,”
a review of Bronislava Nijinska: Early Memoirs (Irina Nijinska and J. Rawlinson,
eds. and trans.), New York Review of Books, 3 December 1981.
238 Amy Greenﬁeld described her early ballet lessons at the Harvard Graduate School
of Education Panel on Choreography in the 1980s, 14 April 1982.
238 Alwin Nikolai is quoted in Cohen, Modern Dance [236], p. 67.
238 Donald McKayle is quoted on p. 57 of Cohen, Modern Dance [236].
239 Baryshnikov’s comment is from M. Baryshnikov and M. Swope, Baryshnikov at
Work (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976), p. 10.
239 Ron Jenkins describes his training to be a Balinese clown in his article “Becoming
a Clown in Bali,” Drama Review 23, 2 (1979): 49–56.
240 Richard Boleslavsky stresses the absolute concentration necessary for acting in Act-
ing: The First Six Lessons (New York: Theatre Arts, 1970).
240 His discussion of the actor’s special memory for feelings is from p. 36 of the same book.
240 His statements on the “gift of observation” are on pp. 93 and 101, respectively, of the
same book.
240 Constantin Stanislavski underscores the crucial role of emotion in acting in his An
Actor Prepares (New York: Theatre Arts, 1948), p. 266.
240 His statement “Some musicians . . .” is from p. 158 of the same book.
241 J. Martin discusses the sixth sense of kinesthesis in his Introduction to the Dance
(New York: Dance Horizons, 1965).
241 Martin’s statement on the dancer’s function is from pp. 53–54 of the same book. His
statement “The building becomes . . .” is from p. 48 of the same book.
242 Ruth Benedict’s statement is from her The Chrysanthemum and the Sword (New
York: Meridian Books, 1946), p. 269.
242 On the mimicking hand movements of spectators at Balinese cockﬁghts, see G. Bate-
son and M. Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis, vol. 11 (New
York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1942), p. 18.
242 For an account of the impetus for the childhood antics of several comedians, see
Steve Allen, The Funny Men (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1956).
243 B. Lowe’s description of “stuff” is from his The Beauty of Sport: A Cross-Disciplinary
Inquiry (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1977), p. 308.
243 The qualiﬁcations necessary for pitching baseball are described in D. Owen, “The
Outer Limits of Excellence,” Inside Sports 3 (November 1981): 62–69.
244 Jack Nicklaus is quoted in Lowe’s Beauty of Sport [00], p. 177. Also see J. Nicklaus,
Golf My Way (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1974).
439
Notes

244 Wayne Gretzky’s skill is described in P. Gzowski, “The Great Gretzky,” Inside Sports
3 (November 1981): 90–96; the passage quoted is from p. 94.
245 On the similarities in the training of the athlete and the artistic performer, see 
B. Bloom, ed., Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (New York: David McKay,
1956).
246 John Arnold describes how he goes about making new printing devices in M. Hunt,
The Universe Within: A New Science Explores the Human Mind (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1982), p. 309.
246 Tracy Kidder discusses computer “whiz-kids” in The Soul of a New Machine (New
York: Avon, 1981), pp. 216 and 93, respectively.
247 The statement about the Greeks’ respect for the human body is from E. Hawkins,
“Pure Poetry,” in Cohen, Modern Dance [236], pp. 40–41. On dance among the
Ibo of Nigeria, see Hanna, To Dance Is Human [235], p. 34.
247 John Messenger’s statement appears in his “Reﬂections on Esthetic Talent,” Basic
College Quarterly 4, 20–24 (1958): 23.
247 On the seafaring skills of Manus children, see M. Mead, Growing Up in New Guinea
(New York: William Morrow, 1975).
248 The descriptions of attention to bodily skill in Bali are from Bateson and Mead, Ba-
linese Character [242], pp. 15 and 17.
Chapter 10: The Personal Intelligences
251 S. Freud, Origins and Development of Psychoanalysis (New York: Regnery-Gateway,
1960).
251 The exchange between James and Freud is quoted in H. Stuart Hughes, Con-
sciousness and Society (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963), p. 113.
252 James’s statement to a conﬁdant, “I hope that Freud . . . ,” is quoted in H. A. Mur-
ray, Endeavors in Psychology: Selections from the Personology of Henry A. 
Murray (New York: Harper & Row, 1981), p. 340.
252 James’s famous phrase “A man has as many social selves . . .” may be found in his
Psychology, abridged ed. (New York: Fawcett, 1963), p. 169.
252 A discussion of the social origins of knowledge may be found in J. M. Baldwin, Men-
tal Development in the Child and the Race (New York: Macmillan, 1897). See
also G. H. Mead, Mind, Self, and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1934).
255 For David Wechsler’s skeptical views on social intelligence, see The Measurement of
Adult Intelligence, 3rd ed. (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1944), pp. 88–89.
258 Harry Harlow’s work on motherless monkeys may be found in H. Harlow, “Love in
Infant Monkeys,” Scientiﬁc American 200 (June 1959): 68–74; H. Harlow, Learn-
ing to Love (New York: Ballantine Books, 1971); H. Harlow and M. K. Harlow,
“Social Deprivation in Monkeys,” Scientiﬁc American 207 (1962): 136–144; and
H. Harlow and M. K. Harlow, “Effects of Various Mother-Infant Relationships
on Rhesus Monkey Behaviors,” in B. M. Foss, ed., Determinants of Infant Be-
havior, vol. 4 (New York: Barnes & Noble, 1969).
258 On the bond between infant and caretaker, and on the effects of infant institution-
alization, see J. Bowlby’s Attachment (New York: Basic Books, 1969), and Sepa-
ration: Anxiety and Anger (New York: Basic Books, 1973), vols. 1 and 2,
respectively, of his Attachment and Loss.
258 For evidence of a universal set of facial expressions, see I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Ethology:
The Biology of Behavior (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1970); C. E.
440
Notes

Izard, The Face of Emotion (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1971); and C.
Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1965).
258 On the inference that there are bodily and brain states associated with facial ex-
pressions of emotion, see M. Clynes, Sentics: The Touch of Emotions (New York:
Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978).
259 On the task of discriminating the moods of familiar others, see Baldwin, Mental De-
velopment in the Child [252].
259 On infants’ ability to imitate facial expressions, see A. N. Meltzoff and M. K. Moore,
“Imitation of Facial and Manual Gestures by Human Neonates,” Science 198
(1977): 75–78.
259 On the empathic abilities of young children, see M. L. Simner, “Newborn’s Response
to the Cry of Another Infant,” Developmental Psychology 5 (1971): 136–150; and
H. Borke, “Interpersonal Perception of Young Children: Egocentrism or Empa-
thy?” Developmental Psychology 5 (1971): 263–269.
259 On the distinctive brain wave patterns yielded when an infant distinguishes between
different affective expressions, see R. Davidson, “Asymmetrical Brain Activity
Discriminates Between Positive Versus Negative Affective Stimuli in Ten-Month-
Old Human Infants,” Science 218 (1982): 235–237.
259 Gordon Gallup’s studies are described in “Chimpanzees: Self-Recognition,” Science
167 (1970): 86–87.
260 On the child’s distress when he violates standards, see J. Kagan, The Second Year
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981); and M. Lewis and L. Rosen-
blum, eds., The Origins of Fear (New York: John Wiley, 1975).
261 On sexual identity as a form of self-discrimination, see L. Kohlberg, “A Cognitive-
Developmental Analysis of Children’s Sex-Role Concepts and Attitudes,” in 
E. Maccoby, ed., The Development of Sex Differences (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press, 1966).
261 For an introduction to the Freudian account of the young child’s development, see
S. Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (New York: W. W. Nor-
ton, 1965).
261 For Erik Erikson’s account of the struggle between feelings of autonomy and of
shame, see E. H. Erikson, Childhood and Society (New York: W. W. Norton, 1963).
261 On the egocentrism of the young child, see J. Piaget and B. Inhelder, The Psychol-
ogy of the Child (New York: Basic Books, 1969).
262 On the “symbolic-interactionist” school of George Herbert Mead and Charles Coo-
ley, see G. H. Mead, Mind, Self, and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1934); and C. H. Cooley, Social Organization (New York: Charles Scrib-
ner, 1909).
262 On the “mediationist” accounts, see L. Vygotsky, Mind and Society (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978); and A. R. Luria, The Making of Mind
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981).
262 For details on personal development, see H. Gardner, Developmental Psychology
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), chs. 5, 8, and 12.
266 Erik Erikson discusses identity in his books Childhood and Society [261]; and Iden-
tity, Youth and Crisis (New York: W. W. Norton, 1968).
266 Erikson discusses the later phases of the maturing self in his “Identity and the Life
Cycle,” Psychological Issues 1 (1959).
267 For an example of the perspective of one school of social psychologists on determi-
nants of behavior, see E. Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life
441
Notes

(New York: Doubleday, 1959); and E. Goffman, Relations in Public (New York:
Basic Books, 1971).
268 T. S. Eliot is quoted in R. W. Hepburn, “The Arts and the Education of Feeling and
Emotion,” in R. F. Deardon, P. Hirst, and R. S. Peters, eds., Education and the
Development of Reason, part 3: Education and Reason (London: Routledge &
Kegan, Paul, 1975).
268 On the importance of the individual’s understanding of his own feelings, see R. S.
Peters, “The Education of the Emotions,” in M. B. Arnold, ed., Feelings and
Emotion (New York: Academic Press, 1970); Hepburn, “The Arts and the Edu-
cation of Feeling and Emotion” [268]; and E. T. Gendlin, J. Beebe, J. Cassens, 
M. Klein, and M. Oberlander, “Focusing Ability in Psychotherapy, Personality,
and Creativity,” Research in Psychotherapy 3 (1968): 217–241.
269 On primitive forms of consciousness in higher animals, see D. Grifﬁn, The Ques-
tion of Animal Awareness, rev. ed. (Los Altos, Calif.: W. Kaufmann, 1981).
270 On the socialization of young chimpanzees, see W. C. McGrew, “Socialization and
Object Manipulation of Wild Chimpanzees,” in S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff and E. E.
Poirier, eds., Primate Bio-social Development: Biological, Social, and Ecological
Determinants (New York: Garland, 1977).
271 On the adaptiveness of the nuclear family, see L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, “The Transition
to Agriculture and Some of Its Consequences,” essay prepared for the Seventh
International Smithsonian Symposium, Washington, D.C., November 1981; 
C. O. Lovejoy, “The Origin of Man,” Science 211, 4480 (23 January 1981): 341–350;
and S. Moscovici, Society Against Nature (Sussex, UK: Harvester Press, 1976).
271 Harry Jerison’s comments on the difference between perception of others and the
perception of self is found in his Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence (New
York: Academic Press, 1973), p. 429.
272 N. K. Humphrey’s views are developed in his “The Social Function of Intellect,” in
P. P. G. Bateson and R. A. Hinde, eds., Growing Points in Ethology (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1976); the quote is on p. 312.
272 On the workings of the “attack system” in cats, see J. P. Flynn, S. B. Edwards, and
R. J. Handler, “Changes in Sensory and Motor Systems During Centrally Elicited
Attack,” Behavioral Science 16 (1971): 1–19; and F. Bloom, The Cellular Basis of
Behavior (San Diego, Calif.: Salk Institute, n.d.).
273 Studies inducing depression in rats were by W. Sullivan, “Depletion of Hormone
Linked to Depression,” New York Times, 25 August 1982, p. A15. On evoking
fear in chimpanzees, see D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior (New York:
John Wiley, 1949).
273 On Harry Harlow’s motherless monkeys, see his “Love in Infant Monkeys” and
Learning to Love; and Harlow and Harlow, “Social Deprivation” and “Various
Mother-Infant Relationships” [all 258].
274 For Ronald Myers’s studies of the primate nervous system, see his “Neurology of
Social Communication in Primates,” The Second International Congress on Pri-
mates 3 (1968):1–9; E. A. Frazen and R. E. Myers, “Age Effects on Social Be-
havior Deﬁcits Following Prefrontal Lesions in Monkeys,” Brain Research 54
(1973): 277–286; and R. E. Myers, C. Swett, and M. Miller, “Loss of Group-
Afﬁnity Following Prefrontal Lesions in Free-Ranging Macaques, Brain Re-
search 64 (1973): 257–269.
275 Ross Buck discussed distinct systems for volitional and spontaneous expressions of
emotions in his “A Theory of Spontaneous and Symbolic Expression: Implica-
tions for Facial Lateralization,” paper presented at the meeting of the Interna-
tional Neuropsychological Society, Pittsburgh, Penn., 4 February 1982.
442
Notes

275 On the importance of the frontal lobes in various forms of personal knowledge, see
H. Gardner, The Shattered Mind (New York: Knopf, 1975), ch. 10.
276 On the effects of injury to the orbital area of frontal lobes, see D. Blumer and 
D. F. Benson, “Personality Changes with Frontal and Temporal Lobe Lesions,”
in D. F. Benson and D. Blumer, eds., Psychiatric Aspects of Neurological Dis-
ease (New York: Grune & Stratton, 1975).
276 A. R. Luria describes Zasetsky in his The Man with a Shattered World: The History
of a Brain Wound, Lynn Solotaroff, trans. (New York: Basic Books, 1972).
277 The statement from Zasetsky’s notebook is quoted on p. 421 of Luria’s book cited in
the previous note.
277 Walle Nauta’s view of the frontal lobes as a meeting place for information is put forth
in his “The Problem of the Frontal Lobe: A Reinterpretation,” Journal of Psy-
chiatric Research 8 (1971): 167–187.
278 On autism, see B. Rimland, Infantile Autism (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1964).
279 On the effects of damage to the right hemisphere (cases where personality is altered
but verbal skills remain essentially intact), see Gardner, Shattered Mind [275], ch.
9, and references cited therein.
280 On the contrast between patients with Alzheimer’s disease and those with Pick’s dis-
ease, see Gardner, Shattered Mind [275], ch. 7 and references cited therein. On
temporal lobe epilepsy, see Gardner, Shattered Mind [275], ch. 10.
281 David Bear’s work on epilepsy was described in his “Hemispheric Specialization and
the Neurology of Emotion,” unpublished paper, Harvard Medical School, 1981.
281 On “split-brain patients,” see M. Gazzaniga, The Bisected Brain (New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1970); and N. Geschwind, “Disconnexion Syndromes in Animals
and Man,” Brain 88 (1965): 273–348, 585–644. My critique of the characteriza-
tions of the two hemispheres appears in Art, Mind, and Brain (New York: Basic
Books, 1982), part 4.
283 Clifford Geertz sketches different cultural conceptions of the self in his “On the
Nature of Anthropological Understanding,” American Scientist 63 (January/
February 1975): 1, 47–53.
283 Geertz’s statement on the Javanese appears on p. 49 of the article cited in the pre-
vious note.
284 Geertz’s statement on the Balinese appears on p. 50 of the same article.
286 Harry Lasker’s metaphor of “particle” and “ﬁeld” societies is a personal communi-
cation, the Harvard Project on Human Potential, March 1980.
286 The statement on the French literary tradition is from S. Sontag, “Writing Itself: On
Roland Barthes,” New Yorker, 26 April 1982, p. 139.
287 Sartre’s remark “Hell is other people” is from J. P. Sartre, No Exit (New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1947).
287 On the contrast between the Dinka of southern Sudan and western “particle soci-
ety,” see G. Liennhart, Divinity and Experience: The Religion of the Dinka (Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1961).
287 On the Maori of New Zealand, see J. Smith, “Self and Experience in Maori Cul-
ture,” in Heelas and Locke, Indigenous Psychologies (see following note).
288 On Yoga psychology, see A. Rawlinson, “Yoga Psychology,” in P. Heelas and A. J.
Locke, eds., Indigenous Psychologies: The Anthropology of the Self (New York:
Academic Press, 1981); and M. Eliade, Yoga (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1958).
288 On traditional China, see I. A. Richards, Mencius on the Mind: Experiments in Mul-
tiple Deﬁnition (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1932).
443
Notes

288 On the Ojibwa of the Lake Superior area, see A. I. Hallowell, Culture and Experi-
ence (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971).
288 On “minimum message communication” among the Japanese, and on jikkan, see 
T. S. Lebra, Japanese Patterns of Behavior (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii,
1976).
288 The statement on the Ixils in Guatemala is from B. N. Colby and L. M. Colby, The
Daykeeper: The Life and Discourse of an Ixil Diviner (Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1981), p. 156.
289 On “negative capability,” see W. J. Bate, John Keats (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1963).
289 On the emergence of a sense of personal identity, see T. Luckmann, “Personal Iden-
tity as an Evolutionary and Historical Problem,” in M. Von Cranach and 
K. Koppo et al., eds., Human Ethology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1980).
Chapter 11: A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences
294 Robert Nozick’s statement is from his Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge,
Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1981), p. 633.
296 For a nontechnical introduction to cognitive psychology and cognitive science, see
M. Hunt, The Universe Within (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1982). For a more
technical treatment, see A. Newell and H. A. Simon, Human Problem Solving
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972).
297 On Allport’s view of the human mind, see D. A. Allport, “Patterns and Actions: Cog-
nitive Mechanisms Are Content Speciﬁc,” in G. L. Claxton, ed., Cognitive Psy-
chology: New Directions (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980).
297 Allport’s statement “Overwhelming evidence . . .” is from p. 5 of the book cited in
the previous note.
298 Jerry Fodor’s defense of the modularity of mind may be found in his The Modular-
ity of Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983).
299 Z. Pylyshyn distinguishes between impenetrable and penetrable processes in his ar-
ticle “Computation and Cognition: Issues in the Foundations of Cognitive Sci-
ence,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980): 111–169.
299 On the parallel model of the operations of the nervous system, see G. E. Hinton
and J. A. Anderson, ed., Parallel Models of Associative Memory (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1981).
299 The speculations of Gazzaniga and his colleagues are found in J. LeDoux, D. H. Wil-
son, and M. S. Gazzaniga, “Beyond Commisurotomy: Clues to Consciousness,”
in M. Gazzaniga, ed., Handbook of Neuropsychology (New York: Plenum, 1977).
301 Israel Schefﬂer proposes a new framework for viewing the concept of potential in
his forthcoming book, tentatively entitled Of Human Potential.
304 On creativity, see “Studies of the Creative Personality,” C. Taylor and F. Barron,
eds., Scientiﬁc Creativity (New York: John Wiley, 1963).
306 On the Miller Analogies Test, see N. E. Wallen and M. A. Campbell, “Vocabulary
and Nonverbal Reasoning Components of Verbal Analogy Tests,” Journal of Ed-
ucational Research 61 (1967): 87–89. Also see reviews of the MAT in O. K. Buros,
ed., Intelligence Tests and Reviews (Highland Park, N.J.: Gryphon Press, 1975).
307 On Harvard Project Zero’s investigation of the development of metaphoric capacities,
see E. Winner, M. McCarthy, and H. Gardner, “The Ontogenesis of Metaphor,”
in R. Honeck and R. Hoffman, eds., Cognition and Figurative Language (Hills-
444
Notes

dale, N.J. Lawrence Erlbaum, 1980); and H. Gardner, E. Winner, R. Bechhofer,
and D. Wolf, “The Development of Figurative Language,” in K. Nelson, ed.,
Children’s Language (New York: Gardner Press, 1978).
309 Lewis Thomas’s gifts can be enjoyed in any of his collections of essays. See, for ex-
ample, The Lives of a Cell (New York: Viking, 1974).
Chapter 12: The Socialization of Human Intelligences Through Symbols
316 The views of Nelson Goodman on symbols and symbol systems may be found in his
Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols (Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing, 1976).
318 On Harvard Project Zero’s research of symbolic development, see H. Gardner and
D. P. Wolf, “Waves and Streams of Symbolization,” in D. R. Rogers and J. A. Slo-
boda, eds., The Acquisition of Symbolic Skills (London: Plenum Press, 1983).
332 On the notion of crystallizing experiences, see L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: The
Development of Psychological Processes (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1978).
331 On isolated versus linked skills, see P. Rozin, “The Evolution of Intelligence and Ac-
cess to the Cognitive Unconscious,” Progress in Psychobiology and Psychology
6 (1976): 245–280; A. Brown and J. C. Campione, “Inducing Flexible Thinking:
The Problem of Access,” in M. Friedman, J. P. Das, and N. O’Connor, eds., In-
telligence and Learning (New York: Plenum Press, 1980); and A. L. Brown,
“Learning and Development: The Problems of Compatibility, Access, and In-
duction,” Human Development 25, 2 (1982): 89–115.
332 B. Bloom holds that most differences in performance can be virtually eliminated by
tutoring: see B. Bloom, ed., Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (New York:
David McKay, 1956).
332 On the ability of the college student to increase his short-term memory tenfold, see
K. A. Ericcson, W. G. Chase, and S. Faloon, “Acquisition of a Memory Skill,”
Science 208 (1980): 1181–1182.
334 For an analysis of the skills involved in the legal profession, see P. A. Freund, “The
Law and the Schools,” in A. Berthhoff, ed., The Making of Meaning (New York:
Boynton/Cook, 1981); and E. H. Levi, Introduction to Legal Reasoning (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1949).
335 On advocates in African societies, see S. Tambiah, “Form and Meaning of Magical
Acts: A Point of View,” in R. Horton and R. Finnegan, eds., Modes of Thought
(London: Faber & Faber, 1973), p. 219; and E. Hutchins, Culture and Inference:
A Trobriand Case Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980).
337 On the “g” or general view of intelligence, see D. K. Detterman, “Does “g” Exist?”
Intelligence 6 (1982): 99–108.
338 On the ﬁnding that décalage across domains is the rule rather than the exception, see
K. Fischer, “A Theory of Cognitive Development: The Control of Hierarchies of
Skill,” Psychological Review 87 (1980): 477–531.
339 On information-processing psychology, see A. Newell and H. A. Simon, Human
Problem Solving (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972).
339 Alan Allport suggests that the picture of the human mind gained from the approach
of information-processing psychology varies depending on the type of analysis
used and on the type of computer considered. See D. A. Allport, “Patterns and
Actions: Cognitive Mechanisms Are Content Speciﬁc,” in G. L. Claxton, ed.,
Cognitive Psychology: New Directions (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980).
445
Notes

339 On N. Chomsky, see his Reﬂections on Language (New York: Pantheon, 1975). On
J. A. Fodor, see his The Modularity of Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1983).
340 The following are works concerned with the effects of culture on the development
of the individual: J. Lave, “Tailored Learning: Education and Cognitive Skills
Among Tribal Craftsmen in West Africa,” unpublished paper, University of Cal-
ifornia at Irvine, 1981; M. Cole, J. Gay, J. A. Glick, and D. W. Sharp, The Cul-
tural Context of Learning and Thinking (New York: Basic Books, 1971); and S.
Scribner and M. Cole, The Psychology of Literacy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1981).
340 Clifford Geertz quotes Gilbert Ryle in C. Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures
(New York: Basic Books, 1972), p. 54.
340 Geertz’s own statement is quoted in L. A. Machado, The Right to Be Intelligent (New
York: Pergamon Press, 1980), p. 62.
341 M. Cole examines the performance of individuals from different cultures on tests of
intelligence and reasoning in “Mind as a Cultural Achievement: Implications for
IQ Testing,” Annual Report 1979–1980, Research and Clinical Center for Child
Development, Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan, p.
326. The following works are by contemporary scholars of development and ed-
ucation: J. S. Bruner, Toward a Theory of Instruction (Cambridge, Mass.: Belk-
nap Press of Harvard University Press, 1966); J. S. Bruner, The Process of
Education (New York: Vintage, 1960); J. S. Bruner, J. J. Goodnow, and G. A. Austin,
A Study of Thinking (New York: Science Editions, 1965); J. S. Bruner, A. Jolly,
and K. Sylva, Play: Its Role in Development and Evolution (New York: Penguin,
1976); D. H. Feldman, Beyond Universals in Cognitive Development (Norwood,
N.J.: Ablex Publishing, 1980); D. E. Olson, ed., Media and Symbols: The Forms
of Expression, Communication, and Education (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1974); and G. Salomon, Interaction of Media, Cognition, and Learning
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1979).
Chapter 13: The Education of Intelligences
348 Jules Henry discusses the central role of education in his “A Cross-Cultural Outline
of Education,” Current Anthropology 1, 4 (1960): 267–305; the quotation is on
p. 287.
352 On the “agents” of education in different cultures, see p. 297 of the title in the pre-
vious note.
354 On becoming a Puluwat navigator, see T. Gladwin, East Is a Big Bird: Navigation
and Logic on Puluwat Atoll (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1970).
356 Gladwin’s statement “No one could possibly . . . “ is from p. 131 of the book cited
in the previous note.
356 Gladwin’s discussion of the building of “mental models” is from p. 182 of the same
book.
357 On the training involved in becoming an epic singer, see A. B. Lord, The Singer of
Tales (New York: Atheneum, 1965).
357 Lord’s statement concerning imitation is from p. 24 of his book cited in the previ-
ous note.
358 On the rites of the Thonga of Africa, see J. W. M. Whiting, C. Kluckhohn, and A. An-
thony, “The Function of Male Initiation Ceremonies at Puberty,” in E. E. Mac-
446
Notes

coby, T. M. Newcomb, and E. L. Harley, eds., Readings in Social Psychology,
3rd ed. (New York: Henry Holt, 1958), p. 308.
358 On the rituals of American Indian tribes and on the Tikopia of Polynesia, see 
M. N. Fried and M. H. Fried, Transitions: Four Rituals in Eight Cultures (New
York: W. W. Norton, 1980).
358 Lamin Sanneh describes the three-month circumcision rite in Senegambia, in a per-
sonal communication.
359 On schooling in the West African bush, see M. H. Watkins, “The West African ‘Bush’
School,” American Journal of Sociology 48 (1943): 666–677; and A. F. Caine, “A
Study and Comparison of the West African ‘Bush’ School and the Southern Sotha
Circumcision School,” MA thesis, Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., June
1959.
359 On the apprenticeship system, see J. Bowen, A History of Western Education, vol.
I (London: Methuen, 1972), p. 33.
360 On apprenticeship in ancient Egypt, see p. 42 of Bowen’s history, cited in the pre-
vious note.
360 On the history of Indian education, see K. V. Chandras, Four Thousand Years of In-
dian Education (Palo Alto, Calif.: R&E Research Associates, 1977).
360 On apprenticeship among the Anang of Nigeria, see J. Messenger, “Reﬂections on
Esthetic Talent,” Basic College Quarterly, Fall 1958.
360 On the apprenticeship system of the arabesque wood worker in Egypt, see A.
Nadim, “Testing Cybernetics in Khan-El-Khalili: A Study of Arabesque Car-
penters,” unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Indiana, 1975.
362 On Koranic education, see D. A. Wagner, “Learning to Read by ‘Rote’ in the Quranic
Schools of Yemen and Senegal,” paper presented in the symposium Education,
Literacy, and Ethnicity: Traditional and Contemporary Interfaces, American Psy-
chological Association, Washington, D.C., December 1980; S. Scribner and 
M. Cole, The Psychology of Literacy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1981); and S. Pollak, “Traditional Islamic Education,” unpublished paper,
Harvard Project on Human Potential, March 1982.
363 On the characteristics of traditional education, see M. J. Fischer, Iran: From Reli-
gious Dispute to Revolution (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980);
R. A. LeVine, “Western Schools in Non-Western Societies: Psychosocial Impact
and Cultural Responses,” Teachers College Record 79, 4 (1978): 749–755; S. Pol-
lak, “Of Monks and Men: Sacred and Secular Education in the Middle Ages,”
unpublished paper, Harvard Project on Human Potential, December 1982; S.
Pollak, “Traditional Jewish Learning: Philosophy and Practice,” unpublished
paper. Harvard Project on Human Potential, December 1981; and S. Pollak,
“Traditional Indian Education,” unpublished paper, Harvard Project on Human
Potential, April 1982.
365 On the frequent contact between religious groups in the Middle East in medieval
times, see Fischer, Iran [363].
365 Richard McKeon is quoted in the work cited in the previous note, p. 51.
366 J. Symonds’s description of a Renaissance university is cited in Fischer, Iran [363],
pp. 40–41. Fischer’s statement is from p. 40 of the same book.
366 See also articles in D. A. Wagner and H. W. Stevenson, eds., Cultural Perspectives
on Child Development (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1982).
367 John Randall quotes Master Tubal Holofernes in J. Randall, The Making of the Mod-
ern Mind (New York: Columbia University Press, 1926, 1940, 1976), p. 215.
447
Notes

367 Francis Bacon is also quoted on p. 215 of the book cited in the previous note.
368 Erasmus’s views on education are described in J. Bowen, A History of Western Ed-
ucation, vol. 2 (London: Methuen, 1975), p. 340.
369 On the importance of forging close interpersonal relationships in the sciences, see
M. Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958).
371 On the rise of the modern secular school, see M. Oakeshott, “Education: The En-
gagement and Its Frustration,” in R. F. Deardon, P. Hirst, and R. S. Peters, eds.,
Education and the Development of Reason, Part I: Critique of Current Educa-
tional Aims (New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1975). Also see W. F. Connell,
A History of Education in the Twentieth-Century World (New York: Teachers
College Press, 1980).
371 Criticisms of schooling in recent years have been made by I. Illich in his Reschool-
ing Society (New York: Harper & Row, 1971); P. Freire, Pedagogy of the Op-
pressed (New York: Seabury, 1971); R. Dore, The Diploma Disease: Education,
Qualiﬁcation, and Development (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976);
U. Neisser, “General, Academic, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,” in L. B. Resnick,
ed., The Nature of Intelligence (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1976); C. Jencks, In-
equality (New York: Basic Books, 1972); and M. Maccoby and N. Modiano, “On
Culture and Equivalence,” in J. S. Bruner, R. S. Oliver, and P. M. Greenﬁeld,
eds., Studies in Cognitive Growth (New York: John Wiley, 1966).
372 Maccoby and Modiano’s statement is from p. 269 of their article cited in the previ-
ous note.
372 For studies reporting positive aspects of well-run modern schools, see M. Rutter,
Fifteen Thousand Hours (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979);
and I. Lazer and R. Darlington, “Lasting Effects of Early Education,” Mono-
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development (1982) 175 (whole).
374 For a survey of the consequences that can be expected from years of schooling, see
M. Cole and R. D’Andrade, “The Inﬂuence of Schooling on Concept Formation:
Some Preliminary Conclusions,” Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Com-
parative Human Cognition 4, 2 (1982): 19–26.
375 On the skills developed through traditional schooling, see D. A. Wagner, “Redis-
covering ‘Rote’: Some Cognitive and Pedagogical Preliminaries,” S. Irvine and 
J. W. Berry, eds., Human Assessment and Cultural Factors (New York: Plenum,
in press); and D. A. Wagner, “Quranic Pedagogy in Modern Morocco,” in L. L.
Adler, ed., Cross-Cultural Research at Issue (New York: Academic Press, 1982).
375 On the cognitive changes resisted by strict traditional schools, see Scribner and Cole,
The Psychology of Literacy [00]; and Wagner, “Learning to Read by ‘Rote’” [362].
376 On the social consequences of literacy in traditional societies, see J. Goody, M. Cole,
and S. Scribner, “Writing and Formal Operations: A Case Study Among the Vai,”
Africa 47, 3 (1977): 289–304.
376 Lévi-Strauss observes that chiefs of nonliterate societies are often observed to feign
literacy, in his Tristes Tropiques (New York: Atheneum, 1964).
377 The results of the study by Jack Goody, Michael Cole, Sylvia Scribner, and their col-
leagues on the Vai of Liberia are reported in their “Writing and Formal Opera-
tions” [376].
378 Lévi-Strauss’s views on the differences between the “traditional” and the “modern”
mind may be found in his The Savage Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1966).
379 Robin Horton argues that there is a fundamental difference between scientiﬁc and
nonscientiﬁc ways of thinking in R. Horton and R. Finnegan, eds., Modes of
448
Notes

Thought: Essays on Thinking in Western and Non-Western Societies (London:
Faber & Faber, 1973).
379 On the similarities between scientiﬁc and nonscientiﬁc thinking, see R. Schweder,
“Likeness and Likelihood in Everyday Thought: Magical Thinking in Judgments
and Personality,” Current Anthropology 18 (1977): 637–658; and D. Sperber, Le
Savoir des anthropologues: Trois essais (Paris: Hermann, 1982).
379 On the mythic beliefs of scientists, see J. Jaynes, The Origin of Consciousness in the
Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind (New York: Houghton, Mifﬂin, 1976).
382 Socrates’s statement is quoted in P. H. Coombs, The World Educational Crisis: A
Systems Analysis (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), p. 113.
Chapter 14: The Application of Intelligences
385 On the Suzuki Talent Education Center, see S. Suzuki, Nurtured by Love (New
York: Exposition Press, 1969); B. Holland, “Among Pros, More Go Suzuki,” New
York Times, 11 July 1982, E9; L. Taniuchi, “The Creation of Prodigies Through
Special Early Education: Three Case Studies,” unpublished paper, Harvard Pro -
ject on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
386 On the World Bank’s call for investment in human development and education, see
World Bank, World Development Report, 1980 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1980); and H. Singer, “Put the People First: Review of World Develop-
ment Report, 1980,” The Economist, 23 August 1980, p. 77.
387 R. S. McNamara’s statement is quoted in “Attack on Poverty: Will We Do Still Less?
Boston Globe, 3 October 1980.
387 Edgar Faure’s statement is from his Learning to Be: The World of Education Today
and Tomorrow, UNESCO report (New York: Unipub, 1973), p. 106.
387 For the Club of Rome’s report, see J. W. Botkin, M. Elmandjra, and M. Malitza, No
Limits to Learning: Bridging the Human Gap—A Report to the Club of Rome
(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1979); Aurelio Peccei’s statement is on p. xiii.
387 The statement “For all practical purposes . . .” is from p. 9 of the book cited in the
previous note.
387 The statement “Innovative learning is . . .” is from p. 43 of the same book.
388 Luis Alberto Machado’s statements are from his The Right to Be Intelligent (New
York: Pergamon Press, 1980), pp. 2, 9, 24, 30, 52, and 59, respectively.
389 Machado’s statement “We are going to completely transform . . .” is from his article
“The Development of Intelligence: A Political Outlook,” Human Intelligence 4
(September 1980): 4. Also see E. de Bono and H. Taiquin, “It Makes You Think,”
Guardian, 16 November 1979, p. 21; J. Walsh, “A Plenipotentiary for Human
Intelligence,” Science 214 (1981): 640–641; and W. J. Skrzyniarz, “A Review of
Projects to Develop Intelligence in Venezuela: Developmental, Philosophical,
Policy, and Cultural Perspectives on Intellectual Potential,” unpublished paper,
Harvard Project on Human Potential, Cambridge, Mass., November 1981.
389 The statements of the Institutes for the Achievement of Human Potential are quoted
in “Bringing Up Superbaby,” Newsweek, 28 March 1983, p. 63. Also see 
K. Schmidt, “Bringing Up Baby Bright,” American Way, May 1982, pp. 37–43.
394 David Feldman’s discussion of domain proﬁciency and child prodigies may be found
in his Beyond Universals in Cognitive Development (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Pub-
lishing, 1980).
397 The advice of Masuru Ibuka, the founder of Sony, is reported in his best-selling
book, Kindergarten Is Too Late! (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1980).
449
Notes

398 On Japan’s success after World War II, see E. Vogel, Japan as Number One: Les-
sons for America (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979).
398 On Japan’s success after World War II, also see R. A. LeVine, “Western Schools in
Non-Western Societies: Psychosocial Impact and Cultural Responses,” Teachers
College Record 79, 4 (1978): 749–755.
398 On early education in Japan and on the high IQ scores of Japanese youths compared
with American youths, see M. Alper, “All Our Children Can Learn,” University
of Chicago Magazine, Summer 1982; D. P. Schiller and H. J. Walberg, “Japan:
The Learning Society,” Educational Leadership, March 1982; “IQ in Japan and
America,” New York Times, 25 May 1982; D. Seligman, “Japanese Brains: Cas-
troism for Kids,” Fortune, 31 May 1982; and K. Kobayashi, “The Knowledge-
Obsessed Japanese,” The Wheel Extended, January-March 1982, p. 1.
398 On the success of the Japanese in achieving a balance between various proﬁciencies
and group feeling, see L. Taniuchi and M. I. White, “Teaching and Learning in
Japan: Premodern and Modern Educational Environments,” unpublished paper,
Harvard Project on Human Potential, October 1982.
398 For Jack and Elizabeth Easley’s reports on mathematics instruction in Japan, see 
J. Easley and E. Easley, Math Can Be Natural: Kitamaeno Priorities Introduced
to American Teachers (Urbana: University of Illinois Committee on Culture and
Cognition, 1982). Also see F. M. Hechinger, “Math Lessons from Japan,” New
York Times, 22 June 1982.
400 P. Freire describes his successful efforts to teach reading to illiterate Brazilian peas-
ants in his Pedagogy of the Oppressed (New York: Continuum Publishing, 1980).
401 On the approach to teaching used in Sesame Street, see G. S. Lesser, Children and
Television: Lessons from Sesame Street (New York: Random House, 1974).
401 On the attempt in China during the Cultural Revolution to expunge all Western ed-
ucational inﬂuence, see T. Fingar and L. A. Reed, An Introduction to Education
in the People’s Republic of China and U.S.-China Educational Exchange (Wash-
ington, D.C.: U.S. China Education Clearinghouse, 1982); S. L. Shirk, Compet-
itive Comrades: Career Incentives and Student Strategies in China (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1982); and J. Unger, Education Under Mao: Class
and Competition in Canton Schools, 1960–1980 (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1982).
401 On the failed attempt to westernize education in Iran, see M. J. Fischer, Iran:
From Religious Dispute to Revolution (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1980).
405 On “markers” or signs of early giftedness, see B. Bloom, “The Role of Gifts and
Markers in the Development of Talent,” Exceptional Children 48, 6 (1982):
510–522.
406 L. S. Vygotsky develops the notion of the “zone of proximal development” in his
Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978). Also see L. S. Vygotsky, “Play
and the Role of Mental Development in the Child,” Soviet Psychology 5 (1967):
6–18.
406 On crystallizing experiences, dominant activities, and critical periods, see V. V. Davy-
dov, “Major Problems in Developmental and Educational Psychology at the Pres-
ent Stage of Developmental Education,” Soviet Psychology 15 (Summer 1977):
4; V. V. Davydov and V. P. Zinchenko, “The Principle of Development in Psy-
chology,” Soviet Psychology 20, 1 (1981): 22–46; D. B. El’konin, “Toward the
Problem of Stages in the Mental Development of the Child,” Soviet Psychology
450
Notes

10 (Spring 1972): 3; and Feldman, Beyond Universals in Cognitive Development
[408], p. 389. 
408 On genetic primary examples, see A. K. Markova, The Teaching and Mastery of Lan-
guage (New York: M. E. Sharp, 1979), pp. 63–65.
408 On the attempts to document improvements resulting from matching students with
appropriate teaching techniques, see L. J. Cronbach and R. E. Snow, Aptitudes
and Instructional Methods (New York: Irvington Publishers, 1977).
409 The role of cooperation in computer programming is illustrated in T. Kidder, The
Soul of a New Machine (New York: Avon, 1982).
410 On the use of tactile-kinesthetic exploration in overcoming learning disabilities, see
J. Isgur, “Letter-Sound Associations Established in Reading-Disabled People by
an Object-Imaging-Projection Method,” unpublished paper, Pensacola Florida
Learning Disabilities Clinic, 1973.
451
Notes


453
NAME INDEX
Abaquin, Mary Joy, xx
Allen, Woody, 242
Arnheim, Rudolf, 186, 208
Auden, W. H., 80, 86, 87, 88, 309
Austen, Jane, xxx
Augustine, Saint, 6
Balanchine, George, 222, 237, 238
Baryshnikov, Mikhail, 23
Battro, Antonio, xxi
Bear, David, 281
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 121
Bell, Clive, 209
Bellow, Saul, 178
Benedict, Ruth, 241
Benson, D. Frank, 276
Bernstein, Leonard, 132
Bettelheim, Bruno, 226–227
Bigelow, Julian, 150
Binet, Alfred, 16, 203–204
Bisiach, Eduardo, 192
Blake, William, 79, 197
Blumer, Dietrich, 276
Blurton-Jones, Nicholas, 170
Bohr, Niels, 156
Boleslavsky, Richard, 240
Bowlby, John, 258
Broca, Pierre-Paul, 14
Bronowski, Jacob, 150, 155
Brooks, Lee R., 187
Brown, Ann, 330
Bruner, Jerome, 233, 343
Buck, Ross, 275
Butterfield, Herbert, 154
Butters, Nelson, 191
Capablanca, José, 179
Case, Robbie, xxiii
Carroll, Lewis, 149
Carson, Johnny, 242
Cassirer, Ernst, 26
Chen, Jie-Qi, xiii, xvii
Cézanne, Paul, 209
Changeux, Jean-Pierre, 46
Chaplin, Charlie, 242
Charlip, Remy, 238
Chase, William, 97
Chomsky, Noam, xviii, xxiii, 83, 84, 95,
298, 340, 341
Christodoulou, Joanna, xx
Churchill, Winston, 100
Clark, Kenneth, 209–211
Clynes, Manfred, 223–224
Colby, Benjamin, 288
Colby, L. M., 288
Cole, Michael, 340–341, 374–375, 376–
377
Cone, Edward T., 110
Constable, John, 208–209
Constantine-Paton, Martha, 53
Cooley, Charles, 262
Copernicus, Nicholas, 8
Copland, Aaron, 108, 110
Cowan, W. Maxwell, 42
Craft, Robert, 109
Crick, Francis, 35, 53, 200

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, xviii
Culicover, Peter, 84
Cunningham, Merce, 238
D’Andrade, Roy, 374
Dalton, John, 186
Danchin, Antoine, 46
Dante, 6
Darling-Hammond, Linda, xviii
Darwin, Charles, 8, 101, 201
da Vinci, Leonardo, 201, 207
Davis, Katie, xx
Davydov, V. V, 407
de Gaulle, Charles, 100
Descartes, René, 15, 162
Deutsch, Diana, 124
Dore, Ronald, 372
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 101
Douglas, Keith, 77
Dreifuss, Fritz, 89
Dube, E. F., 97
Duncan, Isadora, 237
Dürer, Albrecht, 206–207
Easley, Elizabeth, 398
Easley, Jack, 398
Edison, Thomas A., 389
Einstein, Albert, 88, 155–156, 157–158,
160, 168, 200, 389
El Greco, 8
Eliot, T. S., 77–78, 80, 102, 268
Elkonin, D., 407
El-Koussy, A. A. H., 184
Ericcson, K. Anders, 97
Erikson, Erik, 261, 265–266
Euclid, 161, 200
Euler, Leonhard, 142
Eysenck, H. J., xxxiii, 17
Farrell, Suzanne, 221–222
Faulkner, William, 94
Feldman, David, xi, xiii, 26–28, 343, 394
Ferguson, E., 201
Feyerabend, Paul, 175
Fischer, Kurt, 233, 338
Fischer, Michael, 363, 366
Fitch, Tecumseh, xxiii
Flaubert, Gustave, 102
Flourens, Pierre, 14
Flynn, John, 272
Fodor, Jerry, xxiii, 58, 297–300, 306,
310, 339
France, Anatole, 14
Frege, Gottlob, 174
Freire, Paolo, 371–372, 401
Freud, Sigmund, 101, 251–252, 265
Freund, Paul, 334
Frye, Northrop, 81
Fuller, Buckminster, 201–202
Gajdusek, Carleton, 38
Galamian, Ivan, 121
Galileo, 154, 380–381
Gall, Franz Joseph, 7, 13–15, 33, 298
Gallup, Gordon, 259
Gandhi, Mahatma, 253, 267
Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 164
Gay, J., 170
Gazzaniga, Michael, 58, 299, 300
Geertz, Clifford, 283–285, 340
Geschwind, Norman, ix
Gladwin, Thomas, 213–214, 356
Gleason, Andrew, 143, 147
Goldman, Patricia (also Goldman-
Rakic), 42, 53
Goldstein, Kurt, 164
Goodman, Nelson, ix, 30, 316
Gordon, Harold, 126
Gould, Stephen Jay, 18
Graham, Martha, 178, 237
Graves, Robert, 78
Greenfield, Amy, 238
Greenough, William, 46
Gretzky, Wayne, 244
Groot, Adrian de, 204
Gross, Charles, 193
Gross, Larry, 65
Guilford, J. P., 7, 337
Hall, G. Stanley, 251
Hanna, Judith, 235
Hardy, G. H., 134, 146–147, 162, 175,
178
Harlow, Harry, 248, 273, 274
Hauser, Marc, xxiii
Havelock, Eric, 274
Hawkins, Eric, 238
Haydn, Franz Joseph, 119
Head, Henry, 56
Hebb, Donald, 273
454
Name Index

Heims, Steve, 150
Heisenberg, Werner, 156–158
Hemingway, Ernest, 94
Henry, Jules, 348
Hilbert, David, 153
Hinton, Geoffrey, 299, 300
Hirst, Paul, 65
Hofstadter, Douglas, 178
Hogarth, William, 207
Holofernes, Tubal, 367
Holt, John, 165
Holton, Gerald, 158
Homer, 79
Horton, Robin, 379
Hubel, David, 39, 51–53, 193
Hughes, H. Stuart, 251
Hull, Clark, 296
Humphrey, N. K, 272
Hutchins, Edwin, 173
Huxley, Aldous, 197
Illich, Ivan, 371
James, Henry, 102
James, William, 15, 99, 251
Jencks, Christopher, 372
Jenkins, Ron, 239
Jensen, Arthur, 337
Jerison, Harry, 271–272
Jesus Christ, 267
Joachim, Joseph, 120
Johnson, Lyndon B., 253
Joyce, James, 101
Kandel, Eric, 49–50
Kant, Immanuel, 21, 26, 174
Kaplan, Edith, 234–235
Keaton, Buster, 242
Keats, John, 87–88, 289
Kekulé, Friedrich, 200
Kelley, Truman, 184
Kennedy, John M., 194
Kennedy, John F., 100
Kepler, Johannes, 8
Kidder, Tracy, 246
Kimura, Doreen, 191
Köhler, Wolfgang, 194
Konishi, Mark, 39
Konner, Melvin, 170
Kornhaber, Mindy, xix, xviii
Kosslyn, Stephen, 196
Krechevsky, Mara, xiii
Kreisler, Fritz, 396
Kreutzberg, Harald, 237
Kripke, Saul, 161–162
Kuhn, Thomas, 17f, 174–175
Landau, Barbara, 195–196
Langer, Susanne, 26, 97–98
Lashley, Karl, 56
Lasker, Harry, 286
Lave, Jean, 340
Le Corbusier (pseud.), 206
Lenier, Susan, 88
Lennon, John, 122
Levi, Edward, 334
LeVine, Robert, 363
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 95, 130, 378, 246
Lieberman, Phillip, 96
Limon, José, 237
Lintgen, Arthur, 130–131
Lloyd, Harold, 242
Loeb, Arthur, 202
Lord, Albert B., 357, 96
Lowe, B., 243
Lowell, Robert, 81
Luckmann, Thomas, 289
Luria, Alexander, 98, 167, 262, 276
Maccoby, Michael, 372
McGrew, W. C., 229
Machado, Luis Alberto, 388–389
McKayle, Donald, 238
McKeon, Richard, 365
McNamara, Robert, 386–387
Mailer, Norman, 219
Marceau, Marcel, 217–218, 221
Markova, A. K., 408
Marler, Peter, 39
Marmor, Gloria, 195
Marshack, Alexander, 230
Martin, John, 241
Mead, George Herbert, 252, 262
Mead, Margaret, 247
Mehegan, Charles, 89
Meier, Deborah, xviii
Mendelssohn, Felix, 106
Menuhin, Yehudi, 305
Messenger, John, 247
Metzler, Jacqueline, 180
455
Name Index

Michelangelo, 207, 210, 369
Millar, Susanna, 195
Milner, Brenda, 191
Mishkin, Mortimer, 193
Modiano, Nancy, 372
Montaigne, Michel de, 102
Moore, Henry, 197, 215
Moran, Seana, xvii
Mountcastle, Vernon, 51–52, 53
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 106, 119,
133, 305, 389
Murray, Charles, xviii
Myers, Ronald, 274–275
Nabokov, Vladimir, 101
Nadia, 196, 199
Napoleon, 204
Nauta, Walle, 277
Neisser, Ulric, 372
Neumann, John von, 149–151
Newell, Allen, 152
Newton, Isaac, 153, 154–155, 158, 159
Nicklaus, Jack, 244
Nijinsky, Vaslav, 237–238
Nikolai, Alwin, 238
Nottebohm, Fernando, 45
Nozick, Robert, 294–295, 314
Ockham, William of, 168
Olson, David, 26, 29, 343
Papoušek, Hanus, 115
Papoušek, Mechthild, 115
Parker, Susan, 232
Parry, Millman, 96, 357
Pascal, Blaise, 160–161
Pearce, Bryan, 198
Peccei, Aurelio, 387
Piaget, Jean, 8, 18–23, 135, 136, 139,
140–141, 154, 167, 177–178, 
188–189, 233, 330–331, 338
Picasso, Pablo, 208–209, 215
Plato, 15, 178
Poincaré, Henri,144–145, 147
Polanyi, Michael, 143–144
Pollak, Susan, 363
Polya, George, 152
Posner, Michael, xviii, xxi
Proust, Marcel, 253, 289
Pylyshyn, Zenon, 299
Pythagoras, 15, 132, 155
Quine, Willard V. O., 142, 176
Rabelais, Francois, 367
Rabi, I. I., 162–163
Ramanujan, Srinivasa, 175–176
Raphael (Sanzio), 210
Ravel, Maurice, 126
Raven, J. C., 57
Read, Herbert, 80, 208
Reagan, Ronald, 100
Riemann, George Friedrich, 153
Rimland, Bernard, 226
Rodin, Auguste, 197
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 267
Roosevelt, Franklin, 100
Rose, David, xxii
Rosenzweig, Mark, 44, 45
Rotman, Brian, 142, 174
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 289
Rozin, Paul, 58, 330
Rubinstein, Arthur, 120, 151
Runyan, Damon, 95
Russell, Bertrand, 142, 161, 174, 200
Rutter, Michael, 372
Ryle, Gilber, 340
Safford, Truman, 164
Saint-Saëns, Camille, 106, 108
Salomon, Gavriel, 26, 29, 343
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 85, 86, 287
Schaler, Jeffrey, xviii
Schoenberg, Arnold, 108, 109, 111–112
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 109
Schubert, Franz, 127
Scriabin, Aleksandr, 111
Scribner, Sylvia, 340, 377
Seider, Scott, xx
Selfridge, Oliver, 66
Serkin, Rudolf, 121
Sessions, Roger, 106–107, 109, 110, 112,
130
Shahn, Ben, 208
Shakespeare, William, 289, 389
Shapero, Harold, 108–109
Shapiro, Karl, 88
Shearer, Branton, xiii, xvii
456
Name Index

Shebalin, V., 125
Shepard, Roger, 180, 183
Simmel, Marianne, 218
Simon, Herbert, 152, 205
Simon, Théodore, 16
Skinner, B. F., 296
Smith, McFarlane, 201
Socrates, 267, 383, 112
Spearman, Charles, 7, 17, 337
Spence, Kenneth, 296
Spender, Stephen, 78, 86–87
Sperry, Roger, 51, 222
Spinoza, Baruch, 161
Spurzheim, Joseph, 13
Stanislavski, Constantin, 240
Sternberg, Robert, xiv, 24
Stork, Janet, xiii
Stravinsky, Igor, 109, 111, 112, 121, 128,
130, 133, 134, 305
Suzuki, Shinichi, 119, 395, 397
Taniuchi, Lois, 392
Tarrasch, Dr., 202, 204
Teleki, Geza, 228
Tesla, Nikola, 197
Thomas, Lewis, 186, 309
Thurstone, L. L., 7–8, 17–18, 184, 337
Titchener, Edward B., 196–197
Titian, 215
Tolstoy, Leo, 102
Tomlin, Lily, 242
Turner, Joseph M. W., 208
Ulam, Stanislaw, 147, 148, 150, 151,
156, 160, 161
Updike, John, 101
Van Gogh, Theo, 205
Van Gogh, Vincent, 205–206
Vasari, Giorgio, 207
Vendler, Helen, 81
Verdi, Giuseppi, 127
Viens, Julie, xiii
Vitz, Paul, 112–113
Vivaldi, Antonio, 394
Vygotsky, Lev, 119, 19, 262, 406, 
407
Waddington, C. H., 39, 40
Wagner, Richard, 108, 129
Warhol, Andy, xiii
Warrington, Elizabeth, 191
Watson, James D., 35, 200
Wexler, Kenneth, 84
Whitehead, Alfred North, 26, 135, 142,
143
Whitman, Walt, 14
Wiesel, Torsten, 39, 51, 52, 193
Wilder, Thornton, 87
Williams, Moira, 191–192
Wolf, Dennie, 318
Wundt, Wilhelm, 15
Zasetsky, 276–277
457
Name Index


SUBJECT INDEX
459
acting, 219, 239–43; and mimetic skill,
239–43
Alzheimer’s disease, 280
amusia, 48, 125
aphasia, 48; anomic, 95–96; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 225;
Broca’s, 14, 54, 94; and linguistic
intelligence, 14, 93, 103; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
166; and musical intelligence, 125;
and personal intelligence, 254,
279; Wernicke’s, 54, 94, 125
aplysia, 49
apraxia, 225, 234–35
assessment, xiii-xiv
athletics, 245, 301
autism, 67; and bodily-kinesthetic
intelligence, 226–27; and linguistic
intelligence, 89; and musical
intelligence, 105, 119, 127–28; and
personal intelligence, 278; and
spatial intelligence, 198; and
symbolic development, 322
Bali: Balinese clowns, 239; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 241, 248;
and personal intelligence, 284
behaviorism, 41, 251
biology: cognitive psychology, 24–25;
and intelligence, 10, 13–18, 25,
33–61, 315–16, 318, 342; see also
listings under the separate
intelligences
bird song, 48–49, 123–24; and amusia, 48;
and cerebral hemispheres, 48–49,
177; development of, 48–49, 
123–24; and human song, 122–24
blindness: drawing ability, 195; and
figure rotation ability, 195; and
spatial intelligence, 194–95
bodily-kinesthetic intelligence, 217–49;
and acting, 219, 239–43; and
aphasia, 222; and apraxia, 225,
234–35; and athletics, 243–45; and
autism, 226; and Balinese culture,
239–42; and biology, 224–25; and
brain damage, 225; and brain
structure, 218, 224–25; and
cerebral dominance, 224; and
cerebral hemispheres, 224–25;
core operations, 217–35; cultural
differences in, 219, 235–36, 239,
247-49; and dance, 235–39, 247–
49; development of, 233–35;
evolution of, 228–33; and Greek
Culture, 219, 247; and humor,
242–43; and idiots savants, 226;
and invention, 219, 245–47; and
linguistic intelligence, 225–26; and
mimetic ability, 239–40; and motor
skills, 218, 221–26; and musical
intelligence, 130, 219, 237; and
neural feedback, 222–23; and
nonhuman primates, 221, 224,
227–30; and object manipulation,
245; and personal intelligence,

249; and Piagetian stages, 232; and
Puluwat navigation, 356–57, 381;
and symbolization, 351, 356–57;
and tool use, 227–33
Boston Veterans Administration
Medical Center, xlvii, 29, 191
brain damage, 53–54; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 225; and
canalization, 43–44, 46; as criteria
for multiple intelligences, 9, 67,
297; and flexibility, 55, 60, 91; and
linguistic intelligence, 43, 53–54,
89-95; and logical-mathematical
intelligence, 166–67; and musical
intelligence, 124–25; and neural
development, 40, 167; and
personal intelligence, 275–77,
279–82; and phonology, 89, 91–93;
and pragmatics, 92, 94; and
reading, 30–31, 54, 92–93, 103,
115; and semantics, 90, 92, 94; and
spatial intelligence, 190–92, 196;
and symbolization, 29–30, 279–80,
322; and syntax, 89–92
brain structure, 33–61; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 225;
central processor view of, 297–99,
306; and executive function, 24,
72, 296; holist view of, 7, 56;
horizontal processes view of, 15–
16, 22, 24, 41, 298; information
processing view of, 56, 58; and
linguistic intelligence, 43, 54–55,
84–95; localization view of, 7, 14–
15, 56–57, 95, 298; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
166–168; modular view of, 58–59,
297–300; molar view of, 53–55, 58,
60; molecular view of, 51–53; and
musical intelligence, 124–27; and
personal intelligence, 275–77,
279–82; and spatial intelligence,
54, 60, 190–94; and symbol
systems, 30; vertical functions view
of, 43, 52, 56, 298
Broca’s aphasia, 54, 92, 94
bush schools, 359, 361–62, 378
canalization, 39–40, 342; and brain
damage, 44; and linguistic
intelligence, 55, 91–92; and neural
development, 39–40, 50, 55, 60;
and symbolic development, 331
central-processor view of brain
structure, 296–99, 306, 311
cerebral dominance, 54, 224
cerebral hemispheres: bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 224–25;
and linguistic intelligence, 54–55,
57, 89-95; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 166;
and musical intelligence, 125–26;
and neural development, 40; and
spatial intelligence, 51, 57, 
190–92
cerebral palsy, 196
channels of symbolization, 319, 321,
325–27
chess: logical-mathematical intelligence,
160; and patterning skills, 97, 205;
and spatial intelligence, 202; and
visual memory, 202
China, and interest in multiple
intelligences, xviii
Club of Rome, 387, 388
cognitive development, 20–21; see also
Piagetian stages; and listings under
development of for each
intelligence
cognitive psychology, 10, 23–25, 295–97,
338–39; and biology, 24–25;
critique of, 24–25; logical-
mathematical bias of, 24–25; and
originality, 25; verbal bias of, 25;
see also information processing
cognitive science, 10, 23–25; see also
cognitive psychology; information
processing
colorblindness, 35
common sense, 303–4; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 303;
and personal intelligence, 304
compositional sense, 210–211
computer: education, 369, 370, 373,
409–10; and logical-mathematical
intelligence, 176, 370, 409; as
model for cognition, 24–25, 294, 
460
Subject Index
bodily-kinesthetic intelligence
(continued)

339; and multiple intelligences, 381–
382; programming, 4, 5, 370, 409
concrete operational stage, 20, 21; of
logical-mathematical intelligence,
139; of personal intelligence, 263;
of spatial intelligence, 188–89
conservation, 21, 23; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 137,
169
core operations, 64, 322; of bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 217–35; of
linguistic intelligence, 81–85, 89–
96, 294, 322; of
logical-mathematical intelligence,
146–68, 178, 306; of musical
intelligence, 111–13, 294, 322 ; of
personal intelligence, 253–66,
276–81; of spatial intelligence,
179, 183–85, 322
critical period: in linguistic
development, 91; in musical
development, 395; in neural
development, 42–43, 47
crystallizing experience, 119, 329, 359,
406
culture: bodily-kinesthetic intelligence,
219, 235–36, 241; and intelligence,
10, 27, 315–16, 318, 347–411; see
also education; and linguistic
intelligence, 96–101; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 168–74;
and musical intelligence, 110–11,
119; and personal intelligence,
254, 283–89; and spatial
intelligence, 211–14; and symbolic
development, 326
dance, 235–39, 247–49; cultural
functions of, 235–236
deafness: linguistic intelligence, 55, 83,
91, 103; and musical intelligence,
111, 131; and rhythm, 111
décalage, 22, 338
development, 19–23, 27–29, 68–69;
domain approach to, xxxiv, xxxv,
27–31, Erikson’s account of, 265-
66; Freudian account of, 251–52,
261; Piagetian stages of, 20–21,
136–41, 169, 187–90, 331;
Piagetian theory of, 19–22, 27–29,
331, 338; symbol systems approach
to, 20, 27–29; see also neural
development; symbolic
development; and each of the
separate intelligences:
development of
dramatists, 160
drawing, and autism, 198–99; and brain
damage, 191; by the blind, 194–95
dyslexia, 165
dysphasics, 165
education, 327, 347–412; agents of,
352–54, 357, 359–60, 366–69, 372;
and apprenticeship, 359–60, 403;
and computer programming, 339,
409; formal, 351, 358–61; and
human potential, 361, 387–89,
407-411; implications for, xvi-xvii,
xxi–xxii; informal, 380, 403, and
initiation rites, 358–59; Japanese,
371, 375; Koranic, 362–63, 381–
82; and linguistic intelligence, 352,
353, 369, 374–76; and literacy,
374–78, 401–2, 410; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 352,
354, 369–70, 375, 380; and media,
351; and memorization, 360, 363–
64, 366, 369; and mother/child
bond, 392–93, 399; and
motivation, 302, 391; and multiple
intelligences, 10, 347–83, 390–92,
403–12; and musical intelligence,
37, 105, 361, 370, 373–74, 392–
400; in nonliterate societies,
353–61; of Puluwat navigation,
350, 352, 354–57, 360; and
science, 367–68, 378–81; settings
for, 351–52, 354–78; and
symbolization, 351, 376, 390; see
also schools
eidetic imagery, 199
epic singing, 357; and education, 357;
and musical intelligence, 357; and
personal intelligence, 357
epilepsy, 280–81
Eskimos, spatial intelligence of, 193,
212–13, 215
461
Subject Index

executive function, 24, 25, 72, 224, 296
Explorama, Danfoss Universe Theme
Park (Denmark), xvii
expression, 111–13, 234, 322
facial recognition, 277
flexibility: and brain damage, 55, 60, 91,
and linguistic intelligence, 55, 90;
and logical-mathematical
intelligence, 167–68; in neural
development, 33–35, 39–51, 59–
60; in symbolic development, 330
formal operational stage, 20–21; of
logical-mathematical intelligence,
139; of spatial intelligence, 189
“foxes” view of intelligence, 7, 17, 34,
337
frontal lobe, 52–54, 275–80
“g” (general intelligence), xii
general intelligence vs. multiple
intelligences, xii
genetic(s), 35–38; 59–60; drift, 37–38;
engineering, 38, 176; and
intelligence, 15–16, 36–37; and
linguistic intelligence, 84; and
musical intelligence, 106; and
personality, 37
Gerstmann syndrome, 165, 167
GoodWork Project, xv, xx
Harvard Graduate School of Education,
ix, x, xi
Harvard Project Zero, xvi, xxvii, xlviii,
29, 307, 318
“hedgehog” view of intelligence, 7, 17,
34, 337
hemophilia, 35, 37
horizontal processes, 15, 22, 23, 41, 43,
50, 57, 298
human potential, 4; and education, 361,
386–90, 407–12; and multiple
intelligences, 407–11
humor, 242–43
hyperlexia, 89, 164
idioglossa, 94
idiots savants, 9, 31, 67; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 226; and
linguistic intelligence, 89; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
164; and musical intelligence, 127–
28; and personal intelligence, 278;
and spatial intelligence, 198
information processing, 16, 55, 63, 68,
294, 341; view of brain structure,
56, 58; view of intelligence, 23-25,
34, 68, 339; see also cognitive
psychology
initiation rites: education, 358–59; and
linguistic intelligence, 98, 352; and
personal intelligence, 358–59, 361
Institutes for the Achievement of
Human Potential, 389
intelligence: and biology, 10, 13–18, 23,
33–61, 315–16, 318; see also the
separate intelligences; Chomskian
view of, 339–40; classical view of,
5; computer as model for, 24, 25,
294, 339; and culture, 10, 27, 315–
16, 318, 347–411; see also
education, and the separate
intelligences; environmental-
learning view of, 8; executive
function of, 24, 72, 296; “foxes”
view of, 7, 17, 34, 337; “g” factor
of, xii, 17–18, 337–38; and
genetics, 15–16, 36–37;
“hedgehogs” view of, 7, 17, 34,
337; and horizontal processes, 15,
22, 23, 41, 43, 50, 57; information-
processing view of, 23–25, 34, 68,
339; intelligence quotient view of,
7, 24–25; modular view of, xxiii;
296–301; nature/nurture
controversy over, 332–33;
Piagetian theory of, 7, 18–23, 27–
29, 338–39; uniformist view of,
296; uses of term, xv; see also the
separate intelligences; multiple
intelligences
intelligence quotient, 3, 7, 18, 19; and
genetics, 16–17; theory of
intelligence, 7, 25
intelligence tests, 7, 9, 16, 17–19, 337;
logical-mathematical bias of, 24–
25; and spatial intelligence,
184–87; verbal bias of, 18–19, 25
intelligences: and learning styles, xv;
possible new, xiv–xv, xx, xxi
462
Subject Index

interpersonal intelligence, 74, 251–92;
definition of, 253; see also personal
intelligence
intrapersonal intelligence, 251–92; 302,
303–4; definition of, 253; see also
personal intelligence
Japanese education, 398–400; and
mother/child bond, 399
Juilliard School of Music, 394
Key School (now Key Learning
Community), xiii
Kalahari Bushmen: and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 170;
and spatial intelligence, 211–212
Koranic education, 4, 362–64, 381–82;
and linguistic intelligence, 362–63,
381; and memorization, 362-364;
and multiple intelligences, 381
language, see linguistic intelligence
legal profession: and linguistic
intelligence, 334; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 334;
and personal intelligence, 334
linguistic intelligence, 77–103, and
aphasia, 14, 55, 93–95; and autism,
89–90; and biology, 43–44, 54–55,
89–95; and bodily-kinesthetic
intelligence, 226, 231–32; and
brain damage, 43–44, 54–55, 89–
95; and brain structure, 43–44,
54–55, 57, 60–61, 89–95; and
canalization, 55, 91–92; and
cerebral hemispheres, 54–55, 57,
89–95; and core operations, 81–85,
89–96, 294, 322; critical period in,
91; cultural difference in, 96–101;
and deafness, 55, 83, 91, 103;
development of, 43–44, 54–55,
83–85, 89–91, 103; and education,
352, 353, 369, 374–76; and
environment, 85; evolution of, 92,
95–96, 102; and figurative
language, 84; and flexibility, 55, 90;
genetic factors in, 55, 90; and
hyperlexia, 89; and idioglossia, 94;
and idiots savants, 89; individual
differences in, 85; and initiation
rites, 98, 352; and legal profession,
334; and literacy, 97, 362, 374–78,
401; and literary talent, 77–81, 86–
89, 94–103; and musical
intelligence, 103, 122, 124, 132; in
nonhuman primates, 96; in
nonliterate society, 96–100, 362–
63; and phonology, 82, 85, 89; and
poetry, 77–81, 86–88, 99, 102, 103;
and pragmatics, 82, 85;
“preparedness” for, 41; and
Puluwat navigation, 357, 381; and
retardation, 85, 89; and rhetoric,
82; and semantics, 80, 85, 89, 91,
94; and spatial intelligence, 186–
87; and symbolization, 320–30;
and syntax, 81, 84, 90; and verbal
memory, 82, 97, 362
literacy: and education, 374–378, 401,
410; and Koranic education, 362;
and multiple intelligences, 374-76;
and schools, 380; and verbal
memory, 97
literary talent, 77–81, 86–89, 99–103
localization, of brain structure, 14, 56–
57, 298; of spatial intelligence, 187
logical-mathematical intelligence, 135–
78; and aging, 162–63, 215; and
aphasia, 166; and biology, 165–68;
and brain damage, 166–67; and
calculating ability, 164–65; and
cerebral hemispheres, 166–67; and
chess, 159; and common sense,
303; and computers, 176; and core
operations, 146–68, 178, 306;
“counter-preparedness” for, 41;
and counting, 142; cultural
differences in, 168–74, 378–80;
development of, 135–41, 160–61,
169, 177–78; and education, 352,
354, 369–70, 375, 380; and
estimation ability, 170; and
flexibility, 167; and Gerstmann’s
syndrome, 165, 167; and historical
change, 147, 154, 174–76; and
idiots savants, 164; and intuition,
149, 156; and Kalahari bushmen,
170; and the legal profession, 334;
and mathematics, 133, 142–78,
406; and memory, 144–45; and
463
Subject Index

metaphorical ability, 185–86, 306;
and musical intelligence, 132–33,
151, 178; and mysticism, 159, 171–
72; and patterning skills, 146–47,
159–162, 178; and Piagetian
stages, 136–41, 169; and Piagetian
theory, 24–25, 338; and problem
solving, 148–52; and prodigies,
162–63, 168; and science, 142,
152-60, 162–64, 174–75, 378–80;
and spatial intelligence, 178, 185–
86, 215–16; and symbolization,
320–30, 390–91; in the Trobriand
Islands, 173
LOGO, 4
Machado Project, 389–390
mathematics, 142–52, 159–63; and
aging, 162–63, 215; and brain
damage, 165–68; and calculating
ability, 164; and counting, 142;
cultural differences in, 168–74;
history of, 174–76; and intuition,
149; and memory, 144–45; and
musical intelligence, 112, 132,
150–51, 177–78; and patterning
skills, 146, 155, 161–62; and
problem solving, 149–52; and
prodigies, 161–62; and science,
153–63
memory: and chess, 202; and education,
360, 363–64, 366, 369; and idiots
savants, 203; and linguistic
intelligence, 82, 97; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 144–45;
and spatial intelligence, 203–5,
207, 212
metaphorical ability, 306–9; and genius,
306–7; and logical-mathematical
intelligence, 185–86, 306; and
originality, 186, 306; and
patterning skills, 306; and science,
185–86; and spatial intelligence,
185–86; and visual imagery, 185–86
Michelson-Morley experiment, 158
mime, 218
modular view: of brain structure, 58–59;
of intelligence, xxiii, 296;
mother/child bond: and education, 392–
93, 399; and Japanese education,
399; and personal intelligence,
257–258, 269–70, 273–74; and the
Suzuki method, 392–393
multiple intelligences: assessment, xiii–
xiv; biological evidence for,
xxii–xxiii; and computer
programming, 339–40, 381–82;
criteria for, 9, 64, 66–71; critique
of, xix, 293–314; and cultural roles,
347–48; definition of, 63–74; and
education, xvi–xvii, xxi-xxii, 10,
347–83, 390–92, 403–12; future
work, xxi; and human potential,
407–411; individual profiles for,
10, 404–6; introduction to, 8–11;
and literacy, 274–76;
measurement, xix; and motivation,
302; possible new, xiv–xv, xx, xxi;
ramifications of, xxii; and science,
379–80; and symbolization, 320–
30; see also the separate
intelligences
musical intelligence, 105–35, 347; and
amusia, 125; and aphasia, 125; and
auditory sense, 111; and autism,
105, 119, 127–28; and bird song,
123–24; and biology, 122–27; and
brain damage, 124–25; and brain
structure, 124–27; and cerebral
hemispheres, 125–26; and
composing, 106–10, 121–22, 125,
305-6, 396; and core operations,
111–13, 294, 322 ; critical period
in, 395; cultural differences in,
116–17, 119; and deafness, 111,
131; development of, 108–22,
342–43, and education, 37, 105,
361, 370, 373-74, 392–400; see also
Suzuki Method; environmental
factors in, 106; and epic singing,
357; evolution of, 122–27; and
expression, 111–12, 322; figural
mode approach to, 117, 126;
formal mode approach to, 117,
126; genetic factors in, 106; and
idiots savants, 127–28; and
individual differences in, 116; and
linguistic intelligence, 103, 122, 124,
464
Subject Index
logical-mathematical intelligence
(continued)

132; and listening skills, 109–10,
125–26; and logical-mathematical
intelligence, 132–33, 151, 178; and
personal intelligence, 131; and
pitch, 111; and prodigies, 105–106,
118; and retardation, 128; and
spatial intelligence, 130
music composition, 109–113, 121–22,
125, 305; and the Suzuki Method,
397
nature/nurture controversy, 332–33,
385–86
neural development, 38–51; and brain
damage, 40, 167; canalization in,
39, 44, 50, 55, 60; and cerebral
hemispheres, 40; critical period in,
42–43, 47; and environment, 45,
50–51; flexibility in, 33–35, 39–51,
59–60; genetic factors in, 34, 59–
60; individual differences in, 34;
and precocious behavior, 47
neuropsychology, 30, 33–62; and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 225; and
linguistic intelligence, 43, 54–55,
57, 60, 84, 89–95; and logical-
mathematical intelligence, 165–68;
and musical intelligence, 106, 122–
27; and personal intelligence,
274–77, 279–83; and spatial
intelligence, 54, 190–94
New City School (St. Louis, Missouri),
xvii
nonhuman primates: and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence, 221, 224,
227–30; and linguistic intelligence,
96; and personal intelligence, 269–
70, 273–74; and spatial
intelligence, 194–95; and tool use,
227–28
nonliterate societies: and education,
353–61; and linguistic intelligence,
96–100, 362–63; and science, 368-
69
notational symbolization, 319, 326–328
object-permanence stage, 136–137
originality, 304–6, 328, 330; and
cognitive science, 22–23; and
metaphorical ability, 185–86, 
308–9; and Piagetian theory, 22–
23; and science, 185–86; and visual
imagery, 185–86
painting, 198, 205–11; and composition,
208; and visual memory, 207
patterners, 160
patterning skills: and chess, 205; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
146–47, 159–162, 178, 249, 306;
and mathematics, 146, 155, 161–
62, 178; and metaphorical ability,
306; and spatial intelligence, 249
personal intelligence, 251–292, 302,
304; and Alzheimer’s disease, 280;
and aphasia, 254, 279; and autism,
278; and Balinese culture, 284;
and biology, 274–77, 279–82; and
bodily-kinesthetic intelligence,
249; and brain damage, 275–77,
279–82; and brain structure, 275–
77, 279–82; and common sense,
304; and concrete-operational
stage, 263; cultural differences in,
254, 283–88; development of,
257–66; and egocentrism, 261; and
empathy, 259; and epic singing,
357–58; and epilepsy, 280–81;
evolution of, 269–72; and facial
recognition, 277; in a field society,
287; Freudian account of, 251–52,
261; and the frontal lobes, 275–80;
and idiots savants, 278; and
initiation rites, 358–59;
interpersonal intelligence, defined,
253; intrapersonal intelligence,
defined, 253; William James’s
account of, 251–53; and Javanese
culture, 283–85; and latency
period, 263; and legal profession,
334, and Moroccan culture, 284–
85; and mother/child bond,
257–258, 269–70, 273–74; and
musical intelligence, 131; in
nonhuman primates, 269–70, 273–
74; in a particle society, 287;
pathologies of, 275–80; and Pick’s
disease, 280; and retardation, 278;
and role play, 261; and scientific
method, 380; and sexual identity,
261; and split-brain patients, 
465
Subject Index

282–83; and the Suzuki method,
395; and symbolization, 256, 260–
61, 271, 289, 311; and symbol
systems, 289, 311–312
phonology, 80, 82, 85; and brain
damage, 91–92
phrenology, 13–14
Piagetian stages, 19–23; and bodily
kinesthetic intelligence, 232; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
136–41; and personal intelligence,
263; and spatial intelligence, 188–
90; and symbolic development,
331
Piagetian theory, 18–23, 27–29; and
biology, 25; critique of, 20–23, 28;
and domain theory, 27–28; logical-
mathematical bias of, 23–25, 338;
and originality, 22–23; and
prodigies, 28; verbal bias of, 22
Pick’s disease, 280
pitch, 103, 111–112, 115, 116, 124–25,
320, 322, 324
plasticity, see flexibility
poetry, 77–81, 86–87, 99, 102–3, 406
Practical Intelligences for School, xiv
pragmatics, 85, 94
Project on Human Potential, x, li
Project Spectrum, xiii, xl
Project Zero, ix, xvi, xxvii
problem solving, skills of, 23–24, 64–65,
296; and mathematics, 151–152
prodigies, 28–29, 37, 67, 385, 394–95,
and domains theory, 27–28; in
logical-mathematical intelligence,
162–63; in musical intelligence,
105–6, 118; and Piagetian theory,
28–29; in spatial intelligence, 198–
99
pruning of nerve cells, 46–47, 60
psychoanalysis, 251
psychology, 15–18, 63, 69–70, 251–53;
see also cognitive psychology;
development; neuropsychology
Puluwat navigation, 213–15, 356; and
bodily-kinesthetic intelligence,
356–57, 381; and education, 213–
14, 350–51, 354–57; and linguistic
intelligence, 356–57, 381; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
381; and personal intelligence,
356–57, 381; and spatial
intelligence, 213–15; 356–57, 381
retardation, 16, 37, 67; and linguistic
intelligence, 85, 89; and musical
intelligence, 128; and personal
intelligence, 278–279; and spatial
intelligence, 198
rhetoric, 7, 82, 99, 100
rhythm, 111–12; and deafness, 111
schools, 349, 351–52, 359–78, 380;
bush, 359, 361, 378; and literacy,
377, 380; modern secular, 354,
368-73; and science, 380–381;
traditional religious, 353, 362–68,
373, 377
science, 142, 152–57; and aging, 163;
and calculating ability, 163–64; and
education, 378–80; history of, 152–
54, 174–76; and intuition, 156–57;
and mathematics, 152–57; and
mysticism,159; in nonliterate
societies, 378–79; and originality,
185–87; and physical reality, 155–
60; and spatial intelligence,
185-86, 199–202
sculpture, 185, 197, 205, 215
self, see sense of self
semantics, 80, 82, 85; and brain damage,
89, 87, 93–94
sense of self, 251–92, 310–12; see also
personal intelligence
sensori-motor stage, 20; of logical-
mathematical intelligence, 136; of
spatial intelligence, 188
“Sesame Street,” 401, 411
short-term memory, 15, 25, 298–99
sickle cell anemia, 35
spatial intelligence, 179–216; and aging,
215; and appreciation of visual
arts, 208–11; and autism, 198–99;
and biology, 54, 56–57, 190–83,
196; and blindness, 183, 194–96;
and brain damage, 190–92, 196;
and brain structure, 54, 57, 190–
94; and cerebral hemispheres, 54,
57, 190–94; and cerebral palsy,
196; and chess, 202; and
compositional sense, 185, 208–9;
466
Subject Index
personal intelligence (continued)

and concrete-operational stage,
188–89; and copying skills, 183;
and core operations, 179, 183–86,
322; cultural differences in, 211–
16; development of, 187–89; and
drawing, 191, 195, 198–99, 322;
and eidetic imagery, 199; and
Eskimos, 193, 212–13, 215;
evolution of, 193–94; and figure
rotation ability, 183, 195; and 
idiots savants,198, 203; and
intelligence testing, 184, 186–87,
and the Kalahari bushmen, 211;
and the Kikiyu, 211–12; and
linguistic intelligence, 186–87;
localization view of, 187; and
logical-mathematical intelligence,
178, 185–86, 215–16; and
metaphorical ability, 185–87; and
musical intelligence, 130; in
nonhuman primates, 194–95; and
painting, 198, 205–11; and
patterning skills, 205; and
Piagetian stages, prodigies, 198–
99; and Puluwat navigation,
213–14, 357; and retardation, 198;
and the sciences, 185-87; and
sculpture, 200, 205; sex differences
in, 193; and the Shongo, 212; and
Turner’s syndrome, 196; and visual
imagery, 182, 184–87, 196–205;
and visual memory, 189–90, 202–5,
207–8, 211–12
streams of symbolization, 318–19, 321–22
structuralism, see Piagetian theory
Suzuki method, 4, 37, 105, 119, 385,
392–400; and composing, 396;
critique of, 394–98; and imitation,
395, 396; and mother/child bond,
392–95; and personal intelligence,
395; and sight reading, 396
symbolic development, 26, 318–33, and
autism, 322; and brain damage,
322; and canalization, 330; and
Chomskian theory, 339, 342–43;
and flexibility, 330; and Piagetian
stages, 330–31; and Piagetian
theory, 330–31, 342
symbolization: biological basis for, 328;
and bodily-kinesthetic intelligence,
351, 356–57; and brain damage,
29–30, 279–80, 322; channels of,
319, 321, 325–27; and education,
326–27; first-draft knowledge of,
321; flowering of, 234, 325; literal
stage in, 327; and multiple
intelligences, 320–30, 390;
notational, 318–25; and personal
intelligence, 256, 260–61, 271,
289, 311; streams of, 319, 321–22;
and tool use, 323; waves of, 319,
323–325
symbol systems, 20, 66–67, 315–343;
and biology, 30, 315–16, 318; and
culture, 30, 315–16, 318; definition
of, 316–17; and media, 26; and
personal intelligence, 289–90
syntax, 81, 85, 90, 92
termite fishing, 228–230
timbre, 111, 112
tool use: and bodily-kinesthetic
intelligence, 227–33; development
of, 232–33; evolution of, 230–32;
and invention, 245; and language
evolution, 232–33; by nonhuman
primates, 227–28; and symbol
systems, 233
Turner’s syndrome, 196
twins, studies of, 36
“uniformist” view of intelligence, 296
van Leer project, x,
verbal memory, 82; in nonliterate
societies, 97, 98, 362–63
visual imagery, 182, 184–86, 196–97;
and originality, 185–86; and the
sciences, 185–86, 199–200
visual memory, 189–90, 201–5, 207, 212;
and chess, 202–205; and idiots
savant, 198; and painting, 211
waves of symbolization, 319, 323–325
Wernicke’s aphasia, 54, 94, 125
World Bank, 10, 386–387
467
Subject Index








