
Framing Public Memory
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Rhetoric, Culture, and Social Critique
Series Editor
John Louis Lucaites
Editorial Board
Richard Bauman
Carole Blair
Dilip Gaonkar
Robert Hariman
Steven Mailloux
Raymie E. McKerrow
Toby Miller
Austin Sarat
Janet Staiger
Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Framing Public Memory
Edited by
KENDALL R. PHILLIPS
The University of Alabama Press
Tuscaloosa
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Copyright © 2004
The University of Alabama Press
Tuscaloosa, Alabama 35487-0380
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
Typeface: Perpetua
∞
The paper on which this book is printed meets the minimum requirements of American
National Standard for Information Science–Permanence of Paper for Printed Library
Materials, ANSI Z39.48—1984.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Framing public memory / edited by Kendall R. Phillips.
p. cm. — (Rhetoric, culture, and social critique)
ISBN 0-8173-1389-3 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Public history. 2. Memory—Social aspects. 3. History—Psychological aspects.
4. Historiography. 5. Public history—United States. 6. Public history—Germany.
7. History—Philosophy. I. Phillips, Kendall R. II. Series.
D16.163.F73 2004 901′.9—dc22
                          2003022013
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Dedicated to two men who were great
scholars, teachers, and my friends:
Richard B. Gregg and Harold L. Lawson
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Contents
Introduction
Kendall R. Phillips
1
PART I. THE MEMORY OF PUBLICS
1. Public Memory in Place and Time
Edward S. Casey
17
2. Arendt, Eichmann, and the Politics of Remembrance
Stephen Howard Browne
45
3. “Everywhere You Go, It’s There”: Forgetting and Remembering
the University of Texas Tower Shootings
Rosa A. Eberly
65
4. My Old Kentucky Homo: Lincoln and the
Politics of Queer Public Memory
Charles E. Morris III
89
5. Shadings of Regret: America and Germany
Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
115
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

PART II. THE PUBLICNESS OF MEMORY
6. The Appearance of Public Memory
Charles E. Scott
147
7. The Voice of the Visual in Memory
Barbie Zelizer
157
8. “A Timeless Now”: Memory and Repetition
Bradford Vivian
187
9. Renovating the National Imaginary:
A Prolegomenon on Contemporary Paregoric Rhetoric
Barbara Biesecker
212
10. Framing Memory through Eulogy:
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye
Amos Kiewe
248
Contributors
267
viii / Contents
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Framing Public Memory
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

“Public memory” has become a familiar key term in the humanities and
social sciences. The last twenty years have seen a rapid proliferation of the
term’s use in such disciplines as architecture, communication studies,
English, history, philosophy, political science, religion, rhetoric, and soci-
ology. The rapid growth in the transdisciplinary study of public memory
can also be seen in the number of published case studies and the amount
of material encompassed within this rubric, from monuments to televi-
sion programs and museums to city streets.1
Some sense of public memory is evident in human civilization as far
back as we can reckon.2 Recognition of the importance of collective re-
membrance is clearly part of the pyramids of ancient Egypt, for instance,
or the eulogies of ancient Greece. In part the systematic study of collec-
tive memories can be traced to the work of French sociologist Maurice
Halbwachs in the 1920s. Halbwachs, following Durkheim’s notion of
collective conscience, contends that all acts of memory are inherently
social—literally that to remember is to act as part of the collective. In
turn our collectivity is deeply intertwined with our capacity for and en-
actment of remembrance. Halbwachs’s insights, however, were largely
underappreciated until the rapid development of public memory studies
in the 1980s and 1990s.3
The present volume is an intervention into the broad and rapidly ex-
panding transdisciplinary study of public memory. By bringing together
scholars from various disciplines, Framing Public Memory seeks to promote
a broader re®ection on the current state of public memory studies and a
consideration of some of the pressing questions to which future students
of public memory might pro¤tably attend. To this end, the collected essays
Introduction
Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

sketch the frameworks of public memory, frameworks I will consider in
more detail presently.
Although the current volume does not focus on the development of
public memory studies, a brief review of this development may be useful.
The relatively sudden rise in the study of public memory had numerous
causes. A thorough analysis of the conditions leading to its growth is be-
yond the scope of this introduction and, indeed, unnecessary as the task
has been taken up by others. It is, however, worth noting at least one of
the most pervasive contexts within which this recent interest in public
memory has emerged—the increasing mistrust of “of¤cial History.”4
A distinction between memory and history is evident as far back as
Halbwachs, who saw history and memory as opposing ways of recalling
the past. History, with its apparent claims to accuracy and objectivity, is—
or at least had been—viewed as implying a singular and authentic account
of the past.5 Memory, on the other hand, is conceived in terms of multiple,
diverse, mutable, and competing accounts of past events. As claims to a
singular authoritative “History” became increasingly (and rightly) unten-
able in the face of compelling critiques leveled by poststructural and multi-
cultural critics, scholars turned to the notion of memory, or perhaps more
accurately “memories,” as a way of understanding the complex interrela-
tionships among past, present, and future.
Memory, thus, is conceived as ®uid and dynamic or, as Pierre Nora puts
it, “Memory is life, borne out of living societies founded in its name. It
remains in permanent evolution, open to the dialectic of remembering
and forgetting, unconscious of its successive deformations, vulnerable to
manipulation and appropriation, susceptible to being long dormant and
periodically revived.”6 This sense of “living” memory is in stark contrast
to a sense of a ¤xed, singular history, suggesting that societies are both
constituted by their memories and, in their daily interactions, rituals, and
exchanges, constitute these memories. As well, this sense of memory
highlights the extent to which these constituted and constituting memo-
ries are open to contest, revision, and rejection. Thus, in a very real sense,
to speak of memory in this way is to speak of a highly rhetorical process.
Indeed, the study of memory is largely one of the rhetoric of memories.
The ways memories attain meaning, compel others to accept them, and
are themselves contested, subverted, and supplanted by other memories
2 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

are essentially rhetorical. As an art interested in the ways symbols are
employed to induce cooperation, achieve understanding, contest under-
standing, and offer dissent, rhetoric is deeply steeped in a concern for
public memories.7 These memories that both constitute our sense of col-
lectivity and are constituted by our togetherness are thus deeply impli-
cated in our persuasive activities and in the underlying assumptions and
experiences upon which we build meanings and reasons.
The reader interested in either rhetoric or public memory will, there-
fore, ¤nd in this volume a wealth of resources for thinking about the in-
terrelation of these concepts. Although many of the contributors to this
volume are not rhetoricians per se, there is a consistent concern for the
ways that memories attain meaning and become public—two concerns
central to the study of rhetoric. Of course, it would be inappropriate to
dismiss the various disciplinary approaches represented here. Indeed, one
of the strengths of this collection is its interdisciplinary nature. Thus, a
reader might approach this volume as a collection of essays from promi-
nent scholars from different disciplinary frameworks all focused on the
notion of public memory. Taken this way, the volume represents an effort
to foster an interdisciplinary dialogue on the notion of public memory and
an opportunity to survey the various ways public memories are mani-
fested and the ways they might be interrogated and understood.
Frames of Public Memory
In collecting these essays, however, I have become convinced that there is
a larger, more coherent theme underlying them, and I have organized the
essays with this in mind. In my reading of the essays there are two different
though not incompatible ways the notion of public memory is rendered.
Or, more speci¤cally, there is a different sense in which the terms public
and memory are conjoined. These differences can be suggested by consid-
ering two ways of unpacking the phrase “public memory”: “the memory
of publics”; or “the publicness of memory.”
The Memory of Publics
I have grouped the initial set of ¤ve essays under the heading “The Memory
of Publics” and I mean by this title that each of these essays engages the
way that memories affect and are effected by various publics. The impor-
Introduction / 3
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tant sense here is that some entity that can be labeled a public exists and,
further, that these entities have memories. While each contributor in®ects
this sense of a public in his or her own way, there is an overarching sense
that something like a public sphere, or counterpublic, is intended.8 Thus,
following the logic that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, to
speak of public memory as the memory of publics is to speak of more than
many individuals remembering the same thing. It is to speak of a remem-
brance together, indeed, of remembrance together as a crucial aspect of
our togetherness, our existence as a public. The essays in this section illu-
minate various aspects of this conception of a “public’s memory.”
Edward Casey’s essay is an excellent general introduction to the broader
study of public memory. Casey delineates “public memory” as memory
that occurs in the open, in front of and with others, and as distinct from
concepts like “collective memory” or “social memory.” These public memo-
ries are those about which we can interact, deliberate, share. And, in turn,
these public memories serve as a horizon within which a public ¤nds itself,
constitutes itself, and deliberates its own existence. The arena of public
memory becomes a realm within which we act together.9 This notion of
action becomes important as Casey notes parallels between his conception
of public and that of Hannah Arendt, who saw the public as a realm of
action; an arena in which humans achieve immortality by inscribing them-
selves into public memory via their actions before others. Thus, the hori-
zon of public memory both constitutes our sense of public and allows a
space wherein individuals can become public beings.
Hannah Arendt’s concern for remembrance reappears in the essay by
Stephen Browne, which attends to the dark underside of public memory—
erasure, silence, forgetting. If the existence of a healthy and functioning
public is intertwined with its capacity for remembrance, then the gradual
erosion by forgetting must represent a grave danger. Browne recovers this
deeper concern within Arendt’s critical writings and reads Arendt’s con-
troversial book Eichmann in Jerusalem as a provocative meditation on the
failure of memory and of “the persistent and fatal capacity of human beings
to forget.”
Thus, one can read Casey and Browne together as establishing a broad
sense of the importance of memories to publics—Casey notes how memo-
ries serve as a horizon within which publics emerge and constitute them-
4 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

selves, and Browne examines the potentially fatal consequences of the
erasure of memory.
The struggles over remembering and forgetting, the question of whose
memories are inscribed into the broader public horizon and whose are
not, are taken up more concretely in the next two essays. Rosa Eberly
explores her own work with students at the University of Texas at Austin
to recall memories of the Texas Tower shootings, memories the of¤cials of
that community seemed intent on keeping submerged. Eberly’s quest for
the memories of this traumatic event lead her to the ephemeral public
sphere of local talk radio and, ultimately, to the undergraduate classroom,
which Eberly conceives as a “protopublic sphere,” in an effort to see how
other publics work outside and against the authorizing power of “of¤cial
memory.”
Charles Morris pursues a similar interest. His chapter examines reac-
tions to Larry Kramer’s declaration that Abraham Lincoln was homo-
sexual. In reading these reactions, or overreactions, by the guardians of
Lincoln’s of¤cial memory, Morris illuminates the ways memories are sup-
pressed and the rhetoric of erasure, which Morris labels mnemonicide.
Thus, the essays by Eberly and Morris can be read together as an ex-
ploration of the struggle of publics to assert their memories, the negative
reaction of other publics to such assertions, and the rhetorical struggle
involved in these contests. Within the broader horizons of remembrance
and forgetting exist the dynamic relations of authority over public memo-
ries and the forces of resistance.
This theme of authority over memory, or who has the power to autho-
rize a set of memories and the ways that authority is contested, is com-
plemented by the ¤nal essay in this section. Implicit in the notion that
publics have the capacity to authorize (or reject) certain memories is a
sense that publics have a responsibility to remember certain things. The
most poignant instances of this responsibility lie in the almost universal
urge to remember shameful events and collectively express regret. Barry
Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich remind us that although we may ¤nd
expressions of regret in various cultures, the emergence of such regret is
a product of culturally speci¤c and complex relations of institutions of
history and governance, and the cultural logic of the average person. Fo-
cusing on the cultural logic of average people, these authors suggest that
Introduction / 5
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

feelings of responsibility for the past are bounded within cultural forms
of reasoning about the past. Schwartz and Heinrich explore the differ-
ences in cultural senses of responsibility in their comparison of Americans
and Germans and the ways each conceives their relations to past shameful
events. These authors observe that responsibility may be part of public
memory, but it is affected by the patterns of reasoning and norms of a
given public.
Across these opening essays some sense of public memory emerges
with a particular emphasis on publics. Publics, these essays suggest, must
have memories, the capacity for remembrance being one of the de¤ning
aspects of a public. However, to say that publics have memories is not a
simple statement, and the essays in this ¤rst section suggest that to engage
public memory as “the memory of publics” is to encounter a complex set
of factors: the oscillation between horizons of remembrance and forget-
ting; the contrast between the capacity of certain publics to authorize
memories and the struggles of other publics to contest them; and the will-
ingness of a public to accept responsibility for its remembrance or to ab-
solve itself of responsibility. Thus, the scholar seeking to interrogate public
memory within the frame of the “memory of publics” should at the very
least be attentive to the three interrelated dimensions explored in these
chapters: remembrance/forgetting; authority/resistance; responsibility/
absolution.
The Publicness of Memory
One need not, however, necessarily conceive of public memories in rela-
tion to social entities known as publics. One might, rather, think of public
memories as those that have been visible to many, that have appeared in
view of others—the “publicness of memory.” This conception is not mu-
tually exclusive to the previous conception, since the memory of a pub-
lic would necessarily manifest itself publicly. The essays in part 2, how-
ever, bring our attention to the importance of this other sense of public
memories—their public appearance.
Charles Scott’s provocative essay opens part 2 by elaborating the ne-
glected complexities involved in saying that a memory appears publicly.
Here Scott questions the subject-object relation between people and
memories (that is, that people have memories) and notes that we appear
6 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

in memory just as memories appear in us.10 Scott’s focus here is on the
nonsubjective aspects of memory: the memorial dimensions enacted in
our repeated practices, discourses, and languages, our every cultural ac-
tion being laden with cultural memories that give these actions their
meaning and purpose. This surplus of memory imbued in our activities is
deeply intertwined with our very sense of culture—the memory of cul-
ture occurring within these practices—and it is in this sense that we stop
talking about memories as things “had” but as things “happening” or, more
appropriately, as things “appearing.” Scott reminds us that to speak of ap-
pearance, however, is to also speak of loss—the loss of presence in appear-
ance. Or, in other words, to speak of something appearing is not to grasp
its totality but to experience within appearance the loss of that which
appears. Thus, to speak of memory appearing publicly is to acknowl-
edge the loss of memory in that appearance—its mutable and transitory
nature—just as to speak of our appearing within memory is to acknowl-
edge the loss of us. Thus, even within culture’s repetitive return to memory
we cannot speak of memory appearing as what “is,” or even what “was,”
but the loss of presence that occurs in appearing means we more rightly
speak of memory in the subjunctive: memory “might.” Thus, to speak of
the appearance of memory in public is to engage a fragmentary, mutable,
and always ®eeting phenomenon.
Scott’s challenging view of a nonsubjective, repetitive, and subjunctive
sense of memory appearing publicly is worth diligent reading as it casts
public memory in another light, focusing on the appearance of memories
in public. Interestingly, two of the aspects he attends to are also explored
in the next two essays, albeit in slightly different contexts. Barbie Zelizer
considers the publicness of memory in relation to visual images and what
she conceives as the subjunctive voice of images in public memory.11
Zelizer contends that these visual images that make our public memories
visible should be thought of in terms of “voice,” which she de¤nes as “the
relationship developed between the spectator and the image—involving
state of mind, attitude, temporal and sequential positioning.” Zelizer notes
that the voice of the visual in memory is a subjunctive voice; images invoke
in us the possibilities and uncertainties of these removed moments. The
exemplar of this subjunctive visual voice is the “about to die” image, and
Zelizer ¤nds our collective memory ¤lled with these images of individuals
Introduction / 7
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

just before the moment of death, in that subjunctive moment of possibility.
Thus the sense of loss in appearance is manifested here quite concretely:
the seeming certainty of a photographic image of a historical event pre-
sented within the subjunctive voice of possibility, the loss of certainty.
The transitory and fragile nature of memory’s appearance in public is
also taken up by Bradford Vivian, who explores the repetitive nature of
appearing public memories. The repetition of memories, Vivian notes, is
not suggestive of their stability; each repetition of memory occurs (or
appears) differently. Thus, to wander a landscape of repeated memories is
to wander through an ever-shifting terrain or, as Vivian describes it, to live
a nomadic existence. To attend to our nomadic wanderings through this
landscape of remembrance and amnesia is to focus not on the content of
public memory but on the unstable and changing ways these memories
occur and to recall the political and ethical implications of these occur-
rences. As Vivian notes, “[R]egarding memory as a repetition of difference
rather than a repetition of the same . . . enables one to value the produc-
tive capacities of forgetting and mutation elemental to even the most
monumental forms of public memory.”
Despite the inherently transitory and fragmentary nature of these ap-
pearing memories, or perhaps because of it, one can often identify cultural
forces employed to stabilize and unify these memories as they emerge into
public view. These hegemonic forces seek to craft the appearance of memo-
ries, to create in them a sense of permanence and normalcy. Such stabi-
lizing efforts, then, can be thought of as acting in opposition to the sub-
junctive and mutable nature of memories elaborated in the opening three
essays. These hegemonic forces and their capacity to in®uence the appear-
ance of memories in public are the focus of the ¤nal two essays. Barbara
Biesecker surveys the terrain of recent American memories of World War
II, examining memorials, museums, books, and popular ¤lms. Across
these varied manifestations, Biesecker observes a conservative agenda
at work—a reconstruction of a traditional national unity built around
the sacri¤ces made during World War II. What becomes important in
Biesecker’s analysis is the way these reemerging memories are being
crafted—in ¤lms, books, monuments, museums, etc.—into a new, con-
servative notion of national identity.12 Here, ¤fty years after the end of the
8 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

war, the reemergence of the memory of World War II is being cast within
a clear, uni¤ed, and singular framework of national identity.
Amos Kiewe frames his concern for the crafting of public memory
within the classical rhetorical notion of the eulogy, a mode of public ad-
dress designed not simply to memorialize an individual but to pass on
cultural ethics by describing exemplary lives and deaths. Kiewe focuses
on the ¤nal speeches of Ronald Reagan, contending that they represented
his attempt to create his own eulogy and, in turn, to determine the social
lesson of his public life. This exploration turns our attention again to the
way that memory’s appearance in public can be in®uenced and developed
by those who wish to predetermine and stabilize what are inherently ®uid
and transitory memories.
Despite our best efforts, however, memories refuse to remain stable
and immutable. Their appearance, often unbidden, within our cultural ex-
perience is like a mirage: vivid and poignant but impermanent and ®uid.
No matter their importance or revered place in our collective lives, we
cannot grasp them fully nor ¤x them permanently. We can only envision
a ¤xed stable memory, chiseled in stone or encased within museum walls,
when we neglect—or better yet subvert—their nature as appearing.
However, if we attend to the appearance of memories in public, then the
illusion of their stability is dispelled and the transitory and ®uid nature of
memory in public is recovered.
The essays in part 2 remind us that to think of memories occurring
publicly is to encounter a complex set of factors: the subjunctive nature
of the loss of presence inherent in appearance; the mutative nature of
repetition; and the efforts of cultural forces to combat this inherent insta-
bility through hegemonic practices. Thus, the scholar seeking to interro-
gate public memory within the frame of the “publicness of memory”
should be attentive to these three interrelated factors: appearance/loss;
repetition/mutation; and hegemony/instability.
In this way, part 2 opens an interesting dialogue with the perspective
of part 1. Where part 1 operates within a general subject-object logic—
where publics have memories, contest memories, etc.—part 2 opens up
the nonsubjective aspects of memories appearing in public—the uncer-
tainty of memories, their elusiveness, their mutability. Even in spite of
Introduction / 9
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

cultural forces that work to ¤x these memories, as memories appear in
public they are already escaping the hegemonic cultural forces that pro-
duced them. Thus, where part 1 suggests that publics have memories,
part 2 reminds us that in the slippery relationship between us and our
memories it is dif¤cult to determine whether we have them, or they have
us, or perhaps neither is suf¤ciently the case. What becomes important is
that in speaking of or critiquing “public memory” we do not neglect the
complexities involved in the appearance of memories publicly.
I do not mean to suggest that there is some inherent opposition be-
tween the essays in each part. To speak of public memory must be to simul-
taneously speak of certain groups of individuals remembering together
(the memory of publics) and to speak of those memories appearing before
or perhaps simultaneously with those groups (the publicness of memory).13
What is important here is to recognize that these instructive essays explore
the two interrelated but different frames and that each frame captures
different elements of this complex social phenomenon. Thus, the factors
raised in conceiving the memory of publics—remembrance/forgetting,
authority/resistance, responsibility/absolution—are necessarily compli-
cated by the factors raised by the publicness of memory—appearance/
loss, repetition/mutation, hegemony/instability—and vice versa. As one
attends to the horizon of remembrance and forgetfulness, one must be
mindful that these remembrances are the appearances of memories, in-
herently transitory and receding.14 As one examines the mutability of re-
peated memories one must also be mindful of the underlying struggles
by various groups to maintain or resist memories. As we speak of cul-
tural responsibility and/or absolution we should also be mindful of the
hegemonic tendencies that want to inscribe memories—of triumphs or
tragedies—in stone and ¤x them in seeming immutability.
These permutations could go on almost endlessly as the dimensions of
each frame of public memory interact with the various other dimensions.
What this volume does, then, is to play between these two broad frames
of public memory and remind us that public memory exists simultane-
ously in both frames; to speak of memory in one frame is to encounter
a host of complexities invoked by the other. Those wishing to engage
public memory—to theorize it, critique it, or analyze its content or
manifestations—should be mindful of which frame is being invoked and
10 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

which neglected. Recognizing this slippery space in between the memory
of publics and the publicness of memories may open productive lines of
inquiry and critique, thereby making the study of public memory both
more pressing and more complex.
The Frames of Framing
This book was generated during the kind of interdisciplinary dialogue it
seeks to foster, and its origin underscores the importance of studies of
public memory. An interdisciplinary conference was organized at Syracuse
University in the fall of 2001 to discuss public memory. The event was
scheduled for September 28 and 29. Seventeen days before the conference
was to take place two planes were crashed into the World Trade Center in
New York City, a third plane was crashed into the Pentagon, and a fourth
plane crashed outside Pittsburgh. In a little less than an hour September 11
was marked deeply into the American psyche.
There was much that had to be done in the immediate aftermath for
the families of the victims, and even those who were not immediately
connected to the tragic events needed to grieve. When the immediacy of
these activities receded, the question of the conference had to be raised.
Should we go forward? Was it safe? Was it appropriate? After much thought
and deliberation, the decision was made to go forward. Indeed, as some
expressed it, the events of September 11 made the topic of the conference
even more pressing. The spontaneous memorials erected across New York
City and the country, the instantaneous framing of the event by the media
in relation to other national tragedies (especially Pearl Harbor), and the
overwhelming feeling that no one would ever forget the events of Sep-
tember 11 convinced us to go ahead with the conference. The memory of
September 11 is evident in this volume. Some of the scholars who hoped
to be part of the project were unable to do so in light of the tragedy. Some
of the scholars who were able to participate refocused their work to take
up the events. Barbie Zelizer’s examination of press coverage in the im-
mediate aftermath is an excellent example of a scholar adeptly reading
current events through carefully crafted theoretical lenses. Ed Casey’s rec-
ollections of the spontaneous memorials in Union Square Park and his visit
to these memorials on September 17 bring a concrete poignancy to his
deeper meditation on the experience of public memory. All of the con-
Introduction / 11
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tributors, whether they engage the events of September 11 explicitly or
not, were deeply affected by them, as were the discussions during the
conference—the discussions were both more dif¤cult and more pressing
as a result. While some of the explicit references to the conference and its
historical circumstances have been removed in the development of this
volume, others have been left, in part as a recognition that these scholarly
contributions also emerged within broader frames of memory.
The interdisciplinary dialogue we began in Syracuse was made possible by
a number of individuals and institutions. First and foremost, the confer-
ence and subsequent volume would have been impossible without the gen-
erous support of Syracuse University’s College of Visual and Performing
Arts and its dean, Carol Brzozowski. My colleagues in the Department of
Speech Communication also provided kind support, and the Department
of Political Science provided useful funds.
Numerous individuals were crucial to the success of this endeavor. My
colleague Diane Grimes gave important and greatly appreciated aid. Six
graduate students helped at the conference and are worthy of much praise:
Paul Butler, Gabor Hardy, David Heineman, Jessica Reeher, Amy Robil-
lard, and Virginia Rodino. I’d also like to acknowledge the continuing sup-
port and help of my wife, Catherine Thomas.
Finally, I would like to give a warm word of thanks to the excellent
folks at the University of Alabama Press. John Lucaites, series editor, was
also a great help.
Notes
1. There are a number of very useful reviews of public, collective, and/or
social memory studies including: Stephen H. Browne, “Reading, Rhetoric and
the Texture of Public Memory,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 81 (1995): 237–65;
Jeffrey K. Olick and Joyce Robbins, “Social Memory Studies: From ‘Collective
Memory’ to the Historical Sociology of Mnemonic Practices,” Annual Review of
Sociology 24 (1998): 105–40; and Barbie Zelizer, “Reading the Past against the
Grain: The Shape of Memory Studies,” Critical Studies in Mass Communication 12
(1995): 214–39.
2. For an interesting discussion of the way memory has been conceived at
12 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

different points in history, see Jacques Le Goff, History and Memory (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1992).
3. Maurice Halbwachs, On Collective Memory (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1992).
4. The notion that memory studies arose, in part, as a result of mistrust of
of¤cial history is discussed by Barry Schwartz, “Introduction: The Expanding
Past,” Qualitative Sociology 61 (1996): 275–82. Others have suggested such causes
as the growth of multiculturalism (see Michael Kammen, Mystic Chords of Memory:
The Transformation of American Culture [New York: Knopf, 1991]), challenges to the
nation-state (see John Bodnar, “Pierre Nora, National Memory and Democracy:
A Review,” Journal of American History 87 [2000]: 951–63 and David Cressy, Bon-
¤res and Bells: National Memory and the Protestant Calendar in Elizabethan and Stuart
England [Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989]), the development of
poststructural thought (see Patrick Hutton, History as an Art of Memory [Hanover,
NH: University Press of New England, 1993]), or as an attempt to reconcile
American guilt for atrocities committed and reforge an American identity (see
Efraim Sicher, “The Future of the Past: Countermemory and Postmemory in
Contemporary American Post-Holocaust Narratives,” History and Memory 12
[2000]: 56–91).
5. For an insightful account of the notion of objectivity in historiography,
see Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: The Objectivity Question and the American His-
torical Profession (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
6. Pierre Nora, “Between Memory and History: Les Lieux de Mémoire,” Rep-
resentations 26 (1989): 8.
7. Memory, or memoria, is one of the ¤ve classical canons of rhetoric, and
its importance as a “treasury of things invented” is clearly articulated by, among
others, Cicero. See De Oratore, trans. H. Rackman (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1969). For more on the interrelation between rhetoric and
memory in later periods, see two excellent works by Mary J. Carruthers: The
Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993) and The Craft of Thought: Meditation, Rhetoric and the Making
of Images, 400–1200 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
8. While not explicitly invoked by all the contributors to this ¤rst section,
I think something like Jürgen Habermas’s sense of a self-constituting and self-
transforming public sphere is implicit in this conception of a public having
Introduction / 13
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

memories. See Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformations of the Public Sphere
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989). Of course, there is also a sense in some
of these essays, especially Eberly and Morris, that various publics may be in
competition for “memory resources,” and this sense of competing publics and
counterpublics seems similar to Nancy Fraser’s in®uential corrective to Haber-
mas. See Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the
Critique of Actually Existing Democracy,” in Habermas and the Public Sphere,
ed. Craig Calhoun (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 109–42.
9. Casey’s sense that memories are “emplaced” is more fully considered in
his book Remembering: A Phenomenological Study (Bloomington: University of Indi-
ana Press, 2000).
10. Scott’s notion of nonsubjective memories is explored more fully in his
Time of Memory (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1999).
11. Zelizer’s explorations of the relation between visual images and memory
are also taken up in Remembering to Forget: Holocaust Memory through a Camera’s Eye
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998) and her edited volume Visual Cul-
ture and the Holocaust (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2001).
12. Biesecker’s essay is an extended version of an essay previously appearing
in the Quarterly Journal of Speech 88 (2002): 393–409.
13. Here it is worth at least noting my own longstanding skepticism of
the notion of publics or public spheres. See my “Spaces of Public Dissension:
Reconsidering the Public Sphere,” Communication Monographs 63 (1996): 231–48.
Though I do recognize the collective nature of memories and their importance,
I am skeptical of the modernist logic imported by Habermasian notions of public
spheres.
14. In a way, perhaps, this suggests that existing within the oscillating hori-
zons of remembrance and forgetting means existing in a subjunctive mode.
14 / Kendall R. Phillips
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

1
The Memory of Publics
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

I
Despite its monolithic resonance, “public memory” is not just one kind of
thing. Different itself from other basic forms of remembering, it occurs
in several distinctive ways. Let me begin by mentioning some of these
ways in relation to a single fundamental trait, proceed to discuss other
kinds of memory, and then return to public memory for closer analysis.
The trait I have in mind is this: public memory is radically bivalent in
its temporality. Where other modes of remembering deal primarily with
the past—with the notable exceptions of recognition (focused on the in-
gression of the past into the immediate present) and reminding (which
often projects us into a future event of which we wish to be reminded)—
public memory is both attached to a past (typically an originating event
of some sort) and acts to ensure a future of further remembering of that
same event. Public monuments embody this Janusian trait: their very mas-
siveness and solidity almost literally enforce this futurity, while inscrip-
tions and certain easily identi¤able features (for example, the giant seated
Abraham Lincoln of the Lincoln Memorial) pull the same physical object
toward the past it honors. In cases such as these, the perduringness of the
construction itself acts to guarantee the intimate tie between past and
future as if to say: just as the stone from which I’m made stems from time
immemorial and will, as sheer material, last into the inde¤nite future, so
the event here signi¤ed, though stemming from a quite particular past,
will be remembered forever. Thus the monument does not merely em-
1
Public Memory
in Place and Time
Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

body or represent an event (or person, or group of persons), but it strives
to preserve its memory in times to come—at the limit, times beyond
measure. (Or at least this is so in the case of national monuments, the
avowed purpose of which is to re®ect and support the putative immor-
tality of the state. In more modest instances, there is no such pretension
to exist without temporal limit, for instance, in the memorials that mark
the places where friends or family have been killed in highway accidents.)
This is not to say that public memory requires the density of stone to
mark and re-mark it. At another extreme, a eulogy is certainly a form of
public memory—it is pronounced before others and is meant to direct
their attention to the character and accomplishments of the departed—
but it is constructed entirely in words. Only rarely is the text preserved;
it is discarded, even as the speaker hopes to have implanted in the minds
of his or her listeners a new memory that will last—if not inde¤nitely then
at least for the upcoming weeks or months when grief will be most acute.
In certain cases a public speech, meant for the moment, gets preserved
despite its author’s intentions: several of Cicero’s state eulogies, Lincoln’s
Gettysburg Address, FDR’s speech on the occasion of the attack on Pearl
Harbor.
What this points to is that public memory, though thriving on tenacious
media such as stone or brick, is not dependent on them. A mere photo-
graph, reproduced on cheap newsprint but (in the case of a major news-
paper) reaching thousands of readers, is medium enough, as we know
from poignant photographs of the devastated World Trade Towers. Some-
times a single photograph (for example, that of a Vietcong suspect be-
ing shot in the head at close quarters) itself becomes an icon of public
memory: what began as the record of a transient moment gains its own
permanence in the annals of public memory. Paradoxically, its very ®imsi-
ness is an asset: whereas we must travel to Washington to view the Lincoln
Memorial, any copy of the Gettysburg Address or the Vietcong photo suf-
¤ces to bring us immediately to its content. The crucial tie-line between
past and future that is at the heart of public memory can be effected on
the slenderest of reeds—so long as these reeds are at once easily repro-
ducible and widely accessible.
This is not to say that the present is of no compelling interest in public
memory. Often it is: the present in the making, the present that is now, is
18 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

considered to be of central signi¤cance in the future. This is the situation
we designate by saying: “This event will be forever etched upon our
memory.” We say this on the very day of its happening, as on that fateful
Tuesday, September 11. No one doubted, and many said explicitly, “This
day will not be forgotten”—echoing Kant’s exclamation that the French
Revolution is “a phenomenon that cannot be forgotten.”1 In the case of
September 11, not forgotten not just by individuals but not forgotten by
virtually every American then alive (and by many others around the globe).
The power of the event in the present was so shattering—so obviously
and massively destructive—that there could be no doubt of its perdurance
in the public domain: its futurity was assured from the start. Not for a mo-
ment could that moment be forgotten, and this did not require speeches
or monuments. Indeed, it generated its own kind of spontaneous memo-
rial: photographs of those still missing that were pinned to windows and
walls, or taped to enormous sheets of butcher paper, with the names and
descriptions of those lost written underneath. Buckets swung from trees
into which other photographs were placed. “People attached bouquets to
the railings, and notes thick with pain. One note read: ‘You are missed and
loved and will never be forgotten.’”2 At ¤re stations lists of “missing mem-
bers” were bedecked with ®owers: “[A]n impromptu memorial to the
missing ¤re¤ghters had sprung up outside the Rescue 1 station house at
450 W. 43rd St. Carnations, roses, daisies and lilies stretched half the
width of the sidewalk and spilled toward the curb.”3 Although none of
those memorialized in these various makeshift manners was a public ¤g-
ure, by the mere fact of being thus noted, however elliptically, those pic-
tured became part of public memory, either by virtue of the fact that their
image was being actually perceived by those on the scene (themselves
standing in for a much larger public that could not be present) or because
their image was published in the New York Times and other newspapers.4
What does it mean to become part of public memory? Only minimally
to come to the attention of the (reading or viewing) public, to be observed
by them. Much more pertinently, it means to be understood right away,
without hesitation or interpretation, in its basic signi¤cation—a “victim
of this disaster.” A victim is a public person—if not yet explicitly so, then
potentially so (that is, as someone who can be recognized as such, present
a case in court, complain in public, etc.). Precisely because a victim can-
Public Memory in Place and Time / 19
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

not argue for himself—because he is dead or lacks the knowledge or re-
sources to become a plaintiff—public testimonial is all the more requisite
if that person (however unknown to the public initially, however much a
stranger) is to reclaim recognition or vindication.5 Without the testimo-
nial, verbal and/or pictorial, the victim recedes into oblivion, remem-
bered only by his or her family and friends—thus part of individual and
social memory—but not belonging expressly to public memory, at most
a cipher or empty number in that memory (that is, as just one among the
many dead as currently counted).
In this last case, then, not only may the medium be less than permanent
but the very value of permanency itself—still at stake in speeches or im-
ages that are meant to be inde¤nitely preserved—is no longer necessary
for admission to public memory. Entry to the latter can occur in the form
of something not destined to last, so fragile that it will be taken away from
public view in a matter of days or even hours. Even a document that does
not depict a given person but a mere transaction of that person—such as
an application for a job, the record of a bank account, etc.—can be assimi-
lated to public memory in the right circumstance, as when such docu-
ments were merely published in newspapers and journals several days af-
ter the disaster.6
But much more remains to be said about public memory. I shall do this
after undertaking a brief comparative phenomenology of memory overall.
II
There are four major forms of human memory—beyond certain basic
distinctions such as short-versus long-term memory, which apply to all
forms of remembering. These are individual memory, social memory, col-
lective memory, and public memory proper. Let me say some schematic
things about each.
Individual Memory
This refers to the person who is engaged in memory on any given occa-
sion. That person, the always unique rememberer, remembers in sev-
eral particular ways, not just recollecting states of affairs (recalling that
something happened) but also remembering-how (to do certain things),
remembering-as (x as y), etc. And the same person remembers different
20 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

kinds of things—not just things but whole environmental complexes,
auras, and worlds (and how these are given). Moreover, we remember by
way of being reminded, by recognizing something, and by reminiscing
with others. The latter has proven more signi¤cant than I had ¤rst thought:
it is a primary prop of social memory; and it introduces the crucial fac-
tor of language into memory, and thus narrative and history. When we
also consider that there is a distinctive body memory and place memory
and many acts of commemoration, we are already beyond any model of
memory as con¤ned to the individual mind and its representations.
I had spelled out most of this in my book Remembering, which appeared
in the late 1980s, when I wrote a chapter titled “Collective Memory” and
another called “Forgetting,” neither which I saw ¤t to publish. But I would
now say that it was a mistake to have imagined that I could keep the traits
of individual remembering wholly apart from those of the remembering
we do with and through others; they are distinguishable but not separable
dimensions of the same basic activity. Every single act of remembering
that I do comes saturated with social and collective aspects, as well as with
cultural and public determinants. However idiosyncratic and personal a
given act of remembering may be—whatever its individuated style and
bearing—and despite the fact that all remembering takes place in an in-
dividual (I reject the idea of a “mémoire collectif” that all humans share),
still each such act has certain formal dimensions that exceed any indi-
vidual’s contribution. More important, each such act is always as inter-
personal as it is personal, as much between beings as locked inside my own
being. The primary locus of memory is found not only in body or mind
(or even brain, mind’s physiological counterpart) but in an intersubjective
nexus that is at once social and collective, cultural and public. My essay in
this volume attempts to explore these extrapersonal dimensions of re-
membering, with special attention to public memory.
Social Memory
This is the memory held in common by those who are af¤liated either by
kinship ties, by geographical proximity in neighborhoods, cities, and other
regions, or by engagement in a common project. In other words, it is
memory shared by those who are already related to each other, whether
by way of family or friendship or civic acquaintance or just “an alliance
Public Memory in Place and Time / 21
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

between people for a speci¤c purpose.”7 In this case, memory both pre-
supposes these preexisting relationships and is often concerned with as-
pects of the relationships themselves. (There can, however, be social
memories of events that one did not experience oneself but that were
undergone by consociates whom one does in fact know: for example, how
my Uncle Ralph mismanaged the family business—something that hap-
pened before I was born.) Crucial here is that social memories are not
necessarily public: families can harbor memories that are known only to
themselves; such privacy is often itself prized as such, providing that inti-
macy and bonding that are so important to the maintenance of family life.
Only when family (or other group) members become celebrated or no-
torious in certain ways does the sociality of many of their shared memories
become “public property,” that is to say, out of their immediate control
regarding audience, interpretation, or use, as in the case of the Kennedys.
(The same thing can happen to entire neighborhoods—when a person
living in a given block is very prominent, this occasions media and other
forms of attention to that place.)
What does “sharing memories” mean? I take this to signify the situation
in which those who have had the same—I don’t say precisely identical—
history as a given group or who live in the same place remember what
has happened to that group or in that place (and often both). This does
not mean having the same experience of remembering—that will always
be idiosyncratic in one measure or another—but instead remembering
something (some event, some occasion, some physical thing, even some
thought) that others in one’s kin or place-group are also remembering at
the time or could do so. When this is in fact happening, it is tantamount
to “co-reminiscing,” that is, remembering in quasi-narrative form when
assembled in a particular place (the front porch in an earlier era, at dinner
tables on holidays). But it can also happen when two or more group mem-
bers are talking to each other on the telephone or communicating in real
time in a chat room on the Internet. What matters is neither the exact
technology nor the precise location but the fact (or its imminent possi-
bility) of (a) having had the same history, at least via the proxy of another
family member; (b) there having been a common place in which that his-
tory was enacted and experienced; and (c) being able to bring the history-
in-that-place into words or other suitable means of communication and
22 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

expression (one might have social memories through a comparison of
paintings done during a particular period in a given place, say, abstract
expressionists who worked in lower Manhattan in the 1960s).
Collective Memory
By this term, I mean the circumstance in which different persons, not nec-
essarily known to each other at all, nevertheless recall the same event—
again, each in her own way. This is a case of remembering neither indi-
vidually in isolation from others nor in the company of others with whom
one is acquainted but severally. “Severally” signi¤es plural remembering
that has no basis in overlapping historicities or shared places but is brought
together only in and by a conjoint remembrance of a certain event, no
matter where those who remember are located or how otherwise un-
related they are to each other. Nor do they have to remember at the same
time. All that matters is commonality of content. The most striking in-
stance of collective remembering is the phenomenon of “®ashbulb memo-
ries” that have been studied in the wake of John Kennedy’s assassination—
and that have doubtless happened again after September 11. In both cases,
virtually every adult in the United States vividly recalls not just a cata-
strophic event but just where he or she heard it, for example, the actual cir-
cumstance of learning the bad news. I was in a barber’s chair in Chicago
in the ¤rst case, at home in Stony Brook in the second. Despite the vivacity
of the local detail of ¤rst hearing—which differs greatly from person to
person—I am linked to all others who also remember exactly where they
were on hearing of these two emergencies. We are remembering it col-
lectively, from our several stances. Not because there is anything called
“collective memory” as Levy-Bruhl posited too rapidly as a deep faculty
possessed by all human beings, but because our entire experiential and
memorial focus is on one altogether stunning event. Not the experience
but the focus—amounting to a monothetic obsession—is what is shared
in collective memory.
Social memory derives from a basis in shared experience, shared his-
tory or place, or shared project. Collective memory, in contrast, has no
such basis but is instead distributed over a given population or set of places.
Instead of possessing a taproot from which all memory stems as in the case
of social remembering, collective recollection is not effected by members
Public Memory in Place and Time / 23
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of existing clans, or regions, or projects in common (or if it is, this mem-
bership is irrelevant to the collectivity). The grouping is not based on prior
identity or particular placement. It is formed spontaneously and involun-
tarily, and its entire raison d’être is a convergent focus on a given topic:
typically an event but also a thought, a person, a nation. The members of
this momentary collectivity are linked solely by the cynosure on which
their attention falls.
But this attention need not occur at the same time (I may have heard
of Kennedy’s assassination at a different time than you), and it comes from
disparate directions—as disparate as are those brought together on the
occasion. Thus they are in an essentially external relationship to each other
and only loosely assembled, not unlike a Versammlung in Heidegger’s sense
of the term, though now strictly limited to a focus on a single memorandum.
Collective remembering is unremittingly plural—so plural that indi-
vidual or group identities do not count; what is important is only the sheer
fact that those remembering are remembering the same thing. This is quite
different from social or individual remembering, where the singularity of
the rememberer or group of co-rememberers is what counts. In the latter
case, intimacy and bonding are important aspects of remembering—as we
often observe in the case of intense co-reminiscing. But in the collective
situation, all relations are so external that intimacy is not only irrelevant
but intrusive. Students of collective life in cities have underlined this last
feature: Richard Sennett refers to “the tyranny of intimacy” and (much
in®uenced by Jane Jacobs’s similar view) asserts that “the city must be a
place where people can join with other people without compulsion to
know them as persons.”8 When people in cities together remember a given
event—whether awesome or trivial—they do so on just this condition of
remaining comparatively anonymous in their very plurality, their ex-
tended severalness, their manyness in the midst of their oneness of atten-
tion. Only the focus memorium unites them; otherwise, they are rhizomatic
in their dispersion, lacking any single shared basis in experience, history,
or place.
Public Memory
The three kinds of memory we’ve identi¤ed so far contribute to public
memory. Individual remembering remains indispensable at the level of the
24 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

experiential and the idiosyncratic: however wide the swath of memory
may become, in each case individuals effect it and undergo it. Remember-
ing is always je meines (“in each case mine”). Social memory intensi¤es such
personal recall by adding the outreach of group identities that go beyond
personal experience to include (as it always does include) family history
and other shared enterprises. Collective memory may be said to be a nega-
tive condition of public memory, insofar as it allows for co-remembering
without co-reminiscing and for the massive convergence of those who
remember the same thing without knowing each other personally. If indi-
vidual and social memory are the two inner circles of public memory,
collective memory is its outer perimeter, the loose net within which
events and other items are recalled in comparative isolation and hence at
the extreme opposite position from individual remembering, which nec-
essarily happens with and for a given person in a given place.
But what, then, is public memory? To begin with, by saying “public” we
mean to contrast such memory with anything that takes place privately—
that is to say, offstage, in the idios cosmos of one’s home or club, or indeed
just by oneself (whether physically sequestered or not). “Public” signi¤es
out in the open, in the koinos cosmos where discussion with others is possible—
whether on the basis of chance encounters or planned meetings—but also
where one is exposed and vulnerable, where one’s limitations and fallibili-
ties are all too apparent. In this open realm, wherever it may be—in town
halls, public parks, or city streets—public memory serves as an encircling
horizon. It is there as a basso profundo in the chorus of the body politic,
its medley of voices. It is there, however, not just as presupposed but as
an active resource on which current discussion and action draw: members
of the public count on this historical Hintergrund, they speak in terms of
it, and they take off from it. Indeed, they can revise it on the spot, but then
they are revising it. The “it” is a continuant that serves to stabilize any given
direction of public events. The intrinsic mutability of these latter, their
unpredictable course, sometimes their turpitude and tumultuousness, call
for something that stays constant, or at least more or less the same,
throughout the vicissitudes. No wonder that every revolution, no matter
how radically it questions the of¤cial public memory of the ancien régime,
immediately establishes as if by mandated necessity a new version of such
memory—meant to be just as perduring as the previous version and hope-
Public Memory in Place and Time / 25
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

fully more lasting, a new calendar of events to be publicly remembered,
etc. At the limit, one can speculate that traumatic public events such as the
Trade Towers disaster require the almost instantaneous installation of a
new public memory—this time, a public memory of the victims regarded
en masse.
In this latter case, we are witnesses to the creation of a genuinely new
horizon, an inner rather than outer horizon (in Husserl’s distinction). An
established and received public memory serves in untroubled times as an
encircling presence—sanctioning and protecting, legitimating and sup-
porting from afar (an afar of history and culture and typically geography,
its primary location being in a federal capital or some other established
place). It is a continual horizon out there around the public arena, under-
writing it as it were. But in its origin a given public memory is constituted
from within a particular historical circumstance, usually a crisis of some
sort. Then it arises in the form of an inner horizon, that is, as closely
surrounding a particular thing or event that forms a “hearth” for the
emerging memory.
The vigil I attended on Sunday, September 17, 2001, in Union Square
Park was a case in point. By then September 11 had been accepted as the
catastrophe it was—any disbelief had vanished, and only some residual
hope for survivors still remained (and that was quickly disappearing). For
days the posted pictures and descriptions of the missing to which I have
already alluded had appeared all over New York, not just near the site of
the calamity but in Penn Station, on stray walls, everywhere. But until the
Sunday night vigil there had been no attempt to draw together these frag-
mentary images and desperate messages. A “Mural of Hope” was created
at one entrance to Union Square, displaying scores of these cries of de-
spair. But throughout the park many other such displays were set up so
that the public space as a whole became a mausoleum of sorts. But it was
also something else—a public hearth. This was underscored by the innu-
merable votive candles that were lit in many places in the park, sometimes
in a small cluster around images of several missing persons and sometimes
in much larger groups that constituted an entire scene of ¤ery tribute.
Most people, including myself, moved quietly through the park, paus-
ing to look at the faces of the departed, as if paying homage to people one
never knew—but knew now in the context of disaster. Others sang peace
26 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Figure 1.1. Candlelight memorial in Union Square Park, New York City, September
17, 2001 (courtesy of Edward S. Casey).
Figure 1.2. Patriotic memorials in Union Square Park, New York City, September 17,
2001 (courtesy of Edward S. Casey).
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

songs or played various musical instruments. The atmosphere was mourn-
ful and sad but not morbid. There was a distinct sense of relief to ¤nd
oneself in the presence of others—albeit strangers—with whom to share
grief. But more than relief was at stake in this extraordinary circumstance:
something constructive was in the air. What was this?
To start with, there was a palpable sense of coming to terms with a
trauma instead of letting oneself be crushed by it. Incredulousness and
numbness—not to mention outrage and despair—were ceding place to
another phase of handling the trauma, one that refused to be buried under
it. This was the experience of doing something in particular that would
last beyond this given occasion—that would stay in place in years to come
(when, doubtless, the full effects of the trauma will be felt, a trauma that
will perhaps never be “overcome”). I refer to the building of a public
hearth to which those present, and those who witnessed indirectly by
word of mouth, could recur in times ahead—a stabilitas loci, a place for
further and future remembering. This place is both actual—it is the very
place of Union Square as animated that unforgettable Sunday evening—
and memorial, not only looking back but also supporting later additions
from subsequent experiences that ¤t into its horizonal structure and ¤nd
room in an ever-expanding enclosure of conjoint recollection.
Over time the inner horizon of this hearth will gradually transform
itself into an outer horizon of public memory that will be designated by
constant deictic markers of exact date and place and by a consolidated
memorial mass that retains the gist if not the detail of the occurrence I
have described. This mass and these markers will move slowly into the
perimeter of the public mind, eventually taking up a station in the Ameri-
can public’s sense of signi¤cant events in the early twenty-¤rst century. It
will be referred to as something like “the Union Square vigil in the wake
of the World Trade Tower disaster.” It will have become (in the future per-
fect) part of the external horizon of public memory. This is not to imply
that it merely recedes and pales in the future. It may remain a vivid pres-
ence throughout, a major node in the horizonal structure, a “marker
event” in the nation’s history. Perhaps; we cannot tell. Just as the trauma
itself came without warning, so its own futurity possesses no certain
course.
Despite its high accessibility within a given culture—enhanced when
28 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

technology stores memories several times over as image and word—
public memory is not a sure thing. It has its own degrees of endurance and
reliability. Being public does not guarantee constancy over time: to be
public is to be subject to continual reassessment and revision. We like to
think that public memory is always there to reassure us as to our national
or regional identity, and as an external horizon it does in fact play just this
role. It is there to be invoked. But invocation itself occurs in many guises
and with many degrees of nuance. Often we cannot count on invoking
anything like a constant public memory, despite its rhetorical appeal and
despite the often urgent needs of citizens (and even more so, politicians)
to refer to something like the same heritage or tradition and to be able to
transmit this to oneself and others in a consistent and repeatable way.
In fact, a given event in public memory is subject to two forms of re-
vision on the part of the public itself: ¤rst, a discovery of a glaringly false
part of its content; second, a reassessment of its primary signi¤cance as a
wider, or simply different, ethical or historical context arises. The public
memory of the Vietnam War illustrates both points: the public was actively
misled by the military and by at least two presidents as to what actually
happened in this war, and, with time, it has become even more clear that
our interests in pursuing it were much less than noble. At the present the
war is certainly part of public memory but such a problematic part that
no one, not even a politician, can invoke it unambiguously as if it were a
stable event to be cited with pride or for any other single rhetorical pur-
pose. The same is true, with important differences, for the Civil War, in
this case a troubled part of the lingering horizon of our own self-in®icted
aggression against ourselves. In another cultural setting, the legend of
Trumpeldor, the one-armed early Israeli settler who died defending his
home against marauding Palestinians, exhibits the same double disintegra-
tion. On the one hand, his famous “last words” (“It is good to die for
your country”) have been discredited since he did not know the Hebrew
in which they have always been quoted and since in Russian (which he
surely spoke) they probably meant “fuck your mother.” On the other hand,
complicating the impact of such discrediting stands the fact that this par-
ticular legend of self-sacri¤ce in war is no longer so poignant or moving
now that so much grief has occurred in the ongoing struggle with Pales-
tine: “[W]ithin the context of the post-1967 political reality,” writes Yael
Public Memory in Place and Time / 29
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Zerubavel, “it is no longer possible to accept as given the message that
Trumpeldor’s [originally cited] statement conveys.”9
My point is not that public memory is fragile and ¤ckle, nor that its
entropic tendency makes it subject to continual corruption. Instead, I
am signaling the effects of what is a truly constituent feature of public
memory, namely, its formation through ongoing interchange of ideas and
thoughts, opinions and beliefs. It is just because public memory is so much
in the arena of open discussion and debate that it is also subject to revi-
sion or, for that matter, resumption (for example, when a certain faded
memory is revived and revalorized at a later time, such as John Brown’s
raids during the civil rights period).
Let me put this last point still more strongly: public memory is the very
condition for all such interchange, which could not take place without it.
When I posit it as the external horizon of the public domain, I do not mean
that it is somehow beyond this domain, indifferent to it and distant from it.
On the contrary: as is the case with any horizon (internal or external), it
is a constituent feature of the phenomenon for which it is the horizon.
We know this from the experience of ordinary visual perception, which
would lose all coherence were it not to be set within a horizon that at once
delimits and organizes any given “layout of surfaces” within the visual en-
vironment. The external horizon does not merely surround what is per-
ceived within its compass; it gives to what resides in this compass its spe-
cial character, its distinctive “style” (in Merleau-Ponty’s generous sense).
Most important, it allows the various contents of the perceived landscape
to coexist in a viable way—to become parts of the overall con¤guration.
By the same token (and allowing for understandable shifts in context), a
memorial horizon not only engirdles its subject matter but actively sub-
tends it, giving it its own identity and shape, its cast and character, its
characteristic physiognomy. However subject to revision and even re-
placement a given public memory may be, some signi¤cant such memory
will always persist: if Vietnam or the Civil War are controversial by their
very nature, behind them remains the American Revolution as an ongoing
legendary presence, just as behind the rapidly receding Trumpeldor legend
there is still a comparatively unquestioned belief in “the days of milk and
honey,” that is, “the ‘golden age’ of Antiquity when the Hebrews lived as
a nation on their own land, the Land of Israel.”10 Beyond the “invented
30 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

traditions” that are always being posited in response to the challenge of
new circumstances, there is a perduring past, legendary or historical,
which is the persisting horizon of public memory.11
Most crucially, it is precisely because of this actively encompassing and
intimately establishing role that the horizon of public memory makes pos-
sible the very dialogue that can call for its own redescription or even its
own rejection. The vita activa underlined by Hannah Arendt as the indis-
pensable core of the public sphere—an active life of talk, ¤rst enacted in
the agora in the West—would not be possible were it not for the enabling
presence of public memory at its fringes. This memory, not unlike the
walls of the city, literally de¤nes the terms of the agon, providing the
conditions within which open dialogue can happen. In this respect, it is
the equivalent of the habitual body, which acts as a second basic condition
of all productive discourse—a form of inner horizon that is furnished by
the interlocutors’ own gesticulating and moving and perceiving bodies in
the scene of discussion. This body has its own history and its own memory
(this is why I like to speak of “habitual body memory”12 in this context),
but this memory is at once quite private (that is, just the history of the
delights and insults experienced by my own body) and very much re-
pressed (most notably in the case of women’s bodies in social and public
situations). Hence, it is rarely subject to discussion as such—at least not
until recent times—but even so, it is a material condition of possibility
for the open discussion that is part and parcel of public memory proper.
It follows as well that what I earlier identi¤ed as the temporal structure
of such memory—its inherent bidirectionality with regard to past and
future—is also made possible by the horizonal powers of public memory.
Stemming from a deep, sometimes even immemorial past (“a past that was
never a present,” as Levinas says), it allows for and encourages recursion
to it as remaining the same over time—hence as a fount of inspiration, or
at least of reliability—while in its revisability it shows itself open to a
future in which it may mutate. In that future, it may become other than it
was, even if what it was remains requisite for the very constitution of the
public realm itself. And the present? It is the forever eluded moment of
happening, of the event which will be remembered (or forgotten) and
then, in that future moment, assume its identity as what has been the case
(whether recalled or not, whether historical or legendary): “Days will
Public Memory in Place and Time / 31
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

come and songs will be sung about [early Israeli heroes such as Trumpel-
dor] and legends will be formed about them.”13 The present, strung out
between the no longer and the not yet (as Aristotle ¤rst put it in Physics),
gestures to a future of things to come, even as it surely will become part
of what has become. But what happens in it is crucial, as we can see from
the events in Union Square or in any revolutionary moment. What occurs
there, even if it commemorates another event, is itself an event of insti-
tuting public memory itself, or at least that part of it that will become
available to others not now present as a public memory—occupying a
signi¤cant stretch of its horizon, ingredient in its very structure.
III
Public memory is not a nebulous pursuit that can occur anywhere; it al-
ways occurs in some particular place. Let me bear out this basic but elusive
fact in a series of ¤ve short observations14:
(i) public place. In contrast to other primary kinds of remembering—
which can occur with people who are quite isolated from each other (in-
dividual memory or collective memory) or in already constituted groups
(social memory), public memory occurs only when people meet and in-
teract in a single scene of interaction. This means that place is not indif-
ferent, as it is in ®ashbulb memories and many other instances of remem-
bering wherever we happen to be. On the contrary, it is integral to public
memory, which is not merely situated in a public arena or literal “common
place” but enacted there. The place, in other words, lends itself to the re-
membering and facilitates it at the very least, but also in certain cases
embodies the memory itself (as when people engage in conjoint remem-
brance in the presence of certain memorials, ranging from the Tomb of
the Unknown Solider to the Vietnam Memorial to ordinary grave mark-
ers). It is not accidental that Memorial Day parades in the United States
characteristically end up in cemeteries, where speeches are made and
(sometimes) memories of the departed exchanged. This is more than a
matter of setting; it is a question of an active material inducement by the
place—its power of drawing out the appropriate memories in that location.
(ii) public presence. Place provides the vital substructure of public memory
not only by virtue of certain of its features that enable, embody, and in-
duce shared remembrances but also for the very practical reason that it
32 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

offers a space in which human bodies can come into proximity. Such prox-
imity is not for the sake of intimacy—something often sought in social
memory—but for the sake of a public presence that can be accomplished
only when people congregate for a common purpose. This presence is
really a co-presence of each to the other, all within eyeshot and (usually)
earshot. This is a speci¤cally interhuman presence, a form of community
however brief it may be.
(iii) public discussion. A place that nurtures (or at least allows) communal
presence, intense Gemeinschaft, is a place that encourages direct commu-
nication between those who have come together around a shared Sache.
Public discussion always takes place in quite speci¤c locations: the agora,
the forum, and (still at times) Hyde Park. All three of these are established
places for promoting speech in common. But such common places also
spring up spontaneously, as in the case of Union Square (once the scene
of discussions concerning the fate of organized labor, then for many years
merely a public park, most recently the place for the vigil I attended). The
vagaries of a given public space correspond to its changing role in sup-
porting (or failing to support) public discussion.
Given a supportive place (and given a political atmosphere that is not
entirely repressive), such discussion arises in many forms—sometimes as
overt debate (favored by the British), sometimes as philosophical dialogue
(as reported by Plato), sometimes as exhortation on the part of a single
speaker, sometimes as nostalgic recollections of events or people. What is
most striking is the fact that each of these variant forms of common dis-
cussion in a suitable place occurs for the most part in words. The praxis
of public memory is primarily discursive. Even when images ¤gure promi-
nently as at Union Square they are accompanied by verbal descriptions
that act to pin down the image itself. Tawana Grif¤n, whose photograph
was displayed at the park, was described as “30 years old, 140 pounds, 5′5″
in height” and having “four tattoos, one on the upper part of each arm,
one on the left breast, and one on the center of the chest,” along with a
“torn right earlobe and [a] split right ¤nger nail.” The company for which
she worked in the Trade Towers was identi¤ed, along with its location on
the 101st ®oor of World Trade Center 1. Given the unlikelihood of her
survival, these words practically constituted an epitaph. In their grim
¤nality they are not subject to debate, but they contribute to the public
Public Memory in Place and Time / 33
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

discussion that was occurring in the park—the expressions of regret, of
revenge, of what America should do next, etc. Already part of public
memory, they were also part, however implicitly, of the discussion that
was occurring in the place where they could be read by all who were
present.
The role of language in this situation is to articulate what might have
remained sequestered and undiscussed, held in private thought or emo-
tion. In Hannah Arendt’s celebrated interpretation, this began in the West
with the agora, where issues of the polis were actively discussed every-
day in the same political space: “In the experience of the polis, which
not without justi¤cation has been called the most talkative of all bodies
politic . . . the emphasis shifted from action to speech, and to speech as
a means of persuasion. . . . To be political, to live in a polis, meant that
everything was decided through words and persuasion and not through
force and violence.”15 But to be in the public realm is not only a matter of
persuading interlocutors. The discourse, spoken or written, that takes
place in this realm brings topics that concern many into an arena of ap-
pearance that is tantamount to a shared reality. As Arendt continues:
[E]verything that appears in public can be seen and heard by every-
body and has the widest possible publicity. For us [that is, those in
the West], appearance—something that is being seen and heard by
others as well as by ourselves—constitutes reality. . . . Each time
we talk about things that can be experienced only in privacy or in-
timacy, we bring them out into a sphere where they will assume a
kind of reality which, their intensity notwithstanding, they never
could have had before. The presence of others who see what we see
and hear what we hear assures us of the reality of the world and
ourselves.16
This casts a special light on the events at Union Square that memorable
night. What had become insufferable when experienced alone or with
close friends and family called for a wider scene of discursive praxis. In
that scene, ¤lled with images and words, with gestures and walking and
other bodily movements, not only could private grief be shared but it was
34 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

made articulate in the presence of others: it was brought to public appear-
ance, made present and real for all who participated.
(iv) common topic. Not only private and collective grief, however, are ar-
ticulated in a public space. So too is a common topic, a matter of deep
concern to all who gather in a given place. Whether the topic is the next
presidential candidate, environmental policy, the status of illegal immi-
grants, or a recent disaster, this topic bonds the participants, who con-
verge on it even as they disagree about its status or implications. It is not
a matter of coming to agreement, hence not of persuasion per se. The
topic may be so divisive that no agreement is possible; the participants
may be in a circumstance of a differend in Lyotard’s sense of the term: a
dispute for which there is no known mediation, much less resolution.17 In
the immediate aftermath of September 11, how were we to respond to
the terrorist “attack”? By a retaliatory attack on the country “harboring”
Osama bin Laden? Or by trying to capture him and bring him to justice
in the World Court? I heard both views expressed in Union Square—and
many others in between. It was not a time for ¤guring out what to do;
what mattered most was that the topic linked everyone present in a com-
mon concern and that the imagistic, gesticulatory, and linguistic practices
in which we engaged all addressed this concern in one way or another.
(v) commemoration in place. Coursing throughout a public place in which
everyone is co-implicated is something else beyond the place itself, its
presence, the discussions it engenders, and the topics thereby treated.
This is the commemorating that any public, thus gathered, effects by vir-
tue of the very fact of their congregation. This is commemoration in vari-
ous guises. “Remembering together” as the word literally implies, com-
memoration signi¤es a conjoint recollection (or other mode of memory),
not merely severally and disjointedly as in the case of collective memory
or socially in the company of kin or other regular consociates but as effected
in one place. Commemoration, which I have treated elsewhere,18 ranges
greatly—from explicit eulogies to tacit allusions to a past that is honored.
Like public memory itself, it points both backward—to the vanished
event or person—and forward (by means of the resolute wish to preserve
the memory of the event or person, or even to act on it).
What is most striking is that in public commemorating one need not
Public Memory in Place and Time / 35
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

think explicitly of the commemorandum: one only has to enter a certain
ritual in the right way, for example, by joining a Memorial Day parade
even if one is not thinking expressly about any of the veterans or wars
being honored. Moreover, one need not have known the action in order
to commemorate it. When I look intently at the faces and descriptions of
those lost in one of the Trade Towers, I may not recognize anyone, but I
am already commemorating them—not in the detail of their personal
lives but in the stark fact that they once existed and now no longer do
because of an act of violence. Even in this ignorance, it is remarkable
how engaged I can be in this form of commemoration—an engagement
that is at once focused on missing individuals and on the entire group of
those lost.
Even if no words are spoken, such silent commemoration is still a form
of public memory. Much that is mute is nevertheless shared. Commemo-
ration is effected in the presence of others in a place to which we have all
come. This happens not just as a set of similar experiences: more impor-
tant, everyone there is beginning to work through the dif¤cult emotions
and thoughts occasioned by a public trauma, a wound to the body politic.
If words are coming only haltingly, this is due to the weight of the trauma,
which acts to immobilize and paralyze those suffering from it. In fact, the
silence of most of those present in Union Square spoke for itself; as Lyo-
tard insists, silence is itself a fully signifying phenomenon.19 But it exists
only in the very space of discourse that is possible even if not actual at the
moment. Possible in the place of commemoration itself, where, once
actualized, it will contribute powerfully to a more complete working-
through than can occur with feelings and thoughts alone.
IV
Place subtends such memory, being the ground and resource, the location
and scene of the remembering we do in common. In that place, feelings
and thoughts rise from within as responses to events and persons without:
the publicity of place shelters the privacy of emotion and idea but only
insofar as these latter are themselves always on the way to becoming
public—on the way to language, to the speech and writing that articulate
these closely held items. The topics to which language brings us draw to-
gether from above as it were what is otherwise only disparate and idiosyn-
36 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

cratic within the minds of individual rememberers. Public memory in
turn gathers place, people, and topics in its encompassing embrace by
acting as the external horizon that encircles the situation—the human
situation, the human condition, the place we are always at when we are
not merely standing by others or with family and friends.
Regarding this situation—our situation, never just mine or yours—
place acts from below, feeling and thought from within, topics from above,
and public memory from around. What Heidegger termed “the around-
ness of the environment” (as the German phrase “das Um-uns-herum der
Umwelt” is sometimes translated20) is here shared out by place and public
memory, acting as epicenters between which the privacy of feeling and
thought and the overtness of shared subject matters lie linked by language.
Throughout, bodily actions render at once dense and effective the rela-
tionships between the primary terms of this schematic model of life in the
public domain.
What difference does such a model, admittedly mainly descriptive,
make in our understanding of this always problematic, always promis-
ing domain? What conclusions if any can we draw for the fate of public
memory today? These questions are all the more pressing in view of the
impression that I seem to have subordinated public memory by making it
into the external horizon of the vita activa.21 But is this tantamount to
marginalizing public memory itself?
I think not. Let me say why not—why the topic is not just alive but
burning—in ¤ve concluding remarks.
1. Whatever its position vis-à-vis other parameters of the public realm,
public memory is constitutive of identities of many kinds: national and
regional for certain but also (by way of encroachment) social and per-
sonal. There is little in our lives that is untouched by public memory, even
if we do not focus on it except on ceremonial occasions or in massive
emergencies. Thematized or not, however, it remains an abiding presence:
like any horizon, it is at once encompassing and only tacitly present until
singled out as such. A large part of the very power of public memory
resides in its capacity to be for the most part located at the edge of our
lives, hovering, ready to be invoked or revised, acted upon or merely con-
templated, inspiring us or boring us: in every case, public memory is in-
tegral to what I have called “public presence.”
Public Memory in Place and Time / 37
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

2. The stakes of public memory are therefore high. Just because it is
such an implicit presence, it is all the more formative of public life and
public thought. In this regard, it is analogous to habitual body memory,
which guides our corporeal lives from within by embedding cultural and
somatic schemata in our very ®esh; and it is like the psychical incorpora-
tion of others by way of introjection in the aftermath of missing and losing
them. Both soma and psyche are in effect memorials to diverse in®uences,
past and present; and they carry these literal in®uences into a future of
personal and interpersonal action. So, too, with public memory: ¤xated
without in monuments and texts, it is carried on within in our individual
and shared sense of public identity. This identity speci¤es what kind of
citizens we are, indeed what sort of human beings we are, as “citizens of
the world,” not just in a cosmopolitan or Enlightenment sense but as feel-
ing and thinking members of the species. In its very horizonality, public
memory encircles our lives; but it also enters into our most intimate
redoubts—as we learn in a time of trauma, such as September 11, which
brought out such a powerful sense of American identity (or more exactly,
American identities, ranging from super-patriotic to super-skeptical, but
all within the open horizon of publicly remembering that we are Ameri-
cans in such a situation).
3. For two very good reasons, public memory needs a place of enact-
ment, a scene of instantiation. First, public memories are continually sub-
ject to revision, as we have seen most strikingly in the case of Trumpeldor
(but as we could also trace in many of our own national legends such as
Paul Bunyon or Wild Bill Hickok). Second, their temporality is such that
(as Merleau-Ponty said of paintings) they have “almost all their life still
before them.”22 In that life much can change, not just in their conception
or interpretation but in their very content and force as they are retold
slightly differently from generation to generation and as they are transmit-
ted and received with important changes over time. Far from being de-
fects, these two forms of mutability demonstrate the capacity of public
memories to speak to each era, not so much in this era’s own given lan-
guage (perfect translatability is an idle ideal) as in terms of its changing
needs and perceptions. Without this elasticity, public memories could not
survive as the effective presences they are: just as a perceptual horizon
cannot be reduced to a single “horizon-line,” public memories do not pos-
sess a hard edge. Their content is not altogether malleable—if it was, they
38 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

would lack the force to last over generational and historical change—but
it is subject to alteration at any moment.
In view of this intrinsic mutability, public memory requires what the
Romans called stabilitas loci, “stability of place,” in which to arise and last.
Places harbor and hold memories of many kinds, both personal (as we
know from Proust’s descriptions of the talismanic places of his childhood)
and interpersonal (as in the case of a family home that becomes the seat
of a reunion). They ground and collect social as well as collective memo-
ries. Maurice Halbwachs, the French sociologist and student of collective
memory, emphasized precisely that “space is a reality that endures. . . .
The collective thought of the group of believers has the best chance of
immobilizing itself and enduring when it concentrates on places, sealing
itself within their con¤nes and molding its character to theirs.”23 Places
are especially effective in the case of public memories, which are even
more desperately in need of spatial anchorage than other kinds of shared
remembering. Think only of military cemeteries that are built on or next
to the battle¤elds where the buried soldiers once fought: being anchored
there, at that place, brings the public memory of a given battle or war back
to mind with special poignancy. The same holds true for the Vietnam Me-
morial wall, which tethers public memory to one place of recognition and
mourning even if it is far from the original scenes of military action. With-
out such concrete implacements, memories would have “no referent in
reality; or, rather, they [would be] their own referent: pure, exclusively
self-referential signs.”24 These words of Pierre Nora speak for the neces-
sity of place in the very heart of public memory.
Not that places themselves are immune from reinterpretation and even
physical restructing. Claudia Koonz has shown this at work in the struggle
over whether, and how, to preserve Nazi extermination camps, and James
Young has written eloquently about this process in his classic Writing
and Rewriting the Holocaust: Narrative and the Consequences of Interpretation.
Koonz details the transformation of Buchenwald into a major tourist
site—in contrast with Dachau, whose administration buildings and bar-
racks were leveled by the local community, leaving only ruins near the
crematoria.25 Nevertheless, despite being subject to major physical or
hermeneutical transformations, places with some lastingness will always
be called for in the constitution and continuation of public memory.
4. One striking sign of this becomes evident in the case of public
Public Memory in Place and Time / 39
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

trauma—disasters that affect the lives of all too many. Here place func-
tions in two essential ways. First, it serves as a place-of-sanctuary to which
to ®ee or retreat from the scene of trauma itself. The schoolchildren who
®ed from the public school that was only blocks from the World Trade
Center made their way, through dust and smoke, to another school in
mid-Manhattan—another place, a safe place.26 My friend Parviz, who wit-
nessed the collapse of the buildings from the proximity of Battery Park
Plaza where he was working at the time, eventually found his way home
to the West Village, leaving his van stranded and returning on a motorized
scooter. Perhaps each of us, even if not in the city, returned to some sanc-
tuary at the end of the day—if only to our own bedrooms or studies within
the same house in which we were otherwise mesmerized by televised ac-
counts. But then what of the place itself, the place-of-trauma, here that of
the Trade Towers themselves?
This is a wounded place—a deeply injured, in this case obliterated,
public place, a workplace in which work will never happen again as it did
before. The wound in®icted on it was both to the physical buildings and
to the American body politic for which they stood as such exemplary even
if egregious presences—indeed, the two together, indissociable. It was
striking that at Union Square that Sunday night there were many images—
photographs, drawings and paintings, even woven rugs—of the towers.
They, too, were missing and already missed. Mourning was beginning not
only for the human victims but for the buildings themselves. And not just
for the buildings as such but for their real and symbolic place in people’s
lives. The wound, we might say, was to the body of the place of the polis. The
trauma in®icted was on place as well as people, as is testi¤ed by the pain
many were having in looking at the New York skyline in the absence of the
towers: “It hurts even to look in that direction,” as one person said.27 I
have maintained for a long time that mourning (and not just nostalgia) can
be of place, lost place, and if so we are in for a massive public mourning
for the loss of this archetypal New York place. The mourning will be for
the very place itself (here, the place provided by the buildings as well as
the place on which they stood—now, tragically, all that remains), for all
that the place made possible in the aspirations of others, and for all that
would have happened there had the place not been destroyed.
5. Notice how time has crept back into this last line of thought, as if to
underline the rightness of this essay’s title: “Public Memory in Place and
40 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Time.” The Trade Towers are mourned for what had been there before the
day of destruction, for what happened on that same day, and for a future
that will now never take place. Their entry into public memory is tempo-
rally triplex: past and future as well as present. So we are back to where
this paper began: the special two-indeed three-sidedness of public memory:
Janus plus the present. The very idea of “memory,” of course, lends itself
to temporal analysis, as we know from James and Husserl and Bergson
(and already from St. Augustine), all of whom in differing ways regarded
memory as the consciousness of the past. But from this altogether natural
starting point—part of what Husserl would call the “natural attitude” of
time, or what I am tempted to call “chronocentrism”—we have been led,
ineluctably as it were, to recognize the role of place in any full assessment
of public memory. We started with an initial temporal analysis, moved to
a description of such memory as external horizon (itself always both
spatial and temporal), then plunged into place, and at the end touched on
the temporal one last time. Strange course—strange phenomenon. We
thereby reach a different bivalency, that of time and place themselves.
The fact is that the placial parameters of public memory are not secon-
dary to temporal ones (as chronocentrism would have us believe) but al-
together central, if not primary. In the end, we must acknowledge them as
integral to the phenomenon of public memory in all its amplitude. For the
more we pursue the time of such memory, the more we land in place as
sine qua non for time, above all the time of our lives: our public lives, our
lives with one another as part of the public domain. As “domain” itself
implies (or “arena,” “sphere”—all of the Arendtian terms apply in this
context), this time always happens in some very particular place in which
events can exfoliate or expire and people live or die.
The truth is that place subtends every kind of time, thus every kind of
memory—individual and social, cultural and public. It underlies each of
these memorial modes differently—too differently to encompass in any
single formula. But in the case of public memory it does so in two basic
ways which I have attempted to retrace in the central portion of this paper.
On the one hand, place is part of public memory in the making, as we
witnessed in the hearth event of the Union Square vigil, where a new form
of public memory was beginning to emerge in that very place, both re-
®ecting and requiring it. On the other hand, place remains central to a
more fully consolidated public memory that has become a horizon for the
Public Memory in Place and Time / 41
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

future remembering of many others, not only those present at the mo-
ment of making. This horizon will have its own implacements, more stable
than those in Union Square; it will be embodied and supported by more
enduring memorials than the photographs and other images (accompa-
nied by cursory words) strung up on walls and fences throughout lower
Manhattan during that fateful time. But if the horizon in its very exter-
nality will be more perduring, its formative phase was more poignant.
Each is needed—the hearth as well as the horizon—for a fully effective
public memory to arise.
The Germans distinguish among a Denkmal, a monument meant to me-
morialize a person or event, a Mahnmal (a public reminder that acts as a
warning), and a Gedenkstätte (a place in which a momentous event can be
meditated).28 Here time and place conjoin in the very language of public
memory: if the Denkmal looks back to what has already occurred, the
Gedenkstätte calls for thought in the present, while the Mahnmal asks us to
take care in the future. All three temporal modes not only call for concrete
implacement; each is already implaced in a particular scene, a given site—
a scene or site in which we can truly say that public memory takes the time
to take place.
Notes
1. Cited by Reiner Schürmann, ed., The Public Realm: Essays on Discursive Types
in Political Philosophy (Albany: SUNY Press, 1989), 5.
2. Amy Waldman, “Grief, Lessened by Sharing and Solace from Strangers,”
New York Times, September 14, 2001, p. A8. “There are plastic pails tied to trees
all over the site with handwritten signs marked ‘photos’ which are for any pic-
tures we may ¤nd in the debris” (eyewitness report of Christina Maile, Septem-
ber 12, 2001).
3. Richard Lezin Jones, “A Growing Realization of an Unspeakable Loss,”
New York Times, September 15, 2001, p. A20.
4. See the photographs attached to Waldman, “Grief,” A8.
5. On the victim, see Jean-François Lyotard, The Differend (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1988).
6. See the account given in “A Paper Trail Leads to Sorrow and Some Hope,”
New York Times, September 14, 2001, p. A10: photographs of a credit union state-
ment, a résumé, and a blank check.
42 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

7. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1958), 23. Arendt elaborates on the centrality of the family for the social
realm in contrast with public space: “According to Greek thought, the human
capacity for political organization is not only different from but stands in direct
opposition to that natural association whose center is the home (oikia) and the
family. . . . It was not just an opinion or theory of Aristotle but a simple histori-
cal fact that the foundation of the polis was preceded by the destruction of all
organized units resting on kinship, such as the phratria and the phylé” (24).
8. Richard Sennett, The Fall of Public Man: On the Social Psychology of Capital-
ism (New York: Vintage, 1977), 338–39.
9. Yael Zerubavel, “Invented Tradition and Memory,” in Commemorations: The
Politics of National Identity, ed. John R. Gillis (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1994), 113. Zerubavel details both the relatively recent (post-1921) origin
of this legend and its current retreat as a national legend. She shows how its
secularity allowed it to replace or at least supplement much earlier religious
legends, while being replaced by still others as it became “the major target of
doubts.” At the same time, she demonstrates the intricate implication of history
and legend in the Trumpeldor case (cf. 114ff.).
10. Zerubavel, “Invented Tradition and Memory,” 107.
11. The phrase “invented traditions” is from The Invention of Tradition, ed. Eric
Hobsbawm and T. Ranger (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983). Con-
cerning this topic Zerubavel comments that “when a society undergoes rapid
developments that shatter its social and political order, its need to restructure
the past is as great as its desire to set its future agenda . . . such periods often
stimulate the creation of new cultural forms that replace the weakening older
traditions. These ‘invented traditions’ are particularly signi¤cant for the legiti-
mation of the emergent social and political order, and their success depends, to
a large measure, on their ability to reconstruct an acceptable view of the past”
(“Invented Tradition and Memory,” 105–6).
12. See my Remembering: A Phenomenological Study (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 2000).
13. Yosef Klausner, “Al Kedushat ha-Aretz,” ha-Aretz, March 21, 1921, p. 2,
as cited by Zerubavel, “Invented Tradition and Memory,” 107.
14. I have pursued further the role of place in relation to the political in
“Powers of Place,” unpublished manuscript, August 2001.
15. Arendt, The Human Condition, 26.
Public Memory in Place and Time / 43
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

16. Ibid., 50.
17. Lyotard, The Differend.
18. See Casey, Remembering, chapter 10.
19. “Silence is a phrase. There is no last phrase” (Lyotard, The Differend, xii).
20. Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson
(New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 136.
21. Indeed, is this not to marginalize the very topic of this volume and what
we the contributors came together to discuss in a conference at a place whose
name, “Syracuse,” is redolent with the ancient Greek world?
22. M. Merleau-Ponty, “Eye and Mind,” trans. C. Dallery in Primacy of Per-
ception, ed. J. Edie (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), 190.
23. Maurice Halbwachs, The Collective Memory, trans. F. J. Ditter Jr. and V. Y.
Ditter (New York: Harper, 1980), 156. Halbwachs adds: “Since our impressions
rush by . . . we can . . . recapture the past only by understanding how it is, in
effect, preserved by our physical surrounds” (140). Both cited in Claudia Koonz,
“Between Memory and Oblivion,” in Commemorations: The Politics of National Iden-
tity, ed. John R. Gillis (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 258–59.
24. Pierre Nora, “Between Memory and History: Les lieux de mémoire,” Rep-
resentations 26 (spring 1989): 23–24, cited by Koonz, “Between Memory and
Oblivion,” 276n.
25. See Koonz, “Between Memory and Oblivion,” 265–67. The case of
Buchenwald is quite complex: cf. Koonz, “Between Memory and Oblivion,”
271–73. See also James Young, Writing and Rewriting the Holocaust: Narrative and
the Uses of Interpretation (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), passim.
26. A family center for relatives of the missing was opened at Pier 94 on
the West Side Highway, offering child care, meals, telephones, Internet, etc.—
another kind of sanctuary. See Jane Gross, “Relatives of Missing Find a Place for
Their Comfort,” New York Times, September 18, 2001, p. B6.
27. Bernadette Artus, cited in Nichole M. Christian, “On the Free Boat Ride,
‘It Hurts to Even Look,’” New York Times, September 18, 2001, p. B6.
28. For these terms, see Koonz, “Between Memory and Oblivion,” 259, 275.
44 / Edward S. Casey
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

On May 11, 1960, Karl Adolph Eichmann, former traveling salesman and
chief executioner of the Final Solution, was seized by special forces in a
suburb of Buenos Aires. From there he was ®own under cover to Israel to
face ¤fteen counts of “crimes against the Jewish people, crimes against
humanity, and war crimes during the whole period of the Nazi regime and
especially during the period of the second world war.” The ensuing trial
lasted eight months, and on December 5, 1961, he was sentenced to death
by a special three-judge panel in the District Court of Jerusalem. In the
words of the judges, “[T]he idea of the Final Solution would never have
assumed the infernal forms of the ®ayed skin and tortured ®esh of millions
of Jews without the fanatical zeal and the unquenchable blood thirst of the
appellant and his accomplices.” On May 31 of the following year he was
hanged and his ashes spread over the Mediterranean.1
From beginning to end the entire episode had been fraught with con-
troversy. The arrest itself was of dubious legal standing—a kidnapping,
really—and jurisdictional issues plagued the proceedings throughout. In-
deed it was unclear on just what basis an individual could be tried in a
country that had not yet existed when his crimes against it were committed.
And David Ben-Gurion, who had ordered the capture and prosecution in
the ¤rst place, declared that he did “not care what verdict is delivered
against Eichmann,” thus making clear his intention to bring the accused
to a distinctive and some would say theatrical brand of political justice.
Nothing about the trial, however, was to prove so provocative as the role
played by a Jewish-American intellectual, refugee, and political theorist
2
Arendt, Eichmann, and
the Politics of Remembrance
Stephen Howard Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

who had taken it upon herself to report its proceedings in the pages of the
New Yorker. The author of Totalitarianism and The Human Condition, Hannah
Arendt was at the time widely regarded as a thinker of stunning originality
and insight, and these qualities she unquestionably brought to her task.
Once in Jerusalem, Arendt, in the words of Michael Denneny, “received
a jolt whose impact was to set the course of her thinking for the next
¤fteen years, for she realized that this trial ‘touched upon one of the cen-
tral moral questions of all time, namely the nature and function of human
judgment.’” At the same time, nothing could have prepared her for the
onslaught of criticism that followed in the wake of her reports, published
shortly thereafter in 1963 as Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality
of Evil.2
The reactions were not all negative. Arendt’s friend and correspondent
Mary McCarthy thought it “morally exhilarating,” indeed “a paean of tran-
scendence, heavenly music, like that of the ¤nal chorus of Figaro or the
Messiah.” The poet James Lowell judged it “a masterpiece in rendering the
almost unreadably repellent.” Lowell insisted that contrary to her crit-
ics, he “never felt she was condescending, or hard, or driven by a per-
verse theory, or by any motive except a heroic desire for truth.” Dwight
McDonald concluded that the book was “a masterpiece of historical jour-
nalism that explained the real horror of Nazi genocide” and admitted that
whatever the faults of her analysis, Arendt “tried to learn something from
history” and so took “heart in a book like Eichmann in Jerusalem.” While
disapproving of both the book’s “tone and formulation” and its more po-
lemical critics, William Phillips concluded that Eichmann in Jerusalem was
a “powerful account of Eichmann’s contribution to the ¤nal solution.”3
Others, to put it mildly, proved rather less impressed by the work. A
review in The Nation claimed that it was little more than a “thin trickle of
assertion through a ®ooded swampland of redundancies,” a book, wrote
Klaus Epstein in the Modern Age, “marred by prejudices, special pleading,
and attachment to ¤xed ideas.” Even her friend Gershom Scholem sadly
insisted that it was the “heartless, frequently almost sneering and mali-
cious tone with which these matters, touching the very quick of our life,
are treated in your book to which I take exception.” Lionel Abel, one
of her most vociferous critics, publicly condemned the book for its mis-
applied “aesthetic” categories, found its argument “strange and shocking,”
46 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

“perverse and arbitrary,” and ¤nally dismissed the theory underlying it as
wholly “invalidated.” Indeed, to this day, even such sympathetic readers as
Seyla Benhabib concede that Eichmann in Jerusalem “exhibited at times an
astonishing lack of perspective, balance of judgment, and judicious ex-
pression.”4
That Arendt’s “report on the banality of evil” should provoke such dis-
parate, heated, and enduring reactions is noteworthy, certainly, but to
those familiar with her work not especially surprising. Virtually every one
of her major publications through a career spanning much of the mid-
twentieth century similarly prompted both criticism and praise, confusion
and relief. To acknowledge this fact is to appreciate ¤rst that Arendt rep-
resents, among other things, a problem in interpretation: even her most
astute students confess to struggling to decipher just what she means.
Bernard Crick notes that readers of Totalitarianism are often “awed, bewil-
dered, and enthralled all at once”; Bikhu Parekh judges the philosophical
assumptions at work in The Human Condition “brilliant and valid in some
areas but pedestrian and even invalid in others”; while Peter Fuss ¤nds it
“[r]ichly textured, astonishingly erudite, and dif¤cult to read.” James
Miller observes that On Revolution is “a book of paradoxes,” “marked by
violent jolts, startling vistas. Shock mingles with surprise,” he writes,
“doubt with assent, in a tangled web of response that eludes any comfort-
able characterization.” On receiving the 2000 Hannah Arendt Award Elena
Bonner said: “Reading Arendt is frightening even today.”5
At least two reasons may account for the challenges Arendt poses to the
contemporary reader. One has to do with her resolute but often trying
refusal to apply conventional categories and methods derived from disci-
plinary conventions. As many have observed, Arendt thought in spaces
between traditional modes of inquiry, notably political science and politi-
cal economy. In the words of Melvyn Hill, Arendt “took as her point of
departure and her method as a political thinker not the sophistications of
behavioral science nor of Marxist dialectics, but simply the perspective
of the citizen who views the political world as the realm of freedom
needed in order to act with others in matters of common concern.” Simi-
larly, Margaret Canovan explains that Arendt’s thinking “cannot be cate-
gorized according to the accepted labels of ‘political science,’ ‘conceptual
analysis,’ ‘history of ideas,’ or ‘ideological manifesto.’” “[I]nstead,” writes
Politics of Remembrance / 47
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Canovan, “it evidently purports, in the manner of the classics, to arrive at
an understanding of politics which will be true to men’s experience of
political activity, and which will elucidate the place of politics within hu-
man life and the criteria appropriate for making judgments about it.”6
A second explanation refers not so much to the singularity of Arendt’s
approach as to the ways in which she is frequently read, that is, to the
habits of reception and interpretation that have shaped our understand-
ing of her thought. So distinctive and formidable have been her major
works that they have tended to be taken up as discrete texts; this much is
understandable, perhaps, given the labor required to unpack the elusive
and unique meaning inhering in each. Recently this tendency has been
checked by those who are inclined to see in any given text the imprints
and pre¤gurations of others in her works. In any case, some headway may
be made against the frustrations of reading Arendt by refusing to interpret
her key texts in isolation and assembling, so to speak, companion texts
and letting them shed hermeneutic light on each other. Such will be the
aim and approach of this essay.7
We are now in the midst of a renaissance in Arendt studies, and that is
a very good thing indeed. At the same time it may obscure the fact that
with the publication of Eichmann in Jerusalem her claim to intellectual pre-
eminence was very nearly extinguished; we need only recollect how quiet
was her passing in 1975 to see the apparent damage that work had in®icted
on her reputation. In returning to the book, I have no wish to rehabilitate
that reputation—beyond my abilities in one case, and not necessary in the
other—nor to bury it again—equally foolhardy. I want rather to revisit
the text because I think it offers us a fresh way to think through the politics
of memory. To do so we need to position Eichmann in Jerusalem strategically
between her previous work and the chorus of criticism following its pub-
lication. More speci¤cally, I hope to show that by placing Eichmann inter-
mediate to The Human Condition and the public reactions it prompted, we
arrive at the most illuminating representation of her thought on memory.
Read together, these texts lead us to the heart of Arendt’s insight about
the work of remembrance: that far from being merely nostalgic or retro-
spective, such work is always and at once new, discursive, and unpredict-
able. More generally, I suggest that the criticism provoked by Eichmann
in Jerusalem may be usefully seen as a dramatic af¤rmation, however un-
48 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

intended, of Arendt’s more theoretical statements on the sources, func-
tions, and ends of memory. To that end, I remind us of Arendt’s treatment
of memory in The Human Condition, then examine her portrait of Eich-
mann as an anti-type in the drama of memory, and turn ¤nally to her
critics. These last, I shall argue, instantiate Arendt’s view as to the work
required to sustain the conditions requisite to human polity. First, how-
ever, we must consider the status and function of remembrance in Arendt’s
thought generally. On that basis, we may then be in a position to integrate
her insights into a more satisfying account of her most notorious work.
Arendt on Remembrance
As a student of both Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers, Arendt could
scarcely have avoided the philosophical problem of the relation between
time and being. Her achievement, more positively, was to assert into her
analysis the question of the political in ways not taken up by her mentors.
In one form or another, the major Arendt texts evince a fundamental pre-
occupation with time generally and, more speci¤cally, the role of remem-
brance in the constitution and reconstitution of human polity. We cannot
detail this role at any length here, but a brief and selective survey of several
texts will provide us with at least a working sense of what this category
does for Arendt and what its status was in her thinking about the viability
of political life in our time. Prior to and after Eichmann in Jerusalem, Arendt
invoked the concept of remembrance and features it in subtle but decisive
ways. This is especially the case in The Human Condition, the analysis of
which will be deferred for more fulsome examination later. It is enough
to suggest at this point that in Totalitarianism, Between Past and Future, and
On Revolution we can see suggestive hints of the importance Arendt accords
to remembrance as a political category. Three main lines of thought are
then made evident.
First, remembrance is conceived as ballast against the intrinsic frailty
and transience of human life as it is given. This conviction runs as a leit-
motif throughout much of Arendt’s thought, and it is central to her think-
ing about the prospects of being-with-others in the world. Indeed, she
argues, without this capacity for remembrance, no such life would be
possible—at least as it is lived in the manner appropriate to humanity as
such. It is a point she presses to great effect in The Human Condition, as we
Politics of Remembrance / 49
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

shall see, but it is also given forceful expression in “The Concept of His-
tory,” an essay with which she introduces Between Past and Future. The fol-
lowing passage is worth quoting in full:
All things that owe their existence to men, such as works, deeds, and
words, are perishable, infected, as it were, by the mortality of their
authors. However, if mortals succeeded in endowing their works,
deeds, and words with some permanence and in arresting their
perishability, then these things would, to a degree at least, enter and
be at home in the world of everlastingness, and the mortals them-
selves would ¤nd their place in the cosmos, where everything is im-
mortal except man. The human capacity to achieve this was remem-
brance, Mnemosyne, who was therefore regarded as the mother of
all other muses.8
For Arendt, the impermanence of all human productions was at once un-
deniable and subject to quali¤cation; it was the task of memory to ac-
knowledge, confront, and beat back the forces of forgetting—not, it is
important to stress, by way of living through the past and certainly not
out of any sense of lingering nostalgia for antiquity, but because, without
the trust that memory bestows, all hope for meaningful action would dis-
sipate into the winds of time. Accordingly, Arendt writes, “what goes
on between mortals directly [their experience of being together in the
world] . . . would never outlast the moment of their realization, would
never leave any trace without the help of remembrance.”9
As we can see even in these brief passages, the other side of the equation
of remembrance is forgetfulness, the source and subject of considerable
anxiety in Arendt’s thought. Thus a second theme underwriting the argu-
ment: the persistent and fatal capacity of human beings to forget. Seldom
latent, always potential, this capacity is marked most conspicuously by a
failure of judgment, the tendency to forget that we exist in the world with
and through others. Political judgment, more speci¤cally, operates under
conditions of plurality; in the words of Margaret Canovan, “Although each
sees this world from a slightly different standpoint, sound judgments are
nevertheless not limited by this standpoint but take into account also the
positions of others and therefore shares by them.” Forgetting, by contrast,
50 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

collapses the space of judgment by eliminating the presence of others. To
Arendt, this ever-present danger haunts the human condition, especially
under conditions of genuine revolution when the possibilities of freedom
and action are made startling clear. It was, for example, the basis for the
tragic quality of the French Resistance, which seemed to forget the revo-
lutionary tradition out of which it sprung almost as soon as its success
had been secured. Without this tradition, she writes, “which selects and
names, which hands down and preserves, which indicates where the trea-
sures are and what their worth is—there seems to be no willed continuity
in time and hence, humanly speaking, neither past nor future, only sem-
piternal change of the world and the biological cycle of living creatures in
it.” Such a loss, she concludes, “was consummated by oblivion, by a failure
of memory, which befell not only the heirs but, as it were, the actors, the
witnesses, those who for a ®eeting moment had held the treasure in the
palms of their hands, in short, the living themselves.” At its extreme this
forgetfulness will express itself as typical of the totalitarian state and the
“startling swiftness” with which its leaders are forgotten; for “if there is
such a thing as a totalitarian personality or mentality, this extraordinary
adaptability and absence of continuity are no doubt its outstanding char-
acteristics.”10
Hence the imperative to remember: that through the recollection and
embrace of political greatness, which is to say acting together in freedom
to secure the conditions of freedom, the prospects of life in polity are
enhanced if not guaranteed. The modalities through which this freedom
and its remembrance are played out speci¤es the third dimension of
Arendt’s thinking on the subject. It is, she writes, through speech and
action, words and deeds, that humans enact and af¤rm their collective
identity as political creatures. Here Arendt draws heavily, as is her wont,
from Greek antiquity, for there she discovered the essential role of the
poets, whose genius “consisted in the immortal fame which the poets
could bestow upon word and deed to make them outlast not only the futile
moment of speech and action but even the mortal life of their agent.” In
this sense, remembrance functions to con¤rm the reality of those who, no
longer physically present, had acted freely as political beings; it assures us
that such things are possible, real, and thus may, against the odds, appear
again. This interplay of freedom, speech and action, the political, and re-
Politics of Remembrance / 51
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

membrance is ef¤ciently captured in On Revolution: “[T]hese activities
could appear and be real only when others saw them, judged them, re-
membered them. The life of a free man needed the presence of oth-
ers. Freedom itself needed therefore a place where people could come
together—the agora, the market place, or the polis, the political space
proper.”11
Taken together, Arendt’s re®ections on the protection remembrance
affords against the waves of time and transience; the perils of forgetting
and its consequent destruction of hope, meaning, and motive for political
life; and the disclosure of that life through speech and action represent
three tightly braided themes with which the fabric of her thought is given
its distinctive texture. As we move now to take up the role of remem-
brance in The Human Condition, Eichmann in Jerusalem, and the critical re-
sponses to the latter, it will become clear, I hope, that the concept retains
signi¤cant explanatory force and gives us a basis upon which these texts
might be productively read.
Remembrance and The Human Condition
Upon its publication in 1958, The Human Condition was thought to contain
“insights into history and politics” that seemed to Mary McCarthy, among
others, “both amazing and obvious.” In fact it is this very combination of
the strange and the self-evident that continues to provoke Arendt’s cham-
pions and critics, and I must confess that it troubles my analysis as well.
At the same time, the work is marked, like many of her other texts, by a
conspicuous tendency to strike conceptual distinctions that remain for
many of her critics baf®ing or at best inconclusive: labor, work, and action;
vita contemplativa-vita activa; freedom and necessity; politics and philoso-
phy; thought and action. She has moreover been challenged in turn for
being elitist, antifeminist, nostalgic, and excessively beholden to antique
and antiquated political models; for lacking normative standards; and for
being philosophically opportunistic. And then there is her curious habit
of generating extensive lines of inquiry by philologically—and rather
selectively—unpacking the meaning of certain words. But there can be
no mistaking that the work, for all its eccentricities, presents us with the
most promising avenue into her thinking about memory. Arendt does not
dwell at great length on the matter, nor does she expend much effort to
52 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

link the concept to the many, many others that constitute the text as a
whole. Still, there is reason aplenty to revisit The Human Condition as our
starting point, speci¤cally her treatment of action and its constituent
features—the public realm, natality, plurality, and speech. Here we will
¤nd if not a full-blown theory of memory then the operative assumptions
on which such an account might be developed.12
The conditions of our humanity, Arendt contends, are three. Labor is
that activity which corresponds to maintaining the life process itself; its
realm is private and thus excluded by de¤nition from the political. “Labor
power,” Arendt explains, “produces objects only incidentally and is pri-
marily concerned with the means of its own reproduction; since its power
is not exhausted when its own reproduction has been secured, it can be
used for the reproduction of more than one life process, but it never ‘pro-
duces’ anything but life.” Importantly for our purposes, Arendt recognizes
the centrality of labor to the human condition even as she stresses its in-
suf¤ciency: labor by its very nature is caught up in the recurrent cycles of
the biological process; it leaves nothing lasting behind and therefore passes
from memory. Work, by distinction, corresponds to the fabrication of a
world worth living in. Here Arendt refers to humans as homo faber, crea-
tures who create from the endless variety of things in the world the in-
struments and objects that make that world habitable. “Their proper use,”
writes Arendt, “does not cause them to disappear and they give to human
arti¤ce the stability and solidity without which it could not be relied upon
to house the unstable and mortal creature which is man.” Although not
subject to the same forces as labor, the production of such instruments
and objects promises at least a provisional respite from the demands of life
biologically considered; in short, it gives to the human condition a certain
durability, which in turn “gives the things of the world their relative inde-
pendence from men who produce and use them, their ‘objectivity’ which
makes them withstand, ‘stand against,’ and endure, at least for a time, the
voracious needs and wants of their living makers and users.”13
Action, ¤nally, denotes that which actualizes our shared capacity for
living freely in a world inhabited by others. Of the three, Arendt accords
pride of place to the latter, for in action she discovers that condition which
humans alone share and is therefore de¤nitively human. Arendt, who once
described political theory as the art of making distinctions, can be exas-
Politics of Remembrance / 53
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

perating in this as in other such schemata; but it is clear that in the category
of action she seeks to identify that which is decisive, essential to the pros-
pects of our being-in-the-world:
If the animal laborans needs the help of homo faber to ease his labor
and remove his pain, and if mortals need his help to erect a home on
earth, acting and speaking men need the help of homo faber in his
highest capacity, that is, the help of the artist, of poets and histori-
ographers, of monument-builders or writers, because without them
the only product of their activity, the story they enact or tell, would
not survive at all. In order to be what the world is always meant to
be, a home for men during their life on earth, the human arti¤ce
must be a place ¤t for action and speech, for activities not only en-
tirely useless for the necessities of life but of an entirely different
nature from the manifold activities of fabrication by which the world
itself and all things in it are produced.14
As near as I can tell, the category has no speci¤c propositional content:
it is rather a modality, a force that “always establishes relationships and
therefore has an inherent tendency to force open all limitations and cut
across all boundaries.” As elusive as it is conceptually, action may be
de¤ned with reference to its place, that is in the space of appearance,
where we see and are seen by others, and to the object against which that
force is directed, that is to the creation of something new in the world. In
the ¤rst case, action is always to be understood as that which is undertaken
among others, in the public realm, the polis, needing, she wrote, “for its
full appearance the shining brightness we once called glory, and which is
possible only in the public world.” Action thus takes on its aspect only
under conditions of plurality, in a world of others at once similar as specie
are similar and unique as autonomous agents are unique. In the second
case, action marks that enduring capacity of human beings to begin anew.
To act, she writes, is to “assert ourselves into the human world, and this
assertion is like a second birth.” Linking action with natality is absolutely
basic to her argument: it is de¤nitive of action that it starts something, that
it literally activates the world by acting in the world; it is thus constitutive
of ourselves as humans and of the freedom necessary to be fully human.
54 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

“With the creation of man,” Arendt observes, “the principle of beginning
came into the world, which of course, is only another way of saying that
the principle of freedom was created when man was created but not be-
fore.”15
Several entailments from this position bear directly on our subject. Ac-
tion may be said to effect beginnings because the world in which they take
place is un¤xed, contingent, and ultimately frail. Under such conditions,
action always carries with it the element of surprise; that which it creates
can never be predicted or predetermined. Indeed, writes Arendt, “It is in
the nature of beginning that something new is started which cannot be
expected from whatever may have happened before. This character of star-
tling unexpectedness is inherent in all beginnings and in all origins. . . .
The fact that man is capable of action means that the unexpected can
be expected from him, that he is able to perform what is in¤nitely im-
probable. And this again is possible only because each man is unique, so
that with each birth something uniquely new comes into the world.” In a
fragile and impermanent world, that which is created by action is thus not
only unexpected but constantly in danger of being forgotten. That it not
be forgotten, and that it must not be if the world is to regenerate itself,
is a charge imposed upon all those who would sustain the conditions of
public life. By direct implication, action thus conceived is essentially,
profoundly political; indeed it represents the very possibility of politi-
cal life generally and speci¤cally the prospects of democratic polity. As
D’entreves stresses, Arendt’s “theory of action articulates the historical ex-
perience and normative presuppositions of participatory democracy . . .
and such a theory remains essential for the reactivation of public life in
the modern world.”16
Here we encounter the speci¤c function of speech assigned by Arendt,
that is, its capacity to disclose the meaning of action and to enter that
meaning into the collective memory. Speech reveals action for what it
is and the actor for who he or she is: “Without the accompaniment of
speech,” notes Arendt, “action would not only lose its revelatory character,
but, by the same token, it would lose its subject.” Through action and
speech, she writes, “men show who they are, reveal actively their unique
personal identities and thus make their appearance in the world.” But it is
just because that world is so intangible, so ®eeting and relentlessly novel,
Politics of Remembrance / 55
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

that speech is required to not only disclose meaning but to give it perma-
nence, to give it a reality and a history that it would otherwise lose. We
see now, perhaps, the relationship posed by Arendt between action and
remembrance. She summarizes the point as follows: “The whole factual
world of human affairs depends for its reality and its continued existence,
¤rst, upon the presence of others who have seen and will remember, and,
second, on the transformation of the intangible into the tangibility of
things. Without remembrance and without the rei¤cation which remem-
brance needs for its own ful¤llment . . . the living activities of action,
speech, and thought would lose their reality at the end of each process and
disappear as though they never had been.”17 The disclosive function of
speech is accordingly instrumental as well: it reveals the meaning of ac-
tion, and it heralds that meaning into the “web of human relationships”
that Arendt takes to be de¤nitive of human community. To the extent that
that web underlies the conditions of polity, its power and purpose is to
sustain the conditions of life itself. Indeed, she writes, “A life without
speech and without action . . . is literally dead to the world; it has ceased
to be human life because it is no longer lived among men.” Arendt can thus
conclude, “The organization of the polis . . . is a kind of organized re-
membrance. It assures the moral actor that his passing existence and ®eet-
ing greatness will never lack the reality that comes from being seen, being
heard, and, generally, appearing before an audience of fellow men.”18
Eichmann, Forgetting, and the Memory of Politics
Even so brief a review of The Human Condition suggests that we have in it
the means to read Eichmann in Jerusalem in new and productive ways. In
turning to the latter, I have no wish to resolve or even address directly the
many perplexities that still haunt the text. The Human Condition, rather,
may be viewed as a template for making sense of both works; more pre-
cisely, Eichmann in Jerusalem may be seen as instantiating in practice the
theoretical claims summarized above. In this context, Eichmann functions
as a kind of illustrative anti-type to the Periclean model ¤gured in The
Human Condition; it is a character study as well as a narrative, a dramatic
rendering of a man rendered unreal in an unreal world—indeed a non-
world where force is mistaken for action, super®uousness for plurality,
and cliché for speech. Eichmann is thus made to stand as a kind of morality
56 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

lesson for what happens when the space of appearance, action, renewal,
and plurality disappears into the holes of oblivion. His is rather the space,
if it may be called that, of erasure, of silence and the thoughtlessness that
always attends forgetting. Eichmann, we shall see, cannot act because he
occupies no space within which to act, cannot speak because there is no
who there that speech might disclose, and cannot remember because under
such conditions there is literally nothing to remember. Those familiar with
the Penguin edition of Eichmann in Jerusalem will note in this sense how
perfectly its cover photo captures the Eichmann ethos: there he sits in the
courtroom, sealed off from the world in a glass booth, mutely staring
ahead as if in disbelief at his own fate and the fate of those for whom he
was responsible.
By way of approaching Arendt’s portrait, we might begin with what she
takes to be the primal fact of Eichmann’s character: his essential thought-
lessness. This is, of course, the basis of her ¤nal claim about the banality
of his evil, and it gave her much trouble as a result. It has been suggested
that some of that trouble was due to her struggle to put into words a
phenomenon heretofore unknown to the world. Thus Seyla Benhabib ob-
serves that “Arendt was punished by the Jewish community precisely be-
cause she, like so many others who were Holocaust survivors, had not
found the right public language, the right discourse, through which to
narrate past sorrow, suffering, and loss.” If we read Eichmann in Jerusalem
as a study in the consequences of forgetting, however, it becomes apparent
that Arendt had found a powerful language with which to describe and
condemn the evil that had beset the world.19
At the very least, Arendt gives us a means to comprehend just what it
is that makes forgetting on such a scale possible in the ¤rst place. “The
longer one listened to him,” Arendt writes, “the more obvious it became
that his inability to speak was closely connected with an inability to think,
namely, to think from the standpoint of someone else. No communication
was possible with him, not because he lied but because he was surrounded
by the most reliable of all safeguards against the words and presence of
others, and hence against reality as such.” This failure is in the end a failure
to exercise the human capacity for judgment, that is, to assess good from
evil without recourse to convention, self-interest, or language rules. As
Jerome Kohn succinctly writes, “Eichmann was not a dog but a man, but
Politics of Remembrance / 57
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

no more than a conditioned animal did he exercise free choice. Arendt is
intent to show throughout her ‘report’ that Eichmann did not act sponta-
neously or take initiative, that he avoided responsibility and did not judge.
He did as he was bid.” Here was the ultimate source and ground of Eich-
mann’s evil—his “almost total inability to look at anything from the oth-
er’s point of view.” Such a character ®aw—I think Arendt is saying this
®aw is descriptive beyond the man himself—thus is made to stand in the
starkest of contrasts to the plurality marking the human condition. This
thoughtlessness, this incapacity to imagine any perspective but one’s own,
is the surest evidence that his was a life without world, without, that is,
the web of relations constitutive of our shared humanity. He was, as
Arendt brilliantly puts it, “a leaf in the whirlwind of time.”20
From this fact of Eichmann’s character Arendt builds her case. It is a
complex, striking, and painful rendering, but through it we begin to dis-
cern the outlines of what might be called the inhuman condition. Two
deeply interconnected features of that condition are treated with refer-
ence to Eichmann’s habits of speech and then to his memory—or lack
thereof. Arendt was in the ¤rst instance clearly struck by Eichmann’s un-
failing ability to render complicated historical or moral questions into a
cliché. Indeed, the accused seemed incapable of saying anything that was
not at once transparent and empty—the precise opposite, that is, of the
power she accords speech in her earlier work. From beginning to end, the
trial displayed the spectacle of a man for whom language was literally
meaningless—except as a kind of self-protection against authentic disclo-
sure or communication. “Eichmann’s retreat from reality into the clichés
of ideological thinking or postwar reconciliation,” notes Dana Villa, “sig-
naled not a peculiar mendacity, but a bizarre and unsettling form of hon-
esty: the honesty of the other-directed conformist who literally ‘never
realized what he was doing.’”21
Unable to think from the standpoint of others, he ¤lled the vacuum of
his mind with stock phrases and “had at his disposal,” Arendt observes, “a
different elating cliché for each period of his life and each of his activities.”
In this respect, the banality of his evil corresponded to the banality of his
speech. His ¤nal words, Arendt reports in her chilling conclusion, were
of a piece with this habit: “After a short while, gentlemen, we shall meet
58 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

again. Such is the fate of all men. Long live Germany, long live Argentina,
long live Austria. I shall not forget them.” Arendt then notes: “Nothing
could have demonstrated this more convincingly than the grotesque silli-
ness of his last words . . . in the face of death, he had found the cliché
used in funeral oratory. Under the gallows, his memory played him the
last trick; he was elated, and forgot that this was his own funeral. It was
as though in those last minutes he was summing up the lesson that this
long course in human wickedness had taught us—the lesson of the fear-
some, word-and-thought-defying banality of evil.”22
By direct extension, Eichmann’s capacity for remembrance may be
readily glimpsed. Recalling Arendt’s point in The Human Condition—that
“each individual in his unique distinctness, appears and con¤rms himself
in speech and action, and that these activities, despite their material fu-
tility, possess an enduring quality of their own because they create their
own remembrance”—we see in Eichmann’s portrait the image of some-
one for whom genuine remembrance was impossible. And this failure of
memory in turn explained Eichmann’s incapacity for judgment; unable to
remember, he could not judge—could not, that is, incorporate into his
“thought” the fact of others being in the world. Having been blown by the
winds into history, he was possessed, Arendt writes, of an “extraordinarily
faulty memory,” ignorant of “everything that was not directly, technically
and bureaucratically, connected with his job,” functioning “only in respect
to things that had a direct bearing upon his career.” The past was to Eich-
mann what the cliché was to speech: a repository of self-gratifying ¤ctions
ready at hand, stories, as Arendt explains, that “ran along a different tape
in his memory, and it was this taped memory that showed itself to be proof
against reason and argument and information and insight of any kind.”23
Like the cliché, such taped memories bore no more relation to the
world than did the stock phrase; to invoke them was not to act in remem-
brance but to deny such action at all. Thus, I presume, the animus behind
Arendt’s seemingly cold assessment of what she believed were the fraudu-
lent rituals of her own day. “Those young German men and women who
every once in a while—on the occasion of all the Diary of Anne Frank
hubbub and of the Eichmann trial—treat us to hysterical outbreaks of
guilt feelings are not staggering under the burden of the past, their fathers’
Politics of Remembrance / 59
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

guilt; rather they are trying to escape from the pressure of very present
and actual problems into a cheap sentimentality.”24
Criticism and the Work of Memory
A decade after the Eichmann trial Hannah Arendt found herself still pre-
occupied with her experience there and, more pointedly, with what the
accused “meant.” The mind to which she bore witness in that Israeli court-
room had at once repulsed and fascinated her, for in it she had discovered
something about the nature of evil itself—it was not deep as love is deep,
nor heroic as the spirit is heroic; it was not radical but “banal.” She discov-
ered also that Eichmann negatively exempli¤ed something fundamental
about the nature and function of human judgment—hence she returned
to the trial by way of accounting for her last major work, a projected
three-volume study of thinking, willing, and judging under the title The
Life of the Mind. Here she re®ects again: “Clichés, stock phrases, adherence
to conventional, standardized codes of expression and conduct have the
socially recognized function of protecting us against reality, that is, against
the claim on our thinking attention that all events and facts make by virtue
of their existence. If we were responsive to this claim all the time, we
would soon be exhausted; Eichmann differed from the rest of us only in
that he clearly knew of no such claim at all.”25 As we have seen, one of the
chief markers of such language is that it protects against memory itself; it
is a peculiarly insidious form of amnesia, a kind of mental cliché that has
a devastating effect on individuals and cultures. Eichmann, like those
“young German men and women” given to “cheap sentimentality,” was
guilty in the ¤rst place of failing to think, hence to remember. This failure
is perforce a failure to engage the world, to think and act in a world in a
way that acknowledges the existence and the claims of other human be-
ings. Remembrance, to recall our earlier discussion, is for Arendt a speci¤c
type of thinking, de¤nitively political to the extent that it holds in trust
the acts and deeds of those who have come before; it functions as a bul-
wark against the tides of time that otherwise erode our sense of hope and
purpose. To remember is thus not simply to turn backward; it is itself a
type of action that steadies us in the face of an unknown and unpredictable
future; it allows us, as the poet Alan Dugan put it, “to walk out bravely
into the daily accident.”26
60 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

These considerations, I believe, provide us with a way to reconceive the
critical responses to Eichmann in Jerusalem. Some speculation is unavoid-
able here, but we might begin by noting Arendt’s notorious refusal to de-
fend herself, concede the argument, or apologize for so offending her
Jewish (and other) readers. Perhaps—and here is the speculation—she
understood and appreciated at some level that the debate swirling around
her “report” was, however discom¤ting, precisely the kind of action she
had envisioned in The Human Condition and precisely what was missing in
Eichmann’s Germany. For however just or unjust her critics, however per-
sonal, insulting, aggrandizing, and “right” or “wrong” their interpretations,
the fact was that they were debating issues of general concern in public,
risking their reputations and convictions, acting freely in a realm created
by speech and deeds. Was this not glorious?
Make no mistake: the criticism was intense. Arendt’s examination of
the Eichmann trial called down the wrath of Jewish intellectuals in the
United States and abroad, and that wrath has yet to fully dissipate even in
this, her moment of rebirth in American political theory. As I have noted,
much of the criticism had to do with her alleged anti-Zionism, her iden-
ti¤cation of the Jewish leaders with complicity in the Final Solution, and
her reference to the banality of Eichmann’s evil. Arendt’s critics did not
stop there, of course. Among the primary charges against her were several
particularly telling complaints. The ¤rst, leveled most pointedly by Marie
Syrkin, concerned the quality of scholarship Arendt brought to bear on
her study. Here we are told that Arendt’s “astonishing indifference to
charges of gross inaccuracy and omissions of pertinent data” is explicable
only because “Miss Arendt is considered exempt from the criteria reli-
ability usually applied to any work which pretends to be objective schol-
arship rather than tendentious exposition.” Lionel Abel similarly despaired
of the book’s “faults of omission” and “frequent misstatement of fact,” and
like many others he complained that she limited “herself to the description
of the sensational facts, which, while they add to our nausea, add nothing
to our clarity about what happened in Nazi Europe and why the Jewish
leaders behaved as they did.” To these charges Arendt was maddeningly
indifferent.27
A second line of criticism proved equally vehement and perhaps more
telling, more lasting. It concerns what her friend William Phillips refers
Politics of Remembrance / 61
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

to as the “snide, slightly hostile tone” that pervades the work, and it was
this tone “of irony, of insinuation, of moral Olympianism that makes the
treatment of the Jews in Eichmann in Jerusalem seem so cold and harsh.”
Gershom Scholem asked rhetorically how it was that her “version of the
events so often seems to come between us and the events.” Whatever her
intentions, her critics concluded, whatever her brilliance or learning,
Hannah Arendt lacked that love of the Jewish people, that Ahabath Israel,
and for this they could not forgive her.28
Such criticism could be extended considerably. For our purposes, how-
ever, the point is not to mount the case against Arendt but to ¤rst acknowl-
edge the controversy she sparked and then to ask what it might tell us
about the work of memory. I would like to suggest that in the very fact of
that criticism, in its animation, seriousness, and public character, can be
found a kind of redemption for the ideas professed in The Human Condition
and the praxis that was Eichmann in Jerusalem. Perhaps the most succinct
way to the point is to invoke Arendt’s own response to her friend Gershom
Scholem: “What confuses you,” she writes, “is that my arguments and my
approach are different from what you are used to; in other words, the
trouble is that I am independent.”29
And it was this independence of mind—a mind that was not therefore
abstracted from but deeply engaged in the world—that created from the
circumstances of Eichmann’s trial precisely those conditions articulated in
her earlier thought. She had acted and said something new; what she said
could not have been predicted, nor could she have predicted the conse-
quences of her words. But in their very expression, in the debate she pro-
voked and ideas she loosed upon the world, she provided a kind of antidote
to the thoughtlessness and the cliché-ridden idiocy of Eichmann’s speech.
In the process she had helped reconstitute the conditions of remembrance
essential to democratic polity. Hannah Arendt, in other words, had started
an argument.
Notes
1. Quoted in Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality
of Evil (New York: Penguin, 1992), 20, 249.
2. Quoted in Eichmann in Jerusalem, 20; Michael Denneny, “The Privilege of
62 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Ourselves: Hannah Arendt on Judgment,” in Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the
Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York: St. Martin’s, 1979), 253–54.
3. Mary McCarthy, “The Hue and Cry,” Partisan Review 31 (1964): 91;
Robert Lowell, “More on Eichmann,” Partisan Review 31 (1964): 261; Dwight
McDonald, “More on Eichmann,” Partisan Review 31 (1964): 262; William Phil-
lips, “Arguments,” Partisan Review 31 (1964): 283.
4. D. J. Goodspeed, “Violence in the Abstract,” Nation 196 (1963): 379;
Klaus Epstein, “The Eichmann Affair,” Modern Age 8 (1963–64): 110; Gershom
Scholem, “Eichmann in Jerusalem: An Exchange of Letters between Gershom
Scholem and Hannah Arendt,” in The Jew as Pariah: Jewish Identity and Politics in the
Modern Age, ed. Ron Feldman (New York: Grove Press, 1978), 241; Lionel Abel,
“The Aesthetics of Evil: Hannah Arendt on Eichmann and the Jews,” Partisan Re-
view 30 (1963): 219, 224, 230; Seyla Benhabib, “Arendt’s Eichmann in Jerusalem,”
in The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt, ed. Dana Villa (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2000), 65.
5. Bernard Crick, “On Rereading the Origins of Totalitarianism,” in Hannah
Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York: St. Martin’s,
1979), 41; Bikhu Parekh, “Hannah Arendt’s Critique of Marx,” in Hannah Arendt:
The Recovery of the Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York: St. Martin’s, 1979),
99; Peter Fuss, “Hannah Arendt’s Conception of Political Community,” in Hannah
Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York: St. Martin’s,
1979), 158; James Miller, “The Pathos of Novelty: Hannah Arendt’s Image of
Freedom in the Modern World,” in Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World,
ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York: St. Martin’s, 1979), 177; Elena Bonner, “The Re-
mains of Totalitarianism,” New York Review of Books 58 (2001): 4.
6. Melvyn A. Hill, “The Fictions of Mankind and the Stories of Men,” in
Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill (New York:
St. Martin’s, 1979), 277; Margaret Canovan, The Political Thought of Hannah Arendt
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974), 1.
7. For exemplary syntheses, see especially Seyla Benhabib, The Reluctant
Modernism of Hannah Arendt (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996); Richard J. Bern-
stein, Hannah Arendt and the Jewish Question (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996);
Margaret Canovan, Hannah Arendt: A Reinterpretation of Her Political Thought (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992); and Maurizio Passerin D’entreves,
The Political Philosophy of Hannah Arendt (New York: Routledge, 1994).
Politics of Remembrance / 63
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

8. Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought
(New York: Meridian, 1963), 43.
9. Arendt, Past and Future, 44.
10. Canovan, Political Thought, 111. See also Ronald Beiner, Political Judgment
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983); Arendt, Past and Future, 5, 6;
Hannah Arendt, Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1968), 3, 4.
11. Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Penguin, 1965), 31.
12. Mary McCarthy, quoted on back cover of Hannah Arendt, The Human
Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958). For further assessments
of these tensions, see the essays in Hill, Hannah Arendt.
13. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1998), 136, 137.
14. Ibid., 173.
15. Ibid., 176, 177, 180, 190.
16. Ibid., 178; D’entreves, Political Philosophy, 65.
17. Arendt, Human Condition, 95, 178, 179.
18. Ibid., 176, 198.
19. Benhabib, “Arendt’s Eichmann in Jerusalem,” 65.
20. Arendt, Eichmann, 49; Jerome Kohn, “Evil and Plurality: Hannah Arendt’s
Way to The Life of the Mind, I,” in Hannah Arendt: Twenty Years Later, ed. Larry May
and Jerome Kohn (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 153; Arendt, Eichmann,
32, 47–48.
21. Dana R. Villa, “The Banality of Philosophy: Arendt on Heidegger and
Eichmann,” in Hannah Arendt: Twenty Years Later, ed. Larry May and Jerome Kohn
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 184.
22. Arendt, Eichmann, 53, 252.
23. Ibid., 34, 78.
24. Ibid., 251.
25. Hannah Arendt, The Life of the Mind (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovano-
vich), 4.
26. Alan Dugan, “Morning Song,” Poems Seven: New and Complete Poetry (New
York: Seven Stories Press, 2001), 43.
27. Marie Syrkin, “The Clothes of the Empress,” Dissent 4 (1963): 344; Abel,
“Aesthetics of Evil,” 211.
28. Phillips, “Arguments,” 281; Scholem, “Exchange of Letters,” 241.
29. Scholem, “Exchange of Letters,” 250.
64 / Stephen H. Browne
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

3
“Everywhere You Go, It’s There”
Forgetting and Remembering
the University of Texas Tower Shootings
Rosa A. Eberly
Meyer: “Can you look at that Tower and not think of Whitman?”
Pryor: “No. You just can’t do it.”
Interview of Richard “Cactus” Pryor, Austin native, long-
time radio host, and author, by Chuck Meyer, host of Good
Morning Austin, KLBJ-AM, August 1, 1996
John Sayles chose to end Lone Star, his epic ¤lm about Texas, with the com-
mand “Forget the Alamo.”1 However contested memories of the Alamo
have been, the Alamo most certainly has been remembered.2 Forget the
Alamo? Why? How? Sayles has said of his ¤lm:
A lot of what this movie is about is history and what we do with it.
Do we use it to hit each other? Is it something that drags us down?
Is it something that makes us feel good? You can get six different
people to look at the Alamo and they have six different stories about
what actually happened and what its signi¤cance was. The same goes
for your personal history. At what point do you say about your par-
ents, “that was them, this is me. I take responsibility for myself from
this day on.” That’s also what this movie is about.3
Sayles’s claim that certain memories should be forgotten as well as his
distinction between individual and collective memories provide a regional
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

context for understanding some of the different ways the 1966 shootings
at the University of Texas at Austin have been remembered and why, argu-
ably, some people and institutions might prefer that they be forgotten.
Herein I review some of the discursive artifacts that perpetuate differ-
ent memories of what happened on August 1, 1966, when Charles Whit-
man, a former Marine enrolled as an undergraduate engineering major at
the University of Texas at Austin, killed fourteen and injured thirty-one by
sharpshooting randomly for over an hour from the observation deck atop
the UT Tower.4 In addition this chapter will suggest how public discourses
about these artifacts most often blur distinctions among individual, cul-
tural, institutional, and public memories. Because this study was con-
ducted largely through my undergraduate rhetoric course titled “The UT
Tower and Public Memory,” this chapter will also recount some anecdotal
evidence about interactions between and among various publics, institu-
tions, and special interests regarding memories of the shootings and the
status of the Tower itself as a topos.5 This essay thus serves as an active
reminder—not merely a nostalgic recollection—of rhetoric’s produc-
tive and practical as well as critical or hermeneutic powers to use and
shape memory through discourse.
That the events of August 1, 1966, are remembered—at least by indi-
viduals—¤rst became clear to me as I listened to local talk radio on Au-
gust 1, 1995, the twenty-ninth anniversary of the shootings. What I heard
on KLBJ-AM’s Paul Pryor Show that day ultimately convinced me that the
events of August 1, 1966—and how those events are remembered by in-
dividuals, publics, and institutions—deserved study, deliberation, and
perhaps intervention. After an initial one-hour segment with guests, Paul
Pryor, son of “Cactus” Pryor (mentioned above), opened the phone lines
to callers who had memories of the day. Paul Pryor had promoted the
show by saying it would focus on the anniversary of the Tower shootings
and several other topics, but calls recounting individual memories con-
tinued throughout the afternoon, extending Pryor’s three-hour show. In
addition to the many individuals who apparently needed to tell where they
were and what they remembered of the day twenty-nine years before,
Pryor’s studio guests offered a provocative gloss on the status of individual,
institutional, and public memories of the shootings.
Pryor’s guests for the opener were Neal Spelce, a UT alumnus who was
66 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

news director of Austin’s KTBC radio and television in 1966 and whose
voice is often associated with coverage of the shootings,6 as well as Phil
Miller and Les Reedy, both KTBC reporters in 1966. As Miller recounted
his memory of seeing Austin policeman Billy Speed fatally shot by Whit-
man through a six-inch gap in a concrete baluster—what is often de-
scribed as Whitman’s “best shot”—Pryor asked Miller if he still thought
of what happened that day. “Does that still affect you today, Phil? Do you
think about that?”
Miller: “Yes.”
Pryor: “I bet you do. You never forget that.”
Miller: “I was going to say, uh, you know, that, um, this might be
one of the things that we all need to put behind us at some stage of
the game.”
Spelce: “You know, it should, but I tell you what: uh, it made, so
many people it made such an impression on, who were there. And
the university campus is so much a part of this city, and it’s awfully
hard to walk across that campus, even this long afterward, and
not all of a sudden——. I was out at the University of Texas com-
mencement in May. Wonderful evening. Pageantry like you wouldn’t
believe; not like when we graduated out there. It was festive; there
was music; there were colors. It was an unbelievable evening. And
then the Tower lit up orange. And, for a moment there, even though
I was wrapped up in the events of the commencement, for a mo-
ment there, all of a sudden, it just comes back.”
Pryor: “And it’s forever with all of us that were around then. And
I think what you say’s true, Phil, that at some point you’ve got to
deal with the pain of it. Because it was a very painful experience.
But I think it’s important, too, that, for example, the students there
now know about this. Because it is history and it was a very tragic,
unbelievable thing that happened here, in what we thought was the
safest city in the world.”
Miller’s turn from saying he still thinks of the day to saying “this might
be one of the things that we all need to put behind us at some stage of the
game” suggests the dif¤culty Texans and Austinites have had coming to
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 67
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

terms with their memories of the Tower shootings and perhaps of other
tragic regional events. Texans have certainly had their share. As I had coffee
and talked with a friend one day about whether to risk, as an assistant
professor, offering a course on the Tower shootings, I noticed what was
carved deeply into the table where I was sitting: “Texas is the reason JFK
is dead.”7
At its best, local talk radio once provided and some believe still can
provide a means of forming or regenerating ephemeral local publics.8 The
discourses of individuals about the Tower shootings on the twenty-ninth
anniversary and afterward were nearly univocal in their lack of any sense
of publicness; even differences of opinion about whether the shootings
should be remembered were supported by individual psychological war-
rants rather than by any awareness that the event and its resonances might
warrant public judgment and conjoint action.9 In Austin the relationship
between public and institutional forgetting and individual remembering
regarding the Tower shootings is clear: the memories of individuals had
and have no place to go other than local talk radio—or coffeehouse tables
and graf¤ti at the top of the Tower stairs.10 Put differently, because neither
the city of Austin nor the University of Texas at Austin nor any group of
individual citizens engaging in conjoint action had or has yet offered a
public place—a topos—for storing and inventing memories of the events
of August 1, 1966, and their consequences, individual memory has been
reenacted every year on local talk radio.11
That local radio has provided the only public topos for inventions of
individual and public memories of the Tower shootings was con¤rmed
through unsolicited calls to another KLBJ-AM news and talk radio show,
Good Morning Austin with Chuck Meyer, on August 1, 1996. Meyer, who
has worked in several major markets doing various combinations of news
and talk, interviewed Tower shooting perennials “Cactus” Pryor, who
worked for KTBC in 1966 and is now a senior vice-president of the LBJ
Company, which owns KLBJ radio, and Robert Heard, an Associated Press
reporter who was shot by Whitman and ¤led a report (his byline conse-
quently was on stories about the shootings in newspapers around the
globe).12 Meyer, who had been in Austin only four months when his inter-
views with “Cactus” Pryor and Heard aired, did not intend to take any calls
on the shootings.13 Indeed, when the calls came in several minutes after
68 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

the ¤rst interview was over, Meyer and his on-air cohorts were in the
midst of a continuing gag they titled “Trousers for Todd,” which consisted
of asking listeners to bring large pants to the station to ¤t KLBJ’s morn-
ing newsperson, Todd Jeffries. The show’s banter made for discursive
ground as unfurrowed and infertile as possible for expressions of indi-
vidual mourning and memory to sprout and grow. Nonetheless, the calls
came in—insistent and compelling enough for Meyer and his producer to
decide to air them, even in the context of “Trousers for Todd”:
Meyer: “Well, the ‘Trousers for Todd’ campaign continues. Three
more pairs of pants came in yesterday for you, Todd.”
Jeffries: “All right!”
Meyer: “This is a wonderful thing. These are nice, too.”
Jeffries: “Let me see one of those, there.”
Meyer: “Well, and, whoever—-I wish they would have dropped a
note off and let us know who this was. It’s a nice, tasteful gray, 40
waistline, incidentally, Todd. This could ¤t you.”
Jeffries: “Want me to try these on?”
Meyer: “Yeah! Try ’em on on the air.”
Jeffries: “Right now?”
Meyer: “Go ahead. I’ve seen, uh, men in their skivvies before.”
John Midani (sportsperson): “You’ve paid to see men in their
skivvies before.”
Meyer: “I didn’t want to get into that, John. But, now that you
mention it, you know.”
Jeffries: “God, I hope I have clean underwear on.”
Midani: “I hope you have any underwear on.”
Meyer: “This is one of those days that Mom warned you about:
‘Always wear clean underwear.’”
Jeffries (feigning a woman’s voice): “Todd, you never know. You
might have to take your pants off on the air.”
Midani: “How about that? I ¤gured you for a boxers kinda guy.”
Meyer: “No, he’s strictly briefs.”
Jeffries: “I enjoy the support. Uh, these are a little snug.”
Meyer: “Too bad we don’t have a bed for you to lie down on so
you could get these things on.”
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 69
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Midani: “Fasten them under your stomach.”
Jeffries: “Give me some disco music.”
Meyer: “Do you know there’s a female intern in the next room?”
The music faded and Meyer said a caller named Jeannie was on
the line and wanted to talk about the Tower shootings. She began, “I
want you to know that this is one of the hardest calls I’ve ever had to
make. But I wanted to let you know (pause) I appreciate your show.”
Meyer: “Yes.”
Caller: “My husband was the police of¤cer who was killed at the
university.” (Caller hesitates and voice breaks.) “And, I’m sorry—”
Meyer: “That’s ok. What was your husband’s name?”
Caller: “Billy Speed.”
Meyer: “Billy Speed was killed that day at the UT Tower.”
Caller: “Yes, sir. He was a police of¤cer.”
Meyer: “Tell—tell our listeners for those who don’t recall or are
unsure just what the circumstances, uh, were there, uh, what the
timeline was. Where was Billy?”
Caller: “Well, he was at work. At his job. And he was at the Tower,
aiming to shoot the sniper there. I really don’t know too much about
it. All I can say is that he was there at the Tower, that was his district,
and, to my understanding, the way the police department explained
to me, the ¤rst shot missed him, and the second shot—he never
knew what hit him. He was killed instantly.”
Dead air.
Meyer: “Did you see him off to work that morning?”
Caller: “Yes sir, I did. We had an eighteen-month-old baby.”
Meyer: “No.”
Caller: “And she’s thirty-one years old now.”
Meyer: “Well, bless her heart. What is her name?”
Caller: “Her name’s Becky. Rebecca Davis. She’s a wonderful
mother. She’s got two small children. She teaches school out at Drip-
ping Springs.”
Brief dead air.
Meyer: “Well, Jeannie, how are you going to be today? Are you
going to be all right?”
Caller: “Well, it’s a little sad. But, you know, to be honest with
70 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

you Chuck, I wish they would quit showing all this on television and
bringing all this up. Because people would like to forget all this.”
Meyer: “There are a lot of horrible memories for people.”
Caller: “We want it to lie and die down. But how can it? If the
media keeps bringing it up and the press keeps bringing it up? And,
you know, this is something that we’re trying to get over. I mean, I
want to forget it, but every time I turn around—it’s showing on the
television right now. Everywhere you go, it’s there.”
Meyer: “Well, Jeannie, try to just shut that away today and maybe
it will go away for the day. I do appreciate your calling. And our
thoughts are with you today.”
Caller: “I appreciate that.”
Meyer: “You take care. And thanks for holding on.”14
As with Phil Miller on Paul Pryor’s radio show, Jeannie Speed’s com-
ments belie a complex attitude toward individual and public memories.
While the radio makes discourse public, it does not necessarily make pub-
lic discourse. That is, radio gives public access, but it does not necessarily
lead to public discourse—to private people discoursing together in public
about shared consequences, collective judgment, and conjoint action. Ra-
dio cannot teach publicness. Yet it was in large part these two radio shows
that persuaded me that a study of the Tower shootings and memory was
warranted in a rhetoric class, where students at the university would speak
and write in common about whether and how they thought the Tower
shootings were and ought to be remembered. In other words, seeking and
not ¤nding a topos from which to judge the state of public memory of the
Tower shootings, I decided to head to the undergraduate rhetoric class-
room, a place I consider a protopublic space.15
Over the past few decades, accounts of speaking and writing and of
listening and reading have moved away from emphasizing the individual
and static and toward focusing on the social, transactional, and processual.
In criticism this move away from the individual created a space for theories
of reader response and, in their wake, a host of other nominally reader-
centered approaches to interpreting texts. Even when critics claimed to
focus solely on texts or on how “the reader” understands, however, criti-
cism has tended to reify the production and interpretation of texts not as
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 71
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

social actions by real people and concerning real-life effects but as acts of
individual expert auditors and ideal authors in response to ideal texts with
ahistorical human concerns. Similarly, in writing classrooms the move
away from the individual encouraged inquiries into social and collabora-
tive writing among writers at all levels, from elementary school chil-
dren to senior engineers and scientists. But this move away from the in-
dividual and static and toward the social and processual has not gone as
far as it might because the very language critics and teachers use to talk
about speaking and writing and listening and reading rei¤es the product-
oriented assumptions many want to dispel.
Realizing the classroom as a protopublic space and encouraging stu-
dents to see themselves as having rhetorical agency in different and over-
lapping empirical publics might help them—and us—come to terms with
the particularity and situatedness of rhetoric and the need for effective
communication to respond to the particular needs of particular and com-
plex publics at particular times. Ultimately rhetoricians, through their
teaching as well as their criticism and other scholarship—public as well
as academic—could play a more active role in helping to shape what dif-
ferent publics remember and how the artifacts of cultural memory are
understood. Thus, another representative anecdote for this chapter comes
from Cicero’s De Oratore: Early on the second day of conversation at Cras-
sus’s villa, Antonius, dissertating about invention and imitation, complains
that his countrymen have not yet begun serious writing of history. “Do
you see how far the study of history is the business of the orator?” he asks.
“By what other voice than that of the orator is history—the evidence of
time, the light of truth, the life of memory, the directress of life, the herald
of antiquity—committed to immortality?”16
In the case of the 1966 University of Texas Tower shootings, a plethora
of cultural texts over more than thirty years answers Antonius’s rhetorical
question with a litany of responses other than “the orator.” The vast ma-
jority of cultural texts that allude to the shootings emphasize not the vic-
tims but the shooter, Charles Whitman. Besides the 1975 made-for-TV
movie Deadly Tower, starring Kurt Russell, which airs regularly on TNT,
references to Whitman occur in ¤lms from Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal
Jacket, where a drill sergeant says Whitman “showed what one motivated
Marine and his ri®e can do”; to Richard Linklater’s Slackers, in which an
72 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

anarchist philosophy professor says the Tower shootings were Austin’s “¤n-
est hour”; to Oliver Stone’s Natural Born Killers, wherein Whitman serves
as one of the celebrity “American Maniacs”; to, more recently, The Delicate
Art of the Ri®e, a North Carolina–made independent ¤lm that renames
Charles Whitman “Walt Whitman” and concludes that “a Whitman’s got to
do what a Whitman’s got to do.” Film references to Charles Whitman con-
sistently have a smirky ethos: the juxtaposition of Whitman’s horri¤c
deeds with the college photo of him distributed by news services around
the globe in 1966—smiling former Eagle Scout and Marine sharpshooter,
the proverbial all-American boy—sells coolness, detachment, the threat
of furious and random violence, revenge.
T-shirts with that same photo of Whitman’s smiling, crew-cut visage
and a picture of the Tower over the legend “Be True to Your School” are for
sale in many college towns. Another t-shirt, sold by a company called
Burning Church Enterprises and advertised on the Web, features Whitman
surrounded by images of his weapons.17 Burning Church Enterprises, ac-
cording to its web site, is “dedicated to destroying the human race” and
sells shirts featuring the Unabomber, Charles Manson, and, again in the
words of the site, “Shirts to shock and offend one and all. Guaranteed
attention-getters!” The text selling the Whitman shirt offers memory as
aesthetic commodity through its narrative sales pitch:
August 1, 1966, a clear and cloudless day, was beautiful in more ways
than one. From atop the Observation tower at the University of
Austin [sic], it took Charles Whitman just over 90 minutes to kill 13
[sic] people and maim 31 more. Add to that the murders of his wife
and mother the night previous, a nice upper/downer habit, and a
Marine Sharpshooter Award and you have a feat truly ¤t for recog-
nition. Buy the fucking shirt. Available in Ash, Black, White.
This memory of the Tower shootings as commodi¤ed in the image of Whit-
man’s smiling face and the icon of the Tower is also articulated through
Whitman’s place in the Mass Murderer Trading Cards canon,18 and his
handwriting was formatted for sale as a font for word processors through
“Killer Fonts,” another site on the Web.19 “Tired of the same old love
notes?” the text of the site asks. “Promise someone you’re really Helter-
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 73
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Skelter for them [sic] in the script of Charles Manson himself. Nibble on
someone’s ear with Dahmerbits.”
In the text that probably contributed most to disseminating the “cruel”
coolness of Whitman as hero, singer-songwriter and UT Plan II honors
alumnus Kinky Friedman wondered in song how different Whitman really
was from the rest of humanity: “Who are we to say the boy’s insane?” he
asks in his “Ballad of Charles Whitman.”20 An autopsy showed no necessary
connection between a “pecan-sized” glioblastoma multiforme tumor and
Whitman’s behavior.21 Whitman and his actions have thus also come to
symbolize indeterminacy and fear: the Ron Howard movie Parenthood,
starring Steve Martin, features a scene in which a father worries in an
internal monologue over the image of a campus tower whether his son
will become a “bell tower boy” because he was pressured into playing sec-
ond base in a Little League game. Just as the 1991 post of¤ce shootings in
Edmond, Oklahoma, are remembered through the phrase “go postal,”
Charles Whitman, archetypal “bell tower boy,” has become a part of the
vernacular of a violent culture’s collective fears.
Perhaps the most chilling of this kind of manifestation of the commodi-
¤ed mass cultural memory of Whitman is Gregory Combs’s “Charles
Whitman Fan Club” web site. Combs’s site was best known for its click-
able campus map showing where each of the victims fell. Besides the “fan
club” tone of the site, most integral to the study of memory was the site’s
response form. Combs received several thousand responses to the site
during the ¤rst year it was up, and the site was “honored” as “Cruel Site
of the Day” in the fall of 1996 and as one of the “Worst of the Web!” in
1997. The majority of the responses congratulate Combs on his inventive-
ness and laud the site as informative.22
These cultural artifacts in ¤lm, in clothing, on television, and on the
Web are examples of what George Lipsitz has denominated “popular
texts” because they are neither folkloric nor high culture. Still, because of
the way they commodify a nearly univocal perception of Whitman’s ac-
tions and his ethos, they raise the question of what distinguishes counter-
memory from memory—and for whom—in the very speci¤c case of the
UT Tower shootings. These artifacts, in the language of Lipsitz, both “draw
on an oppositional cultural practice deeply rooted in art, in history, and
74 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

in popular collective consciousness” and participate in “a commodi¤ed
mass culture industry [that] covers the globe,” part of “a symbolic order
conducive to the interests of corporate America.”23
Kenneth Burke told us more than half a century ago that language func-
tions in culture in this complex a manner; what is counter and what is
not—what is poison and what is cure, and for whom—is never easy to
unknot. Perhaps not surprisingly, “Sniper,” a song by Burke’s grandson
Harry Chapin that attempts to explain the cause of the Tower shootings,
proved to be one of the more troubling cultural texts the students and I
discussed in the Tower course.24 The song’s emphases on communication
and memory make it a productive cultural text for a course on rhetoric
and public memory. While nothing in the liner notes or elsewhere suggests
Chapin intended the song to portray the events of August 1, 1966, accu-
rately, Chapin’s conjectures have absolutely nothing to do with what was
discovered about Whitman’s relationship with his parents and his possible
reasons for doing what he did. Most troubling, perhaps, is Chapin’s direct-
ing blame toward the sniper’s mother and wife—one could say at women
in general—when news reports and Whitman’s diaries clearly indicate
that Whitman’s father, C. A. Whitman, motivated much of his eldest son’s
anger and self-loathing.25
The rhetorical complexity of producing and understanding symbolic
action is a central reason why cultural texts demand individual and col-
lective judgment and action; such judgments are, some of the students in
the Tower class and I would argue, our critical refuge against the structural
determinism of mass culture, whether in ¤lm, news reporting, popular
music and television, political rhetoric, radio, advertising, or any other
suasive text or medium. The students and I learned this together over
several intense semesters, in classrooms that I de¤ned as and that they
came to some extent to understand as protopublic spaces: Rhetoric 330E,
The UT Tower Shootings and Public Memory, an undergraduate rhetoric
course that was also a substantial writing component course.26 Among the
less examined venues for studying how publics form, de¤ne themselves,
act, and perhaps disintegrate are the sites of struggle over public memory.
The Tower course offers an example of how rhetoric conceived as a pro-
ductive and practical art allowed students not only to study the artifacts
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 75
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of cultural memory but to deliberate whether to intervene publicly in how
a particular incident of common concern might be remembered by vari-
ous publics and institutions.27
At ¤rst amused by the “fan club” spin of the vast majority of cultural
products that mention Whitman, the students began to express their dis-
satisfaction with that cultural univocality soon after they heard the indi-
vidual memories of people whose loved ones were killed or who were
themselves wounded by Whitman. After we had spoken and written to-
gether about various distinctions between public and individual memory,
and after we had studied and written evaluations of the cultural products
created in response to Whitman and the Tower shootings, the students
discussed at length the in®uence the university’s institutional actions—
and its failure to act—might have had on cultural memory of the shoot-
ings. Again and again the students and I deliberated whether and how to
attempt to intervene in the way various institutions and publics remember
the shootings and to make public judgments about the various cultural
products that sustain memory of the incident and its perpetrator. Our
central question in the fall 1996 section of the class became: Given the
cultural products we had studied, would any memorial to the victims of
the Tower shootings end up being a shrine to Whitman?
Unlike Kent State, which has real and virtual memorials to the victims
of the campus shootings there in 1970, the University of Texas seems to
have gone out of its way to erase the Tower shootings from memory. The
UT police department captain told Texas Monthly in 1996, “The University
wishes the whole thing would go away.”28 Of¤cial institutional history of
the shootings is represented in a three-paragraph account in Dr. Margaret
Catherine Berry’s of¤cial history of the university.29 Even more remark-
able than the lack of an of¤cial history of the event is the active repression
evident on the university’s web site. I ¤rst observed this in April 1996,
after the Tower course had been approved, when the university launched
“Scenes from the Top.” To attempt to compensate for keeping the Tower
closed to students, alumni, and the public, the university added to its web
page “Scenes from the Top,” a series of still photos and video clips of the
view from the top of the Tower in eight directions. I was amazed and stu-
dents were later incredulous to ¤nd that in the texts of “Scenes from the
Top” the university’s chronology of the Tower began in 1974.30 After plans
76 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

for the course and my observation about the university’s home page were
published in local and state news reports, the university added Berry’s
three-paragraph account of the Tower shootings and suicides to its web
page.31 During the last weeks of fall semester 1996, however, one of the
students discovered that at least one manifestation of the university’s re-
pression regarding the Tower had come to border on the absurd: upon
going to the University of Texas admissions web site, the student was
shocked to read the following opening sentence under a picture of the
Tower: “This is the jumping off place for information about how to gain
admission to The University of Texas.”32
It was the students, in fact, who ¤rst articulated and persuaded me that
the university’s strategy, intentional or structural, to repress memories of
the Tower shootings had been extremely successful: fewer and fewer stu-
dents know about the shootings every year, and within two or three de-
cades few people will be alive with individual memories of the events.
Another student conducted an email survey of 1,500 randomly selected
UT students to ¤nd out how they ¤rst heard about the Tower shootings
and what kind of information they had. On the whole, information about
the Tower shootings is spread by rumor and word of mouth, and informa-
tion about Whitman comes mainly from cultural texts such as Deadly Tower
and Kinky Friedman’s “Ballad.”
In each of the two semesters that I taught the course, students wanted
to gain access to the top of the Tower, a desire I had not anticipated. During
the fall semester of the course, the students persuaded me that we should
write to then-president Robert Berdahl, now chancellor at the University
of California, Berkeley, to attempt to gain access to the observation deck
of the Tower. Through class discussion, a message forum on our course
web site, and email, we drafted a joint letter to Berdahl, explaining the
nature of the course and offering our reasons for believing access to the
observation deck made at least as much sense for a course devoted to
studying the Tower as it did for football recruits and visiting dignitaries.
After several weeks we received a three-sentence written response from
Charles Franklin, the university’s vice-president for business affairs, de-
nying us access to the Tower because the regents had closed it to the public
in 1975.
It was the grail aspect of the Tower that ¤rst helped distinguish the
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 77
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

classroom as a protopublic space for learning and deliberation from the
classroom as a space for special interests to achieve their own speci¤c ends.
Although the course was overenrolled both semesters, it was required for
no major, so most students who could not get into the course were will-
ing to wait until it might be offered again. Before the fall semester section
of the course began, I was contacted by a student who asked me to add
him to the course list even though I told him that I was not able to override
the twenty-two-student cap on enrollments in substantial writing compo-
nent courses. The student, at the time a sophomore, told me he had been
active in attempts to re-open the observation deck as part of an attempt
to win election to a student government post; these activities, he argued,
made him more suited than other students to take the course. I told him
that he could attend class with other students on the waiting list and would
be able to enroll if someone dropped the course.
This student distinguished himself from the rest of the class by asking
the same question of every class visitor: “Do you think the Tower obser-
vation deck should be reopened?” What was even more striking was that
he intervened in three class activities in a way that marked him as operat-
ing differently from the rest of the class—what the students and I, after
long discussions, agreed was similar to a special interest. First, during the
nearly two-week-long process of drafting the letter to Berdahl, the stu-
dent ran into the president at a meeting in the Main Building. He gleefully
came to class the next day and said he told Berdahl that he “would have to
let us up in the Tower now, because our class was writing him a letter.” The
rest of the class groaned after hearing this, and we spent part of the session
de¤ning and evaluating his actions. (He told me later this was one of his
favorite classes. He remained unconvinced of the class’s judgment that his
actions lacked propriety, given the goal of the letter and the interests of
the class as a whole.)
Another incident that set him apart from the rest of the class involved
his inviting a reporter from the Daily Texan to class on the day that Lana
Holloway, one of Whitman’s victims, was coming to class to discuss her
memories of the shootings and their effects on her life. The reporter came
and covered the event, but once again we took class time to discuss
whether and how the presence of a reporter changed what happened in
our class and whether the student should have asked the class to discuss
78 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

with him whether to invite a reporter. Finally, the student brought a tape
recorder to class on the day another visitor was among us. Readily admit-
ting he wanted to record the comments of the visitor, Vice President for
Student Services James Vick, for use in his student government work, he
decided not to tape the class session after other members of the class per-
suaded him that doing so would change the nature of the discussion with
Vick. I did my best to stay out of these discussions; that the class delibera-
tions about de¤nitional distinctions among privacy, publicity, and special
interests continued on the class message forum suggests that the discus-
sions were prompted as much by the students’ concerns as by my own.
When it came to “getting to the top,” however, my spring semester
students seemed generally more comfortable with certain kinds of special
interest. After I told this second group of students about how the fall se-
mester class had collaboratively drafted a letter to Berdahl, several of the
students told me how naive I was and that such is not how the University
of Texas works. They cited example after example of how privilege rather
than discourse cuts through the considerable red tape at the institution
they knew better than I did. These were, after all, mainly fourth- and ¤fth-
year seniors; this was my third year at UT. Two students, Stuart Vogt and
Allison Chambers, took matters into their own hands, trying, through a
loophole we discovered in the university’s regulations, to gain admittance
to the observation deck by writing a letter to Vice President for Business
Affairs Franklin. Vogt was quite successful; he scored a meeting with
Franklin’s assistant and won tentative approval to go to the observation
deck “in order to complete a writing assignment.” Sharing his good for-
tune with the class, Vogt encouraged another student, Allison Chambers,
to make the same argument to Franklin. When she did, Franklin’s of¤ce
discovered that the students were from the Tower course, and both were
denied access to the observation deck; Franklin’s of¤ce told them that only
students with “unique” writing assignments could have access to the ob-
servation deck, thus de facto allowing students from any course but the
Tower course access to the observation deck. Late in the spring semester
another student in the Tower class, Jim Dedman, wrote as a class assign-
ment and as an op-ed in the Daily Texan a column encouraging UT to clarify
its policy on access to the observation deck.
For their ¤nal paper most students chose to write an editorial column
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 79
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

about whether and how the university should memorialize the Tower
shootings. Most supported a memorial, but they were deeply divided
about the type of memorial; a few students argued vehemently that any
memorial to the Tower shootings would become a memorial to Whitman,
but others argued that the design of the memorial, as with the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, the Holocaust Museum, or the Kent State Memorial,
could affect how people experience and use it, again allowing for active
rather than determined response to cultural texts that attempt to shape
memory. Several students concluded that a Web memorial to the victims
would be most appropriate for the short term. This would counter the
“fan club” ethos of cultural memory and the repression of institutional
memory with a list of Whitman’s victims and details of their lives, infor-
mation about all the possible causes of Whitman’s actions, and a clear sense
of the consequences of violence, whatever its causes.33 I was surprised that
several students in the spring 1997 section of the course wrote for their
¤nal papers proposal arguments suggesting that I continue offering the
course as a living educational memorial to the victims. By making public
arguments in local and wider fora, students in the Tower course took an
active part in whether and how Charles Whitman, his many, many victims,
and the causes of his actions will be remembered.
These students are orators, much in the same way that a San Antonio
Chicano singer-songwriter named Jose Morante was. Morante’s corrido,
“El Policia del Austin: Acion Heróica de Ramiro Martinez,” written a few
weeks after the Tower shootings, offers a version of the events of August 1,
1966, that is very different from how Whitman is remembered nationally
and how the tragedy is repressed institutionally.34 The corrido narrates the
events of August 1, 1966, in classic norteño corrido tradition, for a particular
public forming to counter perceptions of Mexican-Americans as crimi-
nals, to praise Ramiro Martinez, the “Tejano-Mexicano” who was one of
two policemen to end Whitman’s siege by shooting him on the observation
deck of the Tower. “In Austin, Texas, this happened, and I must not exag-
gerate,” the corrido begins; it argues that destiny marked Ramiro Martinez
to “kill a criminal” that day. Among the other issues important to the con-
tours of public memory in the corrido, the lyrics echo a common descrip-
tion of how people learned about what was happening at the Tower that
80 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

day: “The radio announced the horrible massacre.” It also describes the
relation of the Tower to the university as well as the city—“The Tower in
its majesty dominated the plaza”—and describes a common moral out-
rage over Whitman’s actions: “The criminal died / The one who had out-
raged his country / By wounding thirty-one and killing sixteen people.”
Martinez, described in the corrido as “a good policeman,” one who “lived
according to the law,” is celebrated as a hero to his community—his
people and his town (su pueblo): “Monday, the ¤rst of August—I must not
exaggerate / A Mexicano-Tejano knew how to raf®e his life. / In Austin,
Texas, it happened, that which I ¤nish singing about. / Ramiro demon-
strated that he knew how to love su pueblo.” The lyrics of the corrido show
how epideictic rhetoric can be directed at a local public to encourage
remembrance of an event in an act of countermemory.35 Further, the cor-
rido exhibits a sense of publicness that none of the individual memories
recounted each year on local radio was willing or able to express.
But of course memory is never that simple. Both policemen who shot
Whitman sued MGM after the made-for-TV movie was released. Mar-
tinez received a settlement; the other policeman, Houston McCoy, whose
name was not used in the ¤lm, received nothing, even though the ¤lm
portrays him standing by passively as the actor playing Martinez ¤res the
fatal shot. Whitman’s autopsy showed that it was McCoy’s bullet that killed
the sniper. Why did Martinez sue the makers of a movie that portrayed
him, rightly or wrongly, as a hero? In his words, “They portrayed my wife
as a Hispanic woman who is pregnant and barefoot, the usual stereotype,”
he told a reporter for the Austin American-Statesman. Martinez’s wife is
German-American. “They had her arguing with me about going to the
Tower, which didn’t happen. And they portrayed the Austin Police Depart-
ment as being racist against me. Just the opposite from the truth.”36
Reading the UT Tower shootings as a case study in the connections
among individual, cultural, institutional, and public memory suggests that
rhetoric’s productive and practical as well as its analytical powers are cen-
tral to memory work. Furthermore, remembering rhetoric’s productive
and practical powers suggests that we and our students can choose to play
a greater role in making individual and public judgments about artifacts
of cultural memory, about institutional repression, and about the pro-
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 81
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

cess of history-in-the-making. Imagining classrooms as protopublic spaces
might move us closer to the evocative vision offered by John Gillis at the
close of his introduction to Commemorations:
Democratic societies need to publicize rather than privatize the
memories and identities of all groups, so that each may know and
respect the other’s versions of the past, thereby understanding better
what divides as well as unites us. . . . [W]e need civil times and civil
spaces more than ever, for these are essential to the democratic pro-
cesses by which individuals and groups come together to discuss,
debate, and negotiate the past and, through this process, de¤ne the
future.37
It has become a commonplace in public and private discourses that we
live in an age “when people across the political spectrum decry the decline
of ‘civic life’ [and when] government, politicians, and even politics itself
have become objects of indifference and contempt.”38 But such sentiments
are hardly new; indeed, in some forms they date as far back as the origins
of public discourse itself. Those who hold rhetoric as a productive and
practical as well as analytical or hermeneutic art need to keep searching
for ways to reconceive and reenergize the practices of public discourse.
Classrooms imagined as protopublic spaces—as evidenced by the experi-
ences and actions of students in the ¤rst two sections of the Tower class—
allow teachers and students to engage in rhetorical education as training
for public life, widely de¤ned.
Notes
Jeannie Speed’s statement “Everywhere you go, it’s there” refers to memories
of the Tower shootings (her husband, Billy Speed, was killed by Charles Whit-
man), but her statement could refer as well to the Tower itself—both its physical
presence on campus and throughout Austin and its looming place in the cultural
imaginary of the university, the city, and arguably the state of Texas in 1966 and,
for some, to this day. I am indebted to Daniel Barrera of the University of Texas
Undergraduate Library for his immense help in conducting research for my
undergraduate substantial writing component rhetoric course The UT Tower
Shootings and Public Memory. I also want to thank the students in each of the
82 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

several sections of that course for taking me up on my claims that classrooms can
be protopublic spaces. I shall tell a fuller story of that course and those students
in a book project. Finally, I want to thank Stephen H. Browne for encouraging
me in this interdisciplinary endeavor; Sanford Levinson and Edward Linenthal
for conversations about public memory; and Lester Faigley for showing me the
bullet holes. Earlier drafts of this chapter were presented as papers at the 1996
Speech Communication Association annual meeting in San Diego and the 1996
Modern Language Association annual meeting in Washington, D.C.
1. I am grateful to Madison Searle, administrative associate in the Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin’s Division of Rhetoric and Composition, for bringing this
to my attention just after the ¤lm’s release in autumn 1996.
2. See, for instance, Edward Tabor Linenthal, Sacred Ground: Americans and
Their Battle¤elds (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991).
3. John Sayles, “A Statement from John Sayles,” http://lonestar-movie.com,
November 4, 1996.
4. Whitman killed his spouse, Kathy Whitman, and his mother, Margaret
Whitman, before he went to campus. See Gary Lavergne, A Sniper in the Tower:
The Charles Whitman Murders (Denton: University of North Texas Press, 1997), the
¤rst book-length study of the shootings. In yet another commentary on how
the shootings are remembered, Lavergne’s book, re-released as a mass-market
trade paperback book, is most often found under “True Crime” in bookstores.
5. See Rosa A. Eberly, Citizen Critics: Literary Public Spheres (Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 2000), 4–8, for my understanding of topos as literal and
inventional. The presence on the campus and in the city of the Tower, a 1930s-
style skyscraper, is considerable even today when the city is several times larger
and more populated than it was in 1966. UT Professor Lynn C. Miller describes
the presence of the Tower and its synechdochal function this way in The Fool’s
Journey: A Romance (Houston: Winedale Publishing, 2002), her ¤rst novel: “The
Tower was shorthand for the University’s main administrative building, which
did indeed soar in phallic remove over the entire campus (42). The observation
deck on the twenty-eighth ®oor of the Tower long served as a mandatory tourist
stop and favorite destination for campus dates. The university temporarily closed
the observation deck after each of at least ¤ve suicides and after the Whitman
shootings. In 1975 the university’s board of regents closed the Tower “perma-
nently” after yet another suicide. Guests of the university and journalists regu-
larly gained admittance to the observation deck, while student groups regularly
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 83
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

held petition drives to reopen it. (The “permanent” closing of the observation
deck ended in 1999, due at least in part to the efforts of several students in the
Tower class. I tell that story in an upcoming book project; if you scour the Web
and Lexis/Nexus, you can ¤nd shards of the story.)
James Michener gets less than a page into his 1985 historical novel Texas (New
York: Fawcett, 1985) before describing the Tower:
I left my guest of¤ce in the shadow of the main building. When I got outside
I glanced up at its tower; the sight of it always set me thinking about the
con®icting messages that it sent. After any football university major sports
victory, and they came frequently at Texas, it was illuminated gaudily in the
school color, burnt orange, but on gray and misty mornings, which came
less frequently, I knew that people recalled that horrible August day in 1966
when Charles Whitman, an Eagle Scout, gained a gruesome immortality.
After murdering his wife and mother, he ¤lled a footlocker with guns,
ammunition and knives and drove to the university. Slaying the reception-
ist, he took the elevator to the top of the tower, where he unlimbered his
arsenal and began shooting at random any students or casual passers-by. In
all, he killed sixteen persons before sharpshooters gunned him down. Sa-
luting the handsome tower, I crossed the bustling campus which had so
excited me when I ¤rst reported there in 1959.
6. Spelce’s live coverage of the shootings for KTBC-AM and KTBC-TV, the
¤rst live coverage of any news event in Austin, is probably the most often recalled
local cultural text that refers to the shootings—other than the Tower itself—for
those who were in Austin that day. Spelce generously provided me with audio
and video from August 1, 1966, for my course and visited my classes to answer
students’ questions about his own memories of the day as well as his subsequent
anniversary coverage of the shootings.
7. For a discussion of the peculiar relationship among Texas, Texans, and
history, see Jeff Mandell, “Remember the Alamo . . . and Nothing Else,” Texas
Observer, August 1, 1997, pp. 12–15.
8. Ralph Engleman, Public Radio and Television in America: A Political History
(London: Sage, 1996).
9. Gerard A. Hauser, “Constituting Publics and Reconstructing Public
Spheres: The Meese Commission’s Report on Pornography,” in Warranting Assent:
84 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Case Studies in Argument Evaluation (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1995); Gerard A. Hauser and Carole Blair, “Rhetorical Antecedents to the Pub-
lic,” PRE/TEXT 3 (1982): 139–67.
10. Wesley Forni, a student in the Tower course, wrote a paper in 1996 de-
scribing, de¤ning, and evaluating the graf¤ti at the top of the steps on the twenty-
seventh ®oor of the Tower. The graf¤ti were painted over in the process of
reopening the Tower observation deck for tours in 1999.
11. Paul Pryor hosted the anniversary radio shows for several years. It is not
clear whether anniversary shows will continue. Spelce said he expects anniver-
sary coverage in print, radio, and television to diminish until the ¤ftieth anniver-
sary of the shootings.
On August 1, 1996, the University of Texas rang the carillon bells in the Tower
once for each of Whitman’s victims. This event, announced after plans for a
prayer service at University Baptist Church across the street from the university
were published, is by all accounts the closest to a public memorial the university
has held speci¤cally for the victims of the Tower shootings until plans for reopen-
ing the observation deck were announced in May 1999. The church’s pastor,
Reverend Larry Bethune, asked me to read the names of Whitman’s victims for
the university memorial, part of the local ministerium’s Prayers for Healing from
Violence.
12. Heard is now with Inside Texas magazine. Though he is adamant that too
much is made of Whitman and that he does not want to be remembered as a
victim of the shootings, he grants interviews fairly often. He told Meyer, “I think
we make much too much out of Whitman. I think it deserves to be remem-
bered. I don’t think it deserves three pages in the newspaper with pictures and
stuff. [Heard is referring to Hank Stuever, “99 Minutes, 30 Years Later,” Austin
American-Statesman, July 29, 1996, p. A1+.] I think the New Handbook of Texas did
it about right: they wrote about ¤ve inches of just straightforward account of
what happened, and they didn’t get into a bunch of psycho-cultural crap about
the meaning to world history. In my case, in a very minor way, I’ve been working
for thirty years to get Charles Whitman out of the lead paragraph of my obituary”
(KLBJ-AM, August 1, 1996).
13. Conversation with Meyer, October 16, 1996. Meyer attended the Tower
class and answered students’ questions about his reactions to the calls he aired
August 1, 1996.
14. Audio excerpts of calls to Meyer from Jeannie (Beverly Jean) Speed and
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 85
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

someone who identi¤ed himself only as “John” are part of a web page composed
by Wesley Forni and Star Gebser, two students in the Tower course: “Memorial
to the Victims of the University of Texas Tower Shootings,” http://www.cwrl.
utexas.edu/~eberly/330e/memorial/documents/memorial.html.
15. Eberly, Citizen Critics, 161–74; Rosa Eberly, “From Readers and Audi-
ences to Publics: Rhetoric Classrooms as Proto-Public Spaces,” Rhetoric Review
18 (1999): 165–78.
16. Cicero on Oratory and Orators (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University
Press, 1970), 2:xv.
17. Burning Church Enterprises, http://wymple.gs.net/~bce/catalog.html,
November 10, 1996. Matthew Dunlap, a student in the fall 1996 section of the
Tower course, brought this site to my attention.
18. Lisa Brown, a student in the fall 1996 section of the Tower course,
brought these cards back to my attention and wrote a paper on Whitman’s inclu-
sion in the series.
19. See Killer Fonts, http://www.killerfonts.com. Josh Baker, a student in
the Tower class, wrote a paper evaluating Killer Fonts based on Barry Brummett’s
lexicon for cultural texts in Rhetoric in Popular Culture (New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1994).
20. Kinky Friedman, “The Ballad of Charles Whitman,” Glaser Publications,
Inc./BMI, 1973. This brief excerpt from the lyrics suggests the “cruel, cool” ethos
of the song:
Got up that morning calm and cool
He picked up his guns and walked to school.
All the while he smiled so sweetly
And it blew their minds completely
They’d never seen an Eagle Scout so cruel.
Now don’t you think for the shame and degradation,
For the school’s administration,
He put on such a bold and brassy show?
The chance looked right, it’s adolescent
And of course it’s most unpleasant
But I got to admit it was a lovely way to go.
86 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

There was a rumor of a tumor
Nestled at the base of his brain.
He was sitting up there with his .36 Magnum
Laughing wildly as he bagged ’em
Who are we to say the boy’s insane?
21. See Lavergne, Sniper in the Tower, 238–71, for a discussion of questions
about Whitman’s autopsy and other records.
22. Gregory Combs, “Charles Whitman Memorial,” http://www.io.com/
~combs/htmls/charles.html, February 10, 1997. In a visit to the spring 1997
section of the Tower course, Combs told us that he changed the title of the web
site from “Charles Whitman Fan Club” to “Charles Whitman Memorial” after “a
few threats.” Combs’s surprise that anyone would react to his site as anything
other than humor prompted a long and productive class discussion about Web
ethos. There are of course many other cultural texts we studied in the Tower
course that deal directly with or allude to Charles Whitman and the shootings. I
regret that there is not space here to discuss The Impossible Tree, a memoir by
Frances Gabour Lamport, or The Simpsons episode that alludes to the shootings.
Steven Phenix’s unpublished play Texans and Their Guns: A Tragedy for the End of the
Millennium (Austin Circle of Theatres and Vortex Repertory Company, 1994,
photocopied) and the collaboratively written and produced Tower Massacre Musi-
cal (1999) deserve critical attention and will be discussed in my book project.
23. George Lipsitz, Time Passages: Collective Memory and American Popular Cul-
ture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1990), 230–31, 233, 259.
24. Harry Chapin, Sniper and Other Love Songs (Elektra, 1972). It was through
Chapin’s song that I ¤rst learned about the shootings when I was in junior high
in Dallastown, Pennsylvania. At the Burke Centenary in Pittsburgh in May 1996,
I asked Harry Chapin’s brother Tom whether he had ever talked to Harry about
what inspired “Sniper.” Tom said Harry wrote the song after reading a poem by
James Dickey, but he could not remember which one. I asked him whether the
poem was about a stewardess falling from an airplane (“Falling”), and Tom Chapin
said yes, he was quite sure that was the poem. He said his brother was fascinated
by Dickey’s attempt to make poetry about the processes of a mind and body in
extremis.
25. Lavergne, Sniper in the Tower, 53–55, 255–56.
University of Texas Tower Shootings / 87
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

26. While offered through the Division of Rhetoric and Composition (DRC),
the course was for its ¤rst several offerings listed as English 330E; after the DRC
voted to change its course pre¤x to RHE, the course was listed as RHE 330E.
27. This chapter encompasses the ¤rst two times I taught the Tower course.
28. Joe Holley, “A Whitman Sampler,” Texas Monthly, August 1996, p. 30+.
29. Margaret C. Berry, The University of Texas: A Pictorial Account of Its First
Century (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1980), 326.
30. “Scenes from the Top,” http://www.utexas.edu/tours/top/, Septem-
ber 20, 1996.
31. “Why the Observation Deck Is Closed to Visitors,” http://www.utexas.
edu/tours/top/closed.html, September 20, 1996. In addition to Berry’s three-
paragraph account, the text of this page is as follows: “In response to requests
from several visitors, TeamWeb has added this page to explain why the observa-
tion deck is closed.”
32. Stephanie McDowell, a student in the fall 1996 Tower course, brought
this text to my attention. After I published an op-ed about the Tower in the Austin
American-Statesman, the site was changed.
33. Forni and Gebser, “Memorial,” August 9, 2003.
34. Jose Morante, “El Policia de Austin: Acion Heróica de Ramiro Martinez,”
performed by Los Reyos del Alamo, Sombrero S02275-B (1966). The lyric ex-
cerpts were compiled from translations by John Slate, Dan Barrera, and Susan
and Roberto Romano.
35. Dan Barrera’s discussion about the corridos with the fall 1996 section of
the Tower class was extremely helpful. In addition, Susan and Roberto Romano
were of great help in thinking through the implications of the corridos. For an
introduction to corridos as well as readings of other political corridos, see Dan
William Dickey, “The Kennedy Corridos: A Study of the Ballads of a Mexican
American Hero,” master’s thesis, University of Texas at Austin, 1978.
36. Bob Banta, “The Heroes: Ending Whitman’s Life Changed Theirs; From
Different Backgrounds, Two Police Of¤cers Came Together Once, and Then Di-
verged Again,” American-Statesman, July 29, 1996, p. A7. See also Lavergne, Sniper
in the Tower, 167–80.
37. John Gillis, ed., Commemorations: The Politics of National Identity (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 20.
38. Alan Brinkley, “Unceremony: The Conventions Will Come to Order,”
New Yorker, August 12, 1996, pp. 4–5.
88 / Rosa A. Eberly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

4
My Old Kentucky Homo
Lincoln and the Politics
of Queer Public Memory
Charles E. Morris III
O Memory! Thou midway world ’Twixt earth and paradise, Where
things decayed and loved ones lost In dreamy shadows rise, And, freed
from all that’s earthly vile, Seem hallowed, pure, and bright, Like scenes
in some enchanted isle, All bathed in liquid light.
Abraham Lincoln (1846)
The sacred thing is par excellence that which the profane should not
touch, and cannot touch with impunity.
Emile Durkheim (1915)
Nearly vanquished by the ravages of AIDS, National Book Award winner
Paul Monette somehow mustered the requisite fortitude for his last so-
journ to the nation’s capital, so that he might join his brethren in April
1993 for their March on Washington. Too debilitated to participate fully,
he garnered energy enough to ful¤ll those personal and political obliga-
tions he deemed most signi¤cant to the symbolic advancement of the
cause. And so he stood at the feet of Lincoln. His re®ections on this occa-
sion bear mentioning in full:
There is nothing to match the Lincoln, in America anyway, for noble
proportion and spiritual lift. On the wall to the left is the Gettysburg
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Address; on the right the Second Inaugural. With malice toward none,
with charity for all. I suddenly needed to stand in the spot where
Marian Anderson sang her Easter concert, barred from Indepen-
dence Hall by the D.A.R. . . . All under the eyes of Lincoln, eighty
years after the Emancipation Proclamation. Another quarter century
later, and the tempered gaze of Lincoln—warrior and wise man—
bore witness to the passion of Dr. King. I didn’t think the Lincoln of
my understanding would have any trouble equating the Civil Rights
struggle of people of color with the latter-day dreams of the gay and
lesbian movement. There’s too much compelling evidence in his own
life—the bed he shared for four years with Joshua Speed above the
general store in Spring¤eld; the breakdown he suffered when family
duties sent them apart—of the “dear love of comrades.” In any case,
I was choked with tears and in awe to be there. . . . And oh, how
we needed a Lincoln to stand for equal justice and bind us all to-
gether again.1
In Monette’s memoir we ¤nd the meaning of public memory itself: a pur-
poseful engagement of the past, forged symbolically, profoundly constitu-
tive of identity, community, and moral vision, inherently consequential in
its ideological implications, and very often the fodder of political con-
®agration. That he would ¤nd both universal and particular value in the
remembrance of this American icon is not surprising; as his recupera-
tion of Anderson and King suggests, much of our history is, in a sense, a
chronicle of those who have found solace and inspiration in Lincoln’s
rather malleable legacy. What is noteworthy, however, is the revolutionary
mettle potentially derived from such mnemonic encounters. As David
Blight has written of Frederick Douglass’s appropriation of Lincoln and
the Civil War: “Historical memory . . . was the prize in a struggle be-
tween rival versions of the past, a question of will, of power, of persua-
sion. The historical memory of any transforming or controversial event
emerges from cultural and political competition, from the choice to con-
front the past and to debate and manipulate its meaning.”2
While a dying Monette could only articulate a ®eeting if hopeful vision
for Lincoln’s memory as an animating force that might bind gays and les-
bians to each other and to the national inheritance, his comrade Larry
90 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Kramer, whom he once described as “more than a witness, more than a
leader, in his own way like the Elie Wiesel who stood on the heath tearing
his hair,”3 would do more. In February 1999, Kramer would unwittingly
transform that vision into the struggle Blight describes. Those familiar
with Kramer’s penchant for political theater might have expected his “out-
ing” of Lincoln in a speech at the University of Wisconsin to be quickly
dismissed as merely the latest manifestation of his creative propagandistic
imagination. For residents of Spring¤eld, Illinois, and Lincoln scholars,
however, Kramer’s queer public memory of the Great Emancipator con-
stituted a salvo that incited homosexual panic, one that has persisted into
the new millennium, exposing a cultural fault line implicating rhetoric,
history, public memory, and queer politics. The revolution of memory
commenced by Kramer illustrates the complex dynamics initiated when
public memory and (homo)sexuality collide, allowing us to examine these
explosive components as they are marshaled in a symbolic contest for the
communal meaning of historical identity.
I use the word “revolution” carefully and deliberately, not primarily for
its hyperbolic force or polemical charge, but more for what it suggests
about memory and gay American culture and the rather dramatic stakes
for a queer present and future. In a rudimentary sense, what is described
here is a deliberate turn toward memory in a culture for which public
memory itself is de¤ned more by absence than presence. Fragmented as
a community, wasted by disease, and haunted still and in multifarious ways
by the legacy of the closet, gays and lesbians ¤nd that public memory’s
typical infrastructure is largely missing or disabled. In writing of Stone-
wall, for instance, which is arguably the anchor of contemporary gay and
lesbian public memory, Martin Duberman writes, “The decades preced-
ing Stonewall . . . continue to be regarded by most gays and lesbians as
some vast Neolithic wasteland—and this, despite the efforts of pioneering
historians . . . to ¤ll the landscape of those years with vivid, politically
astute personalities.”4
Nonacademic memory work, moreover, often more potent because of
its vibrant narrative and fewer evidentiary constraints, has been hindered
in profound ways by AIDS. The AIDS Quilt, perhaps the most public, most
powerfully symbolic memory text, nonetheless represents a memory
void, a lost generation of memory agents who serve as poignant markers
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 91
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of queer community but speak as eloquently of their incapacity to convey
and preserve their past.5 Among the living, motive may stand as ¤rm an
impediment as means. In San Francisco, with its rich ties to a queer past
visible in numerous memory sites and commemorative practices, espe-
cially those associated with Harvey Milk, public memory falters nonethe-
less. Historian John D’Emilio observes, “The memory in this community
doesn’t last more than a few years.”6 Kramer himself offers a potential
explanation: “To write a history composed mostly of events like this is a
depressing undertaking. I suspect there is much less joy than sorrow bur-
ied in our graves.”7
But in those graves Kramer saw the very bonds of gay community, a
vital past that, although ignored by straight historians and queer theorists
alike, must be remembered if that community is to prosper in the future.
Thus the embodiment of Lincoln in public memory emerged viscerally in
Kramer’s lecture, “Our Gay President,” at the University of Wisconsin’s
Midwest GLBT College Conference in February 1999. For the edi¤cation
and inspiration of a relatively small crowd, Kramer boldly claimed to have
new documentary evidence that clari¤ed the nuances of a long-standing
and fragmentary narrative regarding the nearly four years that twenty-
eight-year-old Abraham Lincoln and twenty-four-year-old Kentucky mer-
chant Joshua Speed spent as bedfellows in Spring¤eld, Illinois.
In order to appreciate Kramer’s fulgurous contribution to this tale, its
general contours and controversial elements must be brie®y recounted.8
An aspiring lawyer and politician, Lincoln nonetheless arrived in Spring-
¤eld penniless in April 1837. Already deeply in debt, Lincoln seemed crest-
fallen over the cost of seventeen-dollar bedding in Joshua Speed’s general
store, which touched the proprietor:
The tone of his voice was so melancholy that I felt for him. I looked
up at him, and I thought then as I think now, that I never saw so
gloomy a face. I said to him: “The contraction of so small a debt,
seems to affect you so deeply, I think I can suggest a plan by which
you will be able to attain your end, without incurring any debt. I
have a very large room, and a very large double bed in it; which you
are perfectly welcome to share if you choose.” Lincoln’s decision was
swift. After immediately climbing the stairs to the bedroom, he re-
92 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

turned, “a face beaming with pleasure and smiles,” exclaiming, “Well
Speed I’m moved.”9
The two bachelors slept in the same bed through December 1840. Such
an arrangement was quite common at the time, as historians are quick to
observe, but it is not too fanciful to suggest that that bed might be read
as a metonymy for their intense emotional bond, which could not be
equaled, even by their betrothed, during their years together.10 They were,
even by conservative estimate, “something like soul mates.”11 Lincoln’s
friend and future bodyguard Ward Lamon called Speed “the most intimate
friend Mr. Lincoln ever had.”12 William Herndon, roommate, friend, and
Lincoln biographer, balked jealously at Nicolay and Hay’s claim in their
biography that Speed was Lincoln’s only intimate friend, but nonetheless
conceded that “Lincoln loved this man more than any one dead or living.”13
On the eve of Speed’s marriage, an event that marked the ¤nal emotional
juncture in their friendship, Lincoln wrote, “You know my desire to be-
friend you is everlasting—that I will never cease, while I know how to do
any thing.”14
Their friendship seemingly derived not only from generosity but also a
shared interest in law and politics, which they discussed (along with bawdy
tales) at great length on many evenings with male friends, and, especially,
their mutual anxieties regarding women. Both men, inexperienced de-
spite their numerous attractions and courtships, seemed to struggle in-
tensely with the idea of physical intimacy with women.15 Lincoln appar-
ently fell in love twice (if not three times) during the late 1830s, only to
thwart engagement plans with Mary Owens and Mary Todd. Charles
Strozier argues that in the face of this romantic tension, these friends
found in each other succor if not a resolution to their troubles: “It would
appear, therefore, that Lincoln and Speed’s close relationship centered on
their similar and reinforcing con®icts. . . . It is probable that such close
male contact during the years of Lincoln’s greatest heterosexual tension
heightened the dif¤culty he found in securing intimacy with a woman. . . .
Speed provided an alternative relationship that neither threatened nor
provoked Lincoln. Each of the two men found solace in discussing their
intimate maleness substituted for the tantalizing but frightening closeness
of women.”16 Most prominent Lincoln scholars share Strozier’s account
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 93
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of Lincoln’s angst regarding the opposite sex, but they minimize or ignore
its centrality to his friendship with Speed, particularly its emotional im-
plications for both.
Lincoln’s feelings for Speed are evident most explicitly, and mysteri-
ously, in the closing year of their intimate friendship. In December 1840
Speed disclosed to Lincoln his intention to sell the store, which fell short
of his ¤nancial aspirations, and his plans to return to his family in Kentucky
in the wake of his father’s death. Dashed hopes for love with Matilda Ed-
wards, whom Lincoln may also have been courting, also likely in®uenced
his decision. “There is nothing here,” he wrote his sister, “but some of the
cleverest fellows that God ever made—the truest friends and warmest
hearts—that is worth living in this country for.”17 Lincoln’s reaction re-
mains a contested issue, one that emanates from con®icting interpreta-
tions of what he called “that fatal ¤rst of Jany. ’41.”18 On that day the sales
notice for Speed’s store appeared in the local paper, and Lincoln broke off
his engagement to Mary Todd. Whether he lost his nerve, as some thought,
loved Matilda Edwards too much, as others surmised, or was despondent
over Speed’s imminent departure, which few are willing to entertain, is
uncertain. That he fell into a terrible depression during the early weeks of
January is certain, documented by those who thought him “crazy as a loon”
and suicidal.19 In his own estimate: “I am the most miserable man living.
If what I feel were equally distributed to the whole human family, there
would not be a cheerful face on earth.”20
Lincoln recovered quickly, if not fully, perhaps in part because Speed
did not actually leave Spring¤eld until May 1841. In August Lincoln paid
an extended visit to the Speed family home in Louisville, during which his
friend experienced a budding romance with Fanny Henning. They almost
immediately became engaged. Between September and the end of the
same year the men were again in Spring¤eld together, likely discussing
Speed’s intense, escalating doubts about his relationship with Henning. As
many have observed, Lincoln served well in the role of trusted and patient
con¤dant and counselor, returning the cherished favor he had enjoyed
during his own failed engagements.21 His ®urry of passionate correspon-
dence to Speed in January and February 1842 bespeaks the depth of their
friendship, even as it raises questions about its nature.
Lincoln’s version of a pep talk is, to say the least, peculiar, though lack
94 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of interpersonal context makes reading the only extant (one-sided version
of) exchange between the men rather dif¤cult. Articulating his “deepest
solicitude for the success of the enterprize you are engaged in,” Lincoln
claims in his ¤rst letter to “adopt this as the last method I can invent to aid
you, in case (which God forbid) you shall need any aid.” Evidently Lincoln
expected that the case would, in fact, present itself, for he outlines “three
special causes” and “one general one” to explain his “reasonable” belief that
Speed “would feel verry [sic] badly some time between this and the ¤nal
consummation of your purpose.” This latter point in time, they both knew
from years of anxiety, represented sexual intercourse, the nadir of hetero-
sexual relations as it was constituted in their imaginations. In addition,
generally, to his “naturally . . . nervous temperament,” Lincoln explained,
Speed would be vulnerable to bad weather, a lack of conversation with
friends, and “the rapid and near approach of that crisis on which all your thoughts
and feelings concentrate.” In response to that crisis, namely the “apprehen-
sion that you do not love her as you should,” Lincoln reassured Speed that
it was not because she expected it or because she was wealthy. No, he had
not “reasoned [himself] into it,” for he did not then know her to be “moral,
amiable, sensible, or even of good character.” In truth he had found himself
“unable to reason himself out of it” because her “personal appearance and
deportment” had impressed “the heart and not the head.” It was those “heav-
enly black eyes.” As a ¤nal measure of comfort, Lincoln urged that he not
worry about Fanny “scouting and despising you, and giving herself up to
another” since he had no such apprehension in the ¤rst place and therefore
could not “bring it home to your feelings.”22 Consensus has not been
achieved regarding Lincoln’s use of praeteritio here, but all are clear that
as before, the trials of love were weathered and romance endured because
of their friendship.
A month later, and just weeks before the wedding, Fanny Henning
nearly died, or so Speed feared. Again Lincoln wrote with words of solace.
“I hope and believe, that your present anxiety and distress about her health
and her life, must and will forever banish those horrid doubts, which I
know you sometimes felt, as to the truth of your affection for her.” Those
doubts, Lincoln observed, could not be matched in “their immeasurable
measure of misery,” even by the prospect of Fanny’s death. “The death
scenes of those we love, are surely painful enough; but these we are pre-
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 95
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

pared to, and expect to see. They happen to all, and all know they must
happen.” If, perhaps, Speed could not fully appreciate Lincoln’s insight,
further consolation followed. “Should she, as you fear, be destined to an
early grave,” Lincoln reminds Speed, she has prepared well through the
religion “he once disliked so much.” He expressed his hope that Speed’s
“melancholly [sic] bodings” were unfounded but optimistically concluded
that whatever happened, his worry provided “indubitable evidence of your
undying affection [and love] for her.”23 David Donald’s interpretation of
these letters, like Lincoln’s advice, is clinical and presumably salubrious:
“In effect, Lincoln and Speed were acting out a game of doctor and patient;
in the winter of 1840–1841 Lincoln had been the sufferer and Speed had
offered encouraging advice; now it was Speed who was at risk and Lincoln
was trying to save his health and sanity.”24
Fanny lived. More consequentially, with Lincoln’s able assistance, em-
bodied in a ¤nal prenuptial pledge that his “desire to befriend” Speed was
“everlasting,” and the sensible advice that Speed go through the ceremony
“calmly, or even with suf¤cient composition not to excite alarm,” his
friend married.25 In what might be rightly called Lincoln’s swan song,26
he wrote days after the marriage that his anticipation on Speed’s be-
half (news of the February 15 consummation did not arrive until the
twenty-fourth) was such that “I opened the letter, with intense anxiety
and trepidation—so much, that although it turned out better that I ex-
pected, I have hardly yet, at the distance of ten hours, become calm.”
Relieved that their “forebodings” were, in the end, “all the worst sort of
nonsense,” Lincoln offered one last bit of advice to calm Speed, who still
seemed plagued by doubts. Speed had written that “something indescrib-
ably horrible and alarming still haunts [me],” and confessed his fear that
the “Elysium” of which he had “dreamed so much, is never to be realized.”
Lincoln responded,
Well, if it shall not, I dare swear, it will not be the fault of her who
is now your wife. I now have no doubt that it is the peculiar misfor-
tune of both you and me, to dream dreams of Elysium far exceeding
all that any thing earthly can realize. Far short of your dreams as you
may be, no woman could do more to realize them, than that same
black eyed Fanny. . . . My old Father used to have a saying that “If
96 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

you made a bad bargain, hug it the tighter”; and it occurs to me, that
if the bargain you have just closed can possibly be called a bad one,
it is certainly the most pleasant one for applying the maxim to,
which my fancy can, by any effort, picture.
If their dreams of Elysium included an intense emotional bond with each
other, that too must be tempered with the bromide of homely maxims and
practical relations. Lincoln married Mary Todd, with whom he resumed a
courtship after Speed’s marriage, in November 1842. His friendship with
Speed persisted throughout their lives, though it would never again, in
word or deed, match the emotional intensity palpable in that ¤nal blessing
of a devoted friend.
In terms of subtlety and indirection, Larry Kramer’s rendering of the
Lincoln-Speed affair paled in comparison to Lincoln’s letters and histori-
ans’ interpretations of them. Indeed, Kramer, armed only with his queer
imagination and sharp tongue, ventured in bullish fashion with Wisconsin-
ites in tow where all others had feared to tread.27 “Between 1839 and 1842
Abraham Lincoln and Joshua Speed loved each other.” Far from being the
crucible of economic hardship, Speed’s bed fostered a blossoming (and
hardly fraternal) love that began at ¤rst sight and was only sundered by
(tortured) political choices that required, among other sacri¤ces, wives.
“For years they shared a bed and their most private thoughts. They fell in
love with each other and slept next to each other for four years.” Like
Lincoln scholars, Kramer substantiated his interpretation in part by ref-
erence to extant correspondence. “One only has to read the letters be-
tween these two to know the depth of their love.” Unlike Lincoln scholars,
however, Kramer without quali¤cation concluded that Lincoln and Speed
were gay.
More provocatively, Kramer’s strikingly romantic narrative was pur-
portedly legitimated, and certainly ampli¤ed, by letters and diary entries
allegedly found buried beneath the ®oorboards of the old store and housed
currently in a private, unnamed collection in Davenport, Iowa. Lush with
witness to the love that dare not speak its name, those diary entries re-
solved any ambiguity about the nature of their friendship: “He [“Linc,” as
Speed called affectionately called him] often kisses me when I tease him,
often to shut me up. . . . He would grab me by his long arms and hug and
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 97
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

hug.” Anticipating the incredulity of posterity, Speed apparently writes,
“Yes, our Abe is like a school girl.”
Kramer’s disclosure, of course, sought to titillate the historical imagi-
nation and provoke collective memory. I want to clarify, however, how it
might be understood as a performance distinguishable from typical non-
academic discourses that grope for queer historical subjects. Kramer’s lec-
ture was not simply a manifestation of familiar gossip meant to intrigue
by raising the specter of homosexuality; nor was it, in keeping with Kra-
mer’s long career of diatribe, a demolition of the historical closet designed
to expose and condemn the hypocrisy of heteronormative power.28 To the
contrary, his protectiveness of the lecture, his uncharacteristically tem-
perate persona, his evidentiary emphasis, and the care with which he con-
stituted Lincoln’s ethos reveal a political but not necessarily polemical
motive.
Kramer offered what Roger Simon calls “insurgent commemoration”:
“attempts to construct and engage representations that rub taken-for-
granted history against the grain so as to revitalize and rearticulate what
one sees as desirable and necessary for an open, just and life-sustaining
future.”29 Insurgency, in this sense, should not be construed as strategic
impiety, to borrow Kenneth Burke’s term. He did not, in other words,
de¤le Lincoln’s sacred memory for the sake of political confrontation.
Rather, in ¤lling a void perpetuated by the caretakers of of¤cial memory,
Kramer exhibited a will to piety, which Burke characterizes as a “loyalty to
the sources of our being. . . . [creating] the deep connection [with] . . .
the ‘remembrance of things past.’”30 As Kramer argues, “To know that
Abraham Lincoln and Joshua Speed were in love with each other for all of
their adult lives and that no history book will record this essential truth
that could so radically alter how gay people are accepted in this country
that worships Lincoln is very painful.”31 “History is about possession,”
Kramer concluded. “History is about claiming what is ours.”32
Proprietary claims are not novel in public memory. Indeed, their dy-
namic social construction and currency, and competition among them,
provide the vital sustenance for memory’s endurance. The agon of Lin-
coln’s memory, as Barry Schwartz and Merrill Peterson’s studies richly
demonstrate, has long contributed fundamentally to his becoming an
“inexhaustible resource,” an exemplar so deeply forged, so iconic, so
98 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

permanent, that he is unquestionably “part of the soul of American so-
ciety.”33 It is noteworthy, however, that Kramer’s countermemory, admit-
tedly a radical recon¤guration of the American soul, provoked responses,
especially by professional historians, attempting what I call mnemonicide
to assuage the anxieties attending their homosexual panic.34 Mindful of
Schwartz’s thoughtful reservations regarding the praxis of Bodnar’s “of¤-
cial memory,”35 I aim nonetheless to account for this rhetoric of con-
trol seeking to preserve Lincoln’s and thus our own hegemonic hetero-
sexuality.
This account begins with a simple question: Why would anyone care if
a known gay extremist delivered a fantastic rendering of an American
icon’s homosexuality at a gathering of midwestern collegiate queers, a tale
only repeated by the end of spring 1999 by the gay press, Madison’s Capital
Times, and the online magazine Salon.com? In response, I turn to the no-
tion of homosexual panic, the homophobic terror of guilt by homosexual
association that subtly governs our social bonds and warrants visceral and
vicious responses to any potential encroachment by the queer contagion.36
Given the magnitude of Lincoln’s memory in forging our collective, na-
tional identity, with obvious implications for individual identity, convic-
tion of his homosexuality would necessarily implicate us all, by means of
this inescapable heritage, as practitioners and progenitors of same-sex
love. The threat elicits not only fear of homosexual complicity but perhaps
more consequentially that of normalizing and centralizing queerness as a
national value. That said, my query reminds us that this panic, while po-
tentially dispersed throughout a community, most keenly strikes locally
those with particular proximity to the stakes. In this case, I highlight
two of these panic-stricken communities to demonstrate mnemonicide
at work.
You do not need to be a queer theorist to fathom the reaction of Spring-
¤eld residents as they opened their Sunday State Journal-Register on May 16,
1999, to ¤nd, just beneath Lincoln’s picture on the masthead, the headline
“Writer Asserts Proof Lincoln Was Gay.”37 Staff writer Jefferson Robbins’s
judicious account38 of Kramer’s speech, its key arguments and the merits
of its evidence as interpreted by historians, evoked a tirade by local resi-
dents sparked by an immediate and intense ®ash of homosexual panic.
They answered this betrayal of their civic pride and collective memory
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 99
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

with cancellations and a ®urry of emails, phone calls, and editorials chas-
tising the State Journal-Register for its sensationalism (what one woman
described as “dredg[ing] up all the trash lying on the bottom of the ocean
for the world to ponder”), its advancement of the gay “agenda,” its endan-
germent of Spring¤eld’s prosperous tourism industry, and its “smearing
of President Lincoln’s reputation.”39 Even editor Barry Locher’s immedi-
ate (if quali¤ed) apology could not quell a feeling that most shared with a
resident who wrote, “Honest Abe must be spinning in his Oak Ridge grave
wondering what he did to Spring¤eld to make them shame him in this
manner.”40 What these local stewards of Lincoln did not articulate fully
was the motive that animated so many of their explicitly pragmatic and
patriotic appeals: to constitute Lincoln’s memory is to be constituted by
Lincoln’s memory.41 As one outraged subscriber astutely, if unfortunately,
observed, “[F]amilies need good values, not gay values.”42
The rather predictable volley of ad hominem and threat exhibits the
limited rhetorical options available to those locals threatened by an “out-
law” memory, a ®exing of vernacular muscle in the interest of bullying
those who give it voice so as to insulate and protect the multiple (economic,
social, familial) investments in a sanctioned and cherished memory.43 Un-
interested in the historical merits of Kramer’s claims or their newswor-
thiness, Spring¤eld residents did not seek to refute a competing memory
out of existence; instead they formed a posse comitatus and performed the
rhetorical equivalent of running the “outlaw” memory out of town on
a rail.
Such tar-and-feather mnemonicide is not nearly as complex or inter-
esting as that attempted by scholars who readily answered Kramer’s folly.
Any claim that professional historians suffered equally the moral, cogni-
tive, and emotional constrictions of homosexual panic or, more precisely,
that consequently they would deploy themselves, consciously or uncon-
sciously, in the service of public memory’s political battle over Lincoln, is
tantamount to ¤ghting words. Many historians would deny that, in the
words of one London reporter, “scholars . . . consider it their business to
safeguard the memory of the Father of the Nation.”44 Thomas Fleming, in
distinguishing between the objectivity of history and the ideological labor
of public memory, stated the case in unequivocal terms: “[M]y painfully
acquired belief [is] that the historian’s chief task is to separate history from
100 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

memory. . . . memory is not history. It is too clotted with sentiment,
with the kind of retrospective distortion that we constantly in®ict on the
past. History gives us, not the past seen through the eyes of the present,
but the past in the eyes, the hearts and minds of the men and women who
lived through a particular time, and experienced it.”45 Merrill Peterson
maintains this distinction regarding the nation’s memory of Lincoln, ar-
guing that the “public remembrance of the past, as differentiated from the
historical scholars’, is concerned less with establishing its truth than with
appropriating it for the present. . . . While heightening consciousness of
the nation’s heritage, it restages it and manipulates it for ongoing public
purposes.”46
Such, no doubt, is the professional response that should readily dis-
miss Kramer’s queer memory of Lincoln, that all-too-familiar speculative
imagining that has circulated at least since Carl Sandburg’s capricious
characterization of Lincoln and Speed as having “a streak of lavender, and
spots soft as May violets” seventy-¤ve years ago.47 The seasoned and seri-
ous historian, with instant discernment, should rightly conclude with Lin-
coln scholar Douglas Wilson, “It sounds like this might be a case of taking
a 19th century event and giving it a 20th century context.”48
How, then, does one explain the passionate engagement of this contro-
versy by historians? Without belaboring an obvious point, ¤rst it must
be said that history is tropologically, ontologically, and ideologically a rhe-
torical enterprise.49 The latter of these three dimensions that shape the
historian-rhetor most concerns me here, generally because its presence in
historiography remains closeted for many of its practitioners and speci¤-
cally because of its profound implications for a queer past. At a minimum
and without yet attributing nefarious motive, one can note with Dominick
LaCapra that “[a]ny ‘dialogue’ with the past in professional historiogra-
phy takes place in a larger social, political, economic, and cultural con-
text that places severe restrictions upon it.”50 The degree to which a
particular historical account is in®ected by those constraints depends on
the historian, but that those accounts are indeed in®ected is dif¤cult to
gainsay. More pointedly, that the past—and its disciplinary recovery and
representation—is usable and used ideologically often escapes notice ex-
cept by those for whom a relevant past has been “consigned to oblivion.”51
Some historians’ passionate differentiation between history and collective
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 101
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

memory might be read as symptomatic of a fear that their ideological
investments, however minimal, will be exposed in the comparison.52
In certain cases historians doth protest too much. Queer history and
memory is certainly one of them. The story of GLBT historiography can-
not be told but as one of struggle against discipline, a term that designates
not only an academic ¤eld but the rhetorical efforts, often cloaked as “ob-
jective” praxis and judgment, that preserve hegemonic constructions of
sanctioned domains of inquiry into the past.53 Despite a contemporary
climate of relative legitimacy, queer history continues to struggle, particu-
larly in sub¤elds like Lincoln studies. Philip Nobile has argued, “Ever since
talk about Lincoln’s possible bisexuality crept into the mainstream circa
1995 . . . Lincoln scholars have been unanimously skeptical and some-
times even hostile to the idea. Perhaps the best word to describe their
reaction is homophobic, that is, fear of a lavender Lincoln.”54
That homophobic fear when intensi¤ed becomes homosexual panic,
as I believe occurred in the wake of Kramer’s speech. Threatened by
memory-making that claimed historical authenticity of Lincoln’s homo-
sexuality by virtue of documentary evidence, Lincoln scholars blurred
Peterson’s distinction between establishing history’s truth and appropri-
ating, restaging, and manipulating the nation’s heritage for ongoing ideo-
logical purposes. I would argue that Joshua Speed’s diary entries, upon
which Kramer’s public memory rests and which historians have not seen,
mark that collision of history and memory that is born of the most dan-
gerous forms of “insurgent commemoration.” Speed’s diary portends a
radical disruption and transformation—a revolution, we might say—of
national collective identity as constituted by Lincoln’s memory. Given
the stakes—what one author astutely labeled the “second Civil War”55—
Lincoln scholars, many of whom as American citizens share the values
embedded in the dominant memory of Lincoln, have reacted to their own
homosexual panic by forming the last battalion capable of preserving Lin-
coln’s heterosexual ethos.
Because, as David Thelen has observed,56 historians professionally are
most concerned with the accuracy of memory, their ethos when defending
a particular version of the past derives from the same source, namely the
legitimacy of a detached voice authorizing the veri¤ed remembrance of
the historical subject. In the face of what could amount to exculpatory
102 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

evidence, namely Speed’s alleged diary, we ¤nd a consistent gesture to-
ward the plausibility of Kramer’s narrative, remote as historians may will
it to be, that preserves this ethos of objectivity. Michael Burlingame, who
wrote a psychobiography of Lincoln, for instance, comments, “If this is an
authentic diary and it does contain homoerotic passages, I’m willing to
believe it if the evidence is there.”57 Others, like Illinois state historian
Thomas Schwartz, establishes similar ethos by clarifying the burden of
proof: “You can’t prove a negative. There’s always a possibility that any-
thing exists, until you can absolutely demonstrate it not being true. On
the other hand, if the thing does exist, it’s really incumbent upon Kramer
to prove his assertion rather than for others to disprove it.”58 Beyond good
method, however, these expressed deferrals of judgment serve to cloak
the ideological work that will get done in the explicit judgments that fol-
low nonetheless. This rhetoric of objectivity and deferral strategically
grounds even as it is belied by enthusiastic arguments that aim precisely
to prove the negative in Lincoln’s case.
In varying degrees of development and sophistication, historians have
challenged Kramer’s memory without waiting for Kramer’s disclosure of
Speed’s diary. Lincoln was “very, very unlikely” a gay man, they argue, for
the following circumstantial reasons: because nineteenth-century frontiers-
men typically slept in the same beds for the same reason Lincoln did—
economic necessity; because Lincoln courted women, several prior to
Mary Todd, and then fathered four children with her; and because the
“very personal and very rough politics of the time” would have pro-
duced evidence of blackmail had there been a romance between Lin-
coln and Speed.59 Each of these arguments provides useful contextual
frames through which inferences regarding the Lincoln-Speed relation-
ship and their texts (extant correspondence) might be derived. As Thomas
Schwartz rightly observes, “History is always interpreted. Facts don’t
speak for themselves. Evidence has to be cemented together with imagi-
nation and interpretation.”60
What marks these accounts ideologically, however, is their rather in-
discriminate if not desperate application, their insistent tone. Although
the contextual frames are not mutually exclusive in their relation to a
queer reading of Lincoln and Speed, nor are they comprehensive, they are
presented as if that were the case, meant to raise doubt suf¤ciently to
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 103
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

eliminate homosexuality as a credible inference. The issue of romance is
particularly illuminating. Michael Burlingame forcefully dismisses the
possibility of Lincoln’s homosexuality by asserting that “there is too much
evidence that Lincoln was strongly attracted to women.”61 In his book The
Inner World of Abraham Lincoln, however, he unambiguously charts the tor-
tured history of Lincoln’s relationships with women, aptly summarized in
the opening sentence of the chapter-long discussion: “Abraham Lincoln
did not like women.” He quotes one love interest from the 1830s who
observed that Lincoln seemed to be “a very queer fellow” and another
whom Lincoln courted in Spring¤eld during his residency in Speed’s bed:
“While he was never at ease with women, with men he was a favorite
companion.” Complexities he methodically elucidates for a narrower
audience are absent in summary judgments that appear in mass-mediated
sources to seek foreclosure of same-sex desire as a dynamic force in Lin-
coln’s heterosexual congress.62
Perhaps more telling, Burlingame offers as evidence of Lincoln’s hetero-
sexuality his love affair with Ann Rutledge, which has long been contested
by historians on evidentiary grounds. In his book Burlingame endorses
those Lincoln scholars who rebut James G. Randall’s skepticism regard-
ing the veracity of the affair. Among those favored revisionists is Douglas
Wilson, who argues that Randall “insists on an extremely high standard
of proof” that be¤ts legal judgment but not historical inquiry. Wilson, who
considers the Rutledge story a “positive gain for all who seek to under-
stand the man and the circumstances that brought him forth,” dismisses
Randall because “[o]bserving the evidentiary safeguards of a criminal trial
would, after all, bring a substantial portion of historical inquiry to a halt,
for much of what we want to know about the past simply cannot be estab-
lished on these terms. Abraham Lincoln’s early life is a perfect example.”
By stark contrast, both Burlingame and Wilson seemingly impose Ran-
dall’s impossibly rigorous standards in interpreting the evidence—of com-
parable if not sounder documentary merit from the same time period—of
Lincoln’s relationship with Speed. Their heterosexist—if not homophobic—
bias is unmistakable here and tells us much about the largely invisible ideo-
logical assumptions at work in their historical method.63
Others have employed de¤nitional argument to limit interpretive
ground for assessing such evidence. Thomas Schwartz, for example, is
104 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

more forthright than Burlingame in dealing with the complexities of
Lincoln’s love affairs, only to dismiss them as a de¤nitional warrant for
a queer reading. “I don’t think anyone would deny that you ¤nd [in Lin-
coln] an ambivalence and awkwardness toward women. Whether you
could make the case that he experienced not only homosexual attrac-
tion but also had homosexual partners is something else.” Lest that case
be made, Michael Rogin deepens the de¤nitional burden: “There may
be evidence of male-male desire, but that’s not gay. If ‘gay’ is going to
mean anything it’s got to mean orgasms with other men. There’s got to be
some sense of transgression and forbiddenness.”64 The ambiguity of estab-
lishing “something else” or the impossibility of discovering in some ar-
chive the ®uid proof of “transgression and forbiddenness” insulates Lin-
coln and his custodians from interpretation that de¤es heteronormative
memory.
Beyond the convulsions that have passed during this homosexual panic
as coolly objective responses to Kramer’s assertions, this discourse exhibits
further assurances that control is both means and end in this struggle. Ab-
sent silencing Kramer by way of an authoritative historical interpretation
of Lincoln’s love for Speed, contingency plans lurk everywhere among cir-
cumstantial and evidentiary claims. First, ad hominem and well-poisoning
abound, as one historian proclaimed on the History News Network: “[E]very
gay historian, or gay activist who claims to be an historian, wants to ‘out’
all of our great historical ¤gures.”65 Second, an admonishment against
certain revisionist history, which Gabor Boritt articulates in The Lincoln
Enigma: “Lincoln strongly bonded with men but what may suggest homo-
sexuality in our time most likely did not so much occur to most people
in his time. . . . In history, context is all-important and the ¤rst duty of
the historian is to understand the past in terms understood by those who
lived in the past.”66 Finally, queer distinctions are distinctions without
meaningful difference. As Harold Evans argues, “If it was an isolated, ear-
lier event that occurred decades before a person rose to prominence, the
public should use their own good judgment and common sense and not
take it very seriously.”67
Fearing their incapacity to discipline memory, historians have sought
the diminution of any queer interpretive context that would sustain the
meaning for collective memory potentially derived from countereviden-
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 105
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tiary authority. Ironically, Lincoln scholars have embodied their critique
of Kramer. As Norman Hellmers, superintendent of the Lincoln Home
National Historic Site, put it so well: “People ¤nd it useful to exploit
Mr. Lincoln for their own purposes. They’ll do whatever it takes to make
the connection.”68 In this case, we witness not a disciplining or domesti-
cation of memory’s imaginative excess but the assassination of memory,
or mnemonicide, for the sake of perpetuating a hegemonic connection to
our ostensibly straight past.
By way of conclusion, let me make a few relevant clari¤cations and
point out some implications. I am not claiming that historians are neces-
sarily elites whose standard practice, whose guiding impulse—as Bodnar
might argue—functions as the ballast of hegemonic memory. Indeed, I
have in principle much sympathy for Timothy Garton Ash’s characteriza-
tion of Holocaust historians: “Thank God for historians . . . [their] fair-
ness, representation, completeness . . . the historians are our protectors.
They protect us against forgetting—that is a truism. But they also protect
us against memory.”69 Gay and lesbian historians have, in this spirit, la-
bored to discover a past that both founds queer memory and dismantles
the myths that have trivialized and scapegoated homosexuals into obscu-
rity. I join Martin Duberman in pressing for the “right of a people to a
knowledge of its own history (its memory), an indispensable prerequisite
for establishing collective identity and for enjoying the solace of knowing
that we too have ‘come through,’ are the bearers of a diverse, rich, unique
heritage.”70 But I also draw from this study of Lincoln’s memory the in-
herent danger in historians’ ability to “protect us against memory.” In-
duced (perhaps unknowingly) by circumstance into the political fray, bol-
stered by a professional ethos that positions them as arbiters and advocates
of memory’s struggle, they threaten to become the midwives of the for-
gotten.
For Larry Kramer, recuperating Lincoln was necessary not foremost as
a form of gay protest but as a mandate that gays and lesbians, in order to
survive, must learn to remember: “A lot of our brothers and sisters, the
generations that came before us, our blood kin, died, and we must never
for one second forget the fact that each and every one of us is related by
blood to every single other gay man and lesbian who not only died from
AIDS but who has ever lived.”71 His astuteness regarding the moral and
rhetorical imperatives inherent in such a mandate of memory is revealed
106 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

in his repeated use of the Gettysburg Address: “It is for us the living, rather,
to be dedicated here to the un¤nished work which they who fought here
have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to
the great task remaining before us—that from these honored dead we take
increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure
of their devotion—that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not
have died in vain.”72 Kramer’s radical appropriation of Lincoln would ex-
tend beyond this rather typical if meaningful invocation of sacred words;
indeed, like Lincoln himself, he would innovate in deploying the usable
symbolic resources of the past as an organizing principle in the present
and moral vision for a sustainable queer future.
Notes
For epigraphs, see Abraham Lincoln, “My Childhood—Home I See Again,”
in Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, ed. Roy P. Basler (New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press, 1953), 1:367; Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of Religious
Life (1915; New York: Free Press, 1965), 55.
1. Paul Monette, Last Watch of the Night (New York: Harcourt Brace and
Company, 1994), 147–49.
2. David W. Blight, “‘For Something beyond the Battle¤eld’: Frederick
Douglass and the Struggle for the Memory of the Civil War,” Journal of American
History 75 (March 1989): 1159. See also Frederick Douglass, “Oration in Memory
of Abraham Lincoln,” in The Life and Writings of Frederick Douglass, ed. Philip S.
Foner (New York: International Publishers, 1955), 4:309–19.
3. Monette, Last Watch of the Night, 149.
4. Martin Duberman, Stonewall (New York: Plume, 1994), xvii.
5. For an excellent analysis of the AIDS Quilt and public memory, see
Marita Sturken, Tangled Memories: The Vietnam War, the AIDS Epidemic, and the Poli-
tics of Remembering (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997); Peter S.
Hawkins, “Naming Names: The Art of Memory and the NAMES Project AIDS
Quilt,” Critical Inquiry 19 (summer 1993): 752–79.
6. John Cloud, “Why Milk Is Still Fresh,” Advocate, November 10, 1998, p. 33.
7. John Nichols, “History Out in the Open; AIDS Activist Says the Miss-
ing Chapters on Gays Must Be Written,” Capital Times (Madison, WI), Febru-
ary 26, 1999, p. 11A; Larry Kramer, “Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow,” Advocate,
March 30, 1999, p. 67.
8. See Charles B. Strozier, Lincoln’s Quest for Union: A Psychological Portrait,
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 107
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

2nd ed. (Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2000), 53–65; Jonathan Ned Katz, “No
Two Men Were Ever More Intimate,” Love Stories: Sex between Men before Homosexu-
ality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 3–25; Douglas L. Wilson,
Honor’s Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln (New York: Knopf, 1998), 245–
59; Charley Shively, “Big Buck and Big Lick: Lincoln and Whitman,” Drum Beats:
Walt Whitman’s Civil War Boy Lovers (San Francisco: Gay Sunshine Press, 1989), 71–
88; Robert L. Kinkaid, Joshua Fry Speed: Lincoln’s Most Intimate Friend (Harrogate,
TN: Department of Lincolniana, Lincoln Memorial University, 1943).
9. Douglas L. Wilson and Rodney O. Davis, eds., Herndon’s Informants: Letters,
Interviews, and Statements about Abraham Lincoln (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1998), 588–91.
10. In addressing the bed question, Charles Strozier is the most sensible of
Lincoln scholars, most of whom refuse to consider its emotional dimensions:
“Social custom and individual experience, however, are not always congruent.
Just because many men slept together casually in inns and elsewhere during this
period by no means proves that it was unimportant that Lincoln lay down in a
crowded bed night after night for well over three years with his best male friend,
whom he trusted above all with his deepest feelings. The question is, what does
it mean?” Strozier, Lincoln’s Quest for Union, 57.
11. Wilson, Honor’s Voice, 245.
12. Ward H. Lamon, The Life of Abraham Lincoln: From His Birth to His Inaugu-
ration as President (1872; Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999), 231.
13. Herndon here exhibits irritation about the implications of the term “in-
timacy.” Although this must be read in its cultural context, it might be under-
stood as the ¤rst of many that resist depictions of same-sex affection or desire.
For the purposes of my argument, it is all the more interesting for its injunction
against the excesses of memory:
Who authorizes H. and N. to assert what they do assert? How do H. and
N. know that Lincoln and Speed poured out their souls to one another? If
to tell a friend some facts in one line or direction constitutes intimate friend-
ship, then Lincoln always, before and after Speed left Illinois, had intimate
friends, and if Lincoln’s refusal to tell all the secrets of his soul to any man
shows a want of intimate friendship, then Lincoln never had an intimate
friend. Poetry is no ¤t place for severe history. I think the truth is just here,
namely, that under peculiar conditions and under lines of love and in that
108 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

direction they were intimate friends. No man pours his whole soul to any
man. (William H. Herndon to Jesse W. Weik, January 22, 1887, in The
Hidden Lincoln: From the Letters and Papers of William H. Herndon, ed. Emanuel
Hertz [New York: Blue Ribbon, 1940], 159.)
14. Abraham Lincoln to Joshua Speed, February 13, 1842, in Basler, Collected
Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:269.
15. Wilson, Honor’s Voice, 195–264; Strozier, Lincoln’s Quest for Union, 41–65.
Others suggest that Lincoln’s struggles with women spanned his lifetime and
stemmed not merely from anxiety about sex. See Katz, Love Stories, 14; Burlin-
game, The Inner World of Abraham Lincoln, 123–46.
16. Strozier, Lincoln’s Quest for Union, 56.
17. Quoted in Wilson, Honor’s Voice, 247.
18. See Douglas L. Wilson, “Abraham Lincoln and ‘That Fatal First of Janu-
ary,’” Lincoln before Washington: New Perspectives on the Illinois Years (Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 1997), 99–132; Wilson, Honor’s Voice, 233–38; Strozier, Lin-
coln’s Quest for Union, 58–59; David Herbert Donald, Lincoln (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1995), 86–88; Katz, Love Stories, 18.
19. William H. Herndon to Isaac N. Arnold, November 20, 1866, in Hertz,
The Hidden Lincoln, 37.
20. Abraham Lincoln to John T. Stuart, January 23, 1841, in Basler, Collected
Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:229.
21. Wilson, Honor’s Voice, 251–59; Donald, Lincoln, 89–90; Strozier, Lincoln’s
Quest for Union, 60–65; Katz, Love Stories, 18–24.
22. All quotations from Abraham Lincoln to Joshua F. Speed, January 3?,
1842, in Basler, Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:265.
23. All quotations from Abraham Lincoln to Joshua F. Speed, February 3,
1842, in Basler, Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:267–68.
24. Donald, Lincoln, 89.
25. Abraham Lincoln to Joshua F. Speed, February 13, 1842, in Basler, Col-
lected Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:269–70.
26. All quotations from Abraham Lincoln to Joshua F. Speed, February 25,
1842, in Basler, Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, 1:280.
27. Kramer has refused to provide a transcript of this speech or the chapter
on Lincoln in his unpublished work-in-progress The American People. Excerpts and
description of the speech are found in Samara Kalk, “Lincoln Was Gay, Activist
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 109
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Contends,” Capital Times (Madison, WI), February 23, 1999, p. 2A; Kate Kail,
“Lecturer Suggests Lincoln Was Gay,” Cardinal News (Madison), February 23,
1999; Nichols, “History Out in the Open,” 11A; Carol Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”
http://www.salon.com/books/it/1999/04/30/lincoln/index.html.
28. For Kramer’s rhetorical career, see Larry Kramer, Reports from the Holo-
caust: The Making of an AIDS Activist (New York: St. Martin’s, 1989); David Berg-
man, “Larry Kramer and the Rhetoric of AIDS,” in AIDS: The Literary Response,
ed. Emmanuel S. Nelson (New York: Twayne, 1992), 175–86; Lawrence D. Mass,
ed., We Must Love One Another or Die: The Life and Legacies of Larry Kramer (New York:
St. Martin’s, 1997).
29. Roger I. Simon, “Forms of Insurgency in the Production of Popular
Memories: The Columbus Quincentenary and the Pedagogy of Counter-
Commemoration,” Cultural Studies 7 (January 1993): 76.
30. Kenneth Burke, Permanence and Change: An Anatomy of Purpose (Los Altos,
CA: Hermes Publications, 1954), 71, 74.
31. Larry Kramer, “Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow,” Advocate, March 30,
1999, p. 67.
32. Nichols, “History Out in Open,” 11A.
33. Merrill D. Peterson, Lincoln in American Memory (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1994); Barry Schwartz, Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National
Memory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
34. In using the term mnemonicide, I mean to imply the rhetorical nature of
collective forgetting or repression of memory and thus retain and emphasize a
sense of agency in thinking about the social construction, transmission, and era-
sure of memory as it occurs at a speci¤c historical moment. I recognize that the
rhetorical acts I explore are part of the broader social/cultural dynamics of col-
lective “amnesia” that can occur over much longer periods of time. See Michael
Schudson, Watergate in American Memory: How We Remember, Forget and Reconstruct the
Past (New York: Basic Books, 1992); Barry Schwartz, “Deconstructing and Re-
constructing the Past,” Qualitative Sociology 18 (1995): 263–70.
35. Schwartz quali¤es Bodnar and other theorists of the politics of memory
who emphasize the retention of state hegemony in social constructions of an
“of¤cial past”: “Collective memory is in truth an effective weapon in contempo-
rary power struggles, but the battle¤eld image of society, taken alone, distorts
understanding of collective memory’s sources and functions, leaving out, as
it does, the cultural realm within which the politics of memory is situated.”
110 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Schwartz, Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National Memory, 15–17. See John Bod-
nar, Remaking America: Public Memory, Commemoration, and Patriotism in the Twentieth
Century (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
36. Homosexual panic functions by means of an ideologically driven fear that
one might be homosexual, harbor homosexual longings, or, most important,
be perceived as homosexual by others. It thus bolsters and perpetuates hetero-
normativity through its terrorizing discourse or by force of gay bashing. See
Edward J. Kempf, Psychopathology (St. Louis: Mosby, 1920), 477–515; Eve Kosof-
sky Sedgwick, Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1985), 83–96; Charles E. Morris III, “Pink
Herring and the Fourth Persona: J. Edgar Hoover’s Sex Crime Panic,” Quarterly
Journal of Speech 88 (May 2002): 228–44. See also Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Epis-
temology of the Closet (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), 182–212.
37. Jefferson Robbins, “Writer Asserts Proof Lincoln Was Gay/Gay Activ-
ist Claims Mystery Diary Shows Recollections of Affair,” State Journal-Register
(Spring¤eld, IL), May 16, 1999, p. 1.
38. Robbins detailed the relationship and the controversy in three articles
published in the same edition. Robbins, “Writer Asserts Proof”; Jefferson Rob-
bins, “Joshua Speed Was Longtime Friend, Prototypical Frontier Settler,” State
Journal-Register (Spring¤eld, IL), May 16, 1999, p. 1; Jefferson Robbins, “Joshua
Speed Suffered a Case of Cold Feet before His 1842 Marriage to Fanny Henning,”
State Journal-Register (Spring¤eld, IL), May 16, 1999, p. 6.
39. For editorial responses, see State Journal-Register (Spring¤eld, IL), May
20, 1999, p. 6; Stephanie Simon, “Lincoln Country Aghast as Local Paper Prints
Gay Allegation; Activist Claims He’s Seen the Diary of the 16th President’s
Homosexual Lover. Historians Deride the Idea as Spring¤eld Fumes,” Los Angeles
Times, June 22, 1999, p. A5.
40. Barry Locher, “Claims about Lincoln Deserved Investigation,” State
Journal-Register (Spring¤eld, IL), May 20, 1999, p. 7.
41. On the relationship between identity and memory, see Maurice Halb-
wachs, On Collective Memory, ed. Lewis A. Coser (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992); John R. Gillis, “Memory and Identity: The History of a Relation-
ship,” in Commemorations: The Politics of National Identity, ed. John R. Gillis (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 3–24.
42. Quoted in Locher, “Claims about Lincoln,” 7.
43. Bodnar’s discussion of vernacular memory is useful here, however in this
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 111
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

instance we witness a struggle between two vernacular memories, one of which
(in Spring¤eld) mirrors and supports rather than disrupts the “of¤cial” memory.
Bodnar, Remaking America. My rendering of Kramer’s countermemory of Lincoln
as an “out-law” memory is in keeping with Sloop and Ono’s broader conception
of “out-law discourse.” John M. Sloop and Kent A. Ono, “Out-law Discourse:
The Critical Politics of Material Judgment,” Philosophy and Rhetoric 30 (1997):
50–69.
44. Andrew Gumbel, “Abe Lincoln’s Home Town Outraged at His ‘Outing,’”
Independent (London), June 27, 1999, p. 21.
45. Thomas Fleming, “History and Memory: They’re Different,” http://
www.historynewsnetwork.org/articles/article.html?id=159.
46. Peterson, Lincoln in American Memory, 35.
47. Sandburg wrote, suggestively, “A streak of lavender ran through him
[Speed]; he had spots soft as May violets. . . . Lincoln too had . . . a streak of
lavender, and spots soft as May violets. . . . Their births, the loins and tissues of
their fathers and mothers, accident, fate, providence, had given these two men
streaks of lavender, spots soft as May violets.” Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lincoln: The
Prairie Years (New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1926), 1:166–67. For an analysis of
the homoerotic subtext here, see Katz, Love Stories, 354.
48. Quoted in Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”
49. See Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge (New York: Pantheon,
1972); Hayden White, Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century
Europe (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973); Hayden White, The
Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1978); Dominick LaCapra, Rethinking Intellectual History: Texts, Contexts,
Language (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1983); Hayden White, The Content of
Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1987); Allan Megill and Donald N. McCloskey, “The Rhetoric
of History,” in The Rhetoric of the Human Sciences, ed. John S. Nelson, Allan Megill,
and Donald N. McCloskey (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987), 221–
38; Michel de Certeau, The Writing of History (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1988); E. Culpepper Clark and Raymie E. McKerrow, “The Rhetori-
cal Construction of History,” in Doing Rhetorical History: Concepts and Cases, ed.
Kathleen J. Turner (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1998), 33–46.
50. Dominick LaCapra, “Rhetoric and History,” History and Criticism (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1985), 42–43.
112 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

51. I borrow the phrase from Gillis, Commemorations, 9. Although his focus
concerns literary studies, Eagleton’s insights on ideology and academic writing
are relevant here. Terry Eagleton, “Ideology and Scholarship,” in Historical Studies
and Literary Criticism, ed. Jerome J. McGann (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1985), 114–25.
52. On the rhetorical similarities between history and collective memory,
see Marouf Hasian Jr. and Robert E. Frank, “Rhetoric, History, and Collective
Memory: Decoding the Goldhagen Debates,” Western Journal of Communication 63
(winter 1999): 95–114.
53. See Blanche Wiesen Cook, “The Historical Denial of Lesbianism,” Radi-
cal History Review 20 (spring/summer 1979): 60–65; Lisa Duggan, “History’s Gay
Ghetto: The Contradictions of Growth in Lesbian and Gay History,” in Presenting
the Past: Essays on History and the Public, ed. Susan Porter Benson, Steven Brier, and
Roy Rosenzweig (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986), 281–92; George
Chauncey Jr., Martin Bauml Duberman, and Martha Vicinus, introduction to
Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past, ed. Martin Bauml Duber-
man, Martha Vicinus, and George Chauncey Jr. (New York: NAL Books, 1989);
John D’Emilio, “Not a Simple Matter: Gay History and Gay Historians,” Making
Trouble: Essays on Gay History, Politics, and the University (New York: Routledge,
1992), 138–47; Lisa Duggan, “The Discipline Problem,” GLQ: A Journal of Gay and
Lesbian Studies 2 (August 1995): 179–91.
54. Philip Nobile, “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t Publish: Homophobia
and Lincoln Studies?” http://www.historynewsnetwork.org/articles/article.
html?id=97.
55. Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”
56. David Thelen, “Memory and American History,” Journal of American His-
tory 75 (March 1989): 1117–29.
57. Quoted in Robbins, “Writer Asserts Proof,” 6. Burlingame implies that
documentary proof is self-evident, obscuring the politics of interpretation that
he exercises in other statements. The resiliency of ideology in the face of such
“proof” can be witnessed in the controversy over Thomas Jefferson’s memory.
See Jan Ellen Lewis and Peter S. Onuf, eds., Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson:
History, Memory, and Civic Culture (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
1997).
58. Quoted in Robbins, “Writer Asserts Proof,” 6.
59. Among the Lincoln scholars making these claims are Gabor Boritt,
Politics of Queer Public Memory / 113
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Douglas Wilson, Michael Burlingame, and Gene Griessman. See their testimony
in Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”; Stephanie Simon, “Lincoln Country Aghast as Lo-
cal Paper Prints Gay Allegation,” Los Angeles Times, June 22, 1999, p. A5; W. Scott
Thompson, “Was Lincoln Gay?” http://www.historynewsnetwork.org/article.
html?id=96; Gabor Boritt, The Lincoln Enigma: The Changing Faces of an American
Icon (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), xiv–xvi.
60. Hilary Shenfeld, “Lincoln’s Love Life: A Lesson in Historical Interpreta-
tion,” Chicago Daily Herald, July 8, 1999, p. 3.
61. Quoted in Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”
62. Michael Burlingame, The Inner World of Abraham Lincoln (Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 1994), 123–24.
63. Burlingame, The Inner World of Abraham Lincoln, 135–36. Douglas L. Wil-
son, “Abraham Lincoln, Ann Rutledge, and the Evidence of Herndon’s Infor-
mants,” in Lincoln before Washington, 74–98.
64. Schwartz, quoted in Simon, “Lincoln Country Aghast”; Rogin, quoted in
Lloyd, “Was Lincoln Gay?”
65. Glenn Williams, “Gay Myths,” http://www.historynewsnetwork.org/
articles/comments/displayCommen t.html?cmid=70.
66. Boritt, The Lincoln Enigma, xv–xvi.
67. Quoted in Shenfeld, “Lincoln’s Love Life,” 3.
68. Quoted in Gumbel, “Abe Lincoln’s Home Town Outraged at His ‘Out-
ing,’” 21.
69. Timothy Garton Ash, “The Life of Death,” New York Review of Books, De-
cember 19, 1985, 39.
70. Martin Bauml Duberman, “‘Writhing Bedfellows’ in Antebellum South
Carolina: Historical Interpretation and the Politics of Evidence,” in Hidden from
History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past, ed. Martin Bauml Duberman, Martha
Vicinus, and George Chauncey Jr. (New York: New American Library, 1989), 168.
71. Kramer, “Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow,” 66.
72. Abraham Lincoln, “Gettysburg Address,” in Garry Wills, Lincoln at Gettys-
burg: The Words That Remade America (New York: Touchstone, 1992), 263.
114 / Charles E. Morris III
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

5
Shadings of Regret
America and Germany
Barry Schwartz and
Horst-Alfred Heinrich
Why should we assume the faults of our friend, or wife, or father or
child, because they sit around our hearth, or are said to have the same
blood? All men have my blood and I all men’s. Not for that will I adopt
their petulance or folly, even the context of being ashamed of it.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
The Spur of Regret
Never before have American leaders and of¤cials apologized for so many
things. Shortly after President Ronald Reagan expressed remorse over the
internment of Japanese Americans during World War II, Americans ob-
served the ¤ve-hundredth anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s voy-
age to the New World by acknowledging his atrocities against its na-
tive people. As American Lutherans rejected the anti-Semitism of their
founder, Martin Luther, and the Southern Baptist Convention formally
apologized for sanctifying slavery, an interfaith delegation visited Japan to
apologize for the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In Sand Creek,
Colorado, whites offered regrets to Native American descendents of the
Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians massacred there a century before. More
recently, President William Clinton apologized for America’s many moral
failings in Africa; Aetna, Inc., apologized for issuing insurance policies on
slaves’ lives. The list of regrets seems endless.1
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

During most of America’s history, political and civil institutions re-
solved con®icts through formal treaties, restitution, or tacit understand-
ing. Only during the last two decades of the twentieth century have for-
mal, public apologies become necessary. What are we to make of this
growing wave of repentance? Emile Durkheim led us to believe that “a
man is surer of his faith when he sees to how distant a past it goes back
and what great things it has inspired.”2 Remembering noble deeds, he said,
elevates the community’s dignity and moral values. How, then, are we to
explain the spreading contamination of the past, the discovery in every
nook and crevice of the memory landscape a new atrocity to be regretted,
a new wrong to be set right?
The swelling wave of repentance corresponds to the outpouring of col-
lective memory literature in the 1980s and 1990s, and both developments
are part of the late twentieth-century “sensitivity revolution,” with its un-
precedented concern for minority dignity and rights.3 As old forms of
religious and class con®icts evolve into ethnic, racial, and gender con®icts,
disadvantaged groups become increasingly aware of the uses of public dis-
course. References to past injustice and suffering are particularly useful
because they legitimate new distributional policies (af¤rmative action, in-
cluding racial and gender quotas and preferences), new civil demeanor
and discourse (political correctness), new interpretations of minority con-
tributions to history, new heroes, new villains, new insights into America’s
criminal history. Such is the background of the new ritual apology. The
spur of regret intensi¤es as the “dominant culture” comes under attack.
In their broadest sense, America’s repentance gestures are aspects of
what James Hunter calls its culture wars—the con®ict between “progres-
sive” and “orthodox” (traditional) conceptions of moral authority. In the
orthodox vision, moral authority arises from a “dynamic reality that is
independent of, prior to, and more powerful than human experience.”4
Whether it be a religion, a nation, or a political movement, this reality
surpasses the existence of the individual, digni¤es him, and promotes
within him a sense of purpose and wholeness. Embracing absolute de¤ni-
tions of right and wrong, the orthodox reject relativism, multiple truths,
and “alternative lifestyles.” In the progressive vision, all racial, religious,
ethnic, and gender boundaries are arbitrary but, ironically, must be main-
116 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tained in a diverse and equal society. Progressives are suspicious of tradi-
tion, dedicated to minority rights, receptive to negative information about
historically oppressive majorities, and inclined to relate minority short-
comings to majority oppression.5 Ritual apologies, because they recognize
oppression and its consequences, provide symbolic support for the pro-
gressive agenda.
Articulating the tension between traditional and progressive strains of
American culture, Hunter’s thesis rings true for many issues. But this the-
sis is self-limiting: by focusing on institutional policies, it downplays indi-
vidual beliefs and underestimates their consensus.6 Hunter observes that
controversial issues have “become institutionalized chie®y through special-
purpose organizations, denominations, political parties, and branches of
government,”7 but to assume that institutions are the only signi¤cant par-
ticipants in matters of moral authority is to skirt too many issues, includ-
ing questions about the clash among culture, memory, and morality on the
one hand and institutional and individual de¤nitions of moral responsi-
bility on the other.
We questioned university students in the United States and Germany
to determine how different combinations of culture and historical expe-
rience lead to different perspectives on personal responsibility. Compar-
ing state discourse to the beliefs of informed citizens, we do not assume
that one level of responsibility is more authentic than another; we seek
rather to understand how these different levels relate to one another. Our
argument is simple: political exigencies, particularly international and in-
ternal political pressures, operate on American and German governments
to express regret of¤cially, while cultural values induce individual Ger-
mans to take seriously claims that Americans are hard-pressed to under-
stand, namely, that people can be morally responsible for events in which
they did not participate. Taking the German sample as our point of refer-
ence, we emphasize the American ¤ndings. The American state is ready
and willing to express regret for past wrongs; the American citizen is de-
cidedly unwilling to do so. On a broader level, this means that collective
memory can have no signi¤cance apart from the relation among what his-
torians say about the past, how political elites represent the past, and what
ordinary people, constrained by their nation’s experience and cultural val-
Shadings of Regret / 117
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ues, think about the past. Regret and responsibility, properly understood,
refer to the relation among these three elements. Such is the claim we
wish to defend.
Individual and Collective Responsibility
Moral responsibility, according to Leszek Kolakowski, is a natural senti-
ment having nothing to do with one’s conduct or the timing of one’s birth.
“Our primary relationship to the world,” he believes, “is that of responsi-
bility voluntarily assumed. [To live is] to take on the debts of the world as
our own.”8 Is Kolakowski saying that the sharing of shame and responsi-
bility is a universal disposition, applicable to everyone in all times? If so,
his burden of proof is heavy indeed.9
Assertions about moral responsibility are dif¤cult to defend when ap-
plied universally. Oskar von der Gablentz, referring to the National So-
cialist era, therefore limits his claim: “Every member of the body politic
is responsible according to his function, from the absolute ruler to the
common voter.”10 Even von der Gablentz’s conception, however, is prob-
lematic. It is one thing for a state and its agents to assume responsibility
for historical wrongdoing; it is another for an individual to assume respon-
sibility for state misdeeds committed before his or her birth.
Gesine Schwan declares that moral guilt can never be transmitted
across generations, but “the psychological and moral consequences of
treating it with silence harm even the subsequent generation and the basic
consensus of a democracy.”11 In this same connection, Jürgen Habermas
used the image of history as a supermarket: we cannot pick out just what
is convenient for us; on the contrary, democratic societies need to deal
with the negative aspects of their past, especially when victims of earlier
atrocities are still alive and still citizens.12
From the standpoint of both social identity theory13 and self-categorization
theory,14 Schwan’s argument makes sense. Since our self-image consists
of both an individual and a group component, identi¤cation with social
groups can support or undermine self-esteem, depending on what those
groups have accomplished historically.15 As individuals identify with the
past of their family, community, or nation, they enhance their sense of
responsibility as group members. But how, precisely, does an open con-
frontation with guilt protect new generations and sustain democracy? Can
118 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

one imagine a point at which constant invocation of past wrongs back¤res,
inhibits rather than promotes recognition of moral responsibility? Might
a measure of silence—not total silence but partial relief from the clamor
of self-condemnation—be necessary rather than harmful to the consensus
of democracy?
Schwan’s formulation, like von der Gablentz’s and Kolakowski’s, con-
nects the burgeoning of regret to accelerating ethnoracial movements,
human rights discourse, decolonization, and the politics of recognition;
but it ignores the question of how accountability of the state and commu-
nity can be convincingly extended to individual citizens. Michel-Rolph
Trouillot asserts that collective bodies have traditionally assumed respon-
sibility for harms committed against one another’s members, but these
bodies are incapable of emotions that convert formal admissions of regret
into expressions that injured parties can recognize. Ritual apologies in-
volve a fatal abstraction: representatives of past perpetrators offering
apologies to representatives of past victims conceal the affective trauma
of the original offense. Apology rituals are abortive because they symbol-
ize injuries no one can really feel and regrets no one can deeply af¤rm.16
Kolakowski, von der Gablentz, and Schwan overestimate the strength of
the linkage between institutional and individual regret; Trouillot under-
estimates it. If ritual apologies were as empty as he claims, recipients
would not react to them and they would have ceased long ago.17 Instead,
the demand for contrition seems to grow stronger with each apology of-
fered.
Under what conditions and at what levels is moral reconciliation pos-
sible? Jeffrey Olick and Brenda Coughlin have recently argued that in mat-
ters of the politics of regret, states take the lead and individuals follow.
(“[T]he confessional individual mimics the regretful state.”)18 In fact, the
situation turns out to be more complex. By locating philosophical asser-
tions within different cultural contexts, we try to contribute, in some
slight and tentative way, to the analysis of this question.
Time Frames of Responsibility
Americans typically reject moral responsibility for the misconduct of oth-
ers, especially their ancestors. This resistance is not an isolated trait to be
dismissed as a moral failing; it re®ects a cultural pattern made up of indi-
Shadings of Regret / 119
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

vidualism and liberalism—a pattern that focuses so closely on individual
rights and individual responsibilities as to distinguish the United States
culturally and historically from other democracies.19
Traditional societies, which bind present generations to the values and
programs of the past, are familiar to us through Old Testament af¤rma-
tions of fathers’ sins being visited upon their posterity, and through me-
dieval notions of collective guilt, including the eternal guilt of the Jew as
Christ’s killer. Enlightenment ideals, by contrast, denounce the dead hand
of the past. Characteristic of every Western society, the Enlightenment’s
antitraditional animus is most prominent in the United States. Lacking
feudalism’s rigid status system and traditions, America’s historical devel-
opment promoted unique forms of present-centered individualism.20
While traveling in America Alexis de Tocqueville realized that the aris-
tocrat “almost always knows his forefathers and respects them; he thinks
he already sees his remote descendants and he loves them. He willingly
imposes duties on himself towards the former and the latter and he will
frequently sacri¤ce his personal grati¤cations to those who went before
and to those who will come after him.”21 Aristocratic belief stems from
the dependency of aristocratic communities, where all citizens occupy
¤xed positions dependent on patronage from above and cooperation from
below. Having never known the profound inequalities of Europe, how-
ever, Americans have convinced themselves of their self-determination
and have “acquired the habit of always considering themselves standing
alone. . . . [N]ot only does democracy make every man forget his ances-
tors, but it hides his descendants and separates his contemporaries from
him; it throws him back forever upon himself alone and threatens in the
end to con¤ne him entirely within the solitude of his own heart.”22
That de Tocqueville had Thomas Jefferson in mind when he wrote about
American individualism is doubtful, but he would have understood Jeffer-
son perfectly. Jefferson believed it to be “self-evident that the earth be-
longs in usufruct to the living: that the dead have neither powers nor rights
over it.”23 If past debts, ¤nancial and otherwise, are not to burden the
present generation, Jefferson believed, federal and state constitutions
must be rewritten every nineteen years. How else can men and women
renounce the past and govern themselves? “By the law of nature, one gen-
eration is to another as one independent nation is to another.”24 Ralph
Waldo Emerson’s American Scholar address echoed Jefferson and de Tocque-
120 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ville: “Each age, it is found, must write its own books; or rather, each
generation for the next succeeding. The books of an older period will not
¤t this.”25
Nathaniel Hawthorne also raged against the past. In The House of the
Seven Gables he demands to know, “Shall we never, never get rid of this
past? It lies upon the present like a giant’s dead body! In fact, the case is
just as if a young giant were compelled to waste all his strength in carrying
about the corpse of an old giant, his grandfather. . . . Just think, a mo-
ment; and it will startle you to see what slaves we are to by-gone times.”26
Hawthorne was referring to his family’s sins, which he wished to redeem,
while at the same time wishing to eliminate the pastness of the family
itself. At ¤fty-year intervals “a family should be merged into the great,
obscure mass of humanity, and forget about all its ancestors.” Likewise,
public buildings, symbolizing public affairs, should be made of inferior
materials that “crumble to ruin once in twenty years, or thereabouts, as a
hint to the people to examine into and reform the institutions which they
symbolize.”27
A century later anthropologist Florence Kluckhohn distinguished
American culture by its tendency to deemphasize the past and segment it
from the present.28 So, too, sociologist Robert Bellah observes: “We live
in a society that encourages us to cut free from the past, to de¤ne our own
selves, to choose the groups with which we wish to identify.”29 When psy-
chologist Thomas Cottle invited his American subjects to order past, pres-
ent, and future in terms of separate (atomistic), touching (continuous), or
overlapping (integrated) circles, 60 percent construed the circles atomis-
tically; 27 percent, continuously; and 13 percent, integrated.30 When
Mikyoung Kim and one of the authors asked Korean students to do the
same, only nine percent separated past, present, and future; 11 percent
conceived time as continuous; and 80 percent integrated the three time
spheres—the extreme opposite of the American pattern.31
Segmenting time affects the way Americans disconnect themselves
from the sins of the past, but how wide is the gap separating of¤cial ex-
pressions of regret from individual feelings of regret?
Gathering Clues
To assert that American culture weakens the relation between the living
and the dead does not mean that Americans never think about their rela-
Shadings of Regret / 121
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tion to the past; it means that that relation means less to them than it does
to people elsewhere. Culture’s in®uence on memory is best documented
among nations in which judgments of the past differ despite similar reli-
gious cultures, economic and educational systems, levels of democracy,
and penchants for self-criticism. In this regard, Americans’ sense of re-
morse over and liability for past oppression of minorities can be usefully
compared to Germans’ sense of remorse over and liability for National
Socialism and the Holocaust. Such close comparison helps us distinguish
the culture of memory from the institutional politics of memory.
Between 1998 and 2001, we administered different versions of a ques-
tionnaire titled “Judging the Past” to 1,215 University of Georgia under-
graduates. Our sample, which approximates the composition of the Col-
lege of Arts and Sciences, is 88 percent white, eight percent black, and
four percent Asian. The sample contains upperclassmen, but the majority,
in almost equal proportion, are freshmen and sophomores. Female re-
spondents slightly outnumber males, and the majority of all respondents
(70 percent) were born in the South.
Given our topic, the following point warrants emphasis. The University
of Georgia serves a conservative state, but its social science and humanities
faculties have instituted liberal academic programs. As its faculty and ad-
ministrators are acutely aware of the state’s history of slavery and segre-
gation, graduation requirements include several hours in courses with
multicultural content, which includes material relevant to African Ameri-
cans, Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans. Ideo-
logically, the student body leans slightly to the left: 53 percent of the stu-
dents describe themselves as liberal or very liberal.
German data were drawn from four sources. The ¤rst set of data in-
cludes questionnaires administered to 360 undergraduate students in
1998. This sample includes mainly freshmen, 55 percent of whom were
enrolled in sociology courses in the formerly West German city of Gies-
sen; the remaining 45 percent of the students studied in Leipzig, an East
German university. As is usual in Giessen social science courses, most
students (79 percent in our case) were women oriented toward careers
in public education. The student body leans decisively to the left, with
84 percent of the Giessen students de¤ning themselves as moderately to
very liberal; 16 percent, conservative. In gender, ideology, and occupa-
122 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tional goals, Leipzig students are comparable to Giessen’s. In a second
(1999) sample, 44 Giessen students answered short questionnaires on spe-
ci¤c aspects of German and American history. The third group of respon-
dents comprises 110 students from the University of Stuttgart, an institu-
tion oriented toward technology, science, and the humanities alike. Most
of the students were freshmen, evenly divided by gender, intending to
major in political science and seeking careers in government, university
teaching, or research. Stuttgart’s students were no less liberal than the
Giessen and Leipzig students, but their teachers were noticeably more
conservative. Our fourth source of German data is a nationwide survey
containing questions about national identity and attitudes toward the Na-
tional Socialist era. These data were collected in 1995 and consist of 649
respondents.
Our student samples, drawn on the basis of availability, are sources of
imperfect clues rather than clean, comparative evidence. Generalization
is the most signi¤cant limitation: American and German university stu-
dents do not and cannot represent the general population of America and
Germany. We assume, however, that our data are defensible in one respect:
the difference between American and German students’ judgments of the
past approximates the difference between judgments of all American and
German adults.
Degrading Events
Asked to name the “three events in American history of which you do
not merely disapprove but which, in your opinion, degrade the United
States and arouse in you as a citizen (rather than private individual) a sense
of dishonor, disgrace, shame, and/or remorse,” 41 percent of Ameri-
can students named slavery; 34 percent, the Vietnam War; 32 percent,
offenses against American Indians. The next ¤ve most commonly men-
tioned events, named by less than 20 percent of the respondents, were
segregation, the Civil War, internment of Japanese Americans, the use of
the atomic bomb, and Watergate.
The conspicuous feature of the events condemned by Americans is their
historical diffusion. Three of the eight events displayed in table 1—slavery,
treatment of Indians, and Civil War—occurred in the nineteenth century;
three events, segregation, internment of Japanese Americans, and the use
Shadings of Regret / 123
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of the atomic bomb occurred in the mid-twentieth century; the other two,
in the late twentieth century. To this broad range of events corresponds a
broad range of victim communities, from African and Native Americans
to Hispanic and Japanese Americans, to citizens of Vietnam and Japan.
In contrast, the three events that German students mention most
frequently—World War II, the National Socialist regime, and the crimes
of the regime—correspond to a narrow twelve-year period starting with
Adolf Hitler’s assumption of power in 1933 and ending in 1945 with his
death and Germany’s surrender (see table 2).
To determine how American and German students feel about the
events they named, we asked three sets of questions. The ¤rst set, admin-
istered in the United States, includes: “I personally feel that my generation
is morally responsible for treating the effects of past discrimination against
all minority groups.” In Germany the parallel question was: “My genera-
tion is responsible today for dealing with the fascist past.”32 Seventy-one
percent of Germans compared to only 23 percent of Americans agreed
that their generation is responsible for past offenses of the state. Compa-
rable questions posed to a German national sample two years earlier
yielded comparable responses.33
“Americans tend to think too much about the mistakes of the past. It is
time to look more to the future.” The German version of this question
124 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

was: “After 1945, Germans have dealt with their past too much.” With
these statements 74 percent of the Americans and 29 percent of the Ger-
mans, respectively, agreed. The ¤nal question posed to Americans was:
“Nothing can be done to offset the effects of past discrimination.” This
question confounds belief that dwelling on the past is a waste of time with
readiness to compensate for past wrongs. Forty-one percent agreed. The
German version was more concrete but within the same realm of content:
“The persecution of Jews by Germans is a huge guilt that cannot be extin-
guished historically.”34 Eighty-two percent agreed.
Next, we asked students to characterize their nation’s past as a whole.
Do the shameful and dishonorable events of the past outweigh events
evoking a sense of pride and honor? Fifty-three percent of the American
students disagreed with a statement de¤ning the past as being more a
source of shame and dishonor than pride and honor. Corresponding per-
centages for Giessen-Leipzig and Stuttgart students are 26 and 34 percent
respectively.
Contexts of Regret
Many factors affect German and American judgments of the past. First,
the negative parts of Germany’s past are concentrated in one time period,
ending in 1945. In the United States, events are diffused over centuries,
and the event deemed most serious, slavery, ended more than 135 years
ago—before many American families’ ancestors arrived in the United
Shadings of Regret / 125
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

States and after many family lines existing in 1865 had died out. Americans
learn most of what they know about their country’s crimes at school, not
home. Although German students also gain information about their coun-
try’s crimes at school, many are exposed to oral family histories. In these
histories some discover authentic family secrets; for others, the silence of
the home is a defense against guilty knowledge.
Second, Germans have been confronted with continual discourse about
their moral guilt and collective responsibility for both the Holocaust
and fascist military aggression. As Germany is geographically contiguous
to eight of the nations it attacked and occupied during World War II, rec-
onciliation was politically and economically imperative. German leaders,
accordingly, undertook moral recovery campaigns in the nation’s press
and mass media and through state rhetoric and policies. This intensive
public discourse about National Socialism is supplemented in German
school curricula and textbooks.35 By contrast, America’s crimes, commit-
ted largely against its own inhabitants, harmed no other nations; therefore,
the American people have experienced no external pressure to recognize
their misdeeds. American textbooks emphasizing the cruelties of the past
did not appear until late in the twentieth century and expressed indige-
nous pressures that arose during a “rights revolution” emphasizing inclu-
sion, diversity, and multiculturalism.
The quality of American and German offenses also differs. The National
Socialist regime conducted war and persecutions that led to the death of
at least 36 million people,36 mostly civilians, and included the murder of
six million Jews and hundreds of thousands of non-Russian communists,
Gypsies, dissidents, and others. American slaveholders, in contrast, valued
their bondsmen’s lives, although denying them human quality. On the
other hand, slavery’s seriousness cannot be underestimated: the number
of persons enslaved at a given period of time never exceeded four million,
but far more than 100 million were enslaved during the era of slavery.
The difference among slavery, indiscriminate killing, and murder might
go some way toward explaining why Americans are less inclined than Ger-
mans to accept responsibility for past wrongs, but it does not go far
enough. Presently, slavery appears in the American media, school cur-
ricula, and textbooks as an absolute sin and the source of present racial
troubles. This is not to mention media and textbook coverage of the op-
pression of Native Americans and the internment of Japanese Americans.
126 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

In terms of objective harm to human life, Americans and their German
counterparts should feel comparable, if not identical, moral responsibility,
but one recalls that a distinctive culture of memory reinforces the condi-
tions leading Americans to consider themselves historically innocent. The
cultural background of contemporary Americans, as Seymour M. Lipset
tells us, revolves around the ideal of individualism.37 Since the single in-
dividual strives to be self-reliant, to reach his goals independently of
family or community, past failures of family and community members
mean less to him than similar failures do to his German counterpart. This
cultural trait powerfully affects the way American students attribute re-
sponsibility to young people in other nations.
Americans Judge Germans
Twelve different versions of our questionnaire were distributed among sev-
eral University of Georgia samples to determine whether responses var-
ied according to (1) personal or generational responsibility and (2) whether
preceded or not by a question sensitizing respondents to their debt to the
past (American soldiers killed during World War II). No differences were
associated with these two split ballots. When comparisons were made
among students de¤ning themselves as liberal and conservative, only slight
differences appeared.
If slavery and the oppression of minorities seem less serious to Ameri-
cans than the mass murder of Jews, and if this difference affects ideas about
moral responsibility, then American students would attribute less moral
responsibility to themselves for slavery and minority oppression than they
attribute to Germans for the Holocaust. Between University of Georgia
students’ assessment of their own and other nations’ responsibility, how-
ever, there is little difference. Nine percent of the students agreed with
the statement, “My generation is [or: I personally feel] morally responsible
for the enslavement of tens of millions of black people over more than one
hundred and ¤fty years.” The level of agreement with the statement, “My
generation is [or: I personally feel] morally responsible for the internment
of Japanese-American men, women, and children in prison camps during
World War II” was nine percent. Eleven percent agreed with the state-
ment, “My generation is [or: I personally feel] morally responsible for the
killing, forced expulsion, and other maltreatment of millions of Indians.”
When we asked Georgia students about Japanese and German young
Shadings of Regret / 127
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

people’s moral responsibility for the atrocities in Asia and the Holocaust,
we found a lower level of attribution: 5 and 3 percent, respectively, agreed
with statements asserting that Japanese and German young people were
responsible for their nations’ past wrongdoing.38 The tendency for Ameri-
can students to judge themselves more harshly than they judge others is a
fact that we note but leave unexplained (see table 3).
Denying and Af¤rming Responsibility
The fact that different people give the same response to a question does
not mean they think about it in the same way. After eliciting responses to
closed questions about moral responsibility, we asked a new block of Uni-
versity of Georgia students to “Explain in a few words your answer to the
above question. Why is the present generation of Americans (or you per-
sonally) morally responsible or not responsible for slavery?” We randomly
asked comparable questions about the oppression of Native Americans and
internment of Japanese Americans, and we received comparable answers
(see table 4).
Responses fell into four categories, the simplest of which was “I wasn’t
born yet.” Thirty percent of Americans gave this type of response. For
American students, “not born yet” means “not present,” “no control,” “not
alive,” “had nothing to do with it,” was “not part of it.” The passage of time
itself made a difference: “It was a different era,” “Before our time,” “It’s in
the past.” Sometimes the respondent deprecated the questioner by posing
and answering a question of his own: “How can a present generation be
responsible for any event in the past? Only past generations can be looked
upon as responsible.” Other respondents were more emphatic, declaring
it “absurd” or “obviously” wrong to assign responsibility to unborn gen-
erations. In some cases, birth and choice went together. “Everyone has the
right to make choices independently, so my ancestors’ choices don’t make
me responsible.” “My generation was not born. It was not our choice.”39
No respondent in this category, however, mentioned the harmful conse-
quences of that choice.
Our second group of respondents, 42 percent of the total, recognized
the offenses that occurred in the past but claimed moral innocence be-
cause they could not see themselves committing them. “My race was re-
sponsible, but not me as an individual.” The pattern is redundant: “That
128 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

was my ancestors’ doing.” “My ideals and values completely differ from
the attitudes of most of my ancestors.” “I feel guilty about what my ances-
tors did, but I do not feel responsible for their actions.” “I consider my
heritage responsible for slavery, but not myself.” Students did not con¤ne
their references to ancestors in general; they dissociated themselves from
speci¤c relatives. “Being a white from the South, I know that parts of my
family were once involved in slavery, but . . . I do not share the views of
130 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

my ancestors.” These are the reactions of principled minds, but they are
inner-directed minds indifferent to the conditions of their day, including
minority disadvantages related to past abuses.
A third group of respondents denying moral responsibility, 18.4 per-
cent of the total, not only recognized past wrongs but also felt a moral
obligation to redress them. “I hold my ancestors responsible. . . . I want
to try to make right what they did wrong.” “The only thing I can be re-
sponsible for is the present.” Multiculturally oriented respondents, while
declaring themselves innocent of past wrongs, strove “towards racial
equality and diversifying all parts of the American way of life.”
The fourth group of respondents, nine percent of the total, accepted
responsibility. “Although I do not believe that very many of my ancestors
were involved in slavery, I believe that it was wrong and that our country
as a whole should take responsibility for slavery.” “I am a Caucasian woman
and I am ashamed of the fact that my ancestors caused minority groups so
much pain and suffering.” Such logic was rare; most students conceding
moral responsibility referred to present consequences of past oppression.
“They have to accept responsibility for what their ancestors did. Good or
bad. Not only do they bene¤t from what their ancestors did but it is their
responsibility to correct the things of the past.” Another respondent held
himself morally liable because his generation “facilitates this oppression
and continues the cycle of inequality”; another, “because we have seen the
bene¤ts of our ancestors owning slaves.” Yet another declared, “Discrimi-
nation is embedded deep into our roots; therefore, each generation is a
contributing factor to this segregation.”40 Guilt over undeserved bene¤ts
and the assumption that existing inequalities between whites and blacks
are due to slavery ¤nd frequent expression: “As a white person, I still enjoy
preference and special privilege over minorities that were created and still
perpetuated by institutions such as slavery. Therefore, I am still responsible
for taking part in that aspect.”
Germans Judge Americans
Americans apply to German contemporaries the same reasoning they ap-
ply to themselves: no one can be responsible for events in which they take
no part. What logic do German students apply?
We addressed this question in two steps. We asked a sample of 44 Ger-
Shadings of Regret / 131
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

mans to respond to two statements: “In the United States young people
are morally responsible for the enslavement of tens of millions of black
people over one hundred and ¤fty years” and “German youth are respon-
sible today for dealing with National Socialism.” Seventy-¤ve percent of
the German students accepted the proposition that German young people
are responsible for the crimes of National Socialism (see table 5a). How-
ever, German responses to the question about American responsibility de-
pended on question order. When the question about American responsi-
bility for slavery appeared before the question about German Holocaust
responsibility, four percent of German students agreed that Americans
are responsible for historical wrongs. When the question about American
responsibility appeared after the question about German responsibility, the
percentage of German students agreeing that Americans are responsible
rose to 13.5 percent, while the percentage falling into the ambivalent/
neutral category (four in a 1 to 7 scale) increased from nine to 32 percent.
The percentage disagreeing fell from 86 to 55 percent (see table 5b).
Changing question order affects response distribution because it trans-
forms the questions’ moral context. Asking about German responsibility
invokes a framework within which all subsequent questions must be con-
sidered. However, no question-ordering effects appeared when the split-
132 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ballot procedure was used on a new sample of 276 University of Georgia
respondents. Whether slavery or Holocaust questions appear ¤rst or sec-
ond, the same percentage denied that their German contemporaries are
responsible for ancestors’ wrongdoing.
The numbers on which this analysis is based are small, but the direction
and magnitude of the result warrant con¤dence. German students disdain
National Socialism, but their quali¤ed beliefs about American responsi-
bility betray ambivalence. German youth commonly ask themselves why
people of other nations are so eager to remind them of their forebears’
crimes, even while knowing they were not alive during their commission.
Logically, German students have no more right to hold their American
peers responsible for slavery than to hold themselves responsible for the
Holocaust; yet when reminded of the Holocaust their reasoning changes:
they believe young people elsewhere must be responsible for their own
ancestors’ misdeeds. “Since others point to us and declare us guilty,” they
would say, “these people must be guilty, too.”
The tone of the University of Stuttgart and University of Georgia re-
sponses could not be more different. When we asked American students to
explain why they rejected moral responsibility for past oppression, we re-
ceived straightforward, innocent, simple, unemotional, sincere answers:
Shadings of Regret / 133
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

typically, “I wasn’t born yet,” or “I didn’t do it,” or “I’m only responsible
for today’s problems.” German students’ responses were more diverse,
complex, and perturbed.41 Many German students believed that Ameri-
can young people are, like themselves, innocent because of the time
of their birth; others couched this belief within a system of ideas un-
known in America. To accept responsibility for past wrongs in Germany
or America, they said, is to embrace the “controversial” and “reactionary”
concept of Erbschuld—inherited guilt—an idea connoting “the commer-
cialization of grief.”42
For some students the coupling in the questionnaire of American
crimes and National Socialist crimes produced resentment. “Americans
are responsible because one should be conscious about one’s own history/
past; one should be conscious of one’s own fallibility. The United States,
in contrast, insolently intervenes in international policy; assumes the role
of world police.” Americans need to be taken down a peg or two and
reminded of their own failures: Because they “are so proud on the one part
of their history they have to bear responsibility for the other.” Slavery,
segregation, endless racial injustice, the murdering of Indians and theft of
their land, the imprisonment of their survivors on reservations—these are
dark matters. “As Americans show an exaggerated national pride, it is rea-
sonable to remind them of the circumstances in their history which can be
neither ethically nor morally supported.” Present practices are also ques-
tionable. “Young U.S. citizens do not stand up for human rights in the
U.S.; consider the death penalty in Texas.” German students are more
willing than their American peers to face the past and ful¤ll their obliga-
tion to deal with it; yet German responses are tinged with an aura of
resentment.43 “Every generation deserves a chance of rehabilitation.
Americans, yes. We Germans should get this chance, too, which is, how-
ever, often refused to us.” If Americans and Germans must be held respon-
sible for past wrongdoing, “[t]he American generation has only the advan-
tage insofar as others do not ®ing the mistakes of the Americans’ ancestors
in their face.”
Martin Walser’s concept of Moralkeule—morality as a weapon—cap-
tures the many nuances of victimization through attribution of guilt.44
Walser asserts that the Holocaust was an unmitigated moral wrong, but
he believes that Germany’s neighbors have for too long used morality as
134 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

a weapon to crush the dignity of its people. When Germans themselves
recognize past atrocities and so carry Germany’s burden privately in their
conscience, there will be no need for their country’s neighbors, or for the
state itself, to remind them of their debts. Whether self-imprisonment
by internalizing the guilt of an earlier generation is a “breakthrough”
(Befreiungsschlag), as Walser believes, is contestable; whether repentance
can be privatized let alone instilled and maintained without educational
and ritual reminders is doubtful. The majority of German students, in any
case, reject Walser’s argument.
One cannot read German students’ responses without being reminded
of anthropologist Ruth Benedict’s distinction between shame cultures
and guilt cultures. “Shame is a reaction to other people’s criticism. . . .
Where shame is the major sanction, a man does not experience relief
when he makes his fault public even to a confessor.”45 In contrast, guilt
results from an internalized censor, a conscience or superego, criticizing
one’s ego independently of others’ knowledge of wrongdoing. Benedict
stresses that people everywhere experience shame and guilt under differ-
ent circumstances, but the emphasis falls differently in different countries.
Japan’s is a shame culture while Germany, with its strong Protestant and
Catholic roots, is, relative to Japan, a culture of guilt. On the other hand,
Germany shares with Japan a feudal past in which relations governed by
shame norms remain relevant. Sensitivity to the judgment of other nations
is a sure sign that the shame dimension of German culture remains viable.
That Germans, like Japanese, often feel resentment toward their judges
and the obligations placed upon them is equally evident and no less an
aspect of shame.
In summary, American and German responses fall into two categories:
a majority denying responsibility and a minority accepting responsibility
for the wrongs of the past. Open-ended responses, however, show that the
size and makeup of the two categories differ. Twenty-one percent of the
German students believe their American peers are morally responsible for
historical wrongs against African and Native Americans, but only nine per-
cent of the American students can think of reasons why they should be.
Thirty-seven percent of the German students believe their American
peers should feel an obligation to address present wrongs, even if not
morally responsible for their causes; 18 percent of the Americans actually
Shadings of Regret / 135
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

do. Germans, then, are more likely than Americans to recognize an obli-
gation to deal with historical injustice (see table 4). Americans’ sense of
obligation to the past is considerably more casual than Germans think it
should be.
Conclusion
Assessing the way students think about responsibility is more than a map-
ping of the working of the mind; it is a way of knowing how human beings
use their minds—symbol-making, conceptualizing, meaning-seeking—to
¤x personal experience at a de¤nite time within the experience of the
nation. Different combinations of culture and experience, we have found,
lead to different perspectives on causation, blame, accountability, and,
above all, community. Since the national community, as Robert Bellah
conceives it, is a community of memory, it continually retells “its consti-
tutive narrative, and in so doing it offers examples of the men and women
who have embodied and exempli¤ed the meaning of the community. These
stories of collective history and exemplary individuals are an important
part of the tradition that is so central to a community of memory. . . .
And if the community is completely honest, it will remember stories not
only of sufferings received but of sufferings in®icted—dangerous memo-
ries, for they call the community to alter ancient evils.”46 In question is
not whether Americans and Germans remember ancient evils but how
they relate themselves to them, and this relationship is complex, re®ecting
many aspects of American and German culture, including the reckoning
and framing of time itself.
American culture and German culture can be located on a continuum
limited at one pole by traditional, “post¤gurative” consciousness and at the
other by modern, con¤gurative consciousness. In “post¤gurative” cul-
tures, past and present are integrated into a single realm of experience.47
Programs for the present are modeled on the past; thoughts of the present
and memories of the past commingle with no boundaries distinguishing
their contents. “Integrators” experience today’s projects, no matter what
their goals, no matter when conceived and formulated, as continuations
of yesterday’s events. At the other extreme are con¤gurative cultures in
which things of the past and things of the present exist in two untouching
136 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

worlds. Guided by peers as much as predecessors, “segmenters” reserve a
separate time zone for each. As segmenters cannot live in the present and
past simultaneously, they cannot bask in the glow of past achievements;
cannot assume guilt for past misdeeds; and cannot connect themselves to
history in any causal or morally meaningful way. Segmenters know the
past but do not—cannot—conceive themselves a part of it.48
Articulating responsibility is a form of boundary work, a way of ex-
pressing beliefs about the proper relation between the living and the dead.
All cultures segment and integrate time, but American culture is largely
a segmenting culture in which the living feel few obligations to the dead
and assume few obligations of the dead. German culture, in contrast, is
rooted in the residue of European status systems, with their strong tradi-
tions of status, honor, exclusion, and mutual obligation.49 Assuming re-
sponsibility for peers enhances status solidarity as it enables all groups,
whether ordered vertically, from the aristocratic ruling class to the peas-
antry, or horizontally by ethnicity or religion, to lessen the precariousness
of life and manage con®ict. German culture is an integrating culture in
which the call to assume past debts, however strongly resisted, is more
dif¤cult to ignore than it is in America.
Culture is a context, not a cause, of national differences in historical
consciousness. Before the 1960s German young people were far less sen-
sitive to National Socialism and Americans less sensitive to slavery than
are their successors. Within the same political structure, contrasting cul-
tures of memory lead to different judgments of the past. Furthermore,
institutions and individuals segment and integrate past and present differ-
ently. Regret, as noted, is orchestrated by institutions, including univer-
sities, media, and religious and political associations, but many individuals
reject their premises. Many individuals cannot hold their generation let
alone themselves responsible for past wrongdoings, but to say that organi-
zations are for this reason morally superior to their members is mislead-
ing. To assert that accepting responsibility for the past is more virtuous
than denying responsibility is equally misleading. Kolakowski, von der Ga-
blentz, and Schwan, among many other moral philosophers, rely on this
assumption, but their views apply more to Germany than to America.
Admission of responsibility for present wrongs alone is rooted in ideas of
Shadings of Regret / 137
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

what it means morally to be an American, what de¤nes the good society,
on what basis citizens are to live together, what claims one set of citizens
may place on another, what rights it may demand of another. These moral
ideas are not equally compelling to every American, but they are no less
moral than beliefs about collective liability, to which many American in-
stitutions, especially American universities, are committed.
Beginning with the 1960s, new history teaching standards have thrown
unprecedented light on the underside of America’s past. The New Ameri-
can History, structured by a logic of inclusion and cultural diversity, not
only condemns historical events that promoted exclusion and consensus
but also de¤nes these events as characteristic features of American his-
tory.50 This “new history,” a product of late twentieth-century progressiv-
ism, provides the intellectual basis for af¤rming regret, but it has not
negated the logic of “traditional history,” whose narrative links public
wrongdoings to individual failings, redeemable by holding the nation’s of-
fenders, not the nation itself, responsible. The ideal of individual respon-
sibility, then, is necessary to the way Americans conceive and relate them-
selves to events. Americans conceive all events, even random events like
automobile accidents,51 as products of individual responsibility and ¤t
them into the way they run their institutions and socialize their children.
The individual, not the society, is for most Americans the relevant agency
of moral obligation.
Is a perspective that so radically denies the past viable? On the one
hand, Americans’ belief that every generation is responsible for itself less-
ens appreciation of the legacy of the past and erodes motivation to sacri¤ce
for posterity. On the other hand, Americans’ belief in the sanctity of the
individual, forever free from the wrongdoings of his or her ancestors,
mitigates racial, ethnic, and religious resentments and accelerates the
quest for an inclusive society. Societies of unlimited inclusion require lim-
ited liability for past wrongs.52
Notes
The authors are grateful to the German Science Foundation (Peter Schmidt,
Principal Investigator, Grant No. Schm 658/4-3) and the German Marshall Fund
of the United States (Grant No. A-0375-17) for their generous support of this
138 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

project. Denise Burgert of Freiburg University and Michelle Petrie of the Uni-
versity of Georgia contributed to the data analysis.
1. In Europe similar rhetoric is exempli¤ed by French Prime Minister
Jacques Chirac’s apologizing for French complicity in the Holocaust and ex-
pressly repudiating former Prime Minister Mitterand’s assertions of French
innocence. Among scores of similar gestures are German President Roman Her-
zog’s regretting formally the Luftwaffe’s devastation of Guernica, public de-
mands for acknowledgment of the German Army’s World War II atrocities against
the Greeks, and Polish President Kwasnietzky’s public admission of wartime
anti-Semitic pogroms by the Polish inhabitants of Jedwabne. Elsewhere, New
Zealand of¤cials apologized for British expropriation of Maori land and awarded
the Maoris $112 million and 39,000 acres in compensation. In Australia, white
reformers rejected of¤cial apologies to aborigines for not going far enough.
2. Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (1915; New
York: Free Press, 1965), 420.
3. For detail, see Barry Schwartz, ed., “Introduction: The Expanding Past,”
Qualitative Sociology 19 (fall 1996): 275–82; Barry Schwartz, “Postmodernity and
Historical Reputation: Abraham Lincoln in Late Twentieth-Century American
Memory,” Social Forces 77 (September 1998): 63–103.
4. James D. Hunter, Culture Wars: The Struggle to De¤ne America (New York:
Basic, 1991), 120.
5. Ibid., 122–27.
6. For a critical overview of the culture wars thesis, see Rhys H. Williams,
ed., Cultural Wars in American Politics: Critical Reviews of a Popular Myth (New York:
Aldine de Gruyter, 1997), esp. 63–100. For a general (balanced) overview, see
James L. Nolan Jr., ed., The Culture Wars: Current Contests and Future Prospects (Char-
lottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1996).
7. Hunter, Culture Wars, 290.
8. Leszek Kolakowski cited in Gesine Schwan, Politics and Guilt: The Destruc-
tive Power of Silence, trans. Thomas Dunlap (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
1997), 11.
9. Friedrich Nietzsche already in the nineteenth century characterized
Christian norms of regret as a triumph of “slave morality” that subordinates noble
achievement to the resentment of history’s losers. In contrast, Richard McKeon
locates moral responsibility historically by de¤ning it as an attribute of demo-
Shadings of Regret / 139
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

cratic, not Christian, culture. As the word “responsibility” appeared in English
and French in 1787 in connection with new, reciprocal relations between the
individual and the state, there arose the corresponding idea of a self-conscious
“cultural” or “collective” responsibility. “The concept of responsibility relates ac-
tions to agents by a causal tie and applies a judgement of value to both. . . . The
agent may be an individual or a group acting in the context of a society or a
political state, or an individual, group, or community acting in the looser asso-
ciation of free individuals or independent communities or states whose actions
affect each other.” “The Development and the Signi¤cance of the Concept of
Responsibility,” in Freedom and History and Other Essays, ed. Zahava K. McKeon
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 82.
10. Oskar H. von der Gablentz, “Responsibility,” in International Encyclopedia
of the Social Sciences, ed. Edward L. Sills (1968; New York: Macmillan, 1979), 497.
11. Schwan, Politics and Guilt, 7–8.
12. Jürgen Habermas, “Grenzen des Neohistorismus.” Interview with J. M.
Ferry, in Jürgen Habermas: Die Nachholende Revolution: Kleine Politische Schriften
(Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1990), 7:149–56.
13. Henri Tajfel and John C. Turner, “The Social Identity Theory of Inter-
group Con®ict,” in Psychology of Intergroup Relations, ed. Stephen Worchel and
William G. Austin (Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1986), 7–24.
14. John C. Turner, Michael A. Hogg, Penelope J. Oakes, Stephen D. Reicher,
and Margaret S. Wetherell, Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization
Theory (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987).
15. Bertjan Doosje, Nyla R. Branscombe, Russell Spears, and Antony S. R.
Manstead, “Guilty by Association: When One’s Group Has a Negative History,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 (1998): 872–86; Eviatar Zerubavel,
“Social Memories: Steps to a Sociology of the Past,” Qualitative Sociology 19 (fall
1996): 283–99.
16. Michel-Rolph Trouillot, “Abortive Rituals: Historical Apologies in the
Global Era,” Interventions 2, no. 2 (spring 2003): 171–86.
17. For a useful if not altogether satisfactory discussion of the conditions
under which apologies succeed or fail, see Nicholas Tavuchis, Mea Culpa: A Soci-
ology of Apology and Reconciliation (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991).
18. Jeffrey K. Olick and Brenda Coughlin, “The Politics of Regret: Analytical
Frames,” in The Politics of the Past, ed. John B. Torpey (Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Little¤eld, 2003). The rise of regret, in their view, is a characteristic of our age,
140 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

“an age of shattered time and shifting allegiances, indeed of skepticism toward
allegiances at all” (37–62).
19. Seymour Martin Lipset, American Exceptionalism: A Double-Edged Sword
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1996).
20. Louis Hartz, The Liberal Tradition in America: An Interpretation of American
Political Thought since the Revolution (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1955).
21. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America (New York: Knopf, 1945),
2:104–5.
22. Ibid., 2:105–6.
23. Thomas Jefferson, “Letter to James Madison,” in The Portable Thomas Jef-
ferson, ed. Merrill D. Peterson (New York: Penguin, 1975), 445.
24. Ibid., 448.
25. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “The American Scholar,” in Selections from Ralph
Waldo Emerson, ed. Stephen Whicher (1837; Boston: Houghton-Mif®in, 1959), 67.
26. Nathaniel Hawthorne, The House of the Seven Gables (1859; New York: New
American Library, 1962), 162.
27. Ibid., 163.
28. Florence Kluckhohn, “Dominant and Variant Value Orientations,” Social
Welfare Reform (New York: Columbia University Press, 1951), 97–113.
29. Robert N. Bellah, Richard Madsen, Ann Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton,
Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life (New York: Har-
per and Row, 1985), 154.
30. Thomas J. Cottle, Perceiving Time (New York: Wiley, 1976), 85–94.
31. Barry Schwartz and Mikyoung Kim, “Honor, Dignity, and Collective
Memory: Judging the Past in Korea and the United States,” in Culture in Mind:
Toward a Sociology of Culture and Cognition, ed. Karen A. Cerulo (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2001), 218.
32. With a similar statement, “My generation is responsible today for dealing
with the National Socialist past,” 71 percent agreed.
33. In a German national sample, drawn and analyzed by Peter Schmidt and
his associates, 64 percent of the respondents agreed with the statement, “I per-
sonally feel the persecution of the Jews by National Socialists is a very heavy
burden.” Seventy-¤ve percent agreed with the statement, “The persecution of
the Jews by the National Socialists is a great crime, which historically cannot be
eradicated.” In contrast, more respondents (49 percent) disagreed with the state-
ment, “After 1945, the Germans have been too preoccupied with their own
Shadings of Regret / 141
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

history” than the number of respondents agreeing with it (33 percent). Only
19 percent agreed with the statement, “Guilt over National Socialism has been
implanted in us by Allied powers.”
34. When “fascists” is substituted for “National Socialists,” the same result,
76 percent agreement, obtains.
35. For detail on the geopolitics of memory, as they distinguish Germany
from Japan, see Akiko Hashimoto, “Japanese and German Projects of Moral Re-
covery: Toward a New Understanding of War Memories in Defeated Nations,”
Occasional Papers in Japanese Studies (Cambridge, MA: Edwin O. Reischauer Insti-
tute of Japanese Studies, Harvard University, March 1999).
36. Wolfgang Michalka, Deutsche Geschichte 1933–1945: Dokumente zur Innen-
und Aussenpolitik (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 1993), 380.
37. Lipset, American Exceptionalism.
38. A slightly different version of the Indian and Holocaust question pro-
duced similar results: 15 percent of the American students agreed that “American
citizens today bear moral responsibility for the killing, forced expulsion, and
other maltreatment of millions of Indians.” Five percent agreed with the state-
ment, “I believe that German citizens born today bear moral responsibility
for the Holocaust—Nazi Germany’s murder of six million Jews during World
War II.”
39. Denying responsibility for the past does not necessarily mean that one
feels no connection to it. As one denier put it: “I take pride in my history and
ancestors when a minority forces me to think about it. For example, blacks run
around saying we owe them for past abuse we didn’t even commit. I don’t agree
and that upsets me that they really think that.” The offense of this respondent’s
ancestors is less relevant to him than the fact of their kinship.
40. Slavery is not only transmuted into the present-day problem of segrega-
tion; “[s]lavery still exists for many people based on gender.”
41. We did not ask German students expressly to explain their own sense of
responsibility; however, when explaining whether or not they considered Ameri-
cans responsible for their country’s historical offenses the students’ responses
were peppered with comments about their felt relation to Germany’s past.
42. Erbschuld (charge or encumbrance on an estate) is a legacy (the pre¤x,
erb, refers to inheritance) differing from Thomas Jefferson’s “natural law” of the
earth belonging to the living unencumbered by the debts of the past. Erbschuld is
a vehicle of guilt distinguishable from other legacies, including Erbfall (heritage),
142 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Erbbesitz (hereditary possession), Erbrecht (right of succession), etc. Only when
Schuld (guilt) is the suf¤x does legacy become negative—“inadequate,” “need-
less,” and “coercive.” Zwanghaft and haftbar likewise refer to moral responsibility
as a libel immorally imposed. The German vocabulary of denial is rich and deep:
to be held responsible for the distant past is to be responsible for “killing a people
that is already dead.” Against this libel some German respondents, thinking of
their own country’s past, referred to the “Mercy of a Late Birth” (quoting Helmut
Kohl’s remark to an Israeli audience).
43. Americans and Germans can also be linked by their common back-
ground. “The American majority has emerged from European tradition or the
European value system with its latent sense of superiority.” In both cases the
obligation to express oneself publicly, a duty routinely ignored during the Na-
tional Socialist era, becomes critical. “People cannot be accountable for past sins,
but people can be held responsible where they shut their eyes and do not take
an initiative.” This respondent offers as his example the Americans’ silence on
capital punishment, which reminds him, as it does other German students, of
the necessity to deal with the National Socialist past.
44. Martin Walser, “Erfahrungen beim Verfassen einer Sonntagsrede,” Dankes-
rede. Friedenspreis des Deutschen Buchhandels (Frankfurt am Main: Börsenverein des
Deutchen Buchhandels, 1998), 37–51.
45. Ruth Benedict, The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Cul-
ture (Cleveland: World Publishing, 1946), 223. No analytic distinction has been
more misrepresented than Benedict’s distinction between shame cultures and
guilt cultures. Tavuchis, Mea Culpa o, 37, and Ian Buruma, The Wages of Guilt: Memo-
ries of War in Germany and Japan (New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1994), 116–17,
for example, are in®uential authors, but they are so concerned about “national
pro¤ling” that they consider the existence of a single guilt-ridden Japanese or a
single shamed German as evidence of Benedict’s cultural prejudice and inade-
quate concepts.
46. Bellah et al., Habits of the Heart, 153.
47. Margaret Mead, Culture and Commitment: A Study of the Generation Gap
(New York: Doubleday, 1970).
48. For a discussion of integration and segmentation in the realm of home
and work (private time and work time as opposed to present time and past time),
see Christena E. Nippert-Eng, Home and Work: Negotiating Boundaries through Every-
day Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
Shadings of Regret / 143
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

49. Max Weber, “Class, Status, Party,” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology,
ed. Hans Gerth and C. Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958),
186–91.
50. Gilbert T. Sewell, History Textbooks at the New Century: A Report of the Ameri-
can Textbook Council (New York: American Textbook Council, 2000).
51. Joseph Gus¤eld, The Culture of Public Problems (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1981).
52. “Surfeit of memory” is the term Charles S. Maier uses to portray the re-
cent celebration of minority glories and sufferings. Such self-indulgence, Maier
believes, diverts attention away from transformative politics. “It testi¤es to the
loss of a future orientation, of progress toward civic enfranchisement and grow-
ing equality. It re®ects a new focus on narrow ethnicity as a replacement for
encompassing communities based on constitutions, legislation and widening at-
tributes of citizenship.” Maier, “A Surfeit of Memory,” History and Memory 5
(1993): 150. Maier is right about the dimensions of the problem but wrong about
causal direction. The surfeit of memory is the effect, not the inhibitor, of narrow
ethnicity.
144 / Barry Schwartz and Horst-Alfred Heinrich
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

2
The Publicness of Memory
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

In this essay I address public memory as it both shapes and is shaped by
our attempts to address it. I shall advance three claims. (1) Public memory
(or “memorial life”) is best approached not in terms of a subject-object
structure but rather as nonsubjective enactment in and as such things as
institutions, practices, and discourses. (2) Insofar as what is public appears
and insofar as any appearing carries with it dimensions of loss and non-
presence, our approach to public memory, our speaking from it and to
it, should be attentive to the dimension of fragility and fragmentariness
that characterizes appearing occurrences. (3) By virtue of two particular
forms of address, the middle voice and the subjunctive mood, our lan-
guage offers resources to speak appropriately of the nonsubjective and
appearing aspects of public memory. I attempt throughout the essay to
engage these resources as I encounter the ways in which public memory
happens.
In a way, in this essay I consider a dimension of public memory that
I believe we enact in this collection. I am not, however, entirely sure
whether to say “we enact” or “a dimension of public memory that enacts
us.” Either phrasing has its problems. If I say, “we enact a dimension of
public memory,” the transitive grammar makes us appear as agents who
carry out and establish by action a dimension of public memory. We who
enact seem to stand in some vague way outside of the object of our action,
that is, outside of public memory. Can “we” appear in our language,
thought, and scholarship and in that sense happen publicly, outside of pub-
6
The Appearance of
Public Memory
Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

lic memory? I will answer that question with a quali¤ed “no” in the course
of these remarks.
If I say, however, that a dimension of public memory enacts us, the
grammar joins the meaning of subjectivity with that dimension. A dimen-
sion of public memory would appear to carry us out and establish us pub-
licly. That is, this dimension becomes public in this language in a transitive
form of subjectivity, and “we” appear as an objective “us” in connection
with an enactment of public memory. Are “we”—indeed am I as I write
and speak these words—an object of public memory’s enactment? That
phrasing seems to say too much.
My language in the last two paragraphs has been controlled by the ac-
tive voice. We or I or public memory does something—acts—and one of
these nouns receives the action. And all the while the language in those
statements is making “us” and the meaning of “public memory” public in
a voice of activity that manifests a subject that is not the object of its action.
I expect that we agree that there is something wrong with this way of
making “us” and “public memory” public in this way. I expect, too, that
you have noticed that “appear” plays an important but understated role in
these remarks so far, that I have equated “making public” and “appear” and
that I have suggested—or the language has suggested (we’re not yet clear
about that)—that as language happens appearing happens; and in the case
at hand appearing is shaped by an active, as distinct from a passive, voice.
A middle voice that is neither active nor passive is probably not fore-
most in your thoughts at this point. Since these remarks must be short, I
will state directly what I have in mind about grammatical voices, this kind
of systematic in®ection, in order to set forth a territory of observation in
which we might make an initial exploration regarding the occurrence of
public memory. First, articulate language is best understood as an appear-
ing event that gives things to be public, that is, perceptible and able to be
understood in speci¤c and de¤nable ways. Second, appearing events are
not primarily active or passive, and they are obscured in their dimension
of eventuation if they are described primarily in active and passive voices.
Third, middle voice constructions are usually better for addressing ap-
pearing events when we want to consider the way appearing occurs; and
since “appearing” and “making public” say almost the same thing, middle
148 / Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

voice constructions are most appropriate when we speak of events of
public memory with primary attention, not to the contents of a public
memory but to the ways public memory appears and takes place.
I make these statements in a context of asking about the manners in
which making public occurs in our addressing the topic of public memory.
I hope to arrive at a point where we can hear the sense of saying that public
memory happens in and as appearing, that public memory occurs as an
appearing event. If I succeed in this intention, when we wish to under-
stand “public,” our attention will be drawn not so much to the content of
public memories as to their appearing enactment.
When I say “middle voice” I evoke the grammatical in®ection of enact-
ment in which an action reverts to the subject as, for example, in the
transitive, middle-voiced statement, the cook cooks for himself, or in the
intransitive, the window shuts, the country sleeps, or birthing happens.
We might also say—awkwardly in our active-passive-controlled manner
of speech—appearing appears.
In the present context I could say that appearing publicly takes place or
happens as articulate language occurs. Appearing publicly is not a subject
that does something actively to something else, and language, in being
public, does not do something to an object called public. And if I say “pub-
lic,” the word says, among other things, exposed with people and available
for their perception. To say “public memory” is to say at once memory of
people, people in memory, and memory that is not a private domain or a
hidden possession. In the occurrences of public memory, people happen
memorially. They appear in an unpossessable, historically dynamic transfer
of past events, and these past events that are not themselves present com-
pose people as people, compose a public world in which and as which
people live. So when we say that a public memory happens as this practice
or that institution or as these words, we speak in, among other memories,
a grammatical memory of a kind of happening that is neither subjective
nor objective.
This kind of linguistic memory gives us to know that when birth or
death or language happens, there need be no subject who does something
to something else. Rather, peoples’ lives are eventuating—are taking
place—in speci¤c ways; they appear dying, birthing, or languaging.
The Appearance of Public Memory / 149
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Before saying more about memorial life, I turn to “culture” in order to
elaborate a meaning of “public” in the context of memories that are em-
bedded in the occurrence of linguistic establishments.
To speak of culture and memory is to speak of care. Care is a disturbing
word. In its history of meaning it suggests loss and grief—it derives from
the Old High German word kara, which means “lament.” Blended into its
meaning are experiences of uncertainty, apprehension, and responsibility.
“Care” contains a suggestion of anxiety and watchful attention. To have a
care is to look out for danger and adversity. To be careful is to be solicitous
of things that can suffer damage and loss. To feel care is to feel concern
and uncertainty.
Culture and cultivate have the sense of tillage, breaking, preparing, and
tending ground for planting and growth, for careful nurturance and pro-
duction. In its broader usage, culture means, of course, development and
transmission of practices, beliefs, and knowledges. The word also carries
in its history the sense of wheel. It derives in part from the ancient Greek
word kyklos (circle, wheel). There is in culture an overtone of recurrence,
return, and revolving movement. It suggests a de¤ning force of movement
on a pivot or axis and in which people are returned to something recalled.
Culture, in this suggestion, thus directs us to memory and its power. For
when we bring together culture and care, we arrive at a basic meaning
that is found in the word memory, which connotes returning to some-
thing vital for people but something that is lost in its earlier and initiatory
presence.
This word memory has in its history the ancient Greek word mermeros,
“care for” something losable, from which the Latin memoria derives. In its
many overtones, the word memory suggests mourning, remainder, solici-
tude, and mentation. The basic meanings of memory in this context are
those of presencing with a loss of original presence, continuation with
absence of guaranteed continuity, and return to beginnings with absence
of a primary origin. When something happens in memory, it is presented
in the absence of its original presence.
I have made these philological observations in order to hold in mind
from the outset that when we address the topic of public memory we are
addressing appearing, cultural memories, and in such address, culture and
human care are reverting to themselves. I mean that public memory ap-
150 / Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

pears as we engage the topic of public memory, and it appears as the care
of culture takes place. I also want to remind myself and us together that
there is no available, original reality called cultural or public memory to-
ward which we can make our way as though toward a timeless essence.
We are culturally and memorially enmeshed immediately. When we speak
of cultural memory, there is a return, even a revolution of cultural memo-
ries. We are enmeshed in memories that are transmitted nonvoluntarily
by words in their histories of suggestion. The word culture, for example,
signi¤es (and, I will say, remembers) not only labor that is required for
human survival—tilling occurs in the absence of paradisiacal plenty—but
also recalls in its usage the de¤nitive importance for people’s survival of
a steady repetition of knowledges and behaviors that help them and de¤ne
them. Culture is like the repetitive movements of a fairly balanced, if
somewhat wobbly, wheel, movements that revert to themselves, that is,
movements that appear as recall and reversion to certain experiences and
meanings that happen only in these appearing movements. And with that
memory of the need of constructive repetition, there is another one, the
memorial knowledge that practices and values by which we survive must
be produced and nurtured; the wheel of repetitive cultural movement
¤nds its shape, dynamics, and beginnings within its own, limited ¤gura-
tions, not outside. The word culture, then, eventuates as a prevoluntary and
prere®ective memory of pervasive danger, loss, care, and struggle as well
as memory of the value of produced and nurtured continuity and stability.
To say that people are cultural means in the word’s signi¤cance that people
survive in occurrences of dynamic and public contexts of recall, that we
are formed in memorial processes of return and recurrence, and that we
are living memories of manners of survival in the immanence of disaster.
As cultural, people happen in what I might call the middle voice of public
memories, as memories, in appearing, revert to themselves, giving people
to live as memorial eventuations.
By holding in mind that I am speaking in cultural memories as I address
the topic of public memory, I also intend to bring into close proximity a
slippage and transformation that appear to accompany memorial events.
When, for example, the word culture recalls tillage, nurturance, and pos-
sible disaster, a person might experience vague, nonvoluntary images of
someone’s preparing a ¤eld or an educational institution or a room in an
The Appearance of Public Memory / 151
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

art gallery. Perhaps not even such vague images but inchoate feelings occur
of rightness and high-mindedness that are accompanied by a sense of dis-
taste for crude and low behavior. “Culture” often brings with it a sense of
light and a sense of something vaguely darker and opposite—a feeling for
what is “uncultured.” My guess is that such vague feelings and images
®icker in some brain processes even in people who are working in as dis-
ciplined and objective a manner as possible with the facts that de¤ne a
cultural situation. Regardless of the feelings and images, it is surely the
case that none of us stands outside of the nonvoluntary force of the word
culture in its signi¤catory life as we consider cultural and public events.
That is a force that is carried in the word’s use and in its position in a
system of rules, in®ections, references, and connotations. It is a force of
meaning that invests our intelligence and affections and that lives as a part
of our brain and composes part of our physical life. In the enactment of
the word culture, many nonvoluntary meanings and memories appear and
are available for all manner of perceptions. In a phrase, the word culture
happens culturally.
In addition to the memories of meanings in “culture,” there is also a
memorial dimension in occurrences of appearing that does not seem to
be dependent on what is appearing. You might recall that I used the phrase
“appearing appears” when I described the middle voice. The two descrip-
tive claims that I wish to make are these: the ways in which appearing
happens are public—of people—and are thus available for understanding;
and the occurrence of appearing happens memorially.
Memorial in what sense?
There is in the occurrence of appearing a vexing aspect that is ¤lled
with discomforting implications: in appearing, I have said, something is
always at a remove from full presence and possession. I ¤nd this aspect
vexing because appearances can be so full. There are things that appear
solid and stable—®oors, earth, well-built structures, thoroughly trusted
friends, certain inevitabilities like the sun, moon, and tide—not to men-
tion such regularities as occurrences of death, lightning, and desire. My
point is not that we know that these occurrences could change or that the
very place of death could cease. I want to note, rather, that in their fullness,
appearing things also recede, that an appearance never fully encompasses
and exhausts a thing’s happening, no matter how stable the thing appears.
152 / Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Appearing gives both presence and loss of presence at once. In an appear-
ance of stability, for example, stability also comes to pass. I will say more
in a moment about the memorial aspect of the recession of appearing in
the happening of appearing. For now I note that in appearing, things come
forth at a distance—the appearing thing is not the thing. They happen with
an elusive and unpossessable quality, even in their full-seeming stability.
The lives of things as they appear seem always to elude full encompass-
ment by their appearing. Appearing happens in a recession of complete
presence in what appears.
Appearing things happen mutably and transitorily. As far as I can tell,
appearing gives what is in appearing to come to pass and come to pass
because it is really, genuinely, unpossessably, palpably appearing. Whatever
appears seems to be subject always to alteration. Appearing thus seems to
happen with a peculiar memory; its occurrence recalls the mutability of
everything that is manifest, as though appearing were a circle of tempo-
rality that wheels whatever appears by an axis of perishability, returning
even the most persistent appearances to the reminders of non-appearing
and the need for care.
I would like to bring together with the meaning of the word subjunctive
the recession of appearing in appearing, mutational transitoriness, and
memory. I make this move because I want to show that the very happening
of public things is memorial—that when we speak of memory we might
speak not only of mental events and dynamic institutional formations but
also of memory in the eventuation of appearing itself. And I wish to show
that the subjunctive mood is especially ¤tted for expressing the memorial
happening intrinsic to appearing. For as appearing happens publicly, hap-
pens with people and their ways of life, a surprising nonfactual aspect also
takes place. By giving accounts of appearing we can also give accounts of
a memorial dimension in our lives that is not circumscribed by any one
group of human practices. This is a dimension of nondetermination in the
occurrence of appearing that I am ¤guring with the words mutability and
transitoriness. It is a dimension of elision that escapes declarative language
and direct, objective engagement.
Although in this discussion I am limiting the ¤eld of appearing to words
and the memorial histories of signi¤cance that they bear, you can see that
I am also shaping an approach to public memory that is a grandchild, if
The Appearance of Public Memory / 153
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

not a great-grandchild, of a way of thinking that gives a methodological
priority to the dynamics and qualities of appearing. Presently, I want to
indicate that the subjunctive mood can serve to recall an aspect of appear-
ing that is important when we consider the meaning of “public” and as we
think of the memorial aspect of appearing.
I choose subjunctivity as a collecting and integrating word because in
naming a grammatical possibility, it recalls a nondeclaratory dimension of
events that is not subject to more literal occurrences—occurrences that
are just as we say they are. Or, to put the matter more formally, the sub-
junctive is a mood of noncompletion contrary to fact. It names a dimen-
sion of occurrences outside the range of declarative statements. Subjunc-
tive phrasing indicates or betokens indeterminate contingency, possibility,
and mood. So when I said a moment ago that in appearing, the mutability
of everything that is manifest happens as though appearing were a circle
of temporality that wheels whatever appears by an axis of perishability,
you probably recalled nonvoluntarily that the verb were indicated not a fact
but a nonliteral, metaphorical possibility. The subjunctive mood subjoins
indeterminacy with a determinate state of affairs and expresses something
by reference to an elision, a gappiness, which is said to be in the way
something happens. This grammatical trope integrates by signifying an eli-
sion of factual literalness and direction in factual events. The subjunctive
mood recalls a nonfactual dimension of facts. Or, I could say, the subjunc-
tive mood is a trope that bespeaks a withdrawal of factuality in the occur-
rence of facts.
I have named aspects of subjunctivity in appearing: “recession,” “mu-
tability,” and “transitoriness.” And I have pointed out that the subjunc-
tive mood recalls us to an indeterminacy in factual situations. Appearing
things—public events—as appearing, embody a recall, a continuous re-
turn to the very qualities of life that make us care, to the instability of
stabilities, to things’ always coming to pass. Appearing carries memory of
the necessity of culture, and culture reminds us constantly and publicly
that ours is a fragile, appearing world with indeterminacy and mere
possibility as well as factual determinacy. Whatever appears, all public
things—axioms, values, meanings, scienti¤c methods, bodies, facts, be-
liefs, and established practices—in their appearing come to completion in
passage and change and can never be held in a perfection of presence, an
154 / Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

exactness of designation, or a language of engagement. This subjunctive
quality of appearing suggests that what is public might be otherwise, is not
only factual and might be found, as it were, in might rather than is.
I will close with some observations on the recession of appearances in
appearing and a consideration of the signi¤cance of this recession for our
accounts of public memory.
In my remarks I have joined recession with the meaning of palpable and
suggested that the reality of what happens, the concreteness of experi-
ences and appearing lives, is found in an eventuation that can be expressed
by the middle voice and the subjunctive mood. I have said that there is a
happy coincidence of this mood with a voice that is controlled by neither
subjectivity nor objectivity. How are we academic disciplinarians to live
with that? If the things that we want to understand are, by virtue of ap-
pearing and becoming public, forever coming to pass and disappearing, if
the very occurrence of the culture that we express and the life to which
we contribute bear witness to the care-¤lled incompletion of all things, if
appearing comprises a nonfactual determination of all public events, how
might we speak knowledgeably of public memories?
I expect that we must take into account the ways in which appearing
happens and make that account a de¤nitive part of our scholarly work. If
we make, for example, public memory into a quasi-essence by reifying
it into something like an historical subjectivity, or if we expect to com-
prehend appearances as though they were completely present, then the
knowledge that we produce will embody a degree of forgetfulness of the
mutable and recessive, appearing lives that we address. We will have over-
looked a nonfactual dimension of what is public. Such knowledge would
forget the appearing culture that we bespeak. Our scholarly care will take
forms that are not attentive enough to the memory of our culture as it
appears. And the structures of objectivity that we in our disciplines intend
will miss the voice of eventuation that does justice to the incompletion of
whatever is public that we wish to understand.
I think that Foucault, for example, knew that. In his broken prose
and rambling empiricism he continuously found broken continuities. He
found continuities in their broken and rambling appearances. He found
fragments of unifying disciplines, shards of practices, happily inconclusive
matrixes of contradicting values, and instances of cruelty in processes that
The Appearance of Public Memory / 155
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

were also charitable and anguished with good intent. There are many oth-
ers on the scene who have found in the incompletion of language and
appearing things avenues to considerations of lives in their striking appear-
ing and withdrawal from anything that would engulf them with meaning,
value, and status: Deleuze, Blanchot, James, Derrida, Heidegger, Dewey,
Nancy, to name a few. One issue upon which they insist places the lan-
guage of our knowledge at the fore of what appears: articulate language
gives publicity, is intrinsic to what is known and meant, and is ¤lled with
memories that are seldom cohesive and always forceful. It appears that in
our speaking, we remember much more than we can know as we make
things public in our many ways. This surplus happens, and no one does it.
And with the surplus come the passing incompletions of whatever be-
comes public.
The question that I wish to underscore is: how might we care for those
vast and con®icting memories in appearing of loss as we speak of public
memory? How might we best give voice to the incompletions of those
memories and of the things that appear with them as we attempt to make
public memory manageable in our disciplines of address?
One way to address such questions would be to give accounts of the
withdrawal of public memories as they appear, to show that public no more
means full presence than memory does and, perhaps, to show that making
public appears to lose what is public in its publicity, that our issue is a
people’s issue of how to address the inevitability of loss and incomplete-
ness as well as address what is lost, and not to forget the loss in such a way
that we become engulfed by our truths and objectivity. I am suggesting
that the life of public memory depends on lives that are never fully public,
on a recession in publicness, and on losses that can never be restored. Alert
to these aspects of public memory we might—here’s the subjunctive
again—¤nd that to speak well of public memory we need to learn how to
speak in regard for nothing public at all. As appearing reverts to itself in
its occurring it is as though nonappearing were remembered, as though a
public place were not literally a place, and as though we were public no
where else than in appearing.
156 / Charles E. Scott
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

For as long as collective memory has been an area of scholarly concern,
the precise role of images as its vehicle has been asserted rather than ex-
plicated. This essay addresses the role of images in collective memory.
Motivated by circumstances in which images, rather than words, emerge
as the preferred way to establish and maintain shared knowledge from
earlier times, it offers the heuristic of “voice” to help explain how images
work across represented events from different times and places. The essay
uses “voice” to elucidate how the visual becomes an effective mode of relay
about the past and a key vehicle of memory.
On the Boundaries of Memory
Memory works through the various vehicles that give collectives a sense
of their past. Addressed already in the work of Frances Yates, who showed
how material artifacts in classical Rome facilitated the capacity to remem-
ber,1 the material object has long been seen as a stand-in or synecdochic
representation of larger events, issues, and settings. That notion has been
elaborated by contemporary scholars; Paul Connerton, Barry Schwartz,
and Jacques Le Goff underscore the instrumentality of remembering
complex events through vehicles of collective memory.2 In particular,
Pierre Nora’s notion of “lieux de mémoire,” or “sites of memory,” has
helped demonstrate the linkage between the ability to remember and the
places—conceptual and physical—where shared memory is lodged.3
This scholarship postulates that different vehicles of memory offer dif-
ferent ways of making sense of the past. From portraits to bodily habits,
7
The Voice of
the Visual in Memory
Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

collective memories take shape at the intersections created by the differ-
ent vehicles involved, with remembering through public monuments
assumed to be a qualitatively different experience than remembering
through ¤lms.4 How these vehicles equip publics to remember thereby
foregrounds different stress points in the memory work under question.
Images are one such vehicle, the various forms—portraits, pictures, pho-
tographs, ¤lms—which constitute a cogent means of tackling the past and
making it work for the present. But how we remember through images
remains powerfully different from how we might remember the same
event were images not involved.
How Images Work
Theories of visual representation have long been occupied with delineat-
ing how images work differently than words. Much recent scholarship has
been drawn to the place at which words and images meet, arguing that
side by side the cogent dimensions of each representational template
emerge.5 Such an intersection has generated similar interest in scholarship
on memory, where the entanglement of words and images plays upon the
respective representational strengths of each memory vehicle.
Indeed, the value of considering how images work by comparing and
contrasting them with words dates back at least to the work of Gotthold
Lessing. In his early essay on the Laocoon, he argued that painting differs
from poetry simply because it “can use but a single moment of an action,
and must therefore choose the most pregnant one, the one most sugges-
tive of what has gone before and what is to follow.”6 In other words the
visual, unlike the verbal, might best tell a story by strategically catching
things in the middle. It depicts for its onlookers a moment in an event’s
unfolding to which they attend while knowing where that unfolding leads.
This means that visual work often involves catching the sequencing of
events or issues midstream, strategically freezing it at its potentially strong-
est moment of meaningful representation.
This point is crucial for explaining the role of images in memory. It
suggests that images help us remember the past by freezing its representa-
tion at a powerful moment already known to us. Indeed, Lessing’s ideas
are particularly interesting because we do not encounter images in con-
temporary experience devoid of other memory vehicles. Rather, images
158 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

about the past appear alongside other visuals, words, sounds, and artifacts
in an array of settings—legal discourse, religion, politics, and journalism,
to name a few. Individuals and publics thus often know more about the
past than what is actually depicted in a given image, perhaps having read
of the depicted, seen a different visual representation of it, or even visu-
alized depictions associated with similar mnemonic schemata. An unusual
relationship is created between spectator and image that positions specta-
tors in the peculiar circumstance of knowing more than they see while
positioning images between what the spectator knows and does not know.
When it comes to viewing images of the past, of which at least some
information may be familiar, spectators are thereby led to suspend knowl-
edge so as to encounter the depiction upon spectatorship.
Against this background, theories of visual representation have long
held that images work through a combination of two forces. On the one
hand, images, particularly photographs, work through a denotative force
that is connected with verisimilitude, or the ability of the image to refer-
ence things “as they are.” Also called the image’s indexicality or referen-
tiality, by which an image appears to capture life on its own terms, the
power to represent is established through the assumption of a correspon-
dence with real life events. On the other hand, we expect from images
a certain connotative force too. Connected with symbolism, generaliz-
ability, and universality, the image in this regard is assumed capable of
invoking and repairing to broad symbolic systems that draw on certain
meanings for the visual representations that are displayed.7
The tension between the denotative and connotative forces of the im-
age has occupied scholars of visual culture for decades. Yet certain theo-
rists of visual culture have remained bewildered by an additional force of
the image, which Roland Barthes calls its “third meaning.”8 In Barthes’s
view, the image’s third meaning compels viewers after they encounter and
deplete both its literal/informational side and its symbolic dimensions.
Barthes argues that the third meaning is dif¤cult to locate because it is not
situated structurally or in a certain place of the image. It is similarly dif¤-
cult to describe because it involves what he calls the image’s obtuseness,
its accent or anaphoric side. It is thus no surprise that contemporary theo-
ries of visual representation generally have left the image’s third meaning
unexplicated.
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 159
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

It may be that visuals need more than just indicative and symbolic force
to work in memory. We know that visual memory uses both indicative and
symbolic parameters to assert itself in predictable and patterned linkages
to the past.9 But it is possible that such parameters come together system-
atically, picking up recurrent visual tropes over time and activating them
across different events and places in a way that lends meaning to the re-
cycling typical of memory. In other words, it may be that in memory im-
ages need more than their indicative and symbolic dimensions and depend
on the successful activation of that third meaning to which Barthes refers.
Photographs and Memory
As vehicles of memory, images work in patterned ways, concretizing and
externalizing events in an accessible and visible fashion that allows us to
recognize the tangible proof they offer of the events being represented.
Images actively depend on their material form when operating as vehicles
of memory, with our ability to remember events of the past facilitated
by an image’s availability and interchangeability. In a sense, then, visual
memory’s texture becomes a facilitator for memory’s endurance.
With photography this is even more the case, for the force of the pho-
tographic image is derived from its powerful capacity to represent the
real. Often photography aids the recall of things and events past so effec-
tively that photographs become the primary markers of memory itself.
We need only think of the wide-ranging familiarity of the image of a small
boy being herded out of the Warsaw Ghetto by Nazi soldiers to recognize
how far a photograph can go in standing in for the event it depicts.
But dif¤culties arise when photographs shape a collective past. At best
photographs are arbitrary, composite, conventionalized, and simpli¤ed
glimpses of the past. They are “conventionalized, because the image has to
be meaningful for an entire group; simpli¤ed, because in order to be gen-
erally meaningful and capable of transmission, the complexity of the im-
age must be reduced as far as possible.”10 They are also schematic, lacking
the detail of the images of personal memory. We do not remember the
name of the South Vietnamese village where children ran screaming from
their napalmed homes into the ¤eld of vision of a photographer’s camera,
nor the date or circumstances under which the photograph was taken. But
its resonance as an image of war atrocity—and consequent invocation by
160 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

U.S. antiwar groups during the sixties and seventies—stabilizes its mean-
ing precisely along its more schematic dimensions. Collectively held im-
ages act as signposts within these limitations, providing a frame in which
people can collectively appropriate images. That frame directs us to pre-
ferred meaning by the fastest if not the most all-encompassing route.
In events as wide-ranging as the Hindenberg explosion and the Chal-
lenger disaster, the collective’s ability to remember through images de-
pends on some recognized means of storage. For unless cultures have the
“means to freeze the memory of the past, the natural tendency of social
memory is to suppress what is not meaningful or intuitively satisfying . . .
and substitute what seems more appropriate or more in keeping with
their particular conception of the world.”11 Modern culture’s capacity to
freeze, replay, and store visual memories for large numbers of people—
facilitated by museums, art galleries, television archives, and other visual
data banks—has enhanced our ability to make the past work for present
aims. Discussions of photographic memory thereby become at some level
discussions of cultural practice—of the strategies by which photographs
are made and collected, retained and stored, recycled and forgotten.
These points of emphasis have moved us substantially in our apprecia-
tion of how photographs work in memory. But they have also introduced
certain blind spots into our understanding of photographs as vehicles of
memory. Scholarship on photographic memory has emphasized the fact
and actuality of photographic depiction to such an extent that it has left
unaddressed its opposite—contingency. De¤ned as the quality of being
uncertain, conditional, or possible, contingency softens the fact-driven
force of the photograph by introducing chance and relativity into its ap-
propriation by spectators.12 Such “what if” dimensions of the image, how-
ever, are largely absent from theories of visual representation. Despite the
lexicon that we have begun to develop for some dimensions of visual au-
thority, there is still no term that complicates/modi¤es/quali¤es what we
see. Without it, all that contingency entails—possibility, quali¤cation,
imagination—is pushed aside to accommodate the blunt force of the pho-
tograph’s depiction of the here and now.
Yet it is possible, even probable, that images function in memory pre-
cisely through contingency, when meaning settles not at the image’s origi-
nal point of display but over time in new contexts that are always altered,
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 161
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

sometimes playful, and often contradictory. By playing to the contingent
aspect of a depicted event or issue, the image’s capacity to speak for the
past changes in its relation to the events it depicts. And when dealing with
events of a tragic nature, contingency may be the best interpretive stance
for which we can hope.
The Subjunctive Voice of Images
“Voice” offers a useful way of making sense of the image’s role in memory.
Seen here as the dimensions of an image that propel it to link with other
events at other times and places, voice helps explain how the image takes
on an already provided meaning upon its initial appearance. In this regard,
voice can be seen as an assist that helps us understand both the image’s
third meaning and the role of contingency in visual memory.
It is important to note that what is here called “voice” in effect corre-
sponds with a slew of linguistic terms—including voice, mood, tense, and
aspect—that complicate and qualify the word of action in a statement.
While in popular usage voice simply means articulation or expression,
voice is de¤ned grammatically as that which shows the relationship be-
tween the subject and the word of action in a statement.13 Taken together,
voice is extended here to refer to the relationship developed between the
spectator and the image—involving state of mind, attitude, temporal and
sequential positioning—and to those aspects of the image that help the
spectator develop that relationship. This is key, for it offsets the limitations
of the image itself. As Slavoj Zizek contends, “[V]oice does not simply
persist at a different level with regard to what we see, it rather points to
a gap in the ¤eld of the visible, toward the dimension of what eludes our
gaze . . . ultimately, we hear things because we cannot see everything.”14
Voice helps situate visual memory on the boundaries of the familiar,
ensuring not only that new images build on a visual tradition in both form
and content but on a series of related expectations for how we are willing
to connect with the past and where our resistance for doing so can be
found. At the same time, voice helps introduce the more amorphous as-
pects of visual depiction that are associated with what might be loosely
called an image’s mood, tense, and aspect.
If we are agreed that the domain of the visual is in need of explication
162 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

for both an image’s third meaning and its connection to contingency, it
makes sense to search for a voice that accomplishes that address effec-
tively. One such voice—the “subjunctive”—does so particularly well, as
it is concerned with the capacity to couch what is represented in an inter-
pretive scheme of “what could be.” Grammatically, the subjunctive quali-
¤es the word of action by situating it within the hypothetical, changing the
statement “I shot that man” to “I might have shot that man.” Usually
signi¤ed in verbal language by auxiliaries such as “might,” “could,” or
“should,” by the substitution of “would have” for “had” and by the use of
“if” clauses, depiction in images adds impulses of supposal, hypothesis, and
possibility to photographic verisimilitude. The condition under focus is
transformed from a reality or future certainty into a probability made
possible by someone’s desire, emotions, or imagination. Technically de-
¤ned as the mood of a verb used to express condition or hypothesis, the
subjunctive creates a space of possibility, hope, and liminality through
which spectators might relate to images. Images that might not be inher-
ently uncertain, hypothetical, or emotional become so due to the attitude
of spectators. It allows them to move through what might be called the
“as if” of visual representation and memory. The “as if” thrives on contra-
diction, on often illogical, unpredictable, and idiosyncratic connections,
whereby the original use value of a piece of visual culture is easily negated
and undermined. The “as if” has many helpers in photography, such as
insuf¤cient credits, overgeneralized captions, an imprecise relation be-
tween text and image—all the tools that blur an image’s referentiality. In
the subjunctive voice, questions about cultural authority are altered and
muted, if not suspended. Spectators begin to ask not “What are we look-
ing at?” but “What does this remind us of?” and “What possibilities does
this raise?”
As a mode of tackling experience, the subjunctive has been addressed
by numerous scholars concerned with meaning and representation. An-
thropologist Victor Turner was instrumental in introducing the subjunc-
tive to discussions of everyday life with his notions about ritual process
and liminality.15 Charles E. Scott, Roger Silverstone, and Michael Schud-
son each elaborated on the notion in the contexts of philosophy, cultural
studies, and journalism, respectively.16 Yet none considered the role that
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 163
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

the subjunctive might play in images and the domain of visual represen-
tation.
The subjunctive enhances the work of visual memory because it acti-
vates visual markers for subjunctive ends and thereby becomes well suited
for representing complex events. Prominent when the visual retreats into
the past, the subjunctive here depends on the texture and availability of
images that are simpli¤ed, schematic, and often composite and that appear
in an interchangeable array of paintings, icons, photographs, and video
clips. In memory, the subjunctive voice connects across these dimensions
in patterned ways. We come to remember whole events through con-
densed images that reduce complex and multidimensional phenomena
into memorable scenes. Often they are memorable because they activate
impulses about how the “world might be” rather than how “it is.”
For example, when a depiction pauses on the “as if” dimensions of an
image—coaxing spectators to consider how a depiction “might mean,”
“might be,” “might look,” or “might end”—it involves many sides of the
imaginary. A photograph of a kiss, tendered in a public square at the end
of World War II, draws imaginary visions of who the people might have
been, what kind of relationship they might have had, or where their act
might have led. Similarly, a photograph of a ®ag raising at the conclusion
of a drawn-out battle conjures up thoughts about the ®ag raisers’ experi-
ences in battle and the world order that their action was hoping to set in
place. Each of these examples illustrates what Lessing said long ago about
the visual: Images break the sequencing of action in the middle. By freez-
ing that sequencing midway at a particularly memorable representational
moment, spectators are able to embellish numerous imaginary schemes
on the “about to” moment that is depicted in the sequencing of action. In
this sense they supply a contingent dimension to visual depiction. That
contingent dimension, in turn, helps activate the image’s third meaning
that facilitates connections between images across times and places.
Visualizing the About-to-Die Moment
The possibilities raised here regarding the role of the image in memory—
that it thrives on both the image’s third meaning and its contingent
dimensions—are key to understanding images over time. Yet both possi-
164 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

bilities depend on representational decisions that strategically play to the
kinds of images that typically emerge as effective vehicles of memory.
Such images tend to be of the type described above: they freeze a particu-
larly memorable moment of representation midway through the sequenc-
ing of action by representing it through the subjunctive voice. Typically,
then, they build on the blunt force of photographic depiction—its con-
cretization of the here and now—and soften that force with quali¤ers that
are suggestive of possibility, contingency, and hypothesis.
While such images come to the foreground in numerous kinds of visual
representation, perhaps nowhere are their attributes as salient as in those
visual images that depict individuals on the brink of death. From Phillippe
Aries we have learned that the representation of death has long been
codi¤ed in conjunction with broader notions about how life is supposed
to be lived and ended.17 The work of Jay Ruby has extended our under-
standing of how people use photographs of loved ones to mitigate the
¤nality of their deaths.18 Such assumptions play to the subjunctive voice
and midway sequencing typical of images in memory. In other words, im-
ages of the about-to-die moment offer a content that is well suited to the
form provided by images acting as memory vehicles.
First, the subjunctive voice offers an apt way of depicting the dif¤cult
topic of death. It allows us to recognize its ¤nality while facilitating the
inclusion of possibility, contingency, and even the illogical conclusion of
its postponement. Visual images using the subjunctive voice to address
death are thus possibly easier to view.
Second, freezing the sequencing of action midway means that these
images purport to delay death’s progression. It positions the action at the
“about to” moment, the moment at which an individual or group is going
to die, but not after they are already dead. By freezing the representation
of death before people actually die, we mark the moment before death,
rather than after, as the most powerful and memorable moment of repre-
sentation in the sequencing of events surrounding human demise. And
indeed, both the arts and scholarship on the death experience have long
held one’s ¤nal moment as crucially important, as it is assumed to offer a
playback of one’s life in which one’s entire life ®ashes by in an instant.
Individuals are often seen re®ecting on personal accomplishments and fail-
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 165
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ures at the moment they are about to die.19 It is not only a point of trans-
ference but a boundary marker of crucial importance that marks signi¤-
cant aspects of all that has come before and all that is to follow.
This is a long way of saying that the moment before death has long been
seen as one of the most perplexing, complicated, and interesting moments
in contemporary civilization. Seen in many instances as the preferred ver-
sion of death’s representation, the ¤nal moment before death can be traced
as an enduring trope in one of the classic representations of civilization—
the Cruci¤xion. Although not all portrayals of the Cruci¤xion show an
already dead Christ, a recurrent visual trope has been to depict Christ at
the moment of his impending death.20 In such images, Christ is portrayed
as still alive and suffering rather than already dead, and the moment before
his death is positioned as the preferred way of depicting death itself,
death’s opposite being used as its stand-in.
It is not surprising, then, that the aesthetic choice to frame the one
already dead at the moment that the person is about to die has a long
history in visual representation. Woodcuts from the ¤fteenth and sixteenth
centuries—the artes moriendi that portrayed for the public the proper
manner of dying—depict the traditional image of the deathbed and the
deathbed scene as the preferred iconographic representation of death.21
Similarly, numerous paintings from the late eighteenth and early nine-
teenth centuries re®ect the decision to feature the moment before death
as the stand-in for death itself.
For instance, a painting by Benjamin West titled The Death of General
Wolfe (1770) portrays Wolfe’s death in the midst of the siege of Quebec
during the French and Indian War. West depicted the death of what he saw
as the modern hero by portraying a dying Wolfe surrounded by adoring
subordinates. Publics here were offered the same tension that had reso-
nated earlier from the Cruci¤xion images, whereby the state of death was
visualized by a still-live body. The Death of Socrates (1787) by Jacques Louis
David portrays Socrates’ last moments in a similar fashion. Despite the
image’s title, publics saw Socrates sitting upright and busily engaged with
everyone around him, all of whom probably wondered when the hemlock
he had just swallowed would take effect. The image was in keeping with
Plato’s account of Socrates’ death, which maintained that the philosopher
died as he lived rather than the other way around. Nearly thirty years later
166 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Francesco Goya portrayed the horrors of the Napoleonic invasion by de-
picting a man stiffened with fear against the ¤ring squad about to end his
life. Titled Third of May, 1808 (1814), the painting showed the man’s last
moment before being bayoneted by insurgent troops.
In considering the middle captured by each of these paintings, we are
reminded again that it is their frozen motion that makes each image so
striking, offering us, as Lessing suggested, what may in fact set visual rep-
resentation and particularly the still moment apart from other modes of
representation. Simply put, the image tells the story of what happened at
a point just before the end of its unfolding. The power of the images is
magni¤ed by the deaths to which they lead, with death built on to accom-
modate broader subjunctive messages.
In each case of viewing the about-to-die image, we are drawn into an
illogical spectator position that is simultaneously naive and all-knowing.
That all-knowingness coaxes us to review what we know is about to hap-
pen and to think about what might have been had things happened differ-
ently. We entertain the irrational hope that death may not occur. As Lessing
suggested, we are drawn here to what is by knowing what follows, sus-
pending what we know is about to happen. This impossible contradictory
stance is facilitated by the mood of contingency made possible by the sub-
junctive voice. As spectators, then, we are drawn to the “as if” of these
representations, left to wonder how things might have looked different
had death not occurred. And it is the subjunctive voice—the stance of
contingency—that persists in memory. The “as if” is what gets recycled—
on posters, collectors’ volumes, photographic yearbooks. Subjunctivity,
then, becomes a voice or trope through which to remember.
All of this suggests that the aesthetic choice to pitch an image of death
as an about-to-die moment has been key. This is important, because it may
have emerged as a choice producing a particularly powerful and emotional
image of death. Moreover, this moment of about-to-die plays itself out
across a wide range of depictions in culture, journalism among them. Even
before the advent of photography in journalism, drawings of about-to-die
moments appeared regularly. Among the most well-known examples was
an illustration of President William McKinley’s assassination in 1901,
which a Leslie’s magazine artist drew at the moment McKinley extended
his right hand for a handshake with his about-to-be assassin.22 Once pho-
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 167
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tography became the preferred way of visualizing events in journalism,
however, the opportunity for displaying about-to-die moments became
more widespread.
Journalism and the About-to-Die Image
The inclusion of the about-to-die image in journalistic representations
provides a particularly interesting illustration of the resonance of this par-
ticular type of depiction. When journalists include the about-to-die mo-
ment as part of their coverage, they in effect subvert journalism’s own
aims—which is to present depictions of that which is most newsworthy.
What is most newsworthy for journalism is death itself. Yet its depiction
may not coincide with that which is most visually powerful, suggesting
that a journalist or news organization’s decision to attend to the visually
powerful in effect neglects that which is newsworthy. When that visually
powerful image remains the primary iconic representation of the depicted
event over time, questions arise concerning the documentary status of the
news image in memory. Moreover, when that depiction uses the subjunc-
tive voice—the “as if”—rather than the indicative—the “as is,” on which
journalism strongly relies—questions arise regarding the voice by which
journalists typically establish their own authority.
This is no small matter, for photographic depictions of the about-to-die
moment have literally cluttered the repository of photojournalism’s high
moments. Collections of the iconic images of photojournalism have long
included versions of the about-to-die moment, where photojournalistic
images have focused on the ¤nal moment before death, actual or pre-
sumed. Such images ¤ll our collective memory: a young boy being herded
from the Warsaw Ghetto under a Nazi machine gun; Lee Harvey Oswald
about to be gunned down by Jack Ruby; a black man ascending the plat-
form to his own lynching; a Palestinian child crouching in fear before he
is shot to death by Israeli soldiers. In each case, the about-to-die moment
recurs time and again as a memorable synecdochic stand-in for a range of
complex, often contested events in contemporary history.
The about-to-die moment involves two aberrations to journalism. One
concerns the violation of journalistic values of newsworthiness at the time
of the photograph’s initial display, either on the part of the photographer
or the news organization, by which the about-to-die photo becomes the
168 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

preferred way of visualizing the death at hand. In most cases this decision
involves substituting depictions of the about-to-die photograph for other
more newsworthy images of death itself. In part, such a decision depends
on what Jessica Fishman has de¤ned as an inhibition regarding the images
of corpses in the news, whereby photographs of dead bodies are rendered
the more offensive choice for journalists to make.23 The second involves
violating journalistic values of newsworthiness over time, whereby the
less newsworthy photo, originally selected for initial display, becomes the
iconic image by which the complex events surrounding death are remem-
bered. Such photos of the about-to-die moment reappear in news retro-
spectives, anniversary issues, and other memory work conducted by news
organizations over time.24 Given that many of the events being depicted
or remembered involve the tragic death of either large populations or
prominent individuals, the selection and maintenance of photos that have
been strategically chosen because they depict death in process rather than
as a ¤nished state is telling.
For instance, three of the four iconic images of the con®ict in Viet-
nam captured individuals poised at the moment of death but not yet
dead.25 Each photo not only received widespread depiction at the time of
the event’s original unfolding but was recycled extensively over time, re-
appearing in retrospectives on the Vietnam War, newspaper and broadcast
retrospectives of the sixties and seventies, and memorial volumes on
Southeast Asia. Perhaps the most famous was the Eddie Adams photo-
graph from 1968 of a South Vietnamese chief of national police—General
Loan—shooting a Vietcong prisoner in the head. The picture, one of a
sequence of still shots that Adams took at the time, rapidly became a po-
tent symbol of antiwar sentiments and played a crucial role in turning U.S.
public opinion against the war. Signi¤cantly, Adams shot numerous images
of the Vietcong prisoner, already dead, which did not make it widely into
print, while the about-to-die moment made it onto the front pages of
nearly every newspaper across the United States. It appeared twice in one
edition of the New York Times, both on the front page and on page 12, brack-
eted by photos that Adams had taken before and after the execution.26 The
photographer’s provision of evidence of the dead prisoner was thus pushed
aside to accommodate the about-to-die image. In somewhat of a reverse
practice, when the shot was shown on NBC Nightly News the network
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 169
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

blacked out its screen for three seconds, thereby increasing the photo’s
impact.27 Not surprisingly, the photograph eventually won a Pulitzer and
has since become one of the iconic representations of the Vietnam War.
Perhaps nowhere has the about-to-die moment been as aptly repre-
sented as in the visuals of the September 11 attacks on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon. Because the World Trade Center attack occurred
in the midst of the nation’s media capital, the New York Times felt that cam-
era crews and news photographers “all had ample time to capture the most
horri¤c moments.”28 Yet images of human death did not generally appear,
other than one photo of a severed hand that appeared in the New York
Daily News.29 Depictions of body parts, blood, and gore were generally
nowhere to be found. Possibly due to the trauma caused by the scope of
the tragedy, depicting the loss of human life at a point before life was lost
seemed to be simply easier than depicting death itself. It also re®ected a
longstanding reluctance, identi¤ed by Fishman, to depict images of human
gore in the press and a tendency to target instead other focal points, such
as inanimate objects or live bodies.30 Hence, news executives admitted
that video footage and photography of body parts were excised from pub-
lic view. MSNBC’s president said that his staff pushed aside numerous pic-
tures showing blood and body parts to ¤nd the more antiseptic images.
“We chose not to show a lot,” he said. “How more horrifying and graphic
can you get than a 110-story building, blowing up and disintegrating before
your eyes?”31 In other words, the about-to-die moment took precedence
as a trope of visual representation from the beginning.
Nonetheless, the depictions that appeared in the days following the at-
tacks were met with incredulity. As Business Week advised its readers, “Close
your eyes and try to make the images go away—the jagged holes ripped
in the twin towers by two hijacked airliners, desperate of¤ce workers
jumping to their deaths, the buildings’ eventual cascading collapse, scenes
of panic in the streets, jumpy TV footage of injured Pentagon of¤cers. You
can’t banish the horror.”32 Photographs connected to the attacks, though
not depicting bodies, appeared with a systematic regularity that bordered
at times on excess. Even by year’s end the same images continued to be
displayed because, in the New York Times’s view, “they freeze-frame a ca-
lamity so great that the mind struggles, even months later, to comprehend
the data being sent by the eyes.”33
170 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

The about-to-die depictions of September 11 had two photographic
focal points: ill-focused shots of people about to die and images of the
burning World Trade Center buildings, ¤lled with individuals who were
not visualized but poised in an imaginary or presumed space on the brink
of death. These two sides of death’s depiction—a ¤rst-order image depict-
ing actual people on the way to their death and a second-order image
depicting their presumed death in the buildings on the way to their
collapse—were shown in complementary but different ways. It makes
sense to consider them in turn.
First-Order About-to-Die Photos
The images of people on the way to their death in the World Trade Center
provided a particularly horri¤c example of the force of photographic de-
piction that constituted a ¤rst-order representation of the about-to-die
moment. Pictures of still-live bodies leaning from upper-story windows
or tumbling from skyscrapers constituted a set of perhaps the most tragic
depictions displayed in the aftermath of the attacks. Reminiscent of an
earlier image in which people in a clothing factory gestured hysterically
at bystanders from inside a ¤ery warehouse and jumped rather than burn
to death,34 these photos were nonetheless shocking for the magnitude of
the loss of human life that they represented. Moreover, the pictures of
people waving frantically as ¤re engulfed the buildings or jumping to cer-
tain death were particularly painful because they underscored the sheer
hopelessness of both the people trapped inside and the people witnessing
their demise.
Images of people about to die appeared ¤rst on television. During
the ¤rst few hours after the attacks, certain broadcast and cable news
organizations—CNN, Fox News, and CBS—initially showed moving im-
ages of people jumping from the center towers’ upper ®oors to their pre-
sumed deaths on the pavement below. These pictures, which portrayed
bodies like unreal stick ¤gures tumbling jerkily into the gray sky from the
side of the buildings, represented but did not depict actual death. No bod-
ies were shown striking the pavement below, and little visual detail of
those about to die was offered. The photographs were peculiar for the long
view of action that they offered and for their failure to depict faces,
identi¤able human features, or detailing of clothing. At the same time the
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 171
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

distance between the photographers and camera people, on the one hand,
and the individuals on the towers’ upper ®oors, on the other, ensured that
the people remained anonymous and would not be recognized by rela-
tives.35 Spectators, instead, were expected to expand on the brutal fact of
anonymous falling bodies with the presumption of their impending death
on the pavement below. In a sense, then, these images that aptly captured
the horror of the attack as it unfolded depended already at their original
depiction on the spectator to ¤ll in the narrative of a gruesome death
beyond that actually depicted. Signi¤cantly, however, the image in its mov-
ing version was pulled from the television screen almost immediately after
its initial broadcast. Both ABC and MSNBC decided not to show it at all,
with executives at both news organizations wondering whether it was
“necessary to show people plunging to their death.”36 NBC showed an
image of one person jumping and then pulled it because, in one executive’s
view, it was “disturbing.”37 Although the image continued to be shown on
some foreign broadcast networks, such as the BBC, on the home front it
was deemed inappropriate and taken off air.
Yet the images of people jumping and hanging out of the towers expe-
rienced a peculiar short-life in the press that underscored the power of
the subjunctive in helping people deal with the World Trade Center at-
tacks. Two particular images made a comeback the day after the attack,
when they were relegated as still photographs to the inner pages of certain
daily newspapers. An Associated Press photograph of a solitary person
tumbling head¤rst out of one of the buildings, taken in two versions by
Richard Drew, was reprinted more widely than other images of people
about to die. The jumper, his legs poised as if in a graceful dance position,
was depicted plummeting straight down the side of the building. The
image appeared in the Philadelphia Inquirer on an inside page under the
matter-of-fact title “A Person Falls from the World Trade Center’s North
Tower,” alongside a much larger picture of a jetliner lining up to ®y into
one of the towers.38 It also appeared in the Chicago Tribune and the Wash-
ington Post, where it was appended to an article pondering why people had
chosen to jump.39 A differently angled version of the same shot was dis-
played in the New York Times and the Washington Post.40 Time labeled it “The
Long Fall.”41
A second image, taken by Reuter’s Jeff Christiensen, was also reprinted
widely in the ¤rst day or two after the attacks. The photograph showed
172 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Figure 7.1. An unidenti¤ed man jumps to his death from one of the towers (Richard
Drew, Associated Press/Wide World Photos).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

people hanging out of the World Trade Center, waving frantically. Al-
though Christiensen did not realize at ¤rst that his much larger shot of the
building included in one corner scores of people caught between death by
¤re and death by jumping, the wire service blew up the smaller image,
constituting one-¤ftieth of the original frame, into its own image once
alerted to its contents. The picture appeared twice in the Washington Post,
the Chicago Tribune, Newsweek, and the Boston Globe.42 Typically it received a
caption that generalized the depicted scene: Newsweek called it “After the
Blast.”43
The images’ immediate display in the press at ¤rst raised the question
of how the photographic still image could suddenly make the horri¤c
display presentable. Why did the image of people jumping, considered
too powerful and inappropriate when positioned as part of a video se-
quence, become appropriate for public display a mere twenty-four hours
later when transformed into a single, static shot? Those questions, how-
ever, were quelled by the fact that the static shots of people about to die
reappeared in only a limited fashion.
Despite a short run in the press during the ¤rst day or two after the
attacks, the photos did not proliferate widely. They were printed in only a
limited number of newspapers, primarily New York papers and newspapers
of record.44 When they did appear, they were printed on inside rather than
front pages and more often than not in black and white rather than color.45
Finally, when they did run, they provoked reader complaints.46
By the weekend the images of people about to die virtually disap-
peared, appearing in very few of the newsmagazines, retrospectives, or
other overviews of that ¤rst week’s events.47 By the time that many of
the later retrospective volumes went into print three months later, they
reappeared hardly at all. One memorial volume comprised nearly one
hundred photos but not one portrayed the tumbling bodies.48 Even an
Associated Press retrospective, issued in September 2001, did not include
the photograph of a solitary jumper taken by its own photographer.49
The contradictory display of the static shot—by which it appeared but
without full force—is telling. On the one hand, its appearance could have
been expected to be short-lived, given the reluctance in the press about
showing human gore.50 On the other hand, the reappearance of the about-
to-die moment as a still shot offered a more subjunctive and contingent
174 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

display of the image than was suggested in the image’s moving version.
While most spectators within a day or two were able to ¤ll in the tragic
details of the larger narrative—the fact that beyond the camera’s frame
lay the harsh pavement on which the bodies landed—there was little in
the images themselves that forced spectators to face that aspect of the
event. Rather, the static depictions allowed them to remain in a subjunc-
tive space even longer than they had with the moving image. In that sub-
junctive space, the people portrayed were not yet dead and the depiction
suggested the remote possibility that perhaps, as in one spectator’s words,
it was “all just a bad dream.”51 As one ABC news correspondent said,
“[T]he most horrible thing was the sight of people hurling themselves
from the building. I was telling myself maybe they weren’t real people.
They looked like little dolls.”52
The tug of these two contradictory impulses facilitated the images’ dis-
appearance and brief return. However, the no-nonsense positioning of the
bodies, some of them tumbling head¤rst as they fell from the buildings,
made it dif¤cult to contain a subjunctive interpretation for long. What
possibilities—other than certain death—could be entertained here? So
Figure 7.2. People poised between death by ¤re and death by jumping (Jeff Christen-
sen, ©Reuters 2001, used by permission).
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 175
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

bothered was the New York Times by the image that it ran an article detail-
ing journalistic decisions to run the picture of jumping bodies.53 While
the New York Times justi¤ed its decision to publish because the photo ap-
peared on an inside page and in black and white and Newsday justi¤ed it
because it was a small image and the person unidenti¤able, this was not
enough for some readers.54 As one person wrote to the Denver Post, “[T]his
is nauseating. . . . Do you have no feelings, no sense of respect for the
families of the loved ones lost?”55
Thus, the portrayals of jumping bodies disappeared a second time. In
need of a visualization that could powerfully convey the tragic events as
they unfolded, a second-order about-to-die moment emerged from the
scores of photos being taken. It depicted the more imaginary or presumed
aspect of impending death as embodied in the collapse of the World Trade
Center itself. In other words, images of the buildings in which people
were about to perish took the place of depictions of people about to die.
Second-Order About-to-Die Photos
Depictions of the buildings upheld a tendency in the press, identi¤ed by
Fishman, to offset the visualization of dead bodies with a focus on inani-
mate objects.56 But the buildings here took on a central role in visualizing
the tragedy for a grieving public from the very beginning. Played over and
over again on television, in newsmagazines, and in other venues of visual
display, the towers provided a remarkable shot of impact that segmented
the larger story neatly into before and after portions. At times the images
seemed to function like “a kind of wallpaper.”57 And yet the repeated dis-
play of the shots helped offset people’s persistent disbelief in what was
happening. In MSNBC anchor Brian Williams’s words, “[I]t just never
ceases to amaze people to watch that piece of videotape.”58
But as an about-to-die photo, the image of the fractured World Trade
Center, its towers burning shortly before their monumental demise, had
an additional function. It forced spectators to imagine or presume the
precise circumstances of the individuals who faced their deaths rather than
see the individuals as they were about to die. In much the same way that
the moving images of jumping bodies offered less of an ability to pause
subjunctively than did the still shots, so too the depiction of bodies offered
less of a subjunctive space than did the inanimate buildings. Choosing to
depict buildings instead of bodies prolonged the moment of contingency
176 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

in which spectators could improbably hope that the buildings would not
fall and the people not die. As one spectator said, “I kept looking and
looking and wishing that the story would take a different turn.”59 Or, as a
New York Times columnist commented on a moment in which the tape of
the just-struck buildings played backward momentarily, “[W]e saw history
reverse itself; the building appeared whole, as if in a wishful dream.”60
These photos portrayed the looming facades of the twin towers in vari-
Figure 7.3. The impending collapse of the World Trade Towers (Sean Adair, ©Reuters
2001, used by permission).
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 177
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ous stages of their demise. Certain photos showed them at the moment of
impact of one or the other airliner; others showed them on ¤re after the
planes struck; still others showed them as they began to crumble. The
front pages of some newspapers elected to show a series of temporal
moments of the buildings crumbling in sequenced succession.61 Each de-
piction was an additional variance of the about-to-die moment, with spec-
tators recognizing that the thousands of live people inside were experi-
encing horri¤c and life-threatening circumstances at the moment of the
images’ depiction.
The same images were shown repeatedly over the next few days. The
day after the attacks, the burning towers appeared on nearly every front
page of U.S. and foreign newspapers.62 In viewing the images by that
point, spectators clearly were forced to suspend what they knew—that
the towers did in fact come down, killing all those still trapped inside.
Yet the image persisted. The Philadelphia Inquirer, for instance, used the
burning towers as its logo for days after the attacks, as a way of marking
its daily inventory of the attack-related articles inside the newspaper.63
The burning towers were also seen in nearly every possible visual venue
beyond the front pages of newspapers. They appeared on the covers of all
of the major newsmagazines and as logos for most televised broadcast
and cable coverage of the aftermath of the attacks.64 The towers adorned
the covers of retrospective memorial volumes over the months that fol-
lowed.65 The cover of Newsweek’s year-end double issue featured an over-
view of the year with the single word “September” af¤xed above a picture
of the burning towers.66 On December 31, the image topped a special New
York Times section titled “The Year in Pictures.”67 The towers appeared not
only on many volume covers but also on inside pages in the same volumes:
a Reuters commemorative volume designated 10 percent of its more than
130 photos to the burning towers.68 The images were also af¤xed to nu-
merous popular cultural artifacts including calendars, buttons, t-shirts,
and posters.69
But we need to ask why these images stuck in memory. Why did the
burning towers persist as the reigning about-to-die moment of the Sep-
tember 11 attacks? It is probable that the images reigned as the preferred
way of making sense of the attacks because they had the right “voice” for
displaying the horror associated with the World Trade Center attacks. Not
178 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

only did the images offer the appropriate degree of contingency for a mes-
sage too harsh to be seen with the brute force of reality’s depiction. As
one spectator, trying to take his own photograph of the towers before they
collapsed, wrote in the New York Times: “It had been a nice shot. And cer-
tainly it had been easier to shape the horror into an aesthetic distance and
deny the human reality. There was safety in that distance.”70 But the image
also cut—and depicted—the story at precisely its most powerful mo-
ment, pushing spectators to recognize what came later while allowing
them to prolong the experience of what had been before. The images
hence created a space of (im)possibility, whereby spectators were able
to linger in a moment when the full scope of the tragedy was not yet
upon them.
Conclusion: When Memory Freezes on Contingency
The substitution of buildings for people as the preferred representation of
the about-to-die moment in the World Trade Center attacks makes sense
when considering the role of the subjunctive in the popular imagination.
Viewing the raw horror of bodies tumbling to their death was clearly
problematic because their harsh depiction overwhelmed the subjunctive
possibility of muting the ¤nality of death for viewers. The buildings, by
contrast, prolonged that subjunctive response, softening the reality of the
response with the improbable—but comforting—sense that time might
have thwarted death’s intention.
It is important to realize that the contradictory display associated with
these images was resolved by drawing from a robust tradition of earlier
about-to-die photos where death was actual or presumed. Not a decision
made on the backs of this event alone, the trajectory by which horri¤c
tragedy came to be visualized through its “as if” rather than its “as is” di-
mensions has a long history connecting this event with other similar
ones—wars, assassinations, natural tragedies, terrorist acts. The image’s
voice made available the parallels, making clear which ¤lters were accept-
able for drawing death’s representation in the public sphere. Voice offered
spectators the space of contingency for as long as they needed to be there,
postponing the logical conclusion of the about-to-die image—death itself.
Signi¤cantly, however, as we have seen through the long and resonant
tradition of such images, the about-to-die representation does not dis-
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 179
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

appear as we move into memory and into what should be a gradual accep-
tance of the horror of its underlying events. Despite its strategic repre-
sentativeness for certain kinds of public events, when it is invoked the
about-to-die moment lingers as a marker of complex events in history. It
persists in manifold forms, turning, in journalism, into prize-winning
photos, celebrated images, and even iconic representations that become,
in one newspaper’s words, “de¤ning statements of the events from which
they have arisen.”71 This means that a subjunctive response to the horrors
they embody persists too, lingering as messages of contingency at a point
where contingency may no longer be the optimum response to the events
of mass destruction depicted in these images.
All of this should give us pause. For the powerful presence of the sub-
junctive within our capacity to remember the past suggests that we often
willingly engage in a kind of irrational game-playing with what we see,
projecting altered ends on the screens through which we see. The “as if”
permeates the core of our very encounters with the real world, molding
our capacity to remember long after it may have outlived its usefulness.
Often “we see” because “we should see.” But our leap into the third mean-
ing of the image, into an embrace of conditionality and hypothesis, is
worth pondering for what it suggests about the boundaries of memory.
For it may be that memory rests not only upon the boundaries of the
familiar but upon the boundaries of the impossible. And when dealing with
the memory of tragic events, we need to ask ourselves if that is the best
response we can muster.
Notes
This essay began as part of a keynote address for a conference on visual rheto-
ric in Bloomington, Indiana, and part of a talk for a conference on framing
memory at Syracuse University (both in September 2001). Thanks go to Barbara
Biesecker, John Lucaites, and Kendall Phillips for organizing my participation; to
Roger Abrahams, Larry Gross, and Amy Jordan for critiquing drafts of my ideas;
and to Bethany Klein for research assistance. A more extended discussion of these
ideas appears in Barbie Zelizer, About to Die: Journalism, Memory, and the Voice of the
Visual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, in press).
1. Frances Yates, The Art of Memory (New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1966).
180 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

2. Paul Connerton, How Societies Remember (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1989); Barry Schwartz, “The Social Context of Commemoration:
A Study in Collective Memory,” Social Forces 61, no. 2 (1982): 347–402; Jacques
Le Goff, History and Memory (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992).
3. Pierre Nora, Realms of Memory (New York: Columbia University Press,
1997–2000).
4. I have discussed this elsewhere. See Barbie Zelizer, Remembering to Forget:
Holocaust Memory through the Camera’s Eye (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1998); Barbie Zelizer, “Reading the Past against the Grain: The Shape of Memory
Studies,” Critical Studies in Mass Communication 12, no. 2 (1995): 214–39; and
Barbie Zelizer, ed., Visual Culture and the Holocaust (New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press, 2001).
5. See, for instance, W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Theory (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994).
6. Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Laocoon (New York: Noonday Press, 1961), 92.
7. See Stuart Hall, “The Determinations of News Photographs,” in The
Manufacture of News, ed. Stanley Cohen and Jock Young (Thousand Oaks: Sage,
1974), 226–43. Also see Allan Sekula, “On the Invention of Photographic Mean-
ing,” Photography against the Grain (Nova Scotia: Press of the Nova Scotia College
of Art and Design, 1984); John Tagg, The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photog-
raphy and History (New York: MacMillan, 1988).
8. Roland Barthes, “The Third Meaning,” in Image/Music/Text (New York:
Hill and Wang, 1977), 52–68.
9. See, for instance, Zelizer, Remembering to Forget; Marita Sturken, Tangled
Memories (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997); Karal Ann Marling and
John Wetenhall, Iwo Jima: Monuments, Memorials, and the American Hero (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1991).
10. James Fentress and Chris Wickham, Social Memory (Oxford: Basil Black-
well, 1992), 47–48.
11. Ibid., 58–59.
12. Richard Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989). Also see Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau, and Slavoj Zizek,
Contingency, Hegemony, Universality (New York: Verso Press, 2000).
13. This de¤nition is paraphrased from Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dic-
tionary. Also see Emile Benveniste, Problems in General Linguistics (Coral Gables,
FL: University of Miami Press, 1981).
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 181
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

14. Slavoj Zizek, “I Hear You with My Eyes,” in Gaze and Voice as Love Objects,
ed. Renata Salaci and Slavoj Zizek (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), 93.
15. Victor Turner, The Ritual Process (New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1969). Also see Arnold Van Gennep, The Rites of Passage (New York: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1960).
16. Charles E. Scott, The Time of Memory (Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1989). Says Scott: “The subjunctive mood belongs to states of af-
fairs in which incompletion and contingency, something not stately or directly
statable, are joined with statement and fact” (279). Roger Silverstone, Why Study
the Media? (Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1999); Michael Schudson, “When? Deadlines,
Datelines, and History,” in Reading the News, ed. Robert Manoff and Michael
Schudson (New York: Pantheon, 1986), 79–108.
17. Phillippe Aries, Western Attitudes toward Death (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1974). Also see Aries, The Hour of Our Death (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1981).
18. Jay Ruby, Secure the Shadow: Death and Photography in America (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1995).
19. Aries, Hour of Our Death, 106. Literature, cinema, and theater abound
with representations structured around the about-to-die moment. One recent
example is the acclaimed play Wit.
20. See Leo Steinberg, The Sexuality of Christ in Renaissance Art and in Modern
Oblivion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996); Mitchell B. Merback, The
Thief, the Cross and the Wheel: The Spectacle of Punishment in Medieval and Renaissance
Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
21. Aries, Western Attitudes, 34.
22. The illustration, by T. Dart Walker, appeared on the front cover of
Frank Leslie’s Weekly, September 21, 1901. Although ¤rst reports maintained that
McKinley, who did not die for over a week, would recover from the assassination
attempt, this about-to-die image was displayed simultaneously with his actual
death.
23. See Jessica M. Fishman, “Documenting Death: Photojournalism and
Spectacles of the Morbid in the Tabloid and Elite Newspaper,” Ph.D. diss., Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, 2001.
24. I have discussed these two modes of interpretation as a distinction be-
tween the local and the durational. See Barbie Zelizer, “Journalists as Interpretive
Communities,” Critical Studies in Mass Communication 10, no. 3 (1993): 219–37.
182 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

25. Other than the Eddie Adams shot discussed below, these included the
photos of a Buddhist monk’s self-immolation and of a group of women and chil-
dren about to be shot in My Lai. When the former picture reached editorial
desks, questions were raised about whether to print it. One Syracuse editor went
on record saying, “If you can publish a picture of the cruci¤xion, you can publish
this picture.” See Vicki Goldberg, The Power of Photography (New York: Abbeville,
1991), 212.
26. Eddie Adams, “Shooting of General Loan” (Associated Press, 1968).
27. Goldberg, Power of Photography, 226.
28. Jim Rutenberg and Felicity Barringer, “The Ethics: News Media Try to
Sort Out Policy on Graphic Images,” New York Times, September 13, 2001, p. A24.
29. New York Daily News, September 13, 2001, evening edition.
30. Fishman, “Documenting Death.”
31. Erik Sorensen, cited in Rutenberg and Barringer, “The Ethics.”
32. “Terror in America,” Business Week, September 24, 2001, p. 35.
33. Andy Grundberg, “Photography,” New York Times Book Review, Decem-
ber 2, 2001, p. 35. Indeed, the number of photos that circulated was enormous,
suggesting that public response to the tragedy was shaped by using photography
to bear witness in a manner set up in 1945 following the liberation of the Nazi
concentration camps. For more on this, see Barbie Zelizer, “Photography, Jour-
nalism, and Trauma,” in Journalism after September 11, ed. Barbie Zelizer and Stuart
Allan (New York: Routledge, 2002); Barbie Zelizer, “Finding Aids to the Past:
Bearing Personal Witness to Traumatic Public Events,” Media, Culture and Society
(May 2002): 697–714.
34. The earlier incident, the Triangle Shirtwaist factory ¤re, occurred in
1911. Approximately ¤fty people jumped from the building to their death.
35. When interviewed, a Fox News Channel cameraman became teary when
he described ¤lming people jumping from the towers. “I stopped,” he said, “but
I saw 25 more jumping, holding hands, in groups” (Rob Ginnane quoted in “Be-
hind the Camera,” TV Guide, September 29–October 5, 2001, p. 15).
36. David Westin, president of ABC News, cited in Rutenberg and Barringer,
“The Ethics.”
37. Bill Wheatley, vice-president of NBC News, cited in Rutenberg and Bar-
ringer, “The Ethics.”
38. The photo appeared in the Philadelphia Inquirer, September 12, 2001,
p. A14.
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 183
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

39. The photo appeared in the Chicago Tribune on September 12, 2001, p. A12.
It was appended to Gene Weingarten and David Von Drehle, “A Death Better
Than Fate’s,” Washington Post, September 13, 2001, p. C1.
40. The photo appeared in the New York Times, September 12, 2001, p. A12.
Pictures of the burning towers appeared on pages A1 and A8. The photo appeared
in the Washington Post on September 12, 2001, p. A8. A slightly different photo of
people jumping, taken by Getty Images, appeared in the Los Angeles Times, Sep-
tember 12, 2001, p. A13.
41. Time, special September 11 edition, n.p.
42. Reuters was alerted to the people in the shot by a European subscriber
who noticed small incongruous blobs on the original larger print. See Valerie
Basheda, “An Unforgettable Picture,” American Journalism Review (October 2001):
27. The photo appeared in the Boston Globe, September 12, 2001, p. A8; the Chi-
cago Tribune, September 12, 2001, p. A12; the Washington Post, September 12, 2001,
p. A16 and September 13, 2001, p. C3.
43. Newsweek, September 24, 2001, Special Report, n.p.
44. See Alice Tugend, “The Simple Act of Getting to Work Was an Ordeal,”
American Journalism Review (October 2001): 25. The newspapers that ran the pho-
tograph included the New York Times, the Detroit News, Newsday, the Denver Post,
and the Philadelphia Inquirer. The Washington Post included a front-page discussion
of the bodies jumping (Barton Gellman, “I Saw Bodies Falling Out—Oh God,
Jumping, Falling,” Washington Post, September 12, 2001, p. A1), but the accom-
panying picture depicted two grieving women holding each other. The Reuters
photo of people hanging out of the towers appeared on A16.
45. In one widespread collection of the front pages of newspapers the day
after the attacks, not one of 122 national papers showed an image of people about
to die on their front pages. See Poynter Institute, September 11, 2001: A Collection
of Newspaper Front Pages Selected by the Poynter Institute (Kansas City: Andrews
McMeel, 2001). The only newspapers in the collection that printed such images
on the front page were foreign: Mexico City’s El Universal showed the Reuters
photo of people hanging out of buildings (September 12, 2001, p. A1), and Rio
de Janeiro’s O Dia showed the AP photo of a man falling head¤rst to his death
under the caption “Desperado” (September 12, 2001, p. A1).
46. See Tugend, “Simple Act of Getting to Work.” Also see Rutenberg and
Barringer, “The Ethics.”
47. The image did appear in Newsweek, September 24, 2001, n.p., as a double-
184 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

page spread, and a different photo, taken by a photographer for Getty Images,
appeared in Time’s special issue on September 11. But the image of people jump-
ing did not appear in the regular issues of Time, Business  Week, People, or In These
Times.
48. Magnum Photographers, New York: September 11, 2001; In the Line of Duty
(New York: Regan Books, 2001); and Reuters, September 11: A Testimony (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2002). In the Reuters volume the Jeff
Christiensen shot of people hanging out of the windows was included (p. 13).
49. World Wide Photography and Associated Press, Day of Terror (New York:
America Products, 2001).
50. Fishman, “Documenting Death.”
51. Anonymous comment made at a public viewing of television coverage,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, September 11, 2001.
52. Don Dahler, quoted in “Ground Zero,” TV Guide, September 29–October 5,
2001, p. 39.
53. See Rutenberg and Barringer, “The Ethics.”
54. Ibid.; Tugend, “Simple Act of Getting to Work,” 25. By contrast, the Phila-
delphia Inquirer ran a column titled “The Most Horri¤c Images,” in which it did
not mention the bodies at all.
55. Cited in Rutenberg and Barringer, “The Ethics.”
56. Fishman, “Documenting Death.”
57. Deborah Potter, “It Isn’t Over,” American Journalism Review (November
2001): 76.
58. Quoted in “Terror Hits Home,” TV Guide, September 29–October 5,
2001, p. 10.
59. Personal communication with author.
60. Caryn James, “Live Images Make Viewers Witnesses to Horror,” New York
Times, September 12, 2001, p. A25.
61. Such a representational template, in which sequenced shots showed the
buildings being struck by the airplanes and then lit on ¤re on their way to col-
lapse, was fairly common. The sequence appeared on the front pages of the
Los Angeles Times, the Lexington Herald-Leader, the Sacramento Bee, the Arizona Re-
public, the Tennessean, the Denver Post, and the Dallas Morning News, among others.
62. In one widespread collection of front pages the day after the attacks, the
burning towers appeared in nearly 85 percent of the newspapers displayed. See
Poynter Institute, September 11, 2001.
The Voice of the Visual in Memory / 185
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

63. The logo stopped appearing in the newspaper on September 16, at which
point a similar image of the burning towers appeared on an internal page (p. 24).
64. The burning towers tended to appear on both the covers and multiple
internal pages of the popular press. For instance, they appeared on the cover of
In These Times, October 15, 2001, and again on pages 9 and 10; on the cover of
TV Guide, under the title “Terror Hits Home,” September 29–October 5, 2001,
and again on three internal pages (8–9, 10, 18); the cover of Business Week, un-
der the title “Act of War,” September 24, 2001, and again internally on page 34;
on the cover of People, under the title “September 11, 2001: The Day That Shook
America,” September 24, 2001, and again on pages 6–7.
65. They included the covers of Magnum Photographers, New York: Septem-
ber 11, 2001 (New York: Powerhouse, 2001); World Wide Photography and Asso-
ciated Press, Day of Terror; Editors of New York Magazine, September 11, 2001: A
Record of Tragedy, Heroism, and Hope (New York: Henry N. Abrams, 2001); Ethan
Casey, ed., 9:11 8.48 a.m.: Documenting America’s Greatest Tragedy (Booksurge.com,
2001).
66. Newsweek, December 31, 2001–January 7, 2002.
67. “The Year in Pictures,” New York Times, December 31, 2001, sec. G.
68. Reuters, September 11: A Testimony. Also see World Wide Photography and
Associated Press, Day of Terror and Magnum Photos, New York: September 11, 2001.
In the latter, of the nearly 100 photos, 20 portrayed the burning or smoking
towers. In a mnemonic pattern that was common to the memorial volumes,
another 12 portrayed the towers before September 11.
69. Some examples included a World Trade Center 2002 Memorial Wall Cal-
endar (Brown Trout Publishers); a Heroes 2002 Wall Calendar (Brown Trout Pub-
lishers); and America 911: We Will Never Forget (VHS).
70. Colson Whitehead, “The Image,” New York Times Magazine, September 23,
2001, p. 21.
71. Richard Edward Larsen, “Did Palestinian Boy Die in Vain?” Ventura County
Star, October 5, 2000, p. B9.
186 / Barbie Zelizer
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

8
“A Timeless Now”
Memory and Repetition
Bradford Vivian
When the shadow of the sash appeared on the curtains it was between
seven and eight o’clock and then I was in time again, hearing the watch.
It was Grandfather’s and when Father gave it to me he said I give you
the mausoleum of all hope and desire; it’s rather excruciating-ly apt that
you will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of all human experience
which can ¤t your individual needs no better than it ¤tted his or his
father’s. I give it to you not that you may remember time, but that you
might forget it now and then for a moment and not spend all your
breath trying to conquer it.
William Faulkner, The Sound and the Fury
Thus begins Quentin Compson’s narrative in William Faulkner’s The Sound
and the Fury, a literary masterpiece whose true subject, more than any
particular character, may be the poignant in®uence of memory on the
experiences of its various narrators. Faulkner’s story comprises four sec-
tions, each with a different narrator, relating the events of four differ-
ent days. The echoes of the past suffuse the narrative of a given day’s
events, as if the nature and meaning of the present only coalesced out of
memory’s reverberations. In the epigraph above, Quentin cannot hear
the ticking of his grandfather’s watch without remembering his father’s
words upon receiving the heirloom. He recalls the elder Compson’s lu-
gubrious commentary on the signi¤cance of time to one’s mortality when-
ever he touches or thinks of this small but momentous memento, “the
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

mausoleum of all hope and desire.” With this gift, Quentin’s father lends
prophetic meaning to his son’s entire life; his words resound endlessly
within Quentin’s consciousness, distressing his every passing moment
with their gravity. Consequently, Quentin remains acutely aware of the
watch’s unstoppable progression, which transforms his days into “the re-
ducto absurdum of all human experience”: the understanding that time is
¤nite and therefore futile, that even the most carefully measured life will
culminate in a timeless end. Despite constant efforts, Quentin never hon-
ors his father’s admonition, which was not to “remember time” by carry-
ing the watch but to “forget it now and then for a moment and not spend
all your breath trying to conquer it.” For Quentin, attempting to for-
get time, to live outside of it, serves only to remind him of time’s inevi-
table consequence, even as he tries to repress his awareness of it. Such
repression merely stimulates memory anew while renewing its potency.
Quentin wanders in and out of his own past and present according to the
repeated interplay of time forgotten and the rush of memory this forget-
ting provokes.
The senses of time and memory in The Sound and the Fury are not ex-
plicitly public. In many ways, they are intensely personal and even resis-
tant to public articulation. The virtuosity of Faulkner’s novel derives from
its invocation of a traumatic and haunting memoryscape that encompasses
the consciousness of the primary narrative perspectives. Yet a “¤ctional
technique,” Jean-Paul Sartre wrote in an essay on The Sound and the Fury,
“always relates back to the novelist’s metaphysics.” While Faulkner’s work
offers no explicit meditation on public memory, it nevertheless dramatizes
what Sartre called “a metaphysics of time”—a system of values and ideals
concerning the interrelated meaning of past, present, and future—which
allows for reconsideration of the assumptions upon which the study of
public memory is often based.1
Repetition offers the most provocative organizing principle of such
metaphysics. Olga W. Vickery observes that although the four sections of
The Sound and the Fury “appear quite unrelated,” they do “repeat certain
incidents and are concerned with the same problem,” namely, the plight
of the oldest Compson sibling, Caddy. “Thus,” Vickery elaborates, “with
respect to the plot the four sections are inextricably connected, but with
respect to the central situation they are distinct and self-suf¤cient. As re-
188 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

lated to the central focus, each of the ¤rst three sections presents a version
of the same facts which is at once the truth and a complete distortion of
the truth.”2 Vickery’s account suggests that the complex truth of memo-
ries depends on the distortions of repeated acts of recollection as much
as any original or authentic perception. In this context, according to
Cleanth Brooks, “the sense of enlightenment” that the novel produces
“comes simply from the fact that we are traversing the same territory in
circling movements.”3 The novel’s repetition of frequently cryptic and dis-
jointed recollections, its “circling movements,” paradoxically induces a
sense of lucidity and linearity, a kind of “enlightenment.”
What is being repeated here? Is the original truth, meaning, or event
somehow preserved through repetition or merely the value and pathos
with which it is invested? Is the de¤ning function of memory to preserve
a truth when that truth may be engendered only by its “distortion,” by
mnemonic mutations inherent in every attempt to narrate the past? To
what extent is the apparent lucidity, linearity, and perdurance of memory
related to the fundamentally incoherent, fragmentary, and ephemeral na-
ture of recollection? To what extent, moreover, does memory depend
on forgetting, on a repeated inducement of amnesia like the kind that
Quentin’s father prescribes to his son? And in what manner does further
meditation on the centrality of repetition to memory warrant closer in-
spection of the privileged ideals of public memory studies, including the
objectivity of the past, its conformity with historical representation, and
the ability to express memory in a normative or canonical form?
In what follows, I address these questions by attending to the different
senses of repetition evident in a mode of collective memory apparently
foreign to conventional Western forms of public commemoration. In or-
der to do so, I turn in the next section from Faulkner’s temporal meta-
physics to a set of cultural practices that exemplify such metaphysics in
the formation of collective memory. Speci¤cally, I draw from a variety of
studies focusing on Eastern European Gypsies in order to scrutinize the
de¤ning features of their collective memory. Gypsy collective memories
exhibit a sense of time, memory, and community dramatically different
from Western forms of public commemoration. The Gypsies’ contrasting
commemorative ideals are exempli¤ed by their distinctive embrace of
memory work, of the ritualized making and remaking of memory—in a
Memory and Repetition / 189
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

word, of repetition—rather than its comparatively static and institutional-
ized outcome: the codi¤cation of public memory central to Western com-
memorative traditions. As such, I propose to augment the very concept of
public memory by surveying the emergence and transformation of collec-
tive memories that do not aspire to the iconic authority so often denoted
by civic monuments or memorials but are nevertheless crucial to the
maintenance of a given community and its heritage. The following, then,
situates the concept of public memory in a broader and more sugges-
tive frame of reference by surveying the dynamic relationships among
memory, repetition, and collective life among Eastern European Gypsies.
I intend to demonstrate that consideration of these dynamic relationships,
far from amounting to a detour around the question of public memory, is
essential to provoking further dialogue about its nature.
In order to conduct this demonstration, I argue that collective or public
memories function nomadically. Like Quentin Compson, we wander about
in the landscape of memory. We may remember the same events over and
over again, but we remember them according to ®uctuating conditions, in
different times and places, in response to changing needs and desires.
Acts of recollection invariably transform the nature of memory because
memory’s changing incitements and purposes ensure that we remember
in different ways, even if we remember the same event. Rather than pre-
serving an identical meaning or truth, the modes of repetition by which
memory emerges and endures in the service of diverse social interests
imbue it with inevitable mutations. Collective or public memory is inher-
ently nomadic because it encompasses a mnemonic landscape comprised
not of stability but ongoing redistribution or, better still, re-membering.
The following consideration of repetition in the enactment of public
memory contributes far more to memory studies than mere semantic dis-
tinctions. Observing such concepts in practice, I am convinced, allows one
to apprehend the ethical and political dynamics inherent in memory work,
though not with the intention of establishing a normative ethical and po-
litical prescription. The claim that public memory is often (if not always)
socially contested, and therefore politically in®ected, is hardly novel. In a
fundamental sense, public memory is political memory. Yet ethical and po-
litical prescriptions modeled on privileged forms of memory tend to sug-
gest correct and incorrect ways to remember (not to mention correct and
190 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

incorrect ways to forget) and therefore make themselves available for the
founding of mnemonic dogma. Such dogma is sometimes aggressively en-
forced when various social groups contest the normative codes of a public
memory. The analysis to come, however, reveals that public memory is
most productively evaluated on the basis of categories other than simple
right and wrong, accurate or inaccurate. Instead of reducing memory to
either one of these categories, I offer an account of the formative and
transformational in®uence of repetition on public memory that mne-
monic dogma would suppress. By surveying the nomadic interplay of au-
thenticity and forgery or continuity and discontinuity from which memory
emerges, this essay seeks to apprehend the formative ethical and political
conditions by which public memory is engendered instead of endorsing a
privileged commemorative ethics or politics. In sum, the essay interro-
gates memory’s debt to repetition by exploring both the processes of re-
membering that take place in forgetting and the sort of amnesia upon
which even the most hegemonic or transparent memories are based.
The Permanent Present
Public memory scholars have long recognized the fundamental relation-
ships among place, historical memory, and the maintenance of commu-
nity. In a Western frame, communities cohere around the formation of
a civic domain, and their history unfolds according to its maintenance.
These relationships among place, history, and community assume a differ-
ent character in the context of Gypsy collective memory. Some scholars
believe the Gypsies became itinerant not by choice but because they were
repeatedly driven away from whatever land they had come to occupy.4
Today, in the volatile topography of post-Communist Eastern Europe,
this trend continues.5 The Gypsies’ perpetually displaced status leaves
them without proven ethnic and geographic origins, despite compel-
ling circumstantial evidence tying them to northern India.6 How does
one preserve and profess the distinctive character of one’s people with-
out recourse to a transparent civic origin, a common commemorative
grounding?
Ceremonial professions of a common cultural identity contribute to its
renewal. This process of cultural renewal is maintained through the repe-
tition of collective rituals that preserve a given unity of memory, place,
Memory and Repetition / 191
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

and community. Such unity depends for its preservation on the authority
of an unmediated historical origin. The authority of this origin governs the
coherence of collective memory in its historical unfolding. Cultural repro-
duction so conceived personi¤es the Platonic logic of an ideal model ap-
proximated by a lineage of diminished copies, for what is repeated is al-
ways the same: the ideal and original form that transcends the mottle of
every repetition and retains its essence in doing so. Repetition as such, in
Gilles Deleuze’s words, occurs “in relation to something unique or singu-
lar which has no equal or equivalent. This is the apparent paradox of fes-
tivals: they repeat an ‘unrepeatable’. They do not add a second and a third
time to the ¤rst, but carry the ¤rst time to the ‘nth’ power.”7 The festival
commemorates an origin through ceremonial repetition, thereby preserv-
ing its sense and value, while the origin, which cannot be repeated but
merely symbolized in memory, transcends the very ritual, the repetition,
that renews its power and dominion.
Despite whatever con®icting testimony they might provide, the Gyp-
sies lack the unity of memory, place, and community that would legitimate
such a repetition—and thus preservation—of their culture. Here I do not
wish to suggest that speci¤c places are unimportant to Gypsies as the loci
of memory. Instead, I wish to underscore the absence of an ideal and origi-
nal place with respect to Gypsy memories: the lack of a transparent spatial
and temporal origin to which the Gypsies can trace the rise of their people
and preserve their culture through its ritual commemoration. In Angus
Fraser’s estimation, “If a people is a group of men, women and children
with a common language, a common culture and a common racial type,
who can be readily distinguished from their neighbors, it is a long time
since the Gypsies were that.”8
The Gypsies’ lack of an objective origin likely explains the instability
of myth as an organizing principle of their culture. “Gypsies have no myths
about the beginning of the world,” Isabel Fonseca explains, “or about their
own origins; they have no sense of a great historical past. Very often their
memories do not extend beyond three or four generations.”9 Michael
Stewart highlights the radical juxtaposition between Judeo-Christian no-
tions of time and remembrance—poetically ¤gured in Walter Benja-
min’s vision of “an angel of history, with his face turned toward the past,
helplessly observing the debris of historical events as it accumulates
192 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

skyward”—and the dramatically different Gypsy experience of passing
time: “For the Gypsies, there is no history, nor is there a past to be re-
deemed. They live with their gaze ¤xed on a permanent present that is
always becoming, a timeless now in which their continued existence as
Rom is all that counts.”10 The Gypsies possess their distinctive histories
and memories because they forget and therefore continually reinvent
them, not because they remember the past in a canonical or uniform
sense. Gypsies do not repeat the past in order to remember; they forget
the past in order to repeat its mythic invention. A given repetition, an
ostensible reproduction of Gypsy culture, repeats only the novelty of “a
timeless now.” For the Gypsies, that is, the inconstancy of the present does
not emerge from the stability of an easily retrievable past; according to
their sense of history and memory, the past only comes into being as it
suits the changing needs and desires of the present.
Gypsies regard the archives of of¤cial memory, with their stores of au-
thoritative documents, as barren edi¤ces. The Gypsy taboo against writ-
ing, against documentation, is illustrated by the story of Papusza, who,
according to Fonseca, was “one of the greatest Gypsy singers and poets
ever and, for a while, one of the most celebrated.”11 But when Papusza
wrote down some of her poems and allowed them to be published by the
Polish poet Jerzy Ficowski in 1950, her people soon turned on her.12 Fon-
seca explains that there are no Gypsy words for “to write” or “to read”;
“Gypsies borrow from other languages to describe these activities.”13
Gypsy culture is largely maintained by the unfettered license of their oral
practices, which remain open to constant embellishment and revision.
Writing is nonsensical to the Gypsies and carries a stigma of arresting or
pinning down. They have no use for graphic memory, for a transparent
public record. Thus, “Papusza was put on trial” and with “little delibera-
tion, she was proclaimed mahrime (or magherdi among Polish Roma),
unclean: the punishment was irreversible exclusion from the group.”14
Committing Gypsy narratives to writing objecti¤es the memories they
dramatize by establishing a ¤xed interpretation of the past. Many Gypsies
would regard the civic archive as a house of dead letters. Hence, Papusza’s
crime was to reduce the distinctive repetition of Gypsy culture, a repeti-
tion of difference and mutation, into a repetition of the same, of an of¤cial
document.
Memory and Repetition / 193
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

The Gypsies are remarkable storytellers, despite a lack of empirical
evidence or coherent memory concerning their origins. Although they
purport to account for such origins, Gypsy folktales often raise more
questions about the past than they answer. Konrad Bercovici recorded a
rendition of perhaps the best known such tale by Macedonian Gypsies in
the 1920s.15 Legend has it that Roman soldiers went looking for black-
smiths to forge the nails that would be used in the cruci¤xion of Jesus
Christ. After two Jewish blacksmiths and a Syrian refused to make the nails
for this purpose, a Gypsy apparently agreed to do so. The soldiers com-
missioned four nails, but before the last nail cooled they rushed out of the
Gypsy’s tent (recall that Jesus was cruci¤ed with only three nails). No
matter how much water the Gypsy poured on the ¤ery nail, it continued
to glow; no matter where or with whom he left it, the nail followed him.
Thus, the legend concludes, “[T]hat nail always appears in the tents of the
descendents of the man who forged the nails for the cruci¤xion of Yeshua
ben Miriam. And when the nail appears, the Gypsies run. It is why they
move from one place to another.”16
Three features of this legend in particular deserve commentary because
they illustrate the distinctive characteristics of Gypsy folktales in general.
First, its apparent account of the Gypsies’ nomadic ways actually accounts
for very little; the Gypsy in the story is named as a Gypsy, so it begs the
question as to how his people came to be even as it purports to ex-
plain their creation. Second, the symbolism of the nail is certainly evoca-
tive; because it is not a Christian folktale, however, one wonders what
exactly it means. Why is this essentially biblical account of any importance
to the Gypsies? Third, the elliptical nature of this legend re®ects its sus-
ceptibility to adaptation. When Fonseca rehearsed the tale for modern-day
Macedonian and Bulgarian Gypsies, she learned that some characters had
changed over time to include Communist dictators from those regions.
Like all myths, the story lends itself to variations in which the general plot
stays the same while particular elements are revised; but unlike most other
myths, the story is characterized by a paucity of information concern-
ing the history and genealogy it is supposed to preserve. Indeed, the
Gypsy in the story, its presumed main character, is introduced almost as
an afterthought. As such, the tale invokes not the authenticity of the Gyp-
sies’ origins, but a simulacrum thereof.
194 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

This simulacrum, which distinguishes so many Gypsy narratives, belies
the fact that Gypsies lack a common sense of identity and thus of culture
and memory. To be sure, I am not claiming that Gypsy communities evince
no sense at all of a de¤ning identity, culture, or memory; recalling his
time among Hungarian Gypsies, Stewart writes, “For them, identity was
neither primordial nor essential, though it was no less deeply felt for
that.”17 My purpose, rather, is to highlight the fragmented and dispersed
mnemonic conditions—the lack of a transcendent origin, the distrust of
archival memory, the highly mutable and often elliptical nature of cultural
folktales—that prevent Gypsy identity, culture, or memory from achiev-
ing the stable or uniform sense and value that such phenomena acquire in
Western communities.
Romani, the language of the Gypsies, imperfectly re®ects the long and
complex chronology of such fragmentation and dispersion. Because the
Gypsies keep no records of events, Romani provides crucial clues about
the Gypsies’ wanderings throughout the landscape of history. Scholars
have identi¤ed a number of ancient Indian roots in Romani, along with
several Persian elements, a smattering of Turkish words, a peppering of
Armenian, and many Greek components dating back to the Byzantine Em-
pire.18 The sheer variety of Gypsy dialects sprouting from these diverse
linguistic seeds offers an index of the Gypsies’ dif¤culty in forging and
professing the transparent ethos of identity, culture, and memory so
esteemed in the Western tradition. According to Jean-Pierre Liegeois,
“There is no single word for ‘Gypsy’ in all Romany dialects. In some dia-
lects, the word ‘Rom’ is a noun meaning ‘Gypsy’, its plural being ‘Roma.’
But not all Gypsies call themselves Roma, and to complicate matters there
is a sub-group of Gypsies who do call themselves Rom (in the singular and
plural alike), but use the designation to set themselves off from other
Gypsy groups.”19 Simply put, the meaning of being Gypsy resists signi¤ca-
tion: as a group, Gypsies lack a proper name and therefore a proper
history—a uni¤ed memory. In light of such lacunae, some scholars even
contend that it makes no sense to refer to the Gypsies as a common cul-
tural group. Gypsy culture and memory thus lack that which is so essential
to the Western tradition: a transcendent logos. At best, the Gypsies can
only aspire to the semblance of such logos and the authenticity it confers
on their shared identity and collective memories.
Memory and Repetition / 195
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Consequently, the collective memories of Gypsies are often derived
not from an essential and unbroken heritage, but from the slander of out-
siders. Much of the familiar lore about Gypsies purports that they are liars
and swindlers by trade. Gypsy stereotypes “of wanton women, of carrion-
eaters, and even those among them who had a ‘relish for human ®esh’”20
can be found in European folklore from medieval times through the early
modern periods. The lingering memory of such tales accounts, in large
part, for the Gypsies’ continued persecution today. Gypsies, however, sel-
dom offer a competing narrative, a countermemory, in response to such
folklore. On the contrary, the oral culture of Gypsies and the slander of
outsiders throughout the centuries have come to appear like different
sides of the same tapestry: identifying where one ends and the other be-
gins would be impossible. Perhaps this common tapestry helps explain the
legend of the Gypsy blacksmith, a time-honored, though dubious, folktale
in which the forefather of one’s people participates in the death of another
culture’s central religious ¤gure.
Mimicry and adaptation have always been principles of Gypsy survival.
According to Fonseca, “When they ¤rst appeared in Europe in the four-
teenth century, the Gypsies presented themselves as pilgrims and told for-
tunes: two winning professions in a superstitious age. Their leaders called
themselves Counts and Princes and Captains. These were not expres-
sions of Gypsy values so much as further evidence of their (often under-
employed) talent for adopting local moods and hierarchies in order to
sustain their ever-precarious prestige.”21 Rather than demanding recogni-
tion for a unique and unbroken heritage, Gypsies often sustain their com-
munities by testifying to the authenticity of a counterfeit heritage. The
public pronouncement by Yugoslavian Gypsies, in the late 1980s, of an
ancient Egyptian ancestry exempli¤es the political utility of such mne-
monic forgery. Wim Willems explains that when the Serbs came to power
after the fall of the Soviet Union, the so-called Yugo-Egyptians reached
back to “reclaim an old, alternative identity.”22 This declaration of an al-
leged Egyptian heritage provided the Gypsies with an alternative fate to
either assimilation or expulsion; as “Yugo-Egyptians,” they were able to
contend that their ancient Egyptian heritage must be protected. That they
supposedly reclaimed this ancestry by appropriating Westerners’ habitual,
though erroneous, attribution of an Egyptian past to the Gypsies (a mis-
196 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

conception phonetically crystallized in the very term “Gypsy”) was likely
no accident. The opportunism of Gypsy collective memories dramatizes
James Young’s distinction between collective and collected memories: the
nature of Gypsy memories, that is, draws attention to the material accu-
mulation of memory in the face of changing social and political exigencies
rather than its ostensibly institutionalized and transhistorical manifesta-
tion.23
Insofar as they claim to be unburdened by the past, the Gypsies’ very
lack of a coherent and uni¤ed historical consciousness enables them to
adapt to the burdens of the present. Such adaptation, however, carries a
heavy price, namely, the indifference of many Gypsy communities to po-
litical organization, despite repeated persecution. To be sure, certain
Gypsy organizations have initiated nationalist and human rights move-
ments in recent decades. These organizations have even established ar-
chives and museums housing Gypsy art, history, and folklore, especially
in Eastern Europe. But without the consolidating power of a shared past,
without the sense of meaning and destiny signi¤ed by common memo-
ries, a transnational and politically viable Gypsy consciousness has yet to
emerge.
Indeed, Gypsy communities often lack a collective investment in the
evidentiary power of the past—a manifest politics of remembrance, in
other words. Traditionally, the Gypsies only exist as they do because they
forget. Apparently, not even the horrors of the Holocaust could induce a
lasting commemorative consciousness in Gypsy culture. The Gypsies were
the ¤rst population slated for extermination by the Nazis speci¤cally on
the basis of their race, and they suffered the loss of a higher percentage
of their people than any other such population.24 Fonseca reports that Pol-
ish Gypsy survivors of what they call the porraimos, or “the devouring,”
today expend minimal effort attempting to pass on collective memories
of the Nazis’ genocidal programs. “The Second World War and its traumas
are certainly within memory,” she writes, “but there is no tradition of
commemoration, or even discussion.”25 So dominating is the in®uence of
what Stewart calls “the timeless now” on the Gypsies’ commemorative
economy that many ¤nd no bene¤t in reliving their harrowing past.
Again, this is not to deny that certain Gypsy organizations have taken
measures to preserve evidence, and thus memory, of the Nazi atrocities
Memory and Repetition / 197
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

against Gypsies in select archives and museums. Despite the scattered
preservation of memory as such, the whole of Gypsy culture has, for one
reason or another, evinced little ability or aspiration to establish a uniform
memory of their wartime past. A simple contrast makes the point: unlike
the monumental relationship that Jewish Holocaust survivors have estab-
lished with that past, the massive symbolic weight of which has quite lit-
erally been concretized again and again in their many public memorials,
the Gypsies are collectively tethered to the same unspeakable events by
little more than a diaphanous gauze of remembrances.26 Rather than mod-
eling their communal ethic and social agenda on a continuity between past
and present, Gypsies traditionally have placed a premium on breaking
with the past as a means of escaping its trials.27 This Gypsy proclivity for
forgetting, however, should not be interpreted as a form of resignation.
Such forgetting nonetheless represents a certain politics of re-membering,
albeit a politics invested in something far more fragmented and transitory
than a democratic consensus sanctioned by a uniform moral interpretation
of the past. “Among Roma,” Fonseca writes, “forgetting does not imply
complacency: its tenor is one of—sometimes buoyant—de¤ance.”28
Perhaps this de¤ance in forgetting appears less complacent when com-
pared with the obstacles other Gypsies have faced while working for rec-
ognition of the porraimos in international Holocaust commemorations.
True to their legendary ®air for adaptation, the Gypsy “art of forgetting,”
as Fonseca puts it, suggests a political response to a democratic politics of
memory, which, in laboring to remember the past so as not to repeat it,
reproduces familiar forms of exclusion by endowing particular kinds of
memory with political priority. Consider: not one Gypsy was called to
testify in the Nuremburg Trials; since World War II ended only one Nazi
has been convicted for crimes of genocide against Gypsies; those Gypsies
who petitioned the United States Holocaust Memorial Council for in-
volvement and representation in its museum met with prolonged resis-
tance and dubious results; and violence against Gypsies has only increased
in the newly democratic regions of post-Communist Eastern Europe.
Surely all these facts and more serve as warrants for at least some Gypsies’
de¤ant forgetting, if this is what a democratic politics, presumably com-
mitted to the equitable representation of diverse commemorative inter-
ests, will make of memory.29 In short, perhaps the fact that the Gypsies’
198 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

victimization prior to, during, and after the Holocaust is so little remem-
bered by those democratic alliances pledged to the preservation of its fatal
lessons is proof enough that Western institutions habitually mistake a nec-
essarily partial and privileged account of the past for its transparent and
universal truth. Whereas Gypsy collective memories are sustained by the
repetition of difference, by an investment in the politics of forgetting and
the incorporation of new mnemonic elements, traditional Western forms
of public memory remain invested in a repetition of the same, in a tran-
scendent mnemonic logos whose pretensions to transparency and univer-
sality obscure its fundamental debt to partisan commemorative values and
politics.
Despite their reputation for wanderlust, the nomadic travels of Eastern
European Gypsies were dramatically and sometimes violently curtailed
during the twentieth century. In countries like Czechoslovakia, for in-
stance, the Gypsies were forced to settle and assimilate under the Com-
munist regime. Following these events, romantic tales of a bucolic Gypsy
life in which, as Konrad Bercovici muses, “[t]he Gypsy has locked himself
out of the gates of modern civilization and roams freely on the highways
and byways of the world” could not be more misleading.30 Stewart advises,
“Forget romantic notions of the careless freedoms of caravans and camp-
¤res; the Gypsies’ lives were hard and sometimes brutal.”31 The sudden
eruptions of ethnic hatred in post-Communist Eastern Europe form a
tragic contrast with such “romantic notions.”32
Yet in the landscape of memory the Gypsies remain essentially no-
madic. Rather than a repetition of the same, of static and transparent rec-
ollections, Gypsy memories are engendered by the continual repetition
of difference, “a timeless now” in which the Gypsy past is solicited and
revised according to the changing needs and desires of the present. The
eternal recurrence of this timeless now is even symbolized on the Gypsy
®ag in the ¤gure of a wheel—the emblem of a people whose only unifying
past is invoked by their travels away from it, and in every repetition of
their culture, of its apparent sameness, difference returns, eternally.
Forgetting to Remember
Regardless of the seemingly alien nature of their commemorative prac-
tices, one would be mistaken in regarding the Gypsies’ collective memo-
Memory and Repetition / 199
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ries as inconsequential to more conventional discussions of public memory.
To the contrary, Gypsy collective memories prompt one to question
whether even the most transparent or monolithic memories are engen-
dered by the very obfuscation of memory. In order to pursue this notion
with greater clarity, I turn now to an additional disciplinary perspective
on the relationship between memory and repetition that will enable fur-
ther reconsideration of the premises and values central to conventional
conceptions of public memory.
Although it concerns individual memories, psychologist John Kotre’s
research on autobiographical memory provides yet another instructive
demonstration of the metaphysics of time and memory that I have been
surveying throughout this essay, speci¤cally according to the trope of
repetition.33 One might even say that Kotre’s work on autobiographical
memory amounts to a dispersion of individual memory as such and an
af¤rmation of its inherently collective and nomadic character. By drawing
from some of the terminology featured in his research, I plan to more
explicitly de¤ne the principles of repetition inherent to the formation of
memory and its ensuing nomadic capacities.
Kotre posits that we often remember not on the basis of stable and
transparent recollections, but by virtue of a kind of amnesia. A “common-
place” phenomenon known as cryptomnesia refers to recollections in
which “you remember what someone told you but you forget that you
were told.”34 Our most intimate memories often function as the media-
tions of others’ recollections and are shaped by processes of forgetting:
“[A]n individual starts to remember what he heard in a hallway conversa-
tion or a group meeting, but he forgets where he heard it, and even that
he heard it. An old idea becomes his original creation.”35 Renowned psy-
chologist Jean Piaget once wrote that he grew up with a vivid memory of
narrowly escaping a kidnapping when he was two years old. During his
childhood and adolescence, he could recall his nurse heroically fending off
the would-be kidnapper. Piaget even recalled that his nurse’s face was
scratched during the attack. The nurse, however, wrote to Piaget’s parents
when he was ¤fteen and admitted that the story was fabricated.36 Citing
this anecdote, Kotre observes: “The clarity with which Piaget had seen the
event in his memory, and the personal conviction that he had about its
truth, was no proof that it ever happened.”37 Amazingly, even the visceral
200 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

clarity of memories relating to personal trauma, which would appear to
preserve the experience of an unmediated event, belies the fact that such
memories may well exist in a state of translation, of migration, from one
locus of memory to another. “Because of cryptomneisa,” Kotre concludes,
“it’s possible to believe that a picture actually planted in your memory by
a photograph, a ¤lm, or someone else’s words originated in a direct ex-
perience of your own. Nor can you tell if a memory has been cryptically
implanted by the way it looks or feels. Unreal memories look and feel like
real ones.”38 Perhaps this account even warrants consideration of whether
or not categories such as “real” and “unreal” prevent a deeper understand-
ing of memory’s nomadic character, of its formation and function as it is
adapted from one context to another.
According to Kotre, cryptomnesia is only one form of the mnemonic
“reconstruction” present in every act of recollection: “[M]emories don’t
sit inertly in our minds the way they do on an audiotape or the shelves of
a library,” he says. “They are constantly refashioned.”39 The irony here is
profound: the memories from which we derive our most fundamental
sense of self may simulate the memories of others, attain a signi¤cance
completely altered from their “original” import, and even refer to a dif-
ferent time and place than they once did. Indeed, the vividness and coher-
ence of such reconstructed memories are predicated upon scattered in-
stances of amnesia. Memory, rather than repeating an ideal and original
impression ad in¤nitum, rather than repeating the same or an “unrepeat-
able” event, is engendered and preserved by mutation—a repetition that
generates memory precisely through a series of mnemonic differences and
transformations. In Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury, Quentin Compson’s
efforts to forget the de¤ning episodes of his past merely stimulate his
memories anew, renewing their potency and lending them new sites of
investment. Gypsy collective memories indicate that forgetting encom-
passes an essential aspect of memory’s production rather than its repres-
sion or erosion. Together with Kotre’s insights, these examples demon-
strate that various gaps in memory and the processes of reconstruction
they engender are not exceptions to memory but one of its formative
principles.
Is it proper, then, to say that memories exist? “Where is the great
Cartesian Theater,” Kotre asks, “the place where the chemical messengers
Memory and Repetition / 201
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of memory become actors before our mind’s eye?”40 Memories “exist” in
a state of dispersion rather than unity or stability. Depending on the age
and signi¤cance of a memory, the activation of it will involve several areas
of the brain, a host of neuronal ¤rings, and any combination of senses.
Whenever we discuss our memories with others, record them in letters,
diaries, and other texts, or preserve them with images or sound, we have
activated the ¤ckle and nomadic character of memory, ensuring that it will
exist in more than one place and form. The memories of Benjy Compson,
the ¤rst narrator of The Sound and the Fury, consist of only a few traumatic
fragments, repeatedly invoked by the smell of trees, the voices of golfers
teeing up on the course across from his house, or the feel of his sister’s
worn and dirty slipper. Quentin’s recollections, like those of his brother
Benjy, do not lie dormant in some ¤xed cognitive nook but are stimulated
by the sound of his father’s watch, the smell of honeysuckle, or the sight
of his own shadow. Memories, like the Gypsies, lack a proper home—a
stable ground or origin. Instead of unity, they connote radical multiplicity.
Recall, for instance, how the different narrative perspectives of Faulkner’s
novel are suffused by the same cluster of incessantly repeated memories,
each narrator “traversing the same territory in circling movements,” to
use Brooks’s description. “The families, neighborhoods, and nations that
envelop us,” Kotre muses, “all have memories of their own that transcend
any one individual’s. So do the memories in the vast cultures we call
Art and Science and Religion. We grow up in the context of collective
memory, and over the course of life we breathe it in and breathe it out.”41
Thus, the memories of individuals, collectivities, or even entire cultures
evince an inherent capacity to subsist in multiple forms and appearances.
How does this multiplicity in®uence the formation of public memory?
Public memories, and the hegemonic ethos they often attain, are engen-
dered by and embodied in the individual recollections of those whose per-
sonal memory work contributes to the conglomeration of such commu-
nal, religious, or even national memories. According to Young, “A society’s
memory . . . might be regarded as an aggregate collection of its mem-
bers’ many, often competing memories. If societies remember, it is only
insofar as their institutions and rituals organize, shape, even inspire their
constituents’ memories. For a society’s memory cannot exist outside of
those people who do the remembering—even if such memory happens
202 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

to be at the society’s bidding, in its name.”42 In this regard, an of¤cial site of
public memory—a monument, an archive, or sacred ground—represents
not the static container of such memory, but the dynamic reference point
for the diverse memory work that sustains it, the commemorative nexus
formed at the intersection of a public’s many mnemonic practices.
Kotre’s research, in addition to the examples of memory I have traced
throughout this essay, warrants the conclusion that memories are not cho-
sen, possessed, or preserved by individuals or publics, at least not in the
conventional senses of those terms. However transparently and intimately
they may appear to open an unmediated window onto the past, such
memories con¤rm that, as in Gypsy communities, the fragmentation and
discontinuity of memory is not simply coincidental, but elemental, to its
formation. Nevertheless, individuals as well as publics derive their sense
of identity by attempting to remember with continuity, to symbolically or
discursively fashion a meaningful relation between the past and present,
precisely by virtue of this mnemonic discontinuity and alterity that forms
what Kotre calls “the immense ecosystem” of memory.43
From this vantage, Gypsy collective memories do not exhibit com-
memorative phenomena fundamentally different from conventional West-
ern forms of public commemoration. Kotre and other researchers compel
us to acknowledge that the very authenticity and continuity of memory,
Gypsy or otherwise, derive from the incorporation of disparate and frag-
mentary recollections that refer to no certain referent, only discontinuity.
Is it possible, then, that even the most traditional forms of public memory
serve as disguises of a collective cryptomnesia? Inspired by Robert Musil’s
conviction that “[t]here is nothing in this world as invisible as a monu-
ment,”44 Young observes that “once we assign monumental form to memory,
we have to some degree divested ourselves of the obligation to remem-
ber.”45 The abiding expression of Western public memory according to
such forms suggests how widely and of¤cially sanctioned this cryptomnesia
may be.
To what extent is the study of public memory, which is guided (not
exclusively but often enough) by the careful separation of fact from ¤c-
tion, of vernacular from of¤cial, of past from present, prepared to af¤rm
memory’s daunting complexity and account for the politics of forgetting
intrinsic to processes of remembering? Based on the accounts of memory
Memory and Repetition / 203
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

featured in this essay, I would like to suggest that evaluating public memo-
ries according to whether or not they accurately represent the past, or
even aspire to a transparent communication of its meanings or lessons,
indicates an investment in analytical principles contrary to the formation
and perdurance of memory itself. My dispute here is not with the preser-
vationist ethic that motivates a good deal of public memory scholarship;
instead, I would like to question the forms of mnemonic enforcement
sometimes established in the name of that ethic. Preserving the past by
insisting on an essential public memory, on correct and incorrect ways to
remember, or even on the representation of a seemingly progressive uni-
versal lesson, hinders the production of memory by reducing its inherent
susceptibility to the forms of reconstruction—the memory work—by
which public memories are adapted to changing needs and desires. Re-
ducing public memory to the repetition of a static, ideal image of the past
and domesticating it in a proper home, in other words, elides the fact that
even the most hegemonic public memories are engendered by the no-
madic and perpetually un¤nished memory work of various groups and
individuals. Gypsy collective memories most explicitly invoke this feature
of public memory in general: without a capacity for variation, such memo-
ries would not “exist.” Or, more speci¤cally, such memories depend for
their relevance and coherence on some principle of modi¤cation, perhaps
even distortion.
Hence, public memory studies must value the nomadic character of
public memory by cultivating its abundant relevance to diverse social in-
terests, not its allegedly essential and unchanging content or meaning.
One cultivates the capacity of public memories to accommodate such di-
verse interests by af¤rming that collective memory suffuses and continu-
ally transforms the temper of social life in the present, by recognizing its
aptitude for new sites of application and the establishment of new so-
cial relationships—“as a basis for political and social action,” in Young’s
terms.46 Regarding memory as a repetition of difference rather than a
repetition of the same, that is, enables one to value the productive capaci-
ties of forgetting and mutation elemental to even the most monumental
forms of public memory.
Does an af¤rmation of the amnesia and reconstruction inherent in pub-
lic memory legitimate any conceivable memory, no matter how contrary
204 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

to existing memories or the historical record? What ethical and political
entailments accompany such an af¤rmation? Should all public memories
be equally valued or be certi¤ed as equally authentic? Simply put, does
mnemonic reconstruction in the context of public memory amount to
irresponsible or even dangerous historical revisionism?
Of course, public memories must be evaluated according to ethical and
political criteria. Not any memory will do. I am not advocating a reduction
of memory to the category of ¤ction.47 I hope to have demonstrated that
memories are nomadic, not in the sense of being in¤nitely unbounded but
because they are maintained by a variety of material practices, by a his-
torically determined range of mnemonic conditions. These practices, the
ongoing memory work that manifests the social and political relevance or
utility of particular memories to a given community, are never invented
ex nihilo. They are elicited, rather, by mnemonic conditions that shape
what can be publicly remembered and how. Even countermemories, such
as those of the Gypsies who trace their heritage to the archetypes of other
cultures, derive their social and political signi¤cance from existing mne-
monic conditions, from established forms of public memory. The erection
and maintenance of public memory, therefore, often involves considerable
labor, borne of constraint rather than fancy. In this frame, the ethical and
political implications of collective or public memories must be measured
by the quality of the social relationships established or sustained through
their expression rather than the transcendent truth or undiminished au-
thenticity of memory itself. “Instead of stopping at formal questions, or
at issues of historical referentiality,” Young posits, “we must go on to ask
how memorial representations of history may ¤nally weave themselves
into the course of ongoing events.”48
The labor of memory as such, I argue, invokes the repetition of forget-
ting as much as the repetition of a static memory. Or, rather, every attempt
to preserve a static memory, in whatever form, occurs in relation to some
form of forgetting. To attest that a memory is engendered and maintained
according to an essential unity is to forget the inherent partiality and mu-
tability, the intrinsically nomadic character, of any recollection. Memories
are neither forgotten nor preserved: the labor of memory requires forget-
ting, and the act of forgetting makes possible new memories.
Af¤rming public memory as such requires an af¤rmation of public for-
Memory and Repetition / 205
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

getting. Assigning this value to forgetting admittedly runs counter to tra-
ditional Western conceptions of memory. Perhaps the familiar injunction
that we must not forget the past so as not to repeat it tells only half the
story. This injunction treats forgetting as the negative of remembering, as
an irretrievable subtraction from a complete and objective apprehension
of the past. Memory as such is ideal and original, perfect and unmediated;
it is God’s memory, not ours. No matter how divine, no matter how
constant and immaculate a public memory may appear, there is no such
memory without collective memory work, without the material practices
that engender the transparent ethos of such memories and sustain their
social value and utility. The two forms of mnemonic repetition surveyed
in this essay—repetition of a static, uniform memory and repetition of
the differences or transformations essential to the evolution of memory
itself—are not antithetical. Even those public memories that announce
themselves with an apparently homogeneous voice are merely the aggre-
gation of multiple and mercurial recollections.
There is more at stake here than a simple opposition between static or
uniform memories and those subject to mutation or fragmentation. Public
memories, with their pretensions of permanence and uniformity, are en-
gendered by something distinctly un-public: the disparate memory work
of collectivities and even individuals. This is not to say that public memo-
ries never attain an ethos of objectivity, uniformity, or permanence; in-
deed, many do. Instead, I would like to emphasize that such memories
derive their monumental ethos from the codi¤cation of multiple com-
memorative practices, from the manifold memory work that sustains it.
In principle, if not in appearance, public memories attain their sense of
objectivity, uniformity, or permanence by virtue of partiality, fragmenta-
tion, and forgetting. The question here concerns not a choice between
wholly uni¤ed and essentially fragmented memories, but an af¤rmation
that public memory is established, even preserved, by virtue of acts of
forgetting and that acts of forgetting simultaneously make possible the
establishment and preservation of collective and public memories.
To say that even the most monumental memories ultimately lack an
essential home or transparent origin is one way of underscoring the
fundamental dif¤culty of de¤ning memory according to ¤xed categories:
as categorically public, collective, or private. Far from amounting to a
206 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tangential issue, the imbrication of collective and individual memory
within public commemoration holds considerable explanatory force for
the study of public memory in general. Such study, however, would be
concerned not solely with the authenticity of public memory, but with the
discursive practices, the diverse memory work, through which public
memories attain their rhetoric of authenticity as well as their hegemonic
ethos. “Public,” “collective,” and “private” refer less to essential mnemonic
categories and more to the different senses by which memory is distin-
guished throughout its nomadic life span.
Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury, like Gypsy collective memories, sug-
gests that memories are most at home when they travel. Benjy, the handi-
capped Compson sibling and the novel’s ¤rst narrator, has erected what
might be called a monument, which the novel’s other characters refer to
as his graveyard. The humble memorial consists of two blue glass bottles
containing withered jimsonweed, located in the yard of the Compson
house. Curiously, this public memorial symbolizes an impenetrably pri-
vate meaning: the graveyard undoubtedly anchors Benjy’s loosely con-
nected memories of his estranged sister, Caddy, but none of the other
members of the household comprehend its exact meaning. Despite the
vagueness of their public symbolism, Benjy treats the least disturbance of
these markers as a traumatic personal violation.
Vickery observes that this intense effort to preserve the past ideally and
originally shapes Benjy’s general awareness of the relationship between
memory and the present, resulting in “an in®exible pattern which he
defends against novelty or change with every bellow in his overgrown
body.”49 By treating novelty and change as the antitheses of memory, by
insisting on the repeated invocation of an original and unmediated memory,
one risks the onset of mnemonic atrophy. “It is not that the bottle has any
intrinsic value for Benjy,” Vickery continues, “but merely that it forms part
of the pattern which must not be disturbed.”50 Like the jimsonweed in
Benjy’s memorial, the memory itself has withered. Benjy’s personal mne-
monic dogma has reduced the ductility of such memory to a calci¤ed husk.
This unyielding effort to preserve an authentic memory inevitably results
in an unwanted act of forgetting, for it sacri¤ces the robust and sugges-
tive meaning of the memorial to preserve its rigid commemorative form,
its pallid and in®exible mnemonic pattern. When this sacrosanct pattern
Memory and Repetition / 207
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

is disturbed, when novelty and change de¤le Benjy’s ideal and original
memory, as they always will, he is “momentarily shocked into silence . . .
overwhelmed with horror and agony.”51 The fossilization of memory re-
sults in an incapacitation, or even dissolution, of the one who remembers.
Memory withers and the self is paralyzed when memory’s nomadic char-
acter, its susceptibility to novelty and change, is denied.
Benjy’s trauma over the least disturbance of his memorial suggests the
importance of distinguishing between what publics remember and how
they remember it. Dictating how collectivities should remember, uni-
formly and authentically, amounts to the erection of a public memory
whose authority does violence to more than an isolated interpretation of
the past. Such commemorative dogma restricts the ability of certain
groups and individuals to sustain their communities by virtue of the col-
lective memory work that de¤nes them and according to which they vie
for public valuation of their professed heritage. By emphasizing only what
is remembered, what is preserved, one risks neglecting the momentous
ethical and political implications of how such remembrance and preserva-
tion occurs or does not occur. By failing to af¤rm the reciprocity of public
remembering and public forgetting, one is condemned to a static com-
memorative pattern, a petri¤ed memory. A collective allegiance to the
bare authenticity of public memory does not lead to deeper communal
bonds but to a public potentially incapacitated by the burden of an authori-
tative or even doctrinal interpretation of the past, unprepared for the vi-
cissitudes of the future. Learning to value the nomadic character of public
memory, or to conceive of public memory as the crucible of collective
remembering and forgetting, presupposes, ¤nally, that we learn to regard
the past not as a constraint, but as a condition of ethical and political pos-
sibility for the present and future.
Notes
1. Jean-Paul Sartre, “On The Sound and the Fury: Time in the Work of Faulk-
ner,” in Literary and Philosophical Essays, trans. Annette Michelson (London: Rider,
1955), 79.
2. Olga W. Vickery, The Novels of William Faulkner: A Critical Interpretation (Ba-
ton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1964), 29.
208 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

3. Cleanth Brooks, William Faulkner: The Yoknapatawpha Country (New Ha-
ven: Yale University Press, 1963), 326.
4. Isabel Fonseca, Bury Me Standing (New York: Knopf, 1995), 178.
5. See David Crowe and John Koltsi, eds., The Gypsies of Eastern Europe (Ar-
monk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1991).
6. See Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 83–112; Angus Fraser, The Gypsies (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1992), 10–22; and Jean-Pierre Liegeois, Gypsies, trans. Tony Berrett
(London: Al Saqi, 1986), 34–38.
7. Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1994), 1.
8. Fraser, The Gypsies, 1.
9. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 243.
10. Michael Stewart, The Time of the Gypsies (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1997), 246.
11. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 3.
12. Ibid., 7–9.
13. Ibid., 11.
14. Ibid., 9. For a collection of Gypsy folktales that have nevertheless found
their way into print, see Diane Tong, Gypsy Folktales (San Diego: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1989).
15. Konrad Bercovici, The Story of the Gypsies (New York: Cosmopolitan,
1928), 41–46.
16. Ibid., 46.
17. Stewart, The Time of the Gypsies, 58.
18. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 93–96. See also Fraser, The Gypsies, 10–22;
Liegeois, Gypsies, 17–47.
19. Liegeois, Gypsies, 16.
20. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 88. See also Liegeois, Gypsies, 87–141; Ian
Hancock, The Pariah Syndrome (Ann Arbor: Karoma, 1987).
21. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 14.
22. Wim Willems, In Search of the True Gypsy, trans. Don Bloch (London:
Frank Cass, 1997), 3.
23. Young writes, “[O]ne of my aims is to break down the notion of any
memorial’s ‘collective memory’ altogether. Instead, I prefer to examine ‘col-
lected memory,’ the many discrete memories that are gathered into common
Memory and Repetition / 209
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

memorial spaces and assigned common meaning.” See James E. Young, The Texture
of Memory: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1993), xi.
24. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 243; Fraser, The Gypsies, 269; Hancock, The
Pariah Syndrome, 61–87. Huttenbach provides the following statistical summary
concerning the extent of Gypsy losses during World War II:
Given present research data, the total number of Gypsies killed by the Nazi
genocidal policy can only be estimated, ranging from a conservative low
of 250,000 to a possible high of 500,000, out of an estimated population of
885,000 European Gypsies in 1939. One source claims that 75 percent of
Europe’s Gypsies were killed by the Nazis, while others, using much
higher prewar European Gypsy population estimates, have claimed that
1 million to 4 million died in the Porajmos. Simon Wiesenthal, among oth-
ers, has stated that up to 80 percent of all Gypsies in Nazi-occupied Europe
were exterminated; some scholars feel 70 percent is more accurate. (45)
See Henry R. Huttenbach, “The Romani Porajmos: The Nazi Genocide of Gyp-
sies in Germany and Eastern Europe,” in The Gypsies of Eastern Europe, ed. David
Crowe and John Kolsti (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1991), 31–49.
25. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 243.
26. Ibid., 275.
27. Liegeois, Gypsies, 54–55.
28. Fonseca, Bury Me Standing, 275.
29. See ibid.; Hancock, The Pariah Syndrome, 61–87; Ian Hancock, “Gypsy
History in Germany and Neighboring Lands: A Chronology Leading to the Holo-
caust and Beyond,” in The Gypsies of Eastern Europe, ed. David Crowe and John
Kolsti (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1991), 11–30; Tong, Gypsy Folktales, 5.
30. Bercovici, The Story of the Gypsies, 3.
31. Stewart, The Time of the Gypsies, 1.
32. David M. Crowe, A History of the Gypsies of Eastern Europe and Russia (New
York: St. Martin’s, 1994), xi–xvi; Liegeois, Gypsies, 44, 56.
33. I have adapted the following treatment of Kotre’s work from my previous
article, “‘Always a Third Party Who Says Me’: Rhetoric and Alterity,” Philosophy
and Rhetoric 34, no. 4 (2001): 343–54.
34. In its Greek root, cryptomnesia means “hidden memory.” John Kotre,
210 / Bradford Vivian
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

White Gloves: How We Create Ourselves through Memory (New York: Free Press,
1995), 36.
35. Kotre, White Gloves, 36–37.
36. Jean Piaget, Play, Dreams and Imagination in Childhood, trans. C. Gattegno
and F. M. Hodgson (New York: W. W. Norton, 1962).
37. Kotre, White Gloves, 36.
38. Ibid., 37.
39. Ibid.
40. Kotre, White Gloves, 25.
41. Ibid., 221. Whether intentionally or not, Kotre’s comments recall
Maurice Halbwachs’s seminal work on the relationship between individual and
collective memory. See On Collective Memory, trans. Lewis A. Coser (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1992).
42. Young, The Texture of Memory, xi.
43. Kotre, White Gloves, 217.
44. Robert Musil, Posthumous Papers of a Living Author, trans. Peter Wortsman
(Hygiene, CO: Eridanos Press, 1987), 61.
45. Young, The Texture of Memory, 13.
46. Ibid.
47. This is not to deny that some scholars have regarded ¤ction as an apt
genre for the narration of memory.
48. Young, The Texture of Memory, 12.
49. Vickery, The Novels of William Faulkner, 35.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
Memory and Repetition / 211
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

9
Renovating the
National Imaginary
A Prolegomenon on Contemporary
Paregoric Rhetoric
Barbara Biesecker
Particularly when we come upon such aspects of persuasion as are
found in “mysti¤cation,” courtship, and the “magic” of class relation-
ships, the reader will see why the classical notion of clear persuasive
intent is not an accurate ¤t, [sic] for describing the ways in which
members of a group promote social cohesion by acting rhetorically
upon themselves and one another. As W. C. Blum has stated the case
deftly, “In identi¤cation lies the source of dedications and enslavements,
in fact of cooperation.”
Kenneth Burke, A Rhetoric of Motives
Paregoric: n. an opium derivative used as a mild sedative and to treat
diarrhea. [1675–85; <LL paregoricus <Gk paregorikós soothing =
paregor(os) pertaining to consolatory speech (par-par + -egoros,
adj. Der. of agorá public speaking, assembly, agora) + ikos—ic]
This essay is about the body, the construction of a corpus, and contempo-
rary U.S. nation building. Speci¤cally, it is an inquiry into the way in which
the body is being conscripted and a certain event rescripted so as to newly
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

anchor national life. This is, then, an essay about the politics of the body’s
and history’s (re)inscription in the current conjuncture, of how they are
presently being deployed to inspire a new esprit de corps, a new common
sense or national sensibility. Another way of putting it is that this is an essay
that critically dissects the recent emergence of a paregoric rhetoric, a ver-
bal and visual “opium for the masses” whose dialectically paired and or-
ganizing tropes are the pained body of World War II and the contemporary
crippled nation, and whose anodynic power is largely an effect of its si-
multaneous production and exploitation of a growing public intolerance
for wounded attachments and so-called victim politics. This is, then, an
analysis that tracks how that pained body is being made to trump the his-
torically and socially disenfranchised subject in the national imaginary so
as to discern the political work it is doing in/for the patriotic public sphere
as we enter what Ronald Takaki has called “the multicultural millennium.”1
The analysis begins by taking critical notice of one of the most re-
cent and successful attempts to enter the national “given-to-be-seen”: the
World War II Memorial.2 First proposed at a time when, according to
numerous accounts in the popular press, the National Mall’s “satisfying
geometry” (that has long served as “an analogue of our society”) and “or-
derly vistas” (which “open receptive minds to the symmetry, balance, pro-
portion and temperateness of our political institutions and the civil society
that sustains our common purposes”) were being threatened by “irritable
factions” vying for national visibility and recognition,3 the memorial’s
swift approval for construction in the very heart of the nation’s capital is
symptomatic of a recon¤guration of the grounds for identi¤cation with or
belonging to the nation that is now in process. Taking formal leave of the
memorial but following the lines drawn by its salient images and motifs,
the essay then turns its attention to two of the most widely disseminated
and wildly popular of all contemporary paregoric rhetorics—Steven Spiel-
berg’s Saving Private Ryan and Tom Brokaw’s The Greatest Generation—and
then closes with a studied tour of the less familiar Women in Military
Service for America Memorial. By looking closely at these “memory
texts”4 as well as the discourses that circulated about them in the popular
press and mass media, I hope to draw out a kind of cultural map of the
current conjuncture and identify some of its deeply troubling implications
for the politics of contemporary national life.
Renovating the National Imaginary / 213
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

A functional change in a sign-system is a violent event. Even when it is
perceived as “gradual,” or “failed,” or yet “reversing itself,” that change
itself can only be operated by the force of a crisis.
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, In Other Worlds
Oh, get over it, already—and go out and do the right thing.
Dr. Laura
A profound—indeed violent—event is taking place on the National Mall
and in the national symbolic: the construction of the World War II Memo-
rial on the sacred ground between the Washington Monument and the
Lincoln Memorial. First proposed in December 1987, signed into law by
President Clinton on May 25, 1993, and promoted by former senator,
disabled veteran, and current Viagra spokesperson Bob Dole as well as the
exorbitantly popular cultural icon Tom Hanks (who is not a World War II
vet but played one on the big screen), the projected $100 million memo-
rial will be dedicated on Saturday, May 29, 2004. As described on its fund-
raising campaign’s home page, the memorial’s winning neoclassical de-
sign, whose latest revision passed the notoriously tough hurdle of approval
by the Fine Arts Commission without objection, promises a structure that
will at once bestow just tribute to the sixteen million World War II veter-
ans, pay appropriate homage to all Americans who supported the war ef-
fort on the home front, and grant due respect to “its magni¤cent site on
the National Mall.”5
Although ¤rst proposed at a time when more than eighty new monu-
ments were warring for position in the nation’s capital, approval of the
World War II Memorial progressed with relative ease. In this case, unlike
so many others, there simply was no debate over whether or not “there
are any other existing memorials that pay tribute to like or similar sub-
jects” and no doubt about its “preeminent historical and lasting signi¤-
cance to the nation.”6 Indeed, the only serious reservation aired was that
its monumental signi¤cance to the nation would seem to necessitate the
raising of an edi¤ce whose proper magnitude promised to overwhelm the
democratically sublime symmetry of the mall.7 As John Graves, speaking
on behalf of a minority of World War II veterans opposing the initiative,
put it on the day the memorial won resounding approval from the com-
214 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

mission, “[W]e want a memorial but not on that particular spot.”8 Given
that six other sites had been considered for placement of the memorial
(the Capitol Re®ecting Pool area, the Tidal Basin, West Potomac Park, the
Washington Monument grounds, Freedom Plaza, and Henderson Hall),
it is no minor detail that nearly ¤ve years previous to ¤nal design selection,
the Commission of Fine Arts, the National Capital Planning Commission,
and the National Park Service swiftly and unanimously settled on the east
end of Constitution Gardens, between Constitution Avenue and the Rain-
bow Pool, calming opposition by stipulating only that the design “not in-
terrupt the vista between the Capitol, the Washington Monument and the
Lincoln Memorial.”9
Why was priority granted to pride of place? The strong answer came
from President Bill Clinton on Veteran’s Day 1995 in an oration that of¤-
cially brought to a close the ¤ftieth commemoration of World War II:
[L]et me urge all of us to summon the spirit that joined that genera-
tion, that stood together and cared for one another. The ideas they
fought for are now ours to sustain. The dreams they defended are
now ours to guarantee. In war they crossed racial and religious, sec-
tional and social divisions to become one force for freedom.
Now, in a world where lives are literally being torn apart all over
the globe by those very divisions, let us again lead by the power of
example. Let us remember their example. Let us live our motto, E
pluribus Unum—from many, one. Let us grow strong together, not
be divided and weakened. Let us ¤nd that common ground for
which so many have fought and died.”10
Like that of the memorial’s fund-raising campaign, the central theme of
Clinton’s panegyric to World War II is the urgent need for national re-
uni¤cation today.11 As he put it again later that afternoon during the site
dedication ceremony, the memorial “will be a permanent reminder of just
how much we Americans can do when we work together instead of ¤ght-
ing among ourselves.”12
Like Clinton’s, numerous other public statements argued that the pro-
jected memorial’s capacity to resuscitate a waning sense of the “People”
warranted its construction in the very heart of the mall:13 “There is no
Renovating the National Imaginary / 215
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

other spot. The memorial should be right there, in the center of things,
because World War II is central to our history, central to our view of our
role in the world, central to our values. A World War II memorial at the
foot of the Rainbow Pool would do to our nation’s capital just what World
War II did to our country. It changed the landscape. It changed the way
we look at things. Build it. They will come around.”14 Or, “An event as
momentous in American and world history as World War II deserved this
prominent site. . . . When it is ¤nally completed, all Americans will be
proud of a World War II Memorial that epitomizes what can happen in our
country when its citizens mobilize and become united in a just and com-
mon cause.”15 In the end, then, a prime piece of property is parceled out
for posterity, for the repair of a nation crippled by “division and resent-
ment”: a small price to pay for the recognition of what the president, on
yet another occasion addressing the matter of “responsible citizenship,”
referred to as the “common ground” requisite to the forging of a “New
[American] Covenant.”16
Given the memorial’s singular location on the mall and the authorizing
logic invoked on its behalf, there is obviously a good deal more at stake in
this will to display than establishing an eternal repository of the heroic
accomplishments of a generation past. Indeed, over the course of this essay
I will suggest that the historic decision to place the World War II Memorial
at the very center of the Capitol—thereby ®anked on one side by the
memorial to the veterans of the traumatic Vietnam War and on the other
by the memorial to the “forgotten” or Korean War17—signals the emer-
gence of World War II as a new national nodal point that promises to secure
the national future against the vicissitudes of the multicultural present.
Traversing and operating on very different forms and domains of discourse
and practice across the national landscape, a certain version or vision of
World War II is (re)materializing as the central coordinate of national life,
reshaping social relations primarily by way of a recon¤guration of the cate-
gory of U.S. citizenship. In other words, the privileged positioning of the
World War II Memorial on the National Mall is symptomatic of an ongoing
effort to rearticulate the relation of the citizen to the nation, thereby
newly determining what differently positioned—by class, race, gender,
and ethnicity—citizen-subjects can and cannot claim as well as expect
from the state.18 That it will continue to operate in such fashion for the
216 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

foreseeable future will certainly be one of the effects of—if it is not the
intent behind—restrictions drafted in September 1999 by the National
Capital Planning Commission, the National Capital Memorial Commis-
sion, and the Commission of Fine Arts that would “ban the building of any
other memorials in a cross shaped area reaching from the Capitol to the
Lincoln Memorial and from the White House to the Jefferson Memo-
rial.”19 Hence, to alter only slightly a phrase taken from the memorial’s
promotional materials, World War II will have been “the de¤ning event of
the [early twenty-¤rst] century in American history.”
It seems possible to me to make ¤ction work within truth, to induce
truth effects within a ¤ctional discourse, and in some way make the
discourse of truth arouse, “fabricate” something which does not as yet
exist, thus “¤ction” something. One “¤ctions” history starting from a
political reality that renders it true, one “¤ctions” a politics that doesn’t
as yet exist starting from an historical truth.
Michel Foucault, “Interview”
I really wanted to tell the stories of these men. . . . I wanted before the
end of the century to tell their experience, as opposed to adding one
more movie to a long train of World War II ¤lms that were ¤lled with
excitement and adventure and sacri¤ce and nobility. Do you sugarcoat it
by telling people that dying is easy, and dying is noble? How many mov-
ies have said that to us ad nauseam? I would rather show how these boys
really died. I really feel that I made this movie as a memorial.
Steven Spielberg, quoted in “Theatre of War”
At the turn of the century, it was beginning to look like the great melting
pot was melting down; we were in desperate need of a way to feel national
again, and, as always, the mainstream media lent a helping hand. Like
clockwork, each evening our national news anchormen would tell us
two stories, one on the front end and one on the back: ¤rst, a report of
yet another instance of acute sexual, racial, ethnic, and religious tension
and con®ict on our streets or in our schools, at the workplace or in our
homespace; last, a so-called human interest story about one or another
benevolent corporation, not-for-pro¤t group, neighborhood association,
Renovating the National Imaginary / 217
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

or charitable individual taking up the Good Samaritan challenge to feed
the hungry, house the homeless, adopt the abandoned, or retrain the “old
economy” workers whose skills had been swiftly out®anked by a high-tech
revolution.20 Out of these narratives, which also became headlines in our
newspapers, received prime-time play on our radios, and mutated into
“special issues” in our popular periodicals, emerged images of citizenship
and incivility as well as a moving moral frame by which we might collec-
tively make sense of them. Indeed, by way of the media whose silences
spoke volumes, we were rhetorically induced to believe that the nation
was being brought to its proverbial knees by all those “mutually suspi-
cious and antagonistic subgroups” whose over-investment in their own
wounded attachments was causing us to lose touch with “our common
ground” and lose sight of our most precious national resource—“old val-
ues.”21 Never mind that despite unprecedented national prosperity, a stub-
born standard-of-living gap between rich and poor was growing ever
wider, the nation’s social safety net was continuing to unravel (funds for
dramatically downsized federal entitlement programs were increasingly
being channeled into private, voluntary, and “faith-based” organizations),
that anti–af¤rmative action initiatives were fast becoming common sense
and common law, and that fetal rights were slowly but surely upending
women’s rights. The country, we were encouraged to believe, could be
brought back to its feet by little more than a healthy dose of old-fashioned
American moral ¤ber.
With the release of Saving Private Ryan in the summer of 1998, the
commonweal got a fabulously timely booster shot of homegrown good-
ness right between the eyes. Set against the backdrop of World War II and
the epic invasion of Normandy and delivered from the point of view of
the so-called grunts in the trenches, this celluloid fanfare for the common
man tells the guardedly triumphant tale of the rescue of “one James Fran-
cis Ryan” who, dropped deep behind enemy lines, is discovered to be the
last surviving son of a mother of four whose three older boys had recently
been felled by enemy ¤re. Having only narrowly escaped the slaughter on
the sands of Omaha Beach, Captain John Miller (played by Tom Hanks)
receives new orders from no less a ¤gure than George C. Marshall, the
Army’s Chief of Staff: Miller is to patch together a small Ranger unit and
bring Ryan home to his mother, alive. For the remaining two and a half
218 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

hours of the ¤lm we watch a “public relations” mission for the home front
morph into an eight-man moral pilgrimage that leads the “multicultural”
squad—Sergeant Horvath (Miller’s right-hand man and con¤dant), Cor-
poral Upham (the bookish, feminized translator), Wade (the merciful
medic), Private Reiben (the Brooklyn bad boy), Private Jackson (the
Scripture-citing sharpshooter), Private Caparzo (the Italian), and Private
Mellish (the Jew)—into greater and greater peril. With them we set out
on the journey asking, “Can [anyone] explain the math in this to me?
Where’s the sense to risk the eight of [them] to save one guy?” And at the
end, like the young Ryan, we are left standing on an Allied-held bridge in
the ¤ctitious town of Romelle, with Miller’s last, barely whispered, com-
mand echoing in our ears, “Earn this.” Therein lie the simple contours of
a story about doing the decent, patriotic thing even when “the whole
world has taken a turn for the surreal,” even when, on their face, the
numbers just don’t add up.
Of course the numbers do add up in Saving Private Ryan at an astonishing
rate. Much of the unbridled enthusiasm for the movie is explicitly attrib-
uted to what is typically, albeit mistakenly, referred to by reviewers as its
“opening scene,” Spielberg’s recreation of the U.S. invasion of Normandy.
Again and again those twenty-¤ve unrelenting minutes of meticulously
chronicled mass slaughter on Omaha Beach are credited with having set
new standards for realistic ¤lmmaking. In Newsweek, for example, Jon
Meacham heralds Saving Private Ryan for being the ¤rst war ¤lm to repre-
sent “battle as it really was, in all its bloodshed and brutality, terror and
tedium”22; Jay Carr of the Boston Globe calls it “the war movie to end all
war movies”23; writing for the New York Times, Martin Arnold imputes the
¤lm with “introducing a whole new generation to the spilled-guts school
of war storytelling.”24 What Norman Mailer’s Naked and the Dead did for
literature, he argues, Stephen Spielberg’s Saving Private Ryan does for ¤lm:
it exposes audiences to “the same brutal, sudden, absurd death—but in
this case concentrated carnage—that is, the chaos and reality of com-
bat.”25 However tempting it may be to see the ¤lm as, in James Wolcott’s
words, “an overture of pure cinema” that wholly rejects the “ideals of both
patriotism and patriarchy”26 characteristic of nearly all previous Holly-
wood renditions of World War II, I want to argue that Saving Private Ryan
functions rhetorically less as a medium for the demysti¤cation of the so-
Renovating the National Imaginary / 219
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

called Good War than it works as a vehicle for the production of a new
national sensibility that is predicated on the retooling of the category of
citizenship.
The ¤rst thing that deserves critical attention is the particular manner
in which the ¤lm deploys the male body in pain. Almost from the start,
Spielberg gives moviegoers what he calls an “unblinking look” at the chaos
and carnage that is real war. As the Higgins landing craft, crowded with
American soldiers, approaches Omaha Beach, the ocean breaking over its
sides, orders are issued and raw fear takes its most humble, human form:
one GI’s hand trembles as it reaches for a canteen and another’s vacant
eyes look toward the beach; two soldiers vomit and others are barely able
to draw in what is certain to be their last breath. Within thirty seconds the
ramp is released. Most of the GIs are cut down by merciless rapid German
gun¤re before they even step off the craft. Those who manage to clamber
over the side of the vessel are plunged into a sea of streaming bullets. Some
drown from the weight of their gear; others are struck down by what
appears to be wandering gunshot. Blood billows. As scores of boys and
men scramble to get out of the bloody surf, onto the beach, and over to
the seawall, bodies are blown in half, legs and arms are torn off, faces are
ripped away. Others die more slowly, clutching their wounds, crying out
for their mothers, receiving their last rites as they look with horror upon
their own entrails poured out on the sand.
What sets Spielberg’s rendition of the human carnage that is war apart
from all the others is not merely, as reviewers have noted, the rate at which
it confronts us with those pained male bodies. Nor is it simply a matter
that for the ¤rst time “we [get to] see, thanks to advances in technology,
precisely what happens to the soft-shelled human body when it encounters
explosives, projectiles, fuel, ®ame, and sword.”27 The real “sneak punch”
of Spielberg’s ¤lm, as Wolcott correctly points out, “is that it bypasses the
usual introductions to its characters” and goes straight into war.28 What
difference does it make that our contact with a battle¤eld soon to be lit-
tered with the pained bodies of war precedes our knowing anything about
its many victims and few survivors other than that they are all American?
Without a doubt there is more than a touch of artistry in Spielberg’s in-
version: there is rhetoric. In exposing us to countless trembling bodies,
220 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

perspiring bodies, gagging bodies, punctured bodies, drowning bodies,
bleeding bodies, bodies with missing arms, legs, eyes, and faces before
informing us of their individual histories, Spielberg’s Omaha Beach scene
effectively promotes our patriotic identi¤cation with all of them while
blocking our subjective identi¤cation with any one of them. In literally
bombarding the audience with these not quite empty signi¤ers, we be-
come witnesses to a mass execution in which the pained male body of war
begins to function as a ground for the production of knowledge and judg-
ment. In all its positivity, our collective, albeit mass-mediated experience
of mass American slaughter functions as a great leveler of sorts; bearing
witness to material, corporal, sensual pain stands in for the pre-ideological,
apolitical, universal, and, thus, universalizing experience out of which
truth (“what really counts”) and prudential wisdom (“what should be
done”) may emerge.
That bearing witness to the sheer factualness of the American GI in
pain—its “realness,” “density,” and “certainty”—may be the foundation
for a new rationality from which can be derived a vision of “the life worth
living” is, of course, the story Saving Private Ryan ¤nally tells. Having made
the trek back to Normandy and standing over Captain John Miller’s grave,
the aged Ryan with generations in tow closes the ¤lm with the following
words: “Tell me I have lived a good life. . . . Tell me I’m a good man.” If
Ryan is positioned in the ¤lm as someone scripted to gauge the value of
his life in relation to those soldiers who, despite differences in age, race,
education, class, religion, and ethnicity, collectively sacri¤ced their own
to save it, we are positioned by the ¤lm to do so as well. Having come “as
close to combat as most of us will ever get,”29 those dead American men,
to turn only slightly the well-known phrase from Protagoras, become for
us the measure of all things. It is in this way that the moral message of the
¤lm bleeds well beyond its diegetic frame and is infused with modern
rhetorical force: the pained male body of World War II is made to displace
the traumatized psyche as origin, end, and arbitrator of individual and
collective national life. As Matt Damon, who played young Ryan in the
¤lm, put it for the Buffalo News, “You can see us on Sally Jessy Raphael
talking about how tough our lives are because we weren’t breast-fed long
enough. Try taking a beach.”30
Renovating the National Imaginary / 221
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

The second thing to notice about Saving Private Ryan is its heavy reliance
on verbal and visual paramnesias, images that, as Lauren Berlant has put
it, “organize consciousness, not by way of explicit propaganda, but by re-
placing and simplifying memories people actually have with image traces
of political experience about which people can have political feelings that
link them to other citizens and to patriotism.”31 Without a doubt, the
pained body of war is one such image; “home” is another. I think it is no
accident that the two-and-a-half-hour-long rescue of Ryan is punctuated
by real as well as remembered scenes of home. Indeed, when the men in
Miller’s Ranger unit are not ¤ghting desperately to survive the battles so
as to eventually get home, they incessantly talk about it. With them we
visit, visually or imaginatively, sanitized and sentimentalized images of
“home,” from the country kitchen and pristine porch of the Ryan family
farm in Iowa, to a dressing room in a small women’s shop on a small street
in Brooklyn, to a young boy’s bedroom visited by a mother who has just
returned from the second shift, and to the hammock and rosebushes in
Miller’s backyard. Decisively juxtaposed against the gritty and grainy
chaos of war on foreign territory, “home” is transformed over the course
of the movie into a fantastical space that is utterly bereft of the complexi-
ties, ambivalences, and incoherence of daily U.S. life both in those war-
torn years and today. Such an idealized vision/version of “home” is repre-
sented in this ¤lm as the nation’s humble, homely, utopian aspiration, its
version of “the good life.”32
Having attended critically to these two typically underacknowledged
elements of the ¤lm, it becomes possible to more fully appreciate the
rhetorical import of another: the frame narrative. Contrary to what re-
views in the popular press would lead us to believe, Saving Private Ryan
neither opens on the surf of Normandy Beach nor closes on a bombed-out
bridge in the ¤ctitious French town of Romelle; instead it begins and ends
with a multigenerational journey to the gravesite of Captain John Miller
in a U.S. cemetery in France at which the gray-haired and teary-eyed Ryan
delivers his long-awaited soliloquy: “My family is with me today. They
wanted to come with me. To be honest with you, I wasn’t sure how I would
feel coming back here. Every day I think about what you said to me that
day on the bridge. I have tried to live my life the best I could. I hope that
222 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

was enough. I hope at least in your eyes I have earned what all of you have
done for me.” It is hardly a surprise that nearly all critics fail to mention
this scenario that frames the story of Ryan’s rescue: the deliberate not
noticing of this highly sentimental, even saccharine scene is requisite to
saving Saving Private Ryan as progenitor to a new generation of American
realist cinema. However, something else is at stake as well. In refusing to
attend to the truncated narrative that frames the tale of the rescue of
young Ryan, critics disavow what may be one of the ¤lm’s most disturbing
consequences for contemporary U.S. collective life: its domestication of
civic responsibility.33
It almost goes without saying that the drama of the core narrative
hinges to a signi¤cant degree on the almost in¤nitely suspended and anx-
iously anticipated encounter with the real James Francis Ryan. For Miller
and his Rangers, progress on this mission is neither steady nor swift. The
journey to Ryan is repeatedly interrupted by unexpected and costly en-
counters with hostile German forces, rerouted because of a mistaken mid-
dle name, and nearly aborted by a one-man mutiny. With each calamity
and casualty the investment in Ryan goes up, to the point at which even
Miller, the captain whose steadfast determination to ¤nd Ryan and thus
“earn [him] the right to get back to [his] wife,” is given pause to question
the “mission [that] is a man”: “This Ryan better be worth it. He better go
home and cure some disease or invent the longer lasting light bulb or
something.” Of course by the ¤lm’s end, audiences know that Ryan went
home, and they may reasonably surmise on the basis of his mild demeanor
and modest dress that he neither developed a vaccine nor “brought new
good things to life.”
Here the motif of counting that played such a central role in the core
narrative of the ¤lm makes itself felt in—and beyond—the frame. Did
Ryan earn it? Is he a good man? The ¤lm ends with the assurance that its
audience has learned to count the ways: a wife, a son and daughter-in-law,
a grandson and granddaughters. They assure the audience that Ryan has
produced a solid body count, has led a fruitful and productive life. All in
all, Spielberg leaves us with a portrait of the multigenerational white
iconic citizen-subject who embodies the becoming-national of home and
the becoming-private of citizenship. For all its blood and guts, Saving Pri-
Renovating the National Imaginary / 223
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

vate Ryan is a paregoric rhetoric that expresses, justi¤es, and induces nos-
talgia for a national future in which each individual’s debt to the republic
may be paid in minor acts of “privatize[d] patriotism.”34
Emergence is always produced through a particular stage of forces. The
analysis of the Enstehung must delineate this interaction, the struggle
these forces wage against each other or against adverse circumstances,
and the attempt to avoid degeneration and regain strength by dividing
these forces against themselves.
Michel Foucault, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History”
It is not enough to say to the citizens, be good; they must be taught
to be so.
Rousseau, The Social Contract and Discourses
Less than four months after the release of Saving Private Ryan and on the
eve of the Jasper dragging-death trial, the Center for Individual Rights’
anti–af¤rmative action lawsuit against the University of Washington Law
School, and a landmark settlement of $3.1 million to underpaid female
employees of the Texaco oil company, Tom Brokaw’s The Greatest Generation
appeared on bookstore shelves across the nation. Within two months this
collection of the life stories of forty-seven U.S. men and women whom
Brokaw began interviewing on the fortieth anniversary of D-Day and who
in one way or another played a part in the Allied war effort was number
one on the New York Times non¤ction best-seller list. By mid-January of
1999 NBC’s Dateline had already aired its own prime-time special docu-
mentary on Brokaw’s book and, owing to its remarkable popularity, The
Greatest Generation was soon reissued in paperback, large print, and audio
editions.35 On the basis of the substantive and stylistic similarities between
Spielberg’s and Brokaw’s odes to the Americans who came of age during
the Great Depression and the World War II years as well as U.S. audi-
ences’ obvious appetite for them, columnists proclaimed the emergence
of “World War II chic” or “retro patriotism,” a new popular culture form
whose “purpose . . . is to represent a world where all the tensions of the
present are subsumed by the mission and the men.”36
To read The Greatest Generation as inducing readers to escape the social
224 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

con®icts of the present by imaginatively transporting themselves into the
past is to grossly oversimplify the rhetoricity of Brokaw’s text. Not only
does the book invoke explicitly the domestic social injustices that vexed
the country during and immediately after the war as well as commemo-
rate the individual who overcame them, it also persistently calls up the
disparities of social power that plague it today and lays all blame for any
citizen’s failure at her or his own feet. Indeed, by strategically juxtaposing
an imperfect past and a troubled present, Brokaw’s trip down memory
lane doubles as a vicious attack on today’s identity politics, using history
as an alibi for a civics lesson that instructs its readership to turn a blind
eye to the social differences that still make a difference. Indeed, The Great-
est Generation is a particularly robust contemporary paregoric rhetoric
whose war on today’s “victim politics” is symbolically subsidized by the
“sacri¤ces” of an entire generation and discursively rationalized by their
cumulative homespun wisdom.
Much like Spielberg’s cinematic account, Brokaw’s treatment of World
War II delivers to its readership the World War II of “ordinary” Americans.
In the main, it tells the story of the little people’s war, of their heretofore
unsung struggles and unacknowledged sacri¤ces: of Lloyd Kilmer who,
after spending ten months in German prison camps, returned home to
marry, raise a family, sell real estate, and serve as county clerk; of Daphne
Cavin, a newlywed who, after learning her twenty-two-year-old husband
had been killed by enemy ¤re in France, made her way as a beautician in
Lebanon, Indiana; of Martha Settle Putnea who, as a young black member
of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps, contended daily with institutional racism
but later earned her doctorate and became a professor of history; of
Wesley Ko, who, upon his return to the States after serving in the 82nd
Airborne, joined forces with a friend and opened a printing business, mar-
ried, and raised a son and two daughters. As has already been hinted, for
all their striking similarities there is something that sets The Greatest Gen-
eration apart from Saving Private Ryan. The Greatest Generation has as much
to tell us about the lives of these Americans after the war as during it.
Indeed, most of the ink in this book is spent on describing, always in me-
ticulous and sometimes tedious detail, the U.S. postwar era, those decades
during which “more than twelve million men and women put their uni-
forms aside,” “returned to civilian life,”37 and, along with those who had
Renovating the National Imaginary / 225
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

worked on behalf of the Allied victory on the home front, “immediately
began the task of rebuilding their lives and the world they wanted.”38
What is the signi¤cance of Brokaw’s treating our “rendezvous with des-
tiny” as the point of departure for forty-seven tales of personal triumph
that take place when all is again relatively quiet on the European and Pa-
ci¤c fronts? It facilitates the transmogri¤cation of World War II from a sign
that has the status of an event into what Michel Foucault has called a tech-
nology, what rhetoricians have long called doxa, and what I, following oth-
ers, have termed a new esprit de corps that has the status of a structure.
In The Greatest Generation World War II shifts from being an event in the
past about which we make sense to becoming a mode of sense-making in
the present. Under Brokaw’s pen World War II becomes a shorthand for a
retroactive common sense or “matrix of popular reason” through which
we are able collectively to comprehend and negotiate the challenges of
contemporary life, not the least of which, in his view, is the ideological
unity of the U.S. polity itself. As Brokaw opines in the closing pages of
the book:
There is no world war to ¤ght today nor any prospect of one anytime
soon, but racial discrimination remains an American cancer. There is
no Great Depression, but economic opportunity is an unending
challenge, especially in a high-tech world where education is more
important than ever. Most of all, there is the need to reinstate the
concept of common welfare in America, so that the nation doesn’t
squander the legacy of this remarkable generation by becoming a
collection of well-de¤ned, narrowly cast special-interest ¤efdoms,
each concerned only with its own place in the mosaic.39
As he reports over the course of his sympathetically spun stories, a citi-
zenry that has become ever more heterogeneous and contentious has be-
gun to leave its demoralizing and devastating mark on the nation. Here
the anchorman joins with other like-minded statesmen and spokespersons
in bemoaning the new “identity” or “victim” politics, holding it account-
able for an impending crisis of national character and national culture.
Whereas “the women and members of ethnic groups who were the objects
226 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

of acute discrimination” during and immediately after the war “have not
allowed it to cripple them, nor have they invoked it as a claim for special
treatment now,”40 subsequent generations of socially injured Americans
are, according to Brokaw, disproportionately invested in their own puta-
tive subjection. How, then, might we arrest this attitudinal erosion? How
might we reverse the national course, “transcend partisan considerations,”
and cultivate a sense of oneness? By training, to use Brokaw’s words, “a
new kind of army”41 of citizen-subjects schooled in three classic American
virtues—self-reliance, self-discipline, and self-sacri¤ce—that have been
retooled to suit the demands of the multicultural and late-capitalist state.
Notably, The Greatest Generation is that new army’s ¤eld handbook. Here,
what Toby Miller has identi¤ed as the call for “the well-tempered self” that
¤rst rang out in mid-sixteenth-century Europe with the mass dissemina-
tion of Erasmus’s De civilitate morum puerilium (On civility in children)
reaches a new pitch.42 To have read The Greatest Generation is to have com-
pleted a tutorial in the kind of radical subjective reformation requisite to
national renewal.
It is hard to imagine a popular text more adroit at using history for the
purpose of contemporary U.S. nation (re)building. The Greatest Genera-
tion’s success in doing so lies in the precise manner in which it strategically
invokes and foregrounds the social and cultural differences of the past—
economic, racial, sexual, and ethnic—to prompt its readers to discount
them in the present. That is, The Greatest Generation engineers a singular
version of the “then” to induce its readers to disavow their own primary
and political passionate attachments “now”; allegiance to the nation or
interpellation into the national is to be secured by a willed disregard of
certain particularities of self that readers, in their reading, will have al-
ready begun to enact.
By the book’s end readers will be well versed and practiced in the art
of personal abstraction that in this book is the sine qua non of national
consubstantiality. Brokaw’s assemblage of tales, both thematically and for-
mally, is an exercise in disincorporation.43 Again and again readers en-
counter yet another variation on the same basic theme: thanks to the quali-
ties of character developed during the war—self-reliance, self-discipline,
and self-sacri¤ce—scores of Americans were able to beat the incredible
Renovating the National Imaginary / 227
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

odds that mitigated against their success, be it physical disability, economic
privation, gender oppression, or racial and ethnic discrimination. In each
and every case, becoming part of “the greatest generation” is accomplished
through the self-conscious dismissal of the particular and potentially dis-
abling material attributes of the body. One representative example is the
pro¤le of Sergeant Johnnie Holmes. Indeed, the life story of this black
American who, in his early years, served in the 761st Tank Battalion and
later in life “specialized” in “low-income rental apartments in buildings
in black neighborhoods” supplies Brokaw with an exemplary illustration
of how the racially marked and stigmatized person can succeed by re-
imagining himself as unmarked:
For all of his combative ways, Johnnie decided he wouldn’t person-
ally bow to the inherent frustration of discrimination. As he puts it
today, “If I let all of the negatives intervene, I would have never
achieved anything. I kept focused on what I wanted to do, which was
to make money, provide for my family. . . .” It was as a landlord
and as a black man who had overcome so much on his own that he
came to hate the welfare system that grew so fast in the ¤fties, six-
ties, and seventies. “It just killed ambition,” according to Holmes. “I
had all of these [black] tenants who in their late twenties had never
worked a day in their life. They just waited around for that govern-
ment check. No incentive.”44
Obviously there is a lot going on here: the unabashed celebration of the
individuated self-making liberal subject as well as a bourgeois norm of
relative material comfort; the discursive obliteration of the politics—as
effects of power—of the asymmetrical distribution of opportunity and
resources in the nation; and the privatization of civic responsibility and
social virtue.45 Notably, what underwrites all of the above in this vignette
is the persistent self-repudiation of the materiality or particularities of
embodiment. Requisite to success and, thus, national belonging is what
Sergeant Johnnie Holmes, in his “twilight years,” calls keeping one’s “focus
on what one wants to do.”46
Second, by virtue of the serial structure of the book, the social and
cultural particularities of American bodies—physical ability, class, gender,
228 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

race, and ethnicity—are rendered merely paratactic. That is, in this assem-
blage asymmetries of embodiment become differences to which readers
learn to be indifferent, markings to which readers are taught to turn a
blind eye. It is hardly fortuitous, then, that the ¤rst of the forty-seven
vignettes recounts the travails and triumphs of Thomas Broderick, who
lost his sight to a German bullet in the head. “What’s a handicap?” asks
Brokaw’s blind bard in the epigraph that opens the book. “I don’t have a
handicap.” 47 Here the pained male body of World War II that in Saving
Private Ryan was the preideological ground for prudential wisdom and
judgment reaches its apogee.
If The Greatest Generation is a pedagogy of prosthetic citizenship in the
multicultural age that induces readers to enact the fantasy of the undiffer-
entiated “We” of “We the People,” what are we to make of the photographs
throughout of “those men and women who have given us the lives we have
today”?48 Might these visual displays of the particular block the reader’s
translation into disincorporated subjectivity? When, in his preface, Bro-
kaw metacritically re®ects on his book and declares that he does not un-
derstand it to be “the de¤ning history of [the World War II] generation”
but “instead, think[s] of [it] as like a family portrait,”49 he is not speaking
only ¤guratively. Indeed, Brokaw, his research assistants, and his publishers
have gone to considerable lengths to recover and reproduce some one
hundred thirty amateurish snapshots, stock family photos, and studio por-
traits that lend the volume the appearance and feel of a family photo album
whose images relate a tale that has yet to be determined. As Annete Kuhn
has written in Family Secrets: Acts of Memory and Imagination, in family photo
albums,
pictures get displayed one after another, their selection and ordering
as meaningful as the pictures themselves. The whole, the series, con-
structs a family story in some respects like a classical narrative:
linear, chronological; though its cyclical repetitions of climactic
moments—births, christenings, weddings, holidays . . .—is more
characteristic of the open-ended narrative form of the soap opera
than of the closure of classical narrative. In the process of using—
producing, selecting, ordering, displaying—photographs, the family
is actually in the process of making itself.50
Renovating the National Imaginary / 229
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

What sort of national family story, then, is being made as we read Brokaw’s
ensemble of inscriptions of shadow and light?
Contrary to what we might ¤rst suspect, the collection of photographs
is not a dangerous visual supplement to Brokaw’s verbal text. Rather,
this visual archive encourages the self-violating interpellation of individu-
als into abstract citizen-subjects. Signi¤cantly, like its verbal counterpart,
Brokaw’s collection of images is structured as a series of discrete but in-
timately related vignettes, each of which is composed of at least two pho-
tos, a “before the return from the war” shot followed by a “long after the
return from the war” shot. Obviously, the strategic sequencing has one
primary function—to visually authenticate the verbal text.51 But if each
pair of photos works alone to certify the verisimilitude of the verbal tale
told, taken together they produce a different truth effect. When viewed
together, “the visual,” as Lisa Cartwright has put it, “is anti-visual.”52 As an
album or archive, serialization displaces sequence, and the negation of
difference is effected through its pluralization. On the visual plane, then,
a paratactical logic reduces the asymmetries of embodiment to equiva-
lence, interchangeability, and invisibility. Indeed, by the time readers near
the end of Brokaw’s tutorial, they will have been trained to disregard that
the concluding seventeen vignettes, notably grouped into sections titled
“Famous People” and “The Arena,” feature the life stories of fourteen
white men, two white women, and one “model minority,” Daniel Inouye,
whose closing words in this context encapsulate, to use Wendy Brown’s
terms, “liberalism’s universal moment” for the multicultural state in late
capitalism: “The one time the nation got together was World War II. We
stood as one. We spoke as one. We clenched our ¤sts as one, and that was
a rare moment for all of us.”53
All in all, then, The Greatest Generation is a particularly robust contem-
porary paregoric rhetoric. It is also a particularly insidious one: an anti-
political political image text that, in claiming to be merely representing
what it is helping to produce and promote, advances a highly normative,
indeed exclusionary, notion of the citizen-subject, of the sensus communi-
tatis, of the national family.
Order is, at one and the same time, that which is given in things as their
inner law, the hidden network that determines the way they confront
230 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

one another, and also that which has no existence except in the grid cre-
ated by a glance, an examination, a language; and it is only in the blank
spaces of this grid that order manifests itself in depth as though already
there, waiting in silence for the moment of its expression.
Michel Foucault, The Order of Things
At the groundbreaking in June, what once might have sounded like
radical feminist rhetoric ®owed from the mouths of Democrats and
Republicans alike. The idea that bravery and valor are female qualities
was suddenly apple pie and motherhood.
Karrie Jacobs, “A Woman’s Place”
With the opening of its doors to the general public in the fall of 1997, the
Women in Military Service for America Memorial (WIMS), a 33,000-
square-foot structure situated at the ceremonial gateway to Arlington Na-
tional Cemetery, would appear to have dealt a decisive blow to (largely
white) masculine presumption and male privilege on the National Mall
and in the national symbolic. For the ¤rst time in our nation’s history, the
heretofore unacknowledged accomplishments of the more than two mil-
lion American women who had served in times of domestic and interna-
tional crisis since the Revolutionary War were understood to be worth
their symbolic weight if not in gold then in granite, steel, and glass. Thus,
on the eve of the new millennium and in the wake of Tailhook, Aberdeen,
and Citadel investigations, it seemed we were a nation ¤nally prepared to
get our history right. As Mary Rose Oakar, who while serving as a member
of the House of Representatives introduced Resolution 36 to authorize
the establishment of the memorial, put it on dedication day: “This Memo-
rial will change the teaching of American history. . . . We will know that
in every war, contrary to past popular belief, women have been killed,
disabled and injured physically and psychologically. We will know of wom-
en’s bravery, courage, their love, dedication and sacri¤ce for their country
and their strong desire for world peace.”54 But the memorial does much
more than call attention to the systematic exclusion of women from the
annals of U.S. military history and, thus, implicitly call for its revision.
Rather than leave that job to posterity, the memorial takes on itself the
compensatory task. “This memorial,” as the mission statement on one of
Renovating the National Imaginary / 231
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

the central interior walls boldly declares, not only “honors the women
who have served in and with the US Armed Forces from the time of the
American Revolution to the present. . . . The Education Center within
this memorial tells the stories of these forerunners and then focuses on
women of the 20th century who have served both in and with the military
in ever-expanding roles.”
Because of its educative function, WIMS is more akin to a museum than
a memorial or monument. To step into the memorial is to leave the mini-
malist rhetoric and aesthetic of national commemoration and to move into
an elaborate system of representation in which a complex assemblage of
image texts is strategically engineered for particular pedagogical effect.55
Upon crossing the memorial’s threshold, patrons ¤nd themselves in a cen-
trally located exhibit gallery. Various objects—from reproductions of pho-
tographs, paintings, drawings, and posters to ®ight logbooks, dog tags,
handmade clothespins, undergarments, and uniforms—are consolidated
within exhibit alcoves that track the numerous roles women have played
in the nation’s military history. With the assistance of explanatory plates
and a guidebook as well as a thirteen-minute video presentation, “In De-
fense of a Nation: The History of Women in the Military,” shown at regular
intervals in the memorial’s state-of-the-art theater, visitors become wit-
nesses to an impressive collection of evidence that points toward one un-
ambiguous and uncontestable truth: from the beginning, women have
been agents of U.S. history even if they have been excluded from its inter-
ested (re)telling.
The memorial’s declared pedagogical purpose is advanced in other
ways as well. From the renovated hemicycle wall “representing the barri-
ers to greater opportunity and recognition that women have encountered
in their efforts to serve our country” to the four new stairways “carved
through the existing stone and concrete, symboliz[ing] women’s efforts to
break through these barriers,”56 the memorial challenges conventional
wisdom and makes visible a national past in which women are seen al-
ways to have been vital participants in rather than passive bene¤ciaries
of military engagement, both at home and abroad. Indeed, nowhere is
the memorial’s repudiation of majoritarian male culture and its biased re-
telling of U.S. military history made more explicit than on its roof, a
literalization—indeed materialization—of the “glass ceiling,” this one
232 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

constructed out of 138 rectangular transparent glass tablets, eleven of
which have etched words such as the following:
From the storm-lashed decks of the May®ower . . . to the present
hour, woman has stood like a rock for the welfare of the history of
the country, and one might well add . . . unwritten, unrewarded,
and almost unrecognized (Clara Barton, Founder of the American
Red Cross, 1911); Let the generations know that women in uniform
also guaranteed their freedom. That our resolve was just as great as
the brave men who stood among us and with victory our hearts were
just as full and beat just as fast—that the tears fell just as hard for
those we left behind (Unknown U.S. Army Nurse, WWII); The
ground they broke was hard soil indeed. But with great heart and
true grit, they plowed right through the prejudice and presumption,
cutting a path for their daughters and granddaughters to serve their
country in uniform (Secretary of Defense William J. Perry, Ground-
breaking, June 22, 1995).
An unguarded, dare we say militant, feminist stance against the received
history?
For rhetorical critics poised to appreciate the memorial’s contestatory
force, an abstract lesson of high theory, that a discontinuous relation al-
ways already obtains between origins and ends, may make itself felt as a
productive practical caution: to guard vigilantly the question of ideologi-
cal effects. More speci¤cally, we should refuse to presume that, as Peggy
Phelan has put it, “increased visibility equals increased power.”57 Not nec-
essarily, not always, not only, because at this particular conjuncture, it may
not.58 As Lacan once put it, “In this matter of the visible, everything is a
trap.”59 Indeed, a critical analysis of the memorial makes it possible to
discern the way in which this lesson in revisionary history may be pressed
into the service of another ideological agenda.
As noted, the heart or center of the memorial is an exhibit gallery
housing sixteen alcoves that by virtue of running the length of the reno-
vated hemicycle may be accessed from double doors on either end. On
entering visitors to the memorial inescapably happen upon seven glass-
enclosed display cases, four of which house exhibits devoted to women’s
Renovating the National Imaginary / 233
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

role in World War II; the other three hold displays documenting women’s
service in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, between 1901 and
1945, and since 1946. Although all of these exhibits visually document the
always crucial but expanding role of women in the armed forces through
the deployment of reproductions of photographs, drawings, and paintings,
the veracity and, thus, force of the World War II displays are enhanced
considerably by the incorporation of a massive collection of the parapher-
nalia of women and war. Indeed, these World War II displays are loaded
from ®oor to ceiling with an array of objects that, notably, do not record
the fantastic feats of singular individuals but instead metonymically mark
the regular rhythms and daily practices of our nation’s servicewomen.
Among scores of others are a pair of mosquito boots that protected one
army nurse in Africa from contracting malaria, a sample identi¤cation card
issued to all Women’s Army Corps (WAC) recruits, one of the hundreds
of summer uniforms issued to Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency
Service (WAVES) inductees, the helmet and calculation instruments used
by an unidenti¤ed Air Force service pilot, one anonymous student’s hand-
written notes on how to repair guns and pack parachutes, and another’s
army-issued underwear and pajamas. From the ¤rst installment to the last,
what the World War II collection features are ordinary, commonplace ob-
jects; typicality rather than rarity subtends the order of things here. The
principle of typicality also underwrites the photographs that have been
incorporated into the permanent exhibits. Instead of bearing witness to
striking moments of uncommon valor, these archived images make visible
the collective or cooperative, anonymous and even monotonous or ge-
neric, character of servicewomen’s daily life: here a sea of telephone op-
erators, there a secretarial pool, here the U.S. Cadet Nurse Corps in for-
mation, there a mass of women working on a factory line so as to “free
our men to ¤ght.” Although rare, when formal portraits and snapshots of
individual women in particular situations do appear, they are recon¤g-
ured into a collage, thereby reconstituting them as members of some
larger whole and those events as part of a broader-based effort. When
amassed, arranged, and placed under or behind glass, then, the artifacts
presented in the exhibit alcoves are invested with new signi¤cance, are
infused with new force, with “representativeness.” In this way a seemingly
234 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

complete, unabridged history of women in the U.S. armed services begins
metonymically to be made visible and present.
As noted, all of the objects brought together at WIMS are placed in in-
dividual exhibit alcoves that have been clearly labeled and chronologically
arranged: “Serving with the Military: 18th and 19th Centuries,” “Serving
in the Military: 1901–1945,” “Women Go to War: World War II,” “Service-
women in World War II: Recruiting, Training and on the Job,” “Volunteer-
ing on the Homefront: World War II,” “Overseas with the Military: World
War II,” and “Serving in the Military since 1946.” Thus, although each
individual window into the past is made to represent a distinct period of
U.S. military history and women’s place in it, the passage from the ¤rst
to the last reveals, step-by-step, women’s ever-evolving role in the armed
services, their natural ascension over time from handmaiden to helicopter
pilot, from battle¤eld nurse to brigadier general. The sequential display
of periodized artifacts has been supplemented by two complementary
narratives—a relatively elaborate Self-Guided Tour manual that visitors may
pick up at the entrance to the memorial and a much abbreviated version
thereof that appears in installments over the course of the exhibit.
The handheld script is a mechanism to normalize and naturalize wom-
en’s integration into the armed services by making it appear as the always
already determined outcome of a process whose reasonableness has been
delivered by and made legible over time. First of all, its repeated deploy-
ment of the constative utterance helps conceal the discursive status of the
display, thereby leaving patrons with the impression that rather than hav-
ing been authored by someone, the written supplement has been dictated
by the objects and movement of American history itself.60 The impact of
this “exhibition rhetoric” that accentuates the objects as it effaces itself is
augmented by two strategic silences that together conceal the artistry at
work. Not once does the name of a photographer appear on the legend
that accompanies each display case (in every case, however, the collection
or archive from which the object has been extracted or donated is clearly
identi¤ed), and nowhere in the memorial or in any of its public relations
literatures are the curators of the exhibits acknowledged.61 Second, the
script’s adroit inclusion of directives to patrons on how they are to read
crucial elements of the visual text controls to a considerable degree the
Renovating the National Imaginary / 235
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

images’ signifying effects. Indeed, when pictures alone may fail, words
step in: “The individuals pictured here are representative rather than fa-
mous”; “Again, the majority of photos are not of famous women but show
the variety of ways in which women have served with the military since
WWII”; “The increased number of photographs in this panel re®ects the
increasing numbers of women in the services during peacetime and times
of con®ict.” Third, the thoroughgoing exclusion from the script of any
reference to the asymmetrical social relations, material circumstances,
and pyramidal-hierarchical logics that have structured and continue to
underwrite the recruitment, incorporation, and containment of women
by the armed services makes these processes appear to be the inevitable
outcome of a rational historical unfolding, thereby eliding, even as it pur-
ports to reveal the historicity of women’s enfranchisement. Indeed, this is
sensationally demonstrated in the decision to mark and mark off the
Women’s Armed Services Integration Act of 1948.62 Presented as a singu-
lar, even watershed moment in the exhibit gallery, the memorialization
of the act neatly buries gender inequality within U.S. military history as
a fait accompli, thereby constituting the present as postfeminist, post-
political.
To represent history in evolutionary terms is often to privilege a con-
servative model of social transformation, one that promotes a general tol-
erance of the status quo predicated on the understanding or belief that
change is the consequence of some greater force—capital H History or
biology, for example. Nonetheless, the exhibit gallery can be seen to utter
an incipient call to a certain kind of collective action, one that is given
palpable expression through the memorial’s computerized registry and
receives dramatic reinforcement from its engraved glass ceiling. Adjacent
to the exhibit hall but visible from it is a room that houses twelve com-
puters through which visitors may access “the photographs, military his-
tories and memorable experiences” of “women veterans, active duty, re-
serve, and guard women, and women who have served in direct support
of the military throughout history.” Additionally, three larger-than-life
screens have been placed above the entrance to the registry; there the
name, record of service, and photographic image of every registered
servicewoman serially appears by way of a computer-generated around-
236 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

the-clock roll call. Operating in tandem with the exhibit gallery, the com-
puterized registry deftly deploys the so-called new information technolo-
gies, linking the abstract national to the situated local; in their engagement
with the of¤cial image archive, visitors literally perform acts of national
identi¤cation that provide them with embodied models of normative na-
tional character. Finally, the pilgrimage to the upper terrace caps off the
“self-guided tour” of WIMS. For patrons already party to the complex
rationalization displayed below, the words etched on the roof not only
grant of¤cial public voice to the women who have served, but they also
function rhetorically as injunctions to serve the national cause:
You have a debt and a date. A debt to democracy, a date with destiny
(Oveta Culp Hobby, Colonel, Director of the Women’s Army Corps,
World War II); All of us must work at patriotism not just believe in
it. For only by our young women offering their services to our coun-
try as working patriots in the armed forces can our defense be ade-
quate (Helen Hayes, Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the
Services, 1951); The qualities that are most important in all military
jobs—things like integrity, moral courage, and determination—
have nothing to do with gender (Rhonda Cornum, Major, US Army
Medical Corps, Operation Desert Storm).
Hence, in addition to advancing an account of America’s military history
that for the ¤rst time duly acknowledges women’s role in it, the Women
in Military Service for America Memorial scripts a version of normative
U.S. identity in which service to the nation is the arche and telos of what
it means for any American—man or woman—in the words of the Self-
Guided Tour, to “exercise full citizenship.” Thus, out of a memorial “dedi-
cated to the women who have served” ¤gures forth an abstract category
of civic agency that folds feminine subjectivity into universal (masculine)
virtues. As Major Marie Rossi, killed in a helicopter crash the day after the
close of the Gulf War, stoically noted in a nationally televised interview, a
portion of which is woven into the memorial’s own video presentation:
“It’s our jobs. There was nothing peculiar about our being women. We
were just the people called upon to do it.”
Renovating the National Imaginary / 237
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

History becomes “effective” to the degree that it introduces disconti-
nuity into our very being—as it divides our emotions, dramatizes our
instincts, multiplies our body and sets it against itself. “Effective” history
deprives the self of the reassuring stability of life and nature, and it will
not permit itself to be transported by a voiceless obstinacy toward a
millennial ending.
Michel Foucault, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History”
“My, my. A body does get around.”
William Faulkner, Light in August
Between the release of Patton and Tora! Tora! Tora! and the premier of
Saving Private Ryan, World War II virtually disappeared from the national
popular scene. Indeed, in striking contrast to its popularity during the
postwar era, “by the early 1970s,” as Tom Engelhardt notes in his historical
analysis of the “Vietnamization” or “castration” of American culture, “the
‘Good War’, even in its down and dirty form, had lost its recyclable
quality.”63 Hence, this essay might best be summed up as an effort to take
rhetorical stock of its dramatic uptake almost thirty years later. How ex-
actly, this essay asks, is World War II being given back to us today, and to
what effect?
I have argued that World War II is returning as a paregoric rhetoric,
a distinct rhetorical form whose curative, soothing, and homogenizing
force is predicated on its cultivation of new modes of self-perception
and self-production. Prompted by the unprecedented decision to break
ground between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial
for a structure commemorating not just the veterans of World War II but
also an exemplary era of “American nation unity,” this examination of sev-
eral contemporary World War II texts argues that the return of World
War II may be understood as a more or less thinly veiled conservative
response to the contemporary crisis of national identity, to our failing
sense of what it means to be an American and to do things the so-called
American way. Indeed, I have tried to demonstrate how Saving Private Ryan
and The Greatest Generation rede¤ne in highly restrictive and distinctly cen-
trist terms what it means to be a “good American.” Although both the ¤lm
and book advocate the domestication and privatization of civic responsi-
238 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

bility, the latter heightens the effect by coaching readers to an individualist
sense of civic self predicated on the imaginative discounting of the marks
of structurally and institutionally supported social inequalities that are re-
coded in these popular culture texts as mere cultural difference. I have also
tried to show how the potentially innovative or progressive political force
of the Women in Military Service for America Memorial is colonized by
its articulation into this broader popular culture frame or formation.
Taken together, then, these memory texts assist in the reconsolidation and
naturalization of traditional logics and matrices of privilege that today
traverse the various arenas of collective life from the political to juridical,
the economic to the social. Quite clearly, then, the general lesson to be
drawn from this reading of the contemporary World War II formation is
unmistakably Foucauldian: “There is power, it is productive, and it works
through the production and dissemination of truth, disciplining the citizen
through a pursuit of the popular.”64 But by in®ecting the constitutive and
not merely mimetic role of these popular culture memory texts, this essay
also argues implicitly that it is possible to remember otherwise, that not
only what we remember but how we remember it could be different, and
that collective memory could be pressed into the service of a very differ-
ent politics. Finally, then, this essay urges rhetorical critics and theorists
to critically engage a multifaceted and multiplying contemporary U.S.
paregoric rhetoric in whose recently renovated narrative of national be-
longing “our” future may (not) lie.
Notes
1. Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1993), 92.
2. As Kaja Silverman explains in The Threshold of the Visible World (New York:
Routledge, 1996), the given-to-be-seen may be de¤ned as “the operation within
the ¤eld of vision of the system of intelligibility which is synonymous with the
dominant ¤ction.” It “depends for its hegemonic effects on the slotting of the eye
into a particular spectatorial position—into a metaphoric geometral point. The
latter can then be best de¤ned as the position from which we apprehend and af¤rm
those elements of the screen which are synonymous with the dominant ¤ction” (179). Al-
though I invoke this phraseology from the Lacanian lexicon to underscore the
spectral or visual character of national identi¤cation, the ensuing analysis of the
Renovating the National Imaginary / 239
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

contemporary American cultural and political scene aims to apprehend the rhe-
torical rather than psychic and—for Silverman—strictly libidinal transactions
that seek to secure ¤delity to the nation.
3. George F. Will, “The Statue Sweepstakes,” Newsweek, August 26, 1991,
p. 64.
4. Marita Sturken, Tangled Memories: The Vietnam War, the AIDS Epidemic, and
the Politics of Remembering (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997).
5. “About the Memorial: World War II Memorial Homepage,” http://
www.wwiimemorial.com, September 3, 1999.
The design concept for the memorial is an ensemble of a lowered plaza
surrounding the Rainbow Pool, parapet walls surmounted by transparent
architectural arms of stone and metal and two monumental memorial
arches. The memorial will include iconography, inscriptions and sculpture
as part of the ¤nal design. . . . Bronze laurel wreaths are suspended from
the oculus of each arch . . . [which] overlook the memorial plaza and
Rainbow Pool. . . . The ®oor of the memorial plaza is an orchestrated
blend of green spaces and paved surfaces surrounding the Rainbow Pool.
A central ceremonial area is placed at the western apex of the memorial
plaza. A curvilinear granite wall is embedded into the waterfalls that navi-
gate the vertical transition between the Re®ecting Pool and the Rainbow
Pool. Inscriptions honoring the fallen and all who served and a ®ame of
freedom will be incorporated into the ceremonial area. . . . In the center
of the plaza, the fountains of the reconstructed Rainbow Pool will be re-
stored to their former splendor as part of the memorial.”
6. Subcommittee on Libraries and Memorials of the Committee on House
Administration, Guidelines for the Consideration of Memorials under the Commemorative
Works Act, 103rd Cong., 2nd sess., 1994, p. 2. Both substantively and stylistically,
public debate (or the relative lack thereof) over the World War II Memorial dif-
fers markedly from the lengthy and often heated rhetorical struggles that
emerged over other proposals to recognize the nation’s fallen heroes by raising
a structure on their behalf on the mall, e.g., the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the
Vietnam Women’s Memorial, and the Women in Military Service for America
Memorial.
7. An interesting exception was delivered by Judy Scott Feldman, chair-
240 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

woman of the National Coalition to Save Our Mall, during her testimony before
the Commission of Fine Arts. She objected vigorously to the proposed memo-
rial’s “imperial and triumphal design” that was “unacceptably reminiscent of
Fascist and Nazi regimes.” Cited in Irvin Molotsky, “Panel Backs World War II
Memorial on Mall in Washington,” New York Times, July 21, 2001, p. A1.
8. Molotsky, “Panel Backs World War II Memorial.” Across the country,
forty-three newspapers (including the New York Times, the Washington Post, and
USA Today) printed at least one article or editorial opposing the site, many of
them, of course, reprints.
9. Rolland Kidder, “War Memorial Will Be in Its Proper Setting,” Buffalo
News, June 6, 1997, p. 3C.
10. “Remarks by President Clinton at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier,
Arlington National Cemetery,” Federal News Service, November 11, 1995. Online,
LEXIS, July 22, 2000.
11. The memorial’s statement of purpose is as follows:
The World War II Memorial will be the ¤rst national memorial dedi-
cated to all who served in the armed forces and Merchant Marine of the
United States during World War II and acknowledging the commitment
and achievement of the entire nation. All military veterans of the war, the
citizens on the home front, the nation at large, and the high moral purpose
and idealism that motivated the nation’s call to arms will be honored. Sym-
bolic of the de¤ning event of the twentieth century in American history,
the memorial will be a monument to the spirit, sacri¤ce, and commitment
of the American people, to the common defense of the nation and to the
broader causes of peace and freedom from tyranny throughout the world.
It will inspire future generations of Americans, deepening their apprecia-
tion of what the World War II generation accomplished in securing free-
dom and democracy. Above all, the memorial will stand for all time as an
important symbol of American national unity, a timeless reminder of the
moral strength and awesome power that can ®ow when a free people are
at once united and bonded together in a common and just cause. (“About
the Memorial”)
12. “Clinton Salutes Veterans, Dedicates Memorial Site,” Los Angeles Times,
November 12, 1995, p. 4A.
Renovating the National Imaginary / 241
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

13. These statements contest Arthur Danto’s theoretical claim that a clear
distinction is to be made between monuments and memorials. He writes: “We
erect monuments so that we shall always remember, and build memorials so that
we shall never forget. Thus we have the Washington Monument but the Lincoln
Memorial. Monuments commemorate the memorable and embody the myths of
beginnings. Memorials ritualize remembrance and mark the reality of ends. . . .
The memorial is a special precinct, extruded from life, a segregated enclave
where we honor the dead. With monuments we honor ourselves” (“The Viet-
nam Veterans Memorial and the Washington Mall,” Critical Inquiry 12 [summer
1986]: 153).
14. David Schribman, “Put the Memorial, Like the War, at the Center,” Buf-
falo News, April 26, 1997, p. 3C.
15. Kidder, “War Memorial,” p. 3C.
16. William Jefferson Clinton, “Remarks on Responsible Citizenship and
Common Ground,” Georgetown University, July 6, 1995, p. 5, http://www.
americanreview.net.
17. Although popular and academic examinations of the National Mall ac-
knowledge the general signi¤cance of the whole as a sum of its parts, a stubborn
hermeneutic seems to foreclose apprehending the ways in which the piecemeal
construction of additional monuments or memorials supplements and alters its
rhetorical force.
18. Another way of describing the aim of my analysis would be to say that it
seeks to extend Michael McGee’s 1975 call for the rhetorical accounting of the
discursive production of a <people> by attending not only to the “material
forces, events, and themes in history only as they have already been mediated or
¤ltered by the Leader whose words [we have typically] studied” (“In Search of ‘The
People’: A Rhetorical Alternative,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 61 [1975]: 235–49),
but also to those other enunciative sites through which national af¤liation is today
being produced.
19. Wire Reports, “Memorial Moratorium,” Baltimore Sun, September 9,
1999, p. 2A. Online, LEXIS, September 10, 1999.
20. There is a growing theoretical and critical literature on the relationships
among the nation, the media, and the discursive production of the citizen-subject
in the late twentieth century. This analysis takes several of its cues from Lauren
Berlant’s analysis of infantile citizenship in The Queen of America Goes to Washing-
ton City: Essays on Sex and Citizenship (Durham: Duke University Press, 1997),
242 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Lawrence Grossberg’s account of the politically disaffected citizen in We Gotta
Get Out of This Place: Popular Conservatism and Postmodern Culture (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1992), and Toby Miller’s treatment of the cultural citizen in Technologies of
Truth: Cultural Citizenship and the Popular Media (Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 1998).
21. Clinton, “Responsible Citizenship.”
22. Jon Meacham, “Caught in the Line of Fire,” Newsweek, July 13, 1998, p. 50.
23. Jay Carr, cited in Christopher Caldwell, “Spielberg at War,” Commentary
106 (October 1998): 48.
24. Martin Arnold, “‘Private Ryan’ Receives a Genre,” New York Times, July
30, 1998, p. E3.
25. Ibid.
26. James Wolcott, “Tanks for the Memories,” Vanity Fair 456 (August
1998): 73.
27. Jean Bethke Elshtain, “Spielberg’s America,” Tikkun 13 (November/
December 1998): C73.
28. Wolcott, “Tanks,” 75.
29. Meacham, “Caught,” 50.
30. Cited in Nick Charles, “Guts and Glory,” People Weekly, October 12, 1998,
p. 162.
31. Berlant, The Queen of America, 57.
32. In a book-length analysis of the return of World War II now in progress,
I will attend at length to the question of the representation of women and its
political entailments. I simply note here the sexism and at times unabashed mi-
sogyny at work throughout the ¤lm but perhaps most visible in scenes during
which combat abates and members of the Ranger unit engage in “intimate” con-
versation: for example, the Brooklyn bad boy’s recounting of Mrs. Rachel Cher-
bowitz’s advice from the dressing room of his mother’s shop that “if [he’s] ever
scared” he “close [his] eyes and remember these” “44EEs” or “massive things”; and
Ryan’s jovial recollection of “the last night the four [Ryan brothers] were to-
gether,” memorable for the brothers’ thwarted rape of Alice Jardine, “a girl who
just took a nose dive from the ugly tree and hit every branch coming down.”
Furthermore, although there are no fantasy rape scenarios in Tom Brokaw’s The
Greatest Generation (New York: Random House, 1998), I will argue that certain
women fare no better there. I will suggest that the subtle but crucial shift from
a neoconservative rhetoric of “family values” to a rhetoric of the “national family”
Renovating the National Imaginary / 243
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

that I analyze in the following section of this essay is effected in part by the
strategic re-membering and repositioning of female bodies and desire. Out of
this re-membering emerges a newly determined abject feminine, the “feminist,”
who refuses to submit her agency to the will of the national family.
33. It is not without consequence that Saving Private Ryan structurally elides
the sixties and seventies—those socially and politically tumultuous decades in
U.S. history during which citizens literally took to the streets.
34. Edward Rothstein, “Rescuing the War Hero from 1990s Skepticism,” New
York Times, August 3, 1998, p. E2.
35. Brokaw has since edited and published several other best-selling books
for which World War II serves as the central reference, organizing theme, or point
of departure. See, for example, An Album of Memories: Personal Histories from the
Greatest Generation (New York: Random House, 2001), and The Greatest Generation
Speaks: Letters and Re®ections (New York: Random House, 1999), all reissued in
audio format.
36. Richard Goldstein, “World War II Chic,” Village Voice, January 19, 1999,
p. 47.
37. Brokaw, The Greatest Generation, 15.
38. Ibid., xx.
39. Ibid., 388–89.
40. Ibid., 388.
41. Ibid., xx.
42. Toby Miller, The Well-Tempered Self: Citizenship, Culture, and the Postmodern
Subject (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).
43. My discussion of disincorporation is indebted to Michael Warner’s theo-
rization in “The Mass Public and the Mass Subject,” in The Phantom Public Sphere,
ed. Bruce Robbins (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press), 234–56.
44. Brokaw, The Greatest Generation, 200–201.
45. Again and again the dismantling of the welfare state and privatization of
social responsibility is sometimes boldly and other times more subtly encour-
aged. See, for example, the story of James and Dorothy Dowling in the midst of
which Brokaw writes: “James Dowling was orphaned soon after he was born.
His mother died when he was only six months old and his father was unable to
care for this baby and his four brothers and sisters. In those simpler times, when much
of social welfare was a matter of good-hearted people, the plight of James and his sib-
lings was made known in the church. The minister announced that someone had
244 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

to take in these children. James and two of his brothers were taken home by the
Conklins, Clarence and Anna” (The Greatest Generation, 46, emphasis added). Or
Brokaw’s closing words to “The Dumbos,” a vignette recounting the postwar
trials and tribulations of four couples “in the small South Dakota city of Yankton”:
“Outside of our own families, to those of us growing up in Yankton at the time,
these World War II couples were emblematic of the values that shaped our lives.
In many respects, their marriages and the way they conducted them were a form of
community service” (249, emphasis added).
46. Brokaw, The Greatest Generation, 200.
47. Ibid., 17.
48. Ibid., xxx.
49. Ibid.
50. Annete Kuhn, Family Secrets: Acts of Memory and Imagination (New York:
Verso, 1995), 17.
51. The literature on the relation of the visual image or the photograph and
the verbal text is extensive. Some key works are: Roland Barthes, Mythologies
(London: Cape, 1972); Roland Barthes, “The Rhetoric of the Image,” Image-
Music-Text (New York: Noonday, 1977), 32–37; John Berger, Ways of Seeing (New
York: Viking Penguin, 1997); W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and
Visual Representation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994); Susan Sontag,
On Photography (New York: Doubleday, 1977); and John Tagg, The Burden of Rep-
resentation: Essays on Photographies and Histories (Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 1993).
52. See Lisa Cartwright, Screening the Body: Tracing Medicine’s Visual Culture
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995).
53. Wendy Brown, States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1995), 57.
54. Linda Witt, The Day the Nation Said “Thanks!” A History and Dedication of the
Women in Military Service for America Memorial (Washington, DC: Military Women’s
Press, 1999), 96.
55. On the minimalist aesthetic (and I would add rhetoric) of monumental
material culture, see, for example: Carole Blair, Marsha S. Jeppeson, and Enrico
Pucci Jr., “Public Memorializing in Postmodernity: The Vietnam Veterans Memo-
rial as Prototype,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 77 (1991): 263–88; John Bodnar,
Remaking America: Public Memory Commemoration, and Patriotism in the Twentieth Cen-
tury (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992); John R. Gillis, ed., Commemo-
Renovating the National Imaginary / 245
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

rations: The Politics of National Identity (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1994); Kirk Savage, Standing Soldiers, Kneeling Slaves: Race, War, and Monument in
Nineteenth Century America (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997); and
Sturken, Tangled Memories.
56. Witt, The Day the Nation Said “Thanks!” 94.
57. Peggy Phelan, Unmarked: The Politics of Performance (New York: Routledge,
1993), 7.
58. The argument I am advancing here is not that WIMS never could perform
a radical, interruptive politics. What I am claiming is that at this particular time-
place, in the context of the cultural formation of which it is a part, it is not doing
so. It may be worthwhile to note here that one of the implications of this analysis
for thinking about rhetoric more generally is that the popular “polysemy thesis”
oftentimes begs rather than answers the question, “What rhetorical work is being
done by or through this text?” Although grasping the polysemic nature of all
discourse and practice is an important ¤rst step, a rigorous rhetorical analysis
proceeds to discern those forces that operate provisionally to secure—through
processes of articulation, disarticulation, and rearticulation—the effectivity of
the text, utterance, or practice. For a cogent review of the literature in the ¤eld
and a call to sharpen our theoretical assumptions and critical practice, see Leah
Ceccarelli, “Polysemy: Multiple Meanings in Rhetorical Criticism,” Quarterly
Journal of Speech 84 (1998): 395–415.
59. Jacques Lacan, Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, ed. Jacques-
Alain Miller, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Norton, 1979), 93.
60. Indeed, the exhibit’s hand-held script is replete with various gestures of
pointing: “See the uniform of Navy nurse Doris Yetter”; “Notice the hand-made
clothespin used by Madeline Ullom”; “Also in the exhibit is a pair of custom-
made mosquito boots, worn by Army nurses in Africa”; “Notice the photograph
of a woman packing a parachute”; etc. For an extensive analysis of the deploy-
ment of the constative utterance in museums of natural history and ¤ne art, see
Mieke Bal, Double Exposures: The Subject of Cultural Analysis (New York: Routledge,
1996).
61. I borrow the term “exhibition rhetoric” from Bruce Ferguson, “Exhibi-
tion Rhetorics: Material Speech and Utter Sense,” in Thinking about Exhibitions,
ed. Reesa Greenberg, Bruce W. Ferguson, and Sandy Nairne (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1996), 175–90. There he tethers together Enzensberger’s expanded con-
cept of the “cultural industries” (“to include advertising, education, and any in-
246 / Barbara Biesecker
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

stitutional use of media techniques intended for vast audiences or what is now
often referred to cynically as ‘infotainment’” [176]) and a classical conception of
rhetoric (“a strategic system of representation” [176]) in order to argue that “[t]he
will to in®uence is at the core of any exhibition” (179).
62. It should be noted that the integration act exhibit, originally placed next
to a wholly separate exhibit documenting the history of the memorial’s emer-
gence, will soon be moved to a display case situated between the World War II
and new Korean War exhibits (Brigadier General Wilma L. Vaught, Ret. [Presi-
dent, Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, Inc.], inter-
view by author, Washington, DC, June 6, 2000).
63. Tom Engelhardt, The End of Victory Culture: Cold War America and the Disil-
lusioning of a Generation (New York: Basic Books, 1995), 236.
64. Miller, Technologies, 265.
Renovating the National Imaginary / 247
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

10
Framing Memory
through Eulogy
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye
Amos Kiewe
On August 12, 1996, Nancy Reagan, the former First Lady, gave tribute
to her husband during the Republican National Convention in San Diego.
Mrs. Reagan spoke brie®y but poignantly following a videotape viewing
dedicated to the former president. Her short tribute brought tears to
many in the convention hall. At the conclusion of her presentation she
repeated a line Ronald Reagan had spoken during the 1992 Republican
National Convention: “When I’m gone, I hope it will be recorded that I
appealed to your best hopes, not your worst fears.” The tears and emo-
tional displays at the convention were indicative of Reagan’s cherished
memory and heroic standing among Republicans. The tribute was also a
testament to Reagan’s rhetorical efforts in conditioning memories of his
presidency. But above all else, the tribute given by Mrs. Reagan to her
husband (quoting her husband’s own words) was situated within the con-
text of death. As such, the tribute took on a eulogistic form—a eulogy
before death. Why would a living former president be given a tribute that
borders on a eulogy? This tribute and other speeches, I contend, were
consistent with a strategic effort on the part of Ronald Reagan and those
entrusted with the construction of his historical place to frame the public
memory of his role in renewing the American dream.
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

All leaders are concerned with their heritage and consequently are
eager to secure their place in history. Presidents, in particular, are prone
to the practice of conditioning memories. These efforts are often under-
stood in terms of the recognized genre of the farewell addresses. My pur-
pose in the present paper, however, is to set aside these generic qualities
and instead attend to these efforts in terms of the rhetorical construc-
tion of public memory.1 While presidents seek to leave a legacy of their
achievements in of¤ce, the construction of public memory requires addi-
tional rhetorical efforts that aim at mythologizing a president’s time and
space in the nation’s collective memory.2
Like other recent presidents Reagan was concerned with his place in
history, but unlike other presidents he pursued numerous opportunities
to fuse eulogistic references to suggest his preferred memories. Late in
his second term and on several occasions thereafter, Ronald Reagan used
his speeches and public statements to condition memories in a unique
way—by crafting his own eulogy. Reagan’s efforts, I contend, are different
from mere wishes of a leader for a good historical account of one’s public
life. Reagan, I submit, consciously sought rhetorical opportunities to con-
dition his own legacy by crafting the very words he hoped others would
utter after his ultimate departure. I arrive at this contention by analyzing
Reagan’s efforts at incorporating eulogistic elements in several of his late
speeches and his efforts at framing the discourse of his public memory.
Ronald Reagan understood better than most recent presidents the
power of rhetoric and mastered its practices throughout his political life.
He would often suggest the narratives that would one day re®ect on his
presidency and his political life. At the zenith of his many years in politics
he began to write his ¤nal chapter and to project a historical account of
his political role and signi¤cance. Eulogistic elements would thus fuse
themselves into several of Reagan’s late public orations, such as his 1989
farewell address and his 1992 Republican Convention address.
I ground my discussion in the functions of the Greek funeral orations.
I supplement this discussion with the notion of time and timing and the
conversion of time into space.3 The connecting thought here is the view
that eulogies are temporal discourses meant to construct timeless memo-
ries and consequently seek to construct future space for such memories.
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 249
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

The eulogy seeks an enduring presence located in an audience member’s
memory. Likewise, eulogies to prominent individuals seek presence in a
community’s myth and narrative.
I stipulate here that similar to the Greek epitaphioi that established Ath-
ens through myths and sacred values attributed to its past heroes, in de-
parting and eulogizing the polis, Reagan eulogized himself to secure his-
torical memories. I argue that in fusing eulogistic elements in his late
speeches, Reagan sought to offer an account of his presidency that he
hoped would be accepted and repeated after his ultimate departure. In
other words, he hoped to condition a preferred account of his presidency
that would be installed in the polity’s public memory. Reagan developed
his persona mythically by converting the temporal into timeless and hence
into memory.4 The framing of public memory was constructed by turning
the temporal into sacred and moral text via eulogistic references.5 Thus,
the temporal Reagan sought to become a mythically enduring Reagan by
constructing space for his time in the polity’s story. In so doing, Reagan
hoped to invest his political persona with moral imperatives whose very
endurance could guarantee memory.
The connection between rhetoric and public memory has ancient ori-
gins. The ancient Athenians recognized the importance of public address
in crafting stable and stabilizing public memories. Contemporary stu-
dents of public memory would do well to attend to classical rhetorical
notions of the construction of public memories.
Epitaphioi and Encomium in the Service of Political Memory
In addition to serving ceremonial discourses to memorialize the dead and
console the grieved, eulogies have been used throughout history as politi-
cal tools. Likewise, the encomium is more than tribute as it, too, functions
to instill more than just a lasting memory. The encomium has political ob-
jectives embedded in the intersection between character and ideology and
between the temporal and the mythic. Both epitaphioi and encomium are
more than what they appear to be as the ceremonial wrapping can camou-
®age political objectives.
As epideictic speech, funeral orations are performative, as they rely
on noble acts and thoughts and their ritual function is to create “a sense
of community among its participants.”6 Memory, in this sense, is a func-
250 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

tion of the ritual of eulogies. Epideictic speech, Farrell argues, closely
resembles the genre of Poetics, and in a eulogy the literary form functions
“to praise or exalt the virtues of a human life before an audience that
Aristotle described as ‘spectators’.”7 Referencing Loraux, Farrell con-
tends that she “has grasped perfectly how aesthetic pain can prepare us for
the invention of public rhetorical meaning.”8 Eulogy, then, “creates and
evokes emotions (pathos) not so much as a vehicle of proper audience
cognition, but rather as an af¤liative bond between perfected action and
human response.”9 Eulogies can thus function beyond commemorating
the deeds of the dead. The emotional state of loss and the memories of the
deceased can be harnessed to rhetorically instruct, educate, guide, and
motivate.
Similarly, Hauser presents the case for the epideictic as carrying a much
more signi¤cant role in public life than mere commemoration.10 Seeking
to resurrect ceremonial address from mere praise or blame, Hauser links
epideictic and phronesis to show how rhetoric can “overcome the emotion
of prejudice in framing public issues.”11 In this sense, epideictic functions
to educate and not just commemorate. “In this respect,” writes Hauser,
“epideictic occupies a unique place in celebrating the deeds of exemplars
who set the tone for civic community and the encomiast serves an equally
unique role as a teacher of civic virtues.” Aristotle, who understood well
the role of the epideictic, assigned “its practitioners the responsibility for
telling the story of lived virtue.” Thus, “by valorizing heroes who are em-
blematic of a society’s best qualities, encomia provide concrete guidance
on how to live in harmony with noble ideals.” Virtues are “proven” through
the narration of the hero’s deeds, not through the factional judgments of
deliberative and forensic speeches.12 The user of the epideictic, then, can
advance political objectives without necessarily resorting to overt parti-
san advocacy. Persuasion, in this sense, can succeed when generated by an
appealing narrative as distinct of an overt advocacy.
Just as the Greek epitaphioi invented Athens, political discourse, espe-
cially presidential discourse, has functioned to invent the American myth.13
Presidential speech is often not about historical truth but about rhetorical
truth or myth (one can argue that historical truth is indeed rhetorical).
Hope, vision, and optimism, the ingredients of political and social conti-
nuity and stability, and the bridge between the cherished past and an un-
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 251
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

known future, can make sense only through the rhetorical. Similar to
funeral orations, several aspects are present in the rhetoric of memorial-
izing: the marking of time, the dialectic between past and future, praising
the dead and lamenting their departure, preservation of the polis, and the
empowerment of the polity and its citizens.14
In the presidential farewell address, Campbell and Jamieson tell us, the
president engages in the “ritual of departure.”15 Reagan, however, used his
late addresses to achieve more than a mere “ritual of departure.” He sug-
gested his own eulogy. Similar to famous Greek funeral orations, Reagan’s
late addresses extolled the nation and its myths. These eulogistic-like
narratives can and do invent a persona and a myth and thus can condi-
tion future discourses and accounts. Though the myth is usually created
through eulogies to a deceased, most intriguing is the notion that eulogies
can also be delivered by a departing yet living individual. In the case of
Ronald Reagan, the rhetoric of departure, his 1989 farewell address, his
1989 last radio address, his 1992 Republican Convention address, and even
his 1994 “Alzheimer Letter,” can collectively be read also as eulogy narra-
tives. Though most if not all presidents are concerned with two kinds of
audiences, “the living citizens and the future historians,”16 Reagan, in my
view, distinctly sought to condition historical memories.17 I go even fur-
ther. I can detect the very suggestion of speci¤c words Reagan hoped oth-
ers would use in establishing his public memory.
Reagan’s January 11, 1989, Farewell Address
This (almost) ¤nal speech in of¤ce (three days later Reagan would give his
¤nal radio address) reads like the ¤nal chapter in a long and unfolding
story. In fact, Reagan would use the very word—chapter—as a metaphor
for political life depicted as a story whose ¤nal chapters were drawing to
a close. The address was distinctly nostalgic and personal, and the use of
¤rst-person references was extensive.
The address was about the marking of time: “This is the 34th time I’ll
speak to you from the Oval Of¤ce and the last. We’ve been together 8
years now, and soon it’ll be time for me to go.” Reagan was parting with
mixed emotions: “[P]arting is such sweet sorrow.”18 One can easily read
this statement in two ways: the physical departure from the of¤ce as well
as the spiritual departure from the living. Such a reading is not out of place
252 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

given the association Reagan made among “departing,” “time,” and “soon.”
In a poetic sense, the phrase “soon it’ll be time for me to go” can be read
as a hint of ultimate departure.
Writing himself into the Capitol’s political scene, Reagan also recalled
moments of solitude when viewing the scenery from a window in the
family quarters of the White House. As he described the view he incorpo-
rated in the scene the monuments to the nation’s great leaders: Washing-
ton, Jefferson, and Lincoln. The very viewing of a cherished scene for the
last time enhanced the double meaning of Reagan’s departure. One can
read in Reagan’s narrative the subtle inclusion of his character with these
men.
Reagan described his term in of¤ce as a journey whose end has come:
“[W]e are reaching our destination.”19 Again, the emphasis was on the
“end” and the reaching of one’s destination. The journey, though, was at
times rough, sometimes exhilarating, he said. Reagan highlighted two
achievements he was most proud of and which he wanted to be remem-
bered for: the economic recovery and the recovery of the nation’s morale.
At the end of the journey he was proud of the respect the United States
enjoyed throughout the world. His mission, he stated, was rather simple:
to rediscover America’s strength. His job was simple because the task was
simple. Implied in Reagan’s observation was his surprise that such a simple
truism was not rediscovered earlier and that it had fallen on him to show
the way. Reagan also implied that his greatness lay in his ability to use
common sense in the service of the country.20
Reagan set out to prove in his farewell address the rightness of his po-
litical agenda. In so doing he provided a narrative wrapped in time meta-
phor: “Well, back in 1980, when I was running for President, it was all so
different. Some pundits said our programs would result in catastrophe.”
The result was the opposite—“The longest peacetime expansion in our
history.” This achievement he attributed not to his being “The Great Com-
municator” as some had suggested but his communicating ideas and prin-
ciples grounded in two centuries of wisdom and experience.21 In other
words, Reagan humbly rejected his authorship of the economic success
and attributed the success to implementing principles established long ago
by others but largely forgotten. Such humility de¤ned his character as a
great but humble president.
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 253
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

The successes, stated Reagan, were greater than anticipated: “We meant
to change a nation, and instead, we changed the world.”22 Reagan shifted
to “we,” thus sharing the successes of his administration with those who
believed in him and supported him. But the proceeding statement was
unmistakably designed to leave a legacy. Re®ecting on earlier years, Rea-
gan told of the fork in the river “right in the middle of my life. I never
meant to go into politics. It wasn’t my intention when I was young . . . I
was happy with my career in the entertainment world, but I ultimately
went into politics because I wanted to protect something precious.” Thus,
out of pure and innocent conviction arose a politician with a purpose who
ended up ushering a revolution, “the ¤rst [revolution] . . . in the history
of mankind that truly reversed the course of government, and with three
little words: ‘We the People.’ . . . This belief has been the underlying ba-
sis for everything I’ve tried to do these past 8 years.”23
Reagan merged the generic lesson of presidential farewell address with
the recounting of his achievements. The lesson that he advocated not be
forgotten was the need for “informed patriotism.” Against the background
of ambiguity and ambivalence regarding America’s heritage and tradition,
Reagan warned “of an eradication of the American memory that could
result, ultimately, in an erosion of the American spirit. Let’s start with
some basics: more attention to American history and a greater emphasis
on civic ritual.”24 The historical lessons Reagan asked be taught again and
with renewed purpose were the same lessons that guided his political life,
especially his presidency. The teaching of this history would ¤t well the
patriotic spirit Reagan brought to the country since 1981 and would thus
¤t perfectly with the narratives of his many speeches. An “informed patri-
otism” would include, no doubt, Reagan’s role in restoring patriotism to
America.
The phrase that came to identify his presidency—a “shining city upon
a hill”—captured the essence of the memories Reagan sought to secure:
his time and his vision. Reagan explained its origin in John Winthrop’s
vision of America and throughout his life his vision as well—“a tall proud
city built on rocks stronger than oceans, windswept, God-blessed, and
teeming with people of all kinds living in harmony and peace.” Reagan
continued: “And how stands the city on this winter night? More prosper-
ous, more secure, and happier than it was 8 years ago . . . after 200 years,
254 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

two centuries, she still stands strong and true on the granite ridge, and
her glow has held steady no matter what storm. And she’s still a beacon,
still a magnet for all who must have freedom, for all the pilgrims from
all the lost places who are hurtling through the darkness, toward home.”
The ¤nal line climaxed the mythical moment: “We’ve done our part.”25
“We”—Reagan and “the men and women of the Reagan revolution”—
brought America back from the abyss and made the city upon the hill shine
and beacon again.26 Humbly and subtly Reagan wrote himself into his un-
folding saga—he restored precious and timeless principles and values that
helped put America back on its feet. Reagan wrote himself into history as
a leader assigned with the mission to restore America’s spirit and to make
the country stronger and sounder for the world to witness.
Final Radio Address: January 14, 1989
Of¤cially, this very short speech was Reagan’s ¤nal presidential address.
The marking of time was the address’s main thrust, but the tone dif-
fered from the address given only three days earlier. If the farewell ad-
dress was personal, the ¤nal radio address was intimate, bordering on
self-disclosure. The eight years in of¤ce were surprisingly described as
“tumultuous . . . in perspective.” Quick to balance this statement, Rea-
gan suggested that his years as president are “best left to the impartial
judgment of history.” Yet, recounting America’s accomplishments under
his leadership and the country’s renewed strength and respect throughout
the world, Reagan stated that “the story of these last 8 years and this Presi-
dency goes far beyond any personal concern. It is a continuation really of
a far larger story, a story of a people and a cause—a cause that from our
earliest beginning has de¤ned us as a nation and given purpose to our
national existence.”27 Reagan sought to project his leadership as unique
and wanted his successes to be appreciated in the context of tumultuous
years.
History for Reagan was a story, an apt metaphor for his preferred nar-
rative mode, as it allowed him to write himself into his narrative and thus
project his preferred interpretation. Though Reagan claimed that his was
only part of a continuous story/history, reminding the people of America’s
story and his role in it ampli¤ed the very character he so humbly por-
trayed. Reagan’s very attempt to let history be the judge functioned to
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 255
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

promote the opposite strategy—to condition a favorable version of his
role through the passivity of his approach.
Republican Convention Speech: August 17, 1992
In 1992 former president Ronald Reagan was invited to speak to the Re-
publican National Convention. Reagan delivered his familiar ode to the
party, to conservatism, and to his presidency and heritage. Though Reagan
sought to rally people behind the candidacy of George Bush, Reagan’s
speech contains distinct references to his role in history, to ¤nal good-
byes, to eulogy to self, and to posterity.
Addressing the party at the formal and of¤cial start of a new presiden-
tial campaign was one more opportunity for Reagan to say farewell. But
the differences between this address and a presidential farewell address
are worth noting. For one, the address of a former president at a conven-
tion is not invested with the symbolic and ceremonial attributes of a presi-
dential speech. The status of a former president is not the same as that of
a sitting president though a former president can be held in great esteem.
Yet the opportunity to in®uence is present, especially the opportunity to
appear wiser and more re®ective. The appearance itself could be con-
strued as the last hurrah and the ¤nal opportunity of an elder politician to
write oneself into history.
Former presidents, especially successful and loved ones, can offer the
party convention the discourse of unity and a metaphorical transition
from a cherished past to an optimistic future. The former president can
in®uence the electability of the presidential candidate and instill con¤-
dence in the party’s future, its agenda, and its elected candidate. For Rea-
gan, the convention also afforded another opportunity to depart, to talk
about the end of his journey, and to shape the historical account of his
presidency—in short, to eulogize himself.
The address is distinctly about time: the passing of time, the marking
of time, and Reagan’s role in constructing America’s time. The address is
about Reagan and his time and about the age-youth polarity. The beginning
of the speech signaled the theme: “Over the years, I’ve addressed this
convention as a private citizen, as a Governor, as a presidential candidate,
as a President and now, once again tonight, as private citizen Ronald
Reagan.” Reagan noted his advanced age and the life journey he enjoyed
256 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

thereof. In sign-posting his political life cycle, Reagan noted that he had
seen the range of technological marvels from the Model-T to landing on
the moon, two world wars, and the rise and fall of communism. The
recounting of these momentous events was set to establish Reagan’s age-
related wisdom. The detailing of events over a century’s span was also
meant to signal that Reagan approached the end of his journey, but not
before he would spend a few minutes to “talk about a country that is for-
ever young.”28
“I have not only seen, but lived the marvels of what historians have
called the ‘American Century,’” he said. According to Reagan, his wonder-
ful journey paralleled America’s greatest period—the twentieth century.
He enjoyed his journey because he knew that his future was inspired by
America’s past, and with this simple formula he said he implemented
throughout his political life, the country had been kept forever young. In
his view, America’s uniqueness was found in its ideals, as distinct from
an empire of landmass, subjugated peoples, or military might.29 The faith
in the ideals of democracy and “the creativity and entrepreneurial drive
of the American people” were the attributes that made America a special
country.30 These ideals were Reagan’s ideals. With the teacher-student po-
larity, Reagan implied that he was taught a lesson by the founder-teachers,
and now it was he who was teaching others the successful lesson.
His optimism, Reagan stated, and his rejection of those who considered
America as weakening were the foundations of his presidency. Reagan in-
terjected himself as an agent in the perpetuation of America’s idealistic
scene. He rejected the malaise of his predecessor, the high interest rates,
and the double-digit in®ation rate. With his inherent optimism, implied
Reagan, he set a different course for America.31 He reminded the audience
of his long ¤ght against Soviet communism and that despite ridicule from
the other party his course proved to be the correct one.32 Reagan also
spoke of the simplicity in changing the domestic course. Here, too, with
a simple truism, he reversed the course of the government, helping those
who should help themselves. Reagan attributed to himself the success of
conservative ideology. The life cycle Reagan outlined functioned to write
himself into a successful century, replete with achievements, progress, and
optimism. The proximity of Reagan to the various times of his narrative
served to elevate him from mere observer to an experienced and wise
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 257
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

elder statesman whose own achievements were driven by the nation’s
growth and vision.
His task now was to ensure the continuation of his idealism after his
departure from the scene, repeating his famous rhetorical aphorism:
“America’s best days are yet to come. Our proudest moments are yet to
be. Our most glorious achievements are just ahead.” The essence of his
political views was summed up by quoting Emerson, who proclaimed
America “The country of tomorrow.” “And yet tomorrow might never
have happened had we lacked the courage in the 1980’s to chart a course
of strength and honor.”33 In Reagan’s account of his time, it was his cour-
age and the people’s courage that brought the required change. He re-
turned brie®y to his earlier apocalyptic rhetoric, suggesting the dire fate
America would have suffered had he not intervened and changed the na-
tion’s erroneous course.
The qualities required of the president were enormous, he stated, add-
ing, “The presidency is a serious business. We cannot afford to take a
chance.”34 Though Reagan seeded doubt in the Democratic candidate, his
endorsement of George Bush was less than enthusiastic, and it, too, re-
vealed much about Reagan himself. Though Reagan called Bush “a trust-
worthy and level-headed leader,” the metaphor he used indicates other-
wise. Reagan had often fashioned himself as the “captain” or the “skipper”
of the nation, the one who navigated “the nation to safe waters and a secure
harbor.” Yet, relative to Reagan’s sense of direction and mission, Bush was
only “a steady hand on the tiller through the choppy waters of the 90’s.”35
Reagan implied that Bush lacked the sense of direction and that supporting
the Bush candidacy was important only to the extent of ensuring Reagan’s
legacy.
Reagan portrayed the crucial nature of the 1992 presidential election
by an allusion to his ¤rst prominent national address twenty-eight years
earlier: a “time for choosing.”36 As in 1964, the country had now reached
a crossroad. Stated Reagan: “There is widespread doubt about our public
institutions and profound concern, not merely about the economy but
about the overall direction of this great country.”37 Reagan often used the
road, crossroad, or fork in the road/river metaphors as the vehicle for
portraying the correct choices he made. The correct direction for the
258 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

country was clearly Reagan’s, reminding the nation not to stray from
the course he had charted.
Implied in Reagan’s narrative was his hope that Bush would keep the
Reagan course. It was for the rest of the nation to do the same. Stated
Reagan: “[N]othing could be more tragic, after having come all this way
on the journey of renewal we began 12 years ago, than if America herself
forgot the lessons of individual liberty that she has taught to a grateful
world.”38 By personifying America, Reagan could only imply his role in
the nation’s history—precisely his objective since any direct attribution of
heroism to self would back¤re.
The proof for his successful course could be found in the emulation of
America’s democratic experience by the new democracies springing up
around the world. With the proof of the successful course at hand, Reagan
requested that his lessons continue to be taught. Reagan projected a future
beyond his life, stating that America “remains on a voyage of discovery, a
land that has never become, but is always in the act of becoming,” and “A
decade after we summoned America to a new beginning, we are beginning
still.”39 The metaphors of continuity woven into famous phrases from past
addresses were designed not only to ensure the polity’s future but also to
ground the future in Reagan’s political compass.
Though the country’s journey was described as continuing, Reagan’s
personal journey, he said, had reached “the latest chapter in a story that
began a quarter of a century ago.” His political life, he indicated, was a
continuous story with identi¤able chapters. Now he had completed the
latest chapter. Though his phrasing left open the door for yet another fare-
well, his following statement revealed that the end was nearing: “And
whatever else history may say about me when I’m gone, I hope it will
record that I appealed to your best hopes, not your worst fears, to your
con¤dence rather than your doubts.” With death hovering above the spec-
ter of hope and fear, con¤dence and doubt, Reagan eulogized himself for
posterity, hoping for a favorable account. Unhesitatingly, he talked about
“when I’m gone” and the historical record of his time. Projecting be-
yond his lifetime, Reagan added: “My dream is that you will travel the
road ahead with liberty’s lamp guiding your steps and opportunity’s arm
steadying your way.”40 His legacy was based on two overlapping val-
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 259
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

ues: optimism and con¤dence in the future. All Reagan could hope to
achieve now was to secure these very values as metonomical of his political
persona.
Like a parent or grandparent on the deathbed, offering blessings to
surrounding family members, Reagan’s departing words were telling:
My fondest hope for each one of you—and especially for the young
people here—is that you will love your country, not for her power
or wealth, but for her sel®essness and her idealism. May each of you
have the heart to conceive, the understanding to direct, and the hand
to execute works that will make the world a little better for you
having been here.
May all of you as Americans never forget your heroic origins,
never fail to seek divine guidance, and never lose your natural, God-
given optimism.
And ¤nally, my fellow Americans, may every dawn be a great new
beginning for America, and every evening bring us closer to that
shining city upon a hill.41
The departing message to the next generation included words of wisdom
couched in the familiar “city on a hill” metaphors of Reagan’s polity. In
his ¤nal thoughts, Reagan condensed his lifelong political perspective—
America’s heroic past as the vehicle for inspiring future generations, divine
guidance in America’s civil religion, and an inborn American optimism.
Now, Reagan was ready to depart, but “Before I go,” with its literal and
metaphoric meaning co-joined, he asked his beloved wife and ultimately
his partner in his “life’s journey” to join him.42 The ¤nal departure with its
double meaning ended Reagan’s journey.
Reagan’s Alzheimer Letter: November 1, 1994
In a brief but touching letter, Ronald Reagan informed the nation of his
af®iction with Alzheimer’s Disease. The letter con¤rmed earlier rumors
that the former president was ill. Now in a formal and of¤cial way, the
disease was disclosed. The letter sought to disengage Reagan from the
public, resorting to sentimentality as the primary strategy of remem-
brance. The letter signaled that Reagan would speak in public no more.
260 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Yet, in one brief but distinct paragraph, Reagan departed (again) from the
nation, fusing eulogistic reference:
Whenever the Lord calls me home, whenever that may be, I will
leave with the greatest love for this country of ours and eternal op-
timism for its future.
I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my
life. I know that for America there will always be a bright dawn
ahead.43
Reagan’s lifelong pursuit—projecting optimism and con¤dence in
America’s future—did not fail him even as he prepared for the ultimate
departure. The journey metaphor, an apt one for politicians who wish to
claim that they have been happy because they did good deeds, was nearing
its end. Though the journey for our hero is nearing its end, the nation’s
journey is forever ongoing. Life-death, continuity-end—these are the im-
plied themes of this narrative.
With the juxtaposition of life and death, self and country, pessimism
and optimism, sunrise and sunset, Reagan artfully fused eulogistic ele-
ments into his ¤nal good-bye. Reagan put the nation above all while his
own life was now in the Lord’s hands. Time is the master metaphor here,
whereby Reagan’s time is fast approaching while the nation’s time is for-
ever secured. The underlying message is that while the hero is departing,
his deeds will live forever.
Reagan’s Epilogue as Eulogy
The perspective taken here is that of recasting public address in terms of
the construction of public memory and the usefulness of classical rhetori-
cal principles in understanding modern political discourse. The case of
Ronald Reagan illustrates an ancient rhetorical practice and explains the
construction of an enduring legacy of a president.
Funeral orations are about the passing of time, preserving a heritage,
and empowering the living. Such were Reagan’s most recent addresses.
Toward the end of his political career and as a former president, Reagan
would look back and claim to have come full circle—a circle that began
many years earlier also at a Republican convention. Reagan’s time/story
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 261
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

served to elucidate the virtues he implemented and now he asked that they
be continued. He did not elaborate on his political time for his sake but
for the country’s sake. This strategy allowed Reagan to project humility
and to imply his lifelong vision of a better tomorrow for the nation. With
this narrative, Reagan hoped he would be remembered as the humble and
sel®ess hero.
Time is the distinct mark of these discourses and the metaphor for the
life-death polarity. With the aid of age-youth polarity, the nearing of death
is hovering above his rhetoric. Indeed, funeral orations generate “extraor-
dinary knowledge . . . by taking its hearers out of ordinary time,” and
thus make time sacred.” The occasion asks “participants to embrace past,
present, and future,” and thus creates “a strong sense of immortality . . .
of time beyond time, of life beyond life.”44 Ultimately, the funeral oration
works through “a transcendent principle that makes . . . otherwise cha-
otic and brutal history intelligible and even worthy of celebration.”45
The passing of time intuitively means that the aging process is under-
way. But in Reagan’s narrative only he was aging, not the nation. Reagan
made references to his advanced age and experience but rejected the aging
process of the nation or its glory. On the contrary, his addresses projected
optimism in a distinct contrast with his dawn of life. The strategy is strik-
ing. By downplaying his fate and extolling the nation’s, Reagan humbly but
successfully narrated his departure, hoping for a space in the nation’s pub-
lic memory. The temporal, Reagan hoped, would become timeless.
In this timeless, sacred moment Reagan sought to create a permanent
space for his legacy within the broader narrative of America. These late
addresses function to both create this sacred space and craft the shape of
Reagan’s legacy within American public memory. While time moves on-
ward, Reagan’s rhetoric constructs America as ¤xed and stable, enduring
and unassailable. It is in this enduring, sacred American space that Reagan
seeks to fashion his own memorial and, thereby, craft his own eulogy.
The addresses are not devoid of ideological trappings, however. Repub-
lican ideology, artfully and subtly dispersed under the cluster of time and
journey metaphors, is central to Reagan’s addresses. With the simplicity
of repetition, Reagan romanticized his role in America’s history, resorting
to his favored themes and his best-known rhetorical staples: “the time for
choosing,” “evil empire,” “new beginning,” and “a shining city upon a hill.”
262 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

In all of these addresses, Reagan was very much the hero of his own nar-
rative. Like the speaker in a eulogy, the recounting of the past centered on
familiar and cherished memories—the kind that could easily secure iden-
ti¤cation with the people through mythical presence.
Reagan’s addresses are about his account of America’s history; they
are not about conveying truths but about accepting ideals. Like the Athe-
nian epitaphioi that purposefully blurred the distinctions between life and
death, reality and fantasy, in order to invent a utopic Athens, so are Rea-
gan’s addresses. Indeed, the addresses are about an American utopia that
remains constant—“a shining city on a hill” very much like the mythic city
the Athenians invented.46
Just as funeral orations place symbols in opposition to function rhetori-
cally on the audience,47 Reagan’s addresses are about contrasting symbols.
He spoke about his advanced age relative the nation’s youthfulness (age-
youth), his successful presidential time in contrast with his predecessor’s
time of despair (light-dark), his party’s ideals in contrast with those of the
opposition (light-dark, words-deeds), and the American century of suc-
cesses in a world replete with wars and subjugation (America/Freedom-
others/subjugation).48 In all these polarities, Reagan stated that America
was always “set apart by our faith in the ideals of Democracy.”49 As he
narrated America’s successes, Reagan elucidated a historical account of
the nation that was stable, idealistic, and visionary. The successful course
had been charted already. What was required now was to continue the safe
course.
Reagan’s addresses of departure are not about projecting an argument
but about accepting premises, which were foundational to his ideology.
He attributed America’s successes to its core values of individualism, op-
timism, simplicity, democratic ideals, divine guidance, free markets, and
the rejection of a powerful government. Though the addresses collectively
supply ample examples to prove the rightness of these premises, the
addresses are not about proving but about accepting these values. This
strategy works when fantasy and vision are constructed as long endur-
ing, thus they appear traditional and mythical. They are not presented as
propositions, nor are they open to counterarguments. Finally, as Ochs
suggests, the funeral address is not an argument but a story, not reasons
with proofs but a dramatic form capable of containing a plot, characters,
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 263
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

and action—Reagan’s addresses are inherently stories with a plot, charac-
ters, and action.50 The Reagan story/plot is about belief in a better future,
about moral lessons, and about succeeding despite insurmountable odds
and doomsayers. Reagan is the unstated hero of his plot against a govern-
ment that thought it knew better. He acted on his faith, relied on the
nation’s moral character, and got results. He was now ready to depart
knowing he did good deeds. His last request was for America to “travel
the road ahead with liberty’s lamp guiding your steps.”51
Throughout these addresses, Reagan projected virtues to be continued
after he is gone. A lament is implied in case his work did not continue. As
the predominant feature of his address was the success of his presidency
and the restoration of American values, the addresses maintain an under-
tone of lament for a future devoid of his legacy. The lament functions as
both a subtle persuasive strategy and a eulogy. As a strategy, the lament
focuses attention on action and his character, which should be admired
after death. As a eulogy, the lament adds the sadness and sorrow appro-
priate for the occasion of a beloved person departing from the scene and
the contemplation of life without the deceased.
Ever conscious of what history would say about him and his role in
America’s polity, Reagan ended his political life with a series of addresses
that suggest a preferred historical accounting. His rhetorical strategy is
intriguing as he sought to in®uence those who would look back at him
after his ultimate departure. The Great Communicator was concerned
about communicating his version of America’s story. The addresses that
feature eulogistic elements were on the surface deliberative and ceremo-
nial addresses, designated as farewell addresses, meant to rally the nation
or the party behind a presidential candidate or designed to promote
awareness of a debilitating disease. These addresses share a subtle strategy
to secure the memory of a leader by resorting to eulogistic elements of
and by a departing leader.
Notes
1. See Karlyn K. Campbell and Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Deeds Done in Words
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
2. It is one thing to remember President Eisenhower’s warning about the
264 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

military industrial complex, but it is at an entirely different level to remember
President Reagan as the one who renewed the nation’s values.
3. Michael Leff, “Textual Criticism: The Legacy of G. P. Mohrmann,” Quar-
terly Journal of Speech 72 (1986): 377–89.
4. Robert Hariman, “Time and the Reconstitution of Gradualism in King’s
Address: Response to Cox,” in Text in Context: Critical Dialogues on Signi¤cant Epi-
sodes in American Political Rhetoric, ed. Michael C. Leff and Fred J. Kaouffeld
(Davis, CA: Hermagoras Press, 1989), 205–17.
5. Michael Leff, “Dimensions of Temporality in Lincoln’s Second Inaugu-
ral,” Communication Reports 1 (1988): 26–31.
6. M. F. Carter, “The Ritual Functions of Epideictic Rhetoric: The Case of
Socrates’ Funeral Oration,” Rhetorica 9 (1991): 209–32.
7. Thomas B. Farrell, Norms of Rhetorical Culture (New Haven: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1993), 118.
8. Ibid., 119.
9. Ibid., 137.
10. Gerard A. Hauser, “Aristotle on Epideictic: The Formation of Public Mo-
rality,” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 29 (1999): 5.
11. Ibid., 6.
12. Ibid., 14, 15.
13. N. Loraux, The Invention of Athens: Funeral Orations in the Classical City,
trans. Alan Sheridan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986), 1–2.
14. See ibid., 19; Donovan Ochs, Consolatory Rhetoric: Grief, Symbol and Ritual
in the Greco-Roman Era (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1993),
xi, 1.
15. Campbell and Jamieson, Deeds Done in Words, 191.
16. E. J. Hughes, The Living Presidency (New York: Penguin, 1972), 26.
17. Walter Fisher, “Romantic Democracy, Ronald Reagan, and Presidential
Heroes,” Western Journal of Speech Communication 46 (1982): 299–310.
18. Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (Washington, DC: GPO,
1989), 53.
19. Ibid.
20. W. F. Lewis, “Telling America’s Story: Narrative Form and the Reagan
Presidency,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 73 (1987): 280–302.
21. Weekly Compilation, 54.
Ronald Reagan’s Long Good-bye / 265
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

22. Ibid.
23. Weekly Compilation, 55.
24. Ibid., 56.
25. Ibid., 56–57.
26. Ibid., 57, emphasis added.
27. Ibid., 71, 72.
28. Davis W. Houck and Amos Kiewe, eds., Actor, Ideologue, Politician: The Pub-
lic Speeches of Ronald Reagan (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993), 330.
29. Ibid.
30. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 331.
31. See Lewis, “Telling America’s Story.”
32. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 332.
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid.
35. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 333.
36. Kurt W. Ritter, “Ronald Reagan and ‘The Speech’: The Rhetoric of Public
Relations Politics,” Western Speech 32 (1968): 50–58.
37. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 333.
38. Ibid., 334.
39. Ibid.
40. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 335.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.
43. Ronald Reagan, “Alzheimer’s Letter,” New York Times, November 1, 1994.
44. Carter, “The Ritual Functions of Epideictic Rhetoric,” 223.
45. Ibid., 221.
46. Gary Wills contends that “America as second Athens” was an idea that
became prominent in the mid-nineteenth century. See his Lincoln at Gettysburg:
The Words That Remade America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992).
47. Ochs, Consolatory Rhetoric, 1.
48. Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg, 56–57.
49. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 331.
50. Ochs, Consolatory Rhetoric, 109.
51. Houck and Kiewe, Actor, Ideologue, Politician, 335.
266 / Amos Kiewe
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Barbara Biesecker (Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh) is associate pro-
fessor of communication studies at the University of Iowa and author of
Addressing Postmodernity: Kenneth Burke, Rhetoric, and a Theory of Social Change
(University of Alabama Press). Her work has also appeared in Philosophy
and Rhetoric and the Quarterly Journal of Speech.
Stephen Howard Browne (Ph.D., University of Wisconsin) is profes-
sor of speech communication at Pennsylvania State University and the
author of Angelina Grimké: Rhetoric, Identity and the Radical Imagination
(Michigan State University Press), Edmund Burke and the Discourse of Virtue
(University of Alabama Press), and coeditor of Readings on the Rhetoric
of Social Protest (Strata). He is also editor of the journal Philosophy and
Rhetoric.
Edward S. Casey (Ph.D., Northwestern University) is professor of phi-
losophy at the State University of New York, Stony Brook. He is the author
of Remembering: A Phenomenological Study (Indiana University Press), Getting
Back into Place (Indiana University Press), and The Fate of Place: A Philosophi-
cal History (University of California Press).
Rosa A. Eberly (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University) is associate pro-
fessor in the departments of Communication Arts and Sciences and of
English at Pennsylvania State University. She is the author of Citizen Critics:
Literary Public Spheres (University of Illinois Press) and coauthor of Elements
of Reasoning (Allyn and Bacon).
Contributors
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Horst-Alfred Heinrich (Ph.D. and Habilitation, Justus-Liebig Univer-
sity) is senior lecturer at Justus-Liebig-Universitaet, Giessen, Germany,
and writes on fascism, the politics of memory, national identity, and col-
lective stereotyping. His recent book, Collective Memories of the Germans, is
based on survey data testing the relationship between remembrances on
the micro and macro levels among different German subgroups.
Amos Kiewe (Ph.D., Ohio University) is chair and associate professor
of speech communication at Syracuse University. He is the coauthor of A
Shining City on a Hill (Praeger), coeditor of Actor, Ideologue, Politician: The
Public Speeches of Ronald Reagan (Greenwood), and editor of The Modern
Presidency and Crisis Rhetoric (Praeger).
Charles E. Morris III (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University) is assistant
professor of communication studies at Vanderbilt University. His work has
been published in Quarterly Journal of Speech and Women’s Studies in Commu-
nication, and he is the coeditor of Readings on the Rhetoric of Social Protest
(Strata).
Kendall R. Phillips (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University) is associate
professor of speech communication at Syracuse University. His previous
publications include Testing Controversy: A Rhetoric of Educational Reform
(Hampton Press) and essays in such journals as Philosophy and Rhetoric,
Literature/Film Quarterly, and Communication Monographs.
Barry Schwartz (Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania) is professor of
sociology at the University of Georgia. His recent work on collective
memory includes Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National Memory (Univer-
sity of Chicago Press). He is working on a second volume about Lincoln,
tracing his place in American memory from 1930 to the present. His re-
search on American and German judgments of the past is part of a broader
series of studies involving Korea, Japan, China, and Israel.
Charles E. Scott (Ph.D., Yale University) is Edwin Erle Sparks Professor
of Philosophy at Pennsylvania State University and the author of The Time
of Memory (SUNY Press), On the Advantages and Disadvantages of Ethics and
268 / Contributors
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

Politics (Indiana University Press), and The Question of Ethics: Nietzsche,
Heidegger, Foucault (Indiana University Press).
Bradford Vivian (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University) is assistant pro-
fessor of communication studies at Vanderbilt University. His work has
appeared in Philosophy and Rhetoric and Western Journal of Communication.
Barbie Zelizer (Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania) is Raymond Wil-
liams Term Chair and associate professor of communications at the Annen-
berg School of Communications, University of Pennsylvania, and the au-
thor of Covering the Body: The Kennedy Assassination, the Media, and the Shaping
of Collective Memory (University of Chicago Press) and Remembering to Forget:
Holocaust Memory through the Camera’s Eye (University of Chicago Press).
She also edited Visual Culture and the Holocaust (Rutgers University Press).
Contributors / 269
   You are reading copyrighted material published by the University of Alabama Press.  
  Any posting, copying, or distributing of this work beyond fair use as defined under U.S. Copyright law is illegal and 
  injures the author and publisher. For permission to reuse this work, contact the University of Alabama Press.

