45 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
Am I autistic?  
An intellectual autobiography 
 
Karl Friston 
 
Karl Friston 
k.friston@ucl.ac.uk 
Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging 
University College London, UK 
Citation: Friston, K. (2018). Am I autistic? An intellectual 
autobiography. ALIUS Bulletin, 2, 45-52. 
 
 
What follows are some personal notes that were inspired by answering the first 
question for ALIUS Bulletin. In looking back at my life, I can see some distinctly 
autistic traits in my childhood—and indeed current ways of engaging with the 
world. For example, I religiously avoid mobile phones and do not Skype. In fact, I 
find any disruption to my weekly routine rather nerve wracking. Unhappily, this 
means travelling to international conferences can be unsettling—where I spend most 
of the time avoiding other human beings; especially in the morning. Curiously, I feel 
most at home with myself when lecturing “onstage”—close to lots of people who are, 
at the same time, comfortably distant. 
When reflecting on my early (academic) experiences, similar themes come to mind. 
I was obsessed with the natural world and would commit to recording it in a 
somewhat obsessional fashion: see, for example, the illustrations of aquatic flora and 
fauna that decorate these notes. I must have spent hours on these for a school 
project—at the expense of actually learning what I should have been learning. 
I am not pretending that I was autistic; however, I remember being assessed by 
educational psychologists on several occasions. The first (at age 5) was a mildly 
traumatic experience that was meant to resolve a confusing relationship with my 
teacher. This educational intervention led to my withdrawal from the state 
education system and I was sent to a private school run by Catholic nuns (where I 
flourished). The second was more amusing: I remember being asked whether I 
thought the puppets in Thunderbirds ever got hungry. I recall thinking at that time 
“what on earth does a psychologist expect me to say?” After several levels of recursive 
sophistication, I opted for “yes”. The third encounter with a psychologist followed a 
science project when I was 10 years of age. I had designed a self-righting robot—
involving mercury levels and feedback actuators that would enable a little robot 
table to traverse uneven surfaces (a useful endeavour that set me in good stead to 
understand the notion of feedback, optimal control, and in later life, cybernetics). 
The psychologist wanted to know how I came up with the idea. I somehow knew she  

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
46
   
 
 
 

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
47
was more interested in me than robots per se. Shortly afterwards, something 
happened, which I want to write down before I forget it: on walking to primary 
school every day I had to pass the grammar school students waiting for the school 
bus. I recall thinking: “one day, I want to be in that queue” and then, more 
poignantly, “I must remind myself about this moment when I am grown—so I do 
not forget the insight, ambition and sophistication of childhood”.  
Throughout my education, my primary sources of self-esteem were largely drilling 
down into an area or problem in a somewhat perfectionist fashion and deriving a 
delightful sense of comfort in isolating the problem domain—that felt like my little 
world. My teachers seemed to know this and used to play games with me. One of 
these games (of which I was most proud) was to see if I could derive answers to A-
level questions in mathematics—that were more parsimonious than the worked 
answers supplied by the examination boards. I recall being obsessed by mathematical 
issues and enormously pleased by their resolution. One of my favorite achievements 
was being able to derive Schrödinger wave equation from scratch. My reward was to 
take the physics class while my physics teacher (Ged Proctor) amused himself in the 
stockroom (I don’t know how, because his primary passion was Morris dancing).  
I do not think I was really autistic; however, any unusual traits may have been 
compounded by my early schooling: my father was a civil (bridge) engineer during 
an active period of motorway construction in the United Kingdom. This meant that 
we had to move around the country. By the age of 10, I had attended six schools, and 
had come to realize that the only constants in my life were my family—and the things 
inside my head. 
This background sets the scene for a series of vignettes that, in retrospect, trace a 
clear path to the current formulations of the free energy principle. The woodlouse 
example (see my interview in this issue of ALIUS Bulletin) was formative in terms of 
subsequent exposure to evolutionary thinking. The apparent emergence of purpose 
from purposeless but “shaped” dynamics made it easy for me to understand natural 
selection; however, there was a more subtle aspect to the insight that speaks to 
second order selection. In other words, irrespective of the implicit gradient descent 
in any optimization process (e.g., natural selection) a simpler mechanism can be in 
play —without any gradient destroying dynamics. This is simply the fast evacuation 
of volatile, high-energy regimes of phase-space. In evolutionary thinking, this has 
often been exemplified in terms of selection for selectability (e.g., the increased 
mutation rate of Drosophila unexposed to a volatile temperature environment). 
Mathematically, this underwrites generic optimization schemes such as stochastic 
dynamic optimization. In later life, I often thought about trying to develop this idea 
in terms of meta-selection—and even ended up using it in the context of active  
 

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
48
 
 
 

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
49
inference; in the form of autovitiation (the destruction of unlikely fixed points by 
simply moving faster in regimes of high surprise or low probability density). 
The translation of this sort of thinking into physics started, for me, in my late teens, 
when I became preoccupied with holistic explanations based on minimal 
assumptions. I recall spending hours thinking furiously in my bedroom—
overlooking cherry blossoms in the front garden: I was convinced that there should 
be a singular explanation for the shape of things, just starting from the premise that 
something existed. My best conceptualization of this was some abstract point in an 
abstract space that, in later life, transpired to be a point attractor in a phase-space. 
This style of thinking made it easy to understand dynamical systems theory in terms 
of attracting sets—and the distinction between different forms of attracting 
manifolds.  
The obsession to put things together came to a practical head in the summer 
holidays after a year of Medical Science Tripos studies at Cambridge University. I 
had, with deliberate intent, chosen psychology and physics to pursue for the 
subsequent years of my undergraduate study. This meant that I had to catch up with 
the other physics students. I spent an absorbing holiday—to the exclusion of 
everything else—trying to get all of physics onto one page. I failed—but was able to 
condense quantum theory into one page (see Figure on the next page). I think that 
this was symptomatic of an obsessional drive to integration and simplification. 
Although I forgot nearly everything I had learned during this period, it meant I was 
not intimidated when taking up these themes in later life—largely by foraging in 
Wikipedia. 
Another memorable episode of intense thinking occurred when on a Christmas 
break from University, thinking earnestly in the early hours over a nourishing coal 
fire in the family living room. The conclusion of this contemplation was that all 
interesting things have to occupy a compact domain of phase-space and must 
therefore possess an attracting set. The key insight here was that the only invariance 
that lent “shape to things” entailed correlations. I nurtured this idea for several years 
(during which I qualified as a doctor and started psychiatric training). I found a 
peaceful distraction from my job in musing on these issues, while working in a 
therapeutic community of chronic schizophrenics in an old-style Victorian asylum.  
I had, at this point, concluded that statistical invariance (i.e., correlations) had to be 
transcribed into the physics of our brains—in order for them to possess an attracting 
set. I found this idea so compelling that I spent an entire Saturday at Blackwell’s 
bookshop in Oxford (where I was training), scouring medical and mathematics 
books for related ideas (this was before the World Wide Web and Wikipedia). After 
about three hours searching, I found references to the writings of Hebb and  

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
50
 

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
51
 
 

K. Friston – Am I autistic? 
 
 
 
ALIUS Bulletin n°2 (2018)  
 
aliusresearch.org/bulletin 
52
surprised myself with an ambivalent reaction: intense pleasure that the idea was 
valid and intense displeasure I had wasted several years on something that was 
already known. I remember trying to work out how old Hebb was—and whether I 
could have ever met him. From that point on, I waited patiently until I could get 
into research proper, at around the age of 28. The next part of the story, from my 
perspective, can be found in (Friston, 2012). 
 
References 
 
Friston, K. (2012). The history of the future of the Bayesian brain. Neuroimage, 62(2), 
1230-1233. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.004 
 
 
 
 

