
From the Closed World 
TO THE 
INFINITE-
UNIVERSE 
i 
AL E XA N D R E  KOYRE, Ph.D., Litt.D. 
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne, Paris 
The 
Johns 
IIopkins 
Press / B A L TIM 0 R E 
Bb 
S j j 
.KLP1 

© 1957 by The Johns Hopkins Press; Baltimore 18, Md. 
Distributed in Great Britain by 
The Oxford University Press, LoJ:l.don 
Printed in U. S. A. by the J. H. Furst Company, Baltimore 
Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 57-7080 
The Hideyo Noguchi Lectureship 
In 1929 the late Dr. Emanuel Libman of New York gave 
$10,000 to The Johns Hopkins University for the establiࠁh­
ment of a lectureship in the History of Medicine. In accord­
ance with Dr. Libman's wishes it was named The Hideyo 
Noguchi Lectureship to pay tribute to the memory of the 
distinguished Japanese scientist. 
The present volume owes its origin to the eleventh lecture 
on this foundation which was delivered on December 15, 1953, 
at The Johns Hopkins Institute of the History of Medicine 
by Professor Alexandre Koyre. 
" 

Preface 
Time and again, when studying the history of scientific 
and philosophical thought in the sixteenth and the seven­
teenth centuries - they are, indeed, so closely interrelated 
and linked together that, separated, they become ununder­
standable - I have been forced to recognize, as many 
others have before me, that during this period human, or 
at least European, minds underwent a deep revolution 
which changed the very framework and patterns of our 
thinking and of which modern science and modern phi­
losophy are, at the same time, the root and the fruit. 
This revolution or, as it has been called, this 
H crisis 
of European consciousness," has been described and ex­
plained in many different ways. 
Thus, whereas it is 
generally admitted that the development of the new 
cosmology, which replaced the geo- or even anthropo­
centric world of Greek and medieval astronomy by the 
heliocentric, and, later, by the centerless universe of 
modern astronomy, played a paramount role in this pro­
cess, some historians, interested chiefly in the social impli­
cations of spiritual changes, have stressed the alleged 
conversion of the human mind from theoria to praxis, 
from the scientia contemplativa to the scientia activa et 
operativa, which transformed man from a spectator into 
an owner and master of nature; some others have stressed 
the replacement of the teleological and organismic pattern 
of thinking and explanation by the mechanical and causal 
pattern, leading, ultimately, to the " mechanisation of the 
yii 

PR E FA C E  
world-view " so prominent in modern times, especially in 
the eighteenth century: still others have simply described 
the despair and confusion brought by the " new philos­
ophy " into a world from which all coherence was gone and 
in which the skies no longer announced the glory of God. 
As for myself, I have endeavored in my Galilean Studies 
to define the structural patterns of the old and the new 
world-views and to determine the changes brought forth 
by the revolution of the seventeenth century. 
They 
seemed to me to be reducible to two fundamental and 
. closely connected actions that I characterised as the 
destruction of the cosmos and the geometrization of 
space, that is, the substitution for the conception of the 
world as a finite and well-ordered whole, in which the 
spatial structure embodied a hierarchy of perfection and 
value, that of an indefinite or even infinite universe no 
longer united by natural subordination, but unified only 
by the identity of its ultimate and basic components and 
laws; and the replacement of the Aristotelian conception 
of space - a differentiated set of innerworldly places ­
by that of Euclidean geometry - an essentially infinite 
and homogenous extension - from now on considered as 
identical with the real space of the world. The spiritual 
change that I describe did not occur, of course, in a 
sudden mutation. Revolutions, too, need time for their 
accomplishment; revolutions, too, have a history. Thus 
the heavenly spheres that encompassed the world and 
held it together did not disappear at once in a mighty 
explosion; 
the world-bubble grew 
and 
swelled before 
bursting and merging with the space that surrounded it. 
The path which led from the closed world of the 
ancients to the open one of the moderns was, as a matter 
viii 
PREFACE 
of fact, not very long: b arely a hundred years separate 
the De revolutionibus orbium coelestium of Copernicus 
(1543) 
from the Principia philosophiae of Descartes 
1(1644) ; barely forty years these Principiae from the Phi­
losophia naturalis principia mathematica (1687) . On the 
other hand, it was rather difficult, full of obstacles and 
dangerous road blocks. Or, to put it in simpler language, 
the problems involved in the ihfinitization of the universe 
are too deep, the implications of the solutions too far­
reaching and too important to 
allow an unimpeded 
progress. 
Science, philosophy, even theology, are, all ·0£ 
them, legitimately interested in questions about the nature 
of space, structure of matter, patterns of action and, last 
but not least, about the nature, structure, and value of 
human thinking and of human science. Thus it is science, 
philosophy, and theology, represented as often as not by 
the very same men - Kepler and Newton, Descartes and 
Leibniz - that join and take part in the great debate that 
starts with Bruno and Kepler and ends - provisionally, 
to be sure - with Newton and Leibniz. 
I did not deal with these problems in my Galilean 
Studies, where I had to describe only the steps that 
led to the great revolution and formed, so to speak, its 
prehistory. 
But in my lectures at The Johns Hopkins 
University - "  The Origins of l\10dern Science," in 1951, 
and " Science and Philosophy in the Age of Newton," in 
1952 - in which I studied the history of this revolution 
itself, I had the opportunity to treat as they deserved 
the questions that were p aramount in the minds of its 
great protagonists. It is this history that, under the title 
From the Closed vVorld to the Infinite Universe, I have 
endeavored to tell in the Noguchi Lecture that I had the 
ix 

P R E FA C E 
honour of giving in 1958; and it is the self-same story 
that, taking the history of cosmology, as Ariadne's thread 
I am retelling in this volume: 
it is, indeed, only an 
expanded version of my Noguchi Lecture. 
I would like to express my gratitude to the Noguchi 
Committee for its kind permission to expand my lecture 
to its present dimensions, and to thank Mrs. Jean Jacquot, 
Mrs. Janet Koudelka, and Mrs. Willard King for assis­
tance in preparing the manuscript. 
I am also indebted to Abelard-Schuman, publishers, for 
the permission to quote Mrs. Dorothea Waley Singer's 
translation of Giordano Bruno's De l'infinito universo et 
mondi (New York, 1950) .  
PRINCETON 
JANUARY, 1957 
x 
Alexandre Koyre 
Contents 
Preface, vii 
Introduction, 1 
1. 
The Sky and the Heavens, 5 
NICHOLAS OF CUSA AND MARCELLUS PALIGENIUS 
II. 
The New Astronomy and the New Metaphysics, fl8 
N. COPERNICUS, TH. DIGGES, G. BRUNO AND W. GILBERT 
III. 
The New Astronomy against the New Metaphysics, 58 
JOHANNES KEPLER'S REJECTION OF INFINITY 
IV. 
Things Never Seen Before and Thoughts Never 
Thought: the Discovery of New Stars in the World 
Space and the Materialization of Space, 88 
GALILEO AND DESCARTES 
v. Indefinite Extension or Infinite Space, 110 
DESCARTES AND HENRY MORE 
VI. 
God and Space, Spirit and Matter, Ifl5 
HENRY MORE 
VII. 
Absolute Space, Absolute Time and Their Relations 
to God, 155 
MALEBRANCHE, NEWTON AND BENTLEY 
VIII. 
The Divinization of Space, 190 
JOSEPH RAPHSON 
IX. 
God and the World: Space, Matter, Ether and 
Spirit, fl06 
ISAAC NEWTON 

x. 
Absolute Space and Absolute Time: 
God's Frame of Action, 221 
BERKELEY AND NEWTON 
XI. 
The Work-Day God and the God of the Sabbath, 285 
NEWTON AND LEIBNIZ 
XII. 
Conclusion: 
The Divine Artifex and the Dieu Faineant, 278 
Notes, 277 
Index, 805 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Figure 1 .  Typical pre-Copernican diagram of the universe, 7 
Figure 2. Thomas Digges's diagram of the infinite 
Copernican universe, 87 
Figure 8. The figure M of Kepler, 79 
Figure 4. Galileo's star-picture of 
the shield and sword of Orion, 98 
I Introduction 
It is generally admitted that the seventeenth century 
underwent, and accomplished, a very radical spiritual 
revolution of which modern science is at the same time 
the root and the fruit.l This revolution can be - and was 
- described in a number of different ways. 
Thus, for 
instance, some historians have seen its most characteristic 
feature in the secularization of consciousness, its turning 
away from transcendent goals to immanent aims, that is, 
in the replacement of the concern for the other world and 
the other life by preoccupation with this life and this 
world. Some others have seen it in the discovery, by man's 
consciousness, of its essential subjectivity and, therefore, 
in the substitution of the subjectivism of the moderns 
for the objectivism of mediaevals and ancients; still others, 
in the .change of relationship between Oewpta and 1TpagĐs, 
the old ideal of the vita contemplativa yielding its place 
to that of the vita activa. Whereas mediaeval and ancient 
man aimed at the pure contemplation of nature and of 
being, the modern one wants domination and mastery. 
These characterizations are by no means false, and they 
certainly point out some rather important aspects of the 
spiritual revolution - or crisis - of the seventeenth cen­
tury, aspects that are exemplified and revealed to us, for 
example, by Montaigne, by Bacon, by Descartes, or by the 
general spread of skepticism and free thinking. 
1 

INTR O D U C TI O N  
Yet, in my opinion they are concomitants and expres­
sions of a deeper and more fundamental process as the 
result of which man - as it is sometimes said - lost his 
place in the world, or, more correctly perhaps, lost the very 
world in which he was living and about which he was 
thinking, and had to transform and replace not only his 
fundamental concepts and attributes, but even the very 
framework of his thought. 
This scientific and philosophical revolution - it is in­
deed impossible to separate the philosophical from the 
purely scientific aspects of this process: they are interde­
pendent and closely linked together - can be described 
roughly as bringing forth the destruction of the Cosmos, 
that is, the disappearance, from philosophically and scien­
tifically valid concepts, of the conception of the world as 
a finite, closed, and hierarchically ordered whole (a whole 
in which the hierarchy of value deterlnined the hierarchy 
and structure of being, rising from the dark, heavy and 
imperfect earth to the higher and higher perfection of 
the stars and heavenly spheres) ,z and its replacement by 
an indefinite and even infinite universe which is bound 
together by the identity of its fundamental components 
and laws, and in which all these components are placed 
on the same level of being. This, in turn, implies the dis­
carding by scientific thought of all considerations based 
upon value-concepts, such as perfection, harmony, mean­
ing and aim, and finally the utter devalorization of being, 
the divorce of the world of value and the world of facts. 
It is this aspect of the seventeenth century revolution, 
the story of the destruction of the Cosmos and the infiniti­
zation of the universe that I· will attempt to present here, 
at least in its main line of development.s 
2 
I N T R O DU C TI O N 
The full and complete history of this process would 
make, indeed, a long, involved and complicated story. It 
would have to deal with the history of the new astronomy 
in its shift from geocentrical to heliocentrical conceptions 
and in its technical development from Copernicus to 
N ewton, and with that of the new physics in its consistent 
trend toward the mathematization of nature and its con­
comitant and convergent emphasis upon experiment and 
theory. It would have to treat the revival of old, and the 
birth of new, philosophical doctrines allied with, and 
opposed to, the new science and new cosmological outlook. 
It would have to give an account of the formation of the 
" corpuscular philosophy," that strange alliance of Democ­
Titus and Plato, and of the struggle between the " ple­
nists " and the " vacuists " as well as that of the partisans 
and the foes of strict mechanism and attraction. It would 
have to discuss the views and the work of Bacon and 
Hobbes, Pascal and Gassendi, Tycho Brahe and Huygens, 
Boyle and Guericke, and of a great many others as well. 
However, in spite of this tremendous number of ele­
ments, discoveries, theories and polemics that, in their 
interconnections, form the complex and moving back­
ground and sequel of the great revolution, the main line 
of the great debate, the main steps on the road which leads 
from the closed world to the infinite universe, stand out 
clearly in the works of a few great thinkers who, in deep 
understanding of its primary importance, have given their 
full attention to the fundamental problem of the structure 
of the world. It is with them, and their works, that we 
shall be concerned here, all the more so as they present 
themselves to' us in the form of a closely connected dis­
CUSSIon. 

I I. The Sky and the Heavens 
Nicholas of Cusa 
& Marcellus Palingenius 
The conception of the infinity of the universe, like every­
thing else or nearly everything else, originates, of course, 
with the Greeks; and it is certain that the speculations 
of the Greek thinkers about the infinity of space and the 
multiplicity of worlds have played an important part in 
the history we shall be dealing with.4 It seems to me, 
however, impossible to reduce the history of the infinitiza­
tion of the universe to the rediscovery of the world-view 
of the Greek atomists which became better known through 
the newly discovered Lucretius 5 or the newly translated 
Diogenes Laertius .6 We must not forget that the infinitist 
conceptions of the Greek atomists were rejected by the 
main trend, or trends, of Greek philosophical and scientific 
thought - the Epicurean tradition was not a scientific 
one 7 - and that for this very reason, though never£or­
gotten, they could not be accepted by the mediaevals. 
We must not forget, moreover, that " influence" is not 
a simple, but on the contrary, a very complex, bilateral 
relation. We are not influenced by everything we read 
or learn. In one sense, and perhaps the deepest, we our-
[) 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
sel yes determine the influences we are submitting to; our 
intellectual ancestors are by no means given to, but are 
freely chosen by, us. At least to a large extent. 
How could we explain otherwise that, in spite of their 
great popUlarity, neither Diogenes nor even Lucretius 
had, for more than a century, any influence on the fifteenth 
century's cosmological thinking? 
The first man to take 
Lucretian 
cosmology 
seriously 
was 
Giordano 
Bruno. 
Nicholas of Cusa - it is true that it is not certain whether 
at the time when he wrote his Learned Ignorance (1440) 
he knew the De rerum natura - does not seem to have 
paid much attention to it. Yet it was Nicholas of Cusa, 
the last great philosopher of the dying Middle Ages, who 
first rejected the mediaeval cosmos-conception and to 
whom, as often as not, is ascribed the merit, or the crime, 
of having asserted the infinity of the universe. 
It is indeed in such a way that he was interpreted by 
Giordano Bruno, by Kepler and, last but not least, by 
Descartes, who in a well-known letter to his friend Chanut 
(Chanut reports some reflections of Christina of Sweden, 
who doubted whether, in the indefinitely extended universe 
of Descartes, man could still occupy the central position 
that, according to the teaching of religion, was given to 
him by God in the creation of the world) tells the latter 
that after all " the Cardinal of Cusa and several other 
Divines have supposed the world to be infinite, without 
ever being reproached by the Church; on the contrary, 
it is believed that to make His works appear very great 
is---to honor God." 8 The Cartesian interpretation of the 
teaching of Nicholas of Cusa is rather plausible as, indeed, 
Nicholas of Cusa denies the finitude of the world and its 
enclosure by the walls of the heavenly spheres. But he 
6 
Schema huiuspra:nllfa: diuifionisSpha:rarum. 
FIGURE 1 
Typical pre-Copernican 
diagram of the universe 
(from the 1589 edition of Peter 
Apian's Cosmographia) 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
does not assert its positive infinity; as a matter of fact 
he avoids as carefully and as consistently as Descartes 
himself the attribution to the universe of the qualification 
" infinite," which he reserves for God, and for God alone. 
His universe is not infinite (infinitum) but " interminate " 
(interminatum) , which means not only that it is bound­
less and is not terminated by an outside shell, but also 
that it is not " terminated " in its constituents, that is, 
that it utterly lacks precision and strict determination. 
It never reaches the " limit "; it is, in the full sense of the 
word, indetermined. It cannot, therefore, be the object of 
total and precise knowledge, but only that of a partial 
and conjectural one.9 It is the recognition or this neces­
sarily partial - and relative - character or our knowl­
edge, of the impossibility of building a univocal and objec­
tive representation of the universe, that constitutes - in 
one or its aspects - the docta ignorantia, the learned 
ignorance, advocated by Nicholas of Cusa as a means of 
transcending the limitations or our rational thought. 
The world-conception or Nicholas of Cusa is not based 
upon a criticism of contemporary astronomical or cosmo- ' 
logical theories, and does not lead, at least in his own 
thinking, to a revolution in science. 
Nicholas or Cusa, 
though it has orten been so claimed, is not a forerunner of 
Nicholas Copernicus. And yet his conception is extremely 
interesting and, in some of its bold assertions - or nega­
tions - it goes far beyond anything that Copernicus ever 
dared to think of.lO 
The universe of Nicholas or eusa is an expression or 
a development (explicatio) , though, or course, necessarily 
imperfect and inadequate, of God - imperrect 'and inade­
quate because it displays in the realm of multiplicity and 
8 
C L O  S E 1;> wo R L D to Infinite Universe 
separation what in God is present in an indissoluble and 
intimate unity (complicatio) , a unity which embraces 
not only the different, but even the opposite, qualities or 
determinations of being. In its turn, every singular thing 
in the universe represents it - the universe - and thus 
also God, in its own particular manner; each in a manner 
different from that of all others, by " contracting " (con­
tractio) the wealth of the universe in accordance with its 
own unique individuality. 
The metaphysical and epistemological conceptions of 
Nicholas of Cusa, his idea of the coincidence of the oppo­
sites in the absolute which transcends them, as well as 
the correlative concept of learned ignoranct as the intel­
lectual act that grasps this relationship which transcends 
discursive, rational thought, follow and develop the pat­
tern of the mathematical paradoxes involved in the 
infinitization of certain relations valid for finite objects. 
Thus, for instance, nothing is more opposed in geometry 
than " straightness " and " curvilinearity "; and yet in 
the infinitely great circle the circumference coincides with 
the tangent, and in the infinitely small one, with the 
diameter. In both cases ,  moreover, the center loses its 
unique, determinate position; it coincides with the circum­
ference; it is nowhere, o r  everywhere. But
'
" great " and 
" small " are themselves a pair of opposed concepts that 
are valid and meaningful only in the realm of finite 
quantity, the realm of relative being, where there are no 
" great " or " small " objects, but only " greater " and 
" smaller " ones, and where, therefore, there is no " great-:­
est," as well as no " smallest." Compared with the infinite 
there is nothing that is greater or smaller than anything 
else. The, absolute, infinite maximum does not, any more 
9 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
than the absolute, infinite minimum, belong to the series 
of the great and small. They are outside it, and therefore, 
as Nicholas of eusa boldly concludes, they coincide. 
Another example can be provided by kinematics. No 
two things, indeed, are more opposed than motion and 
rest. A body in motion is never in the same place; a body 
at rest is never outside it. And yet a body moving with 
infinite velocity along a circular path will always be in 
the place of its departure, and at the same time will always 
be elsewhere, a good proof that motion is a relative concept 
embracing the oppositions of " speedy" and " slow.
it follows that, just as in the sphere of purely geometrical 
quantity, there is no minimum and no maximum· of 
motion, no slowest and no quickest, alld that the absolute 
maximum of velocity (infinite speed) as well as its abso­
lute minimum (infinite slowness or rest) are both outside 
it, and, as we have seen, coincide. 
Nicholas of eusa is well a ware of the originality of his 
thought and even more so of the rather paradoxical and 
strange character of the conclusion to which he is led 
by learned ignorance.ll 
It is possible [he states] that those who will read things 
previously unheard of, and now established by Learned 
Ignorance, will be astonished. 
Nicholas of eusa cannot help it: it has, indeed, been 
established by learned ignorance 12 
. . . that the universe is triune; and that there is nothing 
that is not a unity of potentiality, actuality and connecting 
motion; that no one of these can subsist absolutely without 
the other; and that all these are in all [things] in different 
degrees, so different that in the universe no two [things] 
10 
C L O S E D  W O R L D to Infinite Universe 
can be completely equal to each other in everything. 
Accordingly, if we consider the diverse motions of the 
[celestial] orbs, [we find that] it is impossible for the machine 
of the world to have any fixed and motionless center; be 
it this sensible earth, or the air, or fire or anything else. For 
there can be found no absolute minimum in motion, that is, 
no fixed center, because the minimum must necessarily 
coincide with the maximum. 
Thus the centrum of the world coincides with the circum­
ference and, as we shall see, it is not a physical, but a 
, metaphysical " centrum," which does not belong to the 
world. This " centrum," which is the same as the " circum­
ference," that is, beginning and end, foundation and limit, 
-
the " place " that " contains " it, is nothing other than the 
Absolute Being or God. 
Indeed, pursues Nicholas of eusa, curiously reversing 
a famous Aristotelian argument in favour of the limitation 
of the world: 13 
The world has no circumference, because if it had a center 
and a circumference, and thus had a beginning and end in 
itself, the world would be limited in respect to something 
else, and outside the world there would be something other, 
and space, things that are wholly lacking in truth. Since, 
therefore, it is impossible to enclose the world between a 
corporeal centrum and a circumference, it is [impossible for] 
our reason to have a full understanding of the world, as 
it implies the comprehension of God who is the center and 
the circumference of it . 
Thus,14 
. . .  though the world is not infinite, yet it cannot be con­
ceived as finite, since it has no limits between which it is 
confined. The earth, therefore, which cannot be the center, 
11 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
cannot be lacking in all motion; but it is necessary that it 
move in such a way that it could be moved infinitely less. 
Just as the earth is not the center of the world, so the 
sphere of the fixed stars is not its circumference, though if 
we compare the earth to the sky, the earth appears to be 
nearer to the center, and the sky to the circumference. The 
earth therefore is not the center, neither of the eighth nor 
of [any] other sphere, nor does the rising of the six signs 
[of the Zodiac] above the horizon imply that the earth is 
in the center of the eighth sphere. For even if it were 
somewhat distant from the center and outside the axis, 
which traverses the poles, so that in one part it would be 
elevated towards one pole, and in the other [part] depressed 
towards the other, nevertheless it is clear that, being at 
such a great distance from the poles and the horizon being 
just as vast, men would see 'only half of the sphere [and 
therefore believe themselves to be in its center]. 
Furthermore the very center of the world is no more 
inside the earth than outside it; for neither this earth, nor 
any other sphere, has a center; indeed, the center is a point 
equidistant from the circumference; but it is not possible 
that there be a true sphere or circumference such that a 
truer, and more precise one, could not be possible; a precise 
. equidistance of divers [objects] cannot be found outside of 
God, for He alone is the infinite equality. Thus it is the 
blessed God who is the center of the world; He is the center 
of the earth and of all the spheres, and of all [the things] 
that are in the world, as He is at the same time the infinite 
circumference of all. Furthermore, there are in the sky no 
immovable, fixed poles, though the sky of the fixed stars 
appears by its motion to describe circles graduated in magni­
tude, lesser than the colures or than the equinoctials and 
also circles of an intermediate [magnitude]; yet, as a matter 
of fact, all the parts of the sky must move, though unequally 
lo 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
in comparison with the circles described by the motion of 
the fixe stars .. Thus, as certain stars appear to describe 
the m.axImal cIrcle, so certain [others], the minimal, but 
there .IS no star that does not describe any. Therefore, as 
there IS no fixed pole in the sphere, it is obvious that neither 
c˥n there be found an exact mean, that is, a point equi­
d:stant from the poles. There is therefore no star in the 
eIghth sphere which by [its] revolution would describe a 
maximal circle, because it would have to be equidistant 
from the poles w~ich do not exist, and accordingly [the star1 
that would descrIbe the minimal circle does not exist either. 
Thus the poles of the spheres coincide with the center and 
there i˦ no other center than the pole, that is, the blessed 
God HImself. 
.
The exact meaning of the conception developed by 
NICholas of Cusa is not quite clear; the texts that I have 
qôoted could be - and have been - interpreted in many 
dIfferent ways which I will not examine here. 
As for 
myself, I belióve that we can understand it as expressing, 
and as streSSIng, the lack of precision and stability In 
the created world. 
Thus ,  there are no stars exactly on 
}he poles, or on the equator of the celestial sphere. There 
IS no fixed constant axis; the eighth, as well as all the other 
spheres, perform their revolutions around axes that con­
tinuously shift their positions. Moreover, these spheres 
are by no means
. exact, mathematical (" true ") spheres, 
bòt ?,nly som:thIng which we· should today call " spher­
OIds 
.
; accordIngly, they have no center, in the precise 
meanIng of this term. 
It follows therefore that neither 
the
, 
earth, nor anything else, can be placed in this center, 
whIch does not exist, and that thus nothing in this world 
can be completely and absolutely at rest. 
13 

C L O S ED W O RLD to Infinite Universe 
I do not believe we can go further than that and at­
tribute to Nicholas of eusa a purely relativistic conception 
of space, such as, for instance, Giordano Bruno imputes 
._- to him. Such a conception implies the denial of the very 
existence of celestial orbs and spheres, which we cannot 
ascribe to Nicholas of eusa. 
Yet, in spite of this retention of the spheres, there is a 
good deal of relativism in Nicholas of Cusa's world-view. 
Thus he continues: 15 
But we cannot discover motion unless it be by compari­
son with something fixed, that is [by referring it to] the 
poles or the centers and assuming them in our measurements 
of the motions [as being at rest]; it follows therefrom that 
we are always using conjectures, and err in the results [of 
our measurements]. And [if] we are surprised when we do 
not find the stars in the . places where they should be 
according to the ancients, [it is] because we believe [wrongly] 
that they were right in their conceptions concerning the 
centers and poles as well as in their measurements. 
It seems, then, that for Nicholas of Cusa the lack of 
agreement between the observations of the ancients and 
those of the moderns has to be explained by a change in 
the position of the axis (and poles) , and, perhaps, by a 
shift in that of the stars themselves. 
From all this, that is, trom the fact that nothing in the 
world can be at rest, Nicholas of eusa concludes: 
. . .  it is obvious that the earth moves. And because from 
the motion of the comets, of the air and of fire, we know by 
experience that the elements move, and [that] the moon 
[moves] less from the Orient to the Occident than Mercury 
or Venus, or the sun, and so on, it follows that the earth 
14 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
[considered as an element] moves less than all the others; 
yet [considered] as a star, it does not describe around the 
center or the pole a minimal circle, nor does the eighth 
sphere, or any other, describe the maximal, as has already 
been proved. 
You have now to consider attentively what follows: just 
as the stars move around the conjectural poles of the eighth 
sphere, so also do the earth, the moon and the planets move 
in various ways and at [different] distances around a pole, 
which pole we have to conjecture as being [in the place] 
where you are accustomed to put the center. It follows there­
from that though the earth is, so to speak, the star which 
is nearer the central pole [than the others] it still moves, 
and yet does not describe in [its] motion the minimum circle, 
as has been shown supra. Moreover, neither the sun, nor 
the moon, nor any sphere-though to us it seems otherwise 
-can in [its] motion describe a true circle, because they 
do not move around a fixed base. Nowhere is there a true 
circle such that a truer one would not be possible, nor is 
[anything] ever at one time [exactly] as at another, neither 
does it move in a precisely equal [manner], nor does it 
describe an equally perfect circle, though we are not a ware 
of it. 
It is rather difficult to say precisely what kind of motion 
is ascribed to the earth by Nicholas of Cusa. In any case, 
it does not seem to be any of those that Copernicus was 
to attribute to it: it is neither the daily rotation around 
its axis, nor the annual revolution around the sun, but 
a kind of loose orbital gyration around a vaguely deter­
mined and constantly shifting center. This motion is of 
the same nature as that of all other celestial bodies, the 
sphere of the fixed stars included, though the slowest of 
15 

C L O S E D  WO R L D  to Infinite Universe 
them all, that of the sphere of the fixed stars being the 
quickestह 
As for Nicholas of Cusa's assertions (quite unavoidable 
from his epistemological premises) that there is nowhere 
a precise circular orb or a precisely uniform motion, they 
must be interpreted as implying immediately (though he 
does not say it explicitly, it is clearly enough suggested 
by the context) that not only the factual contentऺ but 
the very ideal of Greek and mediaeval astronomy, that 
is, the reduction of celestial motions to a system of inter­
locking uniform circular ones which would " save " the 
phenomena by revealing the permanent stability of the 
real behind the seeming iITegularity of the apparent, is 
fallacious and must be abandoned. 
Yet Nicholas of Cusa goes even further and, drawing 
the (penultimate) conclusion from the relativity of the 
perception o£ space 
(direction) and motion, he asserts 
that as the world-image of a given observer is determined 
by the place he occupies in the universe; and as none of 
these places can claim an absolutely privileged value (for 
instance, that of being the center of the universe), we 
have to admit the possible existence of different, equivalent 
world-images, the relative - in the full sense of the word 
_ character of each of them, and the utter impossibility 
of forming an objectively valid representation of the 
universe.16 
Consequently, if you want to have a better understanding 
of the motion of the universe, you must put together the 
center and the poles, with the aid of your im,agination as 
far as you can; for if somebody were on the earth, under 
the arctic pole, and somebody else on the arctic pole, then 
just as to the man on the earth the pole will appear to be 
16 
C L O S E D  W O RLD to Infinite Universe 
in the zenith, to the man on the pole it is the center that 
would appear to be in the zenith. And as the antipodes 
have, like ourselves, the sky above them, so to those who 
are in the poles (in both), the earth will appear to be in 
the zenith, and wherever the observer be he will believe 
himself to be in the center. Combine thus these diverse 
imaginations, making the center into the zenith and vice 
versa, and then, with the intellect, which alone can practise 
learned ignorance, you will see that the world and its 
motion cannot be represented by a figure, because it will 
appear almost as a wheel within a wheel, and a sphere 
within a sphere, having nowhere, as we have seen, either 
a center or a circumference. 
The ancients [continues Nicholas of Cusa 17] did not arrive 
at the things that we have brought forth, because they were 
deficient in learned ignorance. But for us it is clear that 
this earth really moves, though it does not appear to us to 
do so, because we do not apprehend motion except by a 
certain comparison with something fixed. Thus if a man 
in a boat, in the middle of a stream, did not know that 
the water was flowing and did not see the bank, how would 
he apprehend that the boat was moving? 18 Accordingly 
as it will always seem to the observer, whether he be o| 
the earth, or on the sun or on another star, that he is in 
the ˠuasi-ˡotionlesˢ center and that all the other [things] 
are ˣn mˤtIOn, he. wIll certainly determine the poles [of this 
mobon] In relatIOn to himself; and these poles will be 
different for the observer on the sun and for the one on the 
earth, and still different for those on the moon and Mars 
and so on for the rest. Thus, the fabric of the world 
(maÎhina
. 
mundi) will quasi have its center everywhere 
and Its cIrcumference nowhere, because the circumference 
and the center are God, who is everywhere and nowhere. 
It must be added that this earth is not spherical, as 
17 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
some have said, though it tends towards sphericity; indeed, 
the shape of the world is contrasted in its parts, as well as 
its motion; but when the infinite line is considered as con­
tracted in such a way that, as contracted, it could not be 
more perfect or more spacious, then it is circular, and the 
corresponding corporeal figure [is the] spherical one. For all 
motion of the parts is towards the perfection of the whole; 
thus heavy bodies [move] towards the earth, and light ones 
[move] upward, earth towards earth, water towards water, 
fire towards fire; accordingly, the motion of the whole tends 
as far as it can towards the circular, and all shapes towards 
the spherical one, as we see in the parts of animals, in trees, 
and in the sky. But one motion is more circular and more 
perfect than another, and it is the same with shapes. 
VVe cannot but admire the boldness and depth of 
Nicholas of Cusa's cosmological conceptions which culmin­
ate in the astonishing transference to the universe of 
the pseudo-Hermetic characterization of God: " a  sphere 
of which the center is everywhere, and the circumference 
nowhere." 19 But we must recognize also that, without 
going far· beyond him, it is impossible to link them with 
astronomical science or to base upon them a " reformation 
of astronomy.
" This is prob
so utterly disregarded by his contemporaries, and even 
by his successors for more than a hundred years. No one, 
not even Lefevre d'Etaples who edited his works, seems 
to have paid much attention to them,zo and it was only 
after Copernicus - who knew the works of Nicholas of 
eusa, at least his treatise on the quadrature of the circle, 
but does not seem to have been influenced by him 21 - and 
even after Giordano Bruno, who drew his chief inspiration 
from him, that Nicholas of Cusa achieved fame as a fore-
18 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
runner of Copernicus, and even of Kepler, and could be 
quoted by Descartes as an advocate of the infinity of 
the world. 
It is rather tempting to follow the example of these 
illustrious adulirers of Nicholas of eusa, and to read 'into 
him all kinds of anticipations of later discoveries, such, 
for instance, as the flattened form of the earth, the elliptic 
trajectories of the planets, the absolute relativity of space, 
the rotation of the heavenly bodies upon their axes. 
Yet we must resist this temptation. 
As a matter of 
fact, Nicholas of Cusa does not assert anything of the 
kind. He does believe in the existence and also in the 
motion of heavenly spheres, that of the fixed stars being 
the quickest of all, as well as in the existence of a central 
region of the universe around which it moves as a whole, 
conferring this motion on all its parts. He does not assign 
a rotary motion to the planets, not even to this our earth. 
He does not assert the perfect uniformity of space. More­
over, in deep opposition to the fundamental inspiration of 
the founders of modern science and of the modern world­
view, who, rightly or wrongly, tried to assert the panarchy 
of mathematics, he denies the very possibility of the 
mathematical treatment o f  nature. 
We must now turn our attention to another aspect of 
the cosmology of Nicholas of Cusa, historically perhaps 
the most important: his rej ection of the hierarchical struc­
ture of the universe, and, quite particularly, his denial ­
together with its central position - of the uniquely low 
and despicable position assigned to the earth by traditional 
cosmology. Alas, here too ,  his deep metaphysical intuition 
is marred by scientific conceptions that were not in ad­
vance of but rather behind his time, such as, for instance, 
19 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
the attribution to the moon, and even to the earth, of a 
light of their own.22 
The shape of the earth is noble and spherical, and its 
motion is circular, though it could be more perfect. And 
since in the world there is no maximum in perfections, 
motions and figures (as is evident from what has already 
been said) it is not true that this earth is the vilest and 
lowest [of the bodies of the world], for though it seems to 
be more central in relation to the world, it is also, for the 
same reason, nearer to the pole. N either is this earth a 
proportional, or aliquot part of the world, for as the world 
has neither maximum, nor minimum, neither has it a moiety, 
nor aliquot parts, any more than a man or an animal [has 
them]; for the hand is not an aliquot part of the man, 
though its weight seems to have a proportion to the body, 
just as it does to the dimension and the figure. Nor is the 
dark colour [of the earth] an argument for its baseness, 
because to an observer on the sun, it [the sun] would not 
appear as brilliant as it does to us; indeed, the body of the 
sun must have a certain more central part, a quasi earth, 
and a certain circumferential quasi-fiery lucidity, and in the 
middle a quasi-watery cloud and clear air, just as this earth 
has its elements.23 Thus someone outside the region of fire 
would see [the earth as] a brilliant star, just as to us, 
who are outside the region of the sun, the sun' appears very 
luminous. 
Having thus destroyed the very basis of the opposition 
of the " dark " earth and the " luminous " sun by estab­
lishing the similarity of their fundamental structure, 
Nicholas proclaims victoriously: 24 
The earth is a noble star, which has a light and a heat 
and an influence of its own, different from those of all other 
oo 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
stars; every [star] indeed differs from every other in .light, 
nature and influence; and thus every star communIcates 
its light and influence to [every] other; not intentionally, 
for stars move and glitter only in order to exist in a more 
perfect manner: the participation arises as a. consequence; 
just as light shines by its own nature, not In order that 
I may see it. 
Indeed, in the infinitely rich and infinitely diversified 
and orO'anically linked-together universe of Nicholas of 
Cusa, there is no center of perfection in respect to which 
the rest of the universe would play a subservient part; 
on the contrary, it is by being themselves, and asserting 
their own natures, that the various components of the 
universe contribute to the perfection of the whole. Thus 
the earth in its way is j ust as perfect as the sun, or the 
fixed stars. Accordingly, Nicholas of Cusa continues: 25 
It must not be said either that, because the earth is 
smaller than the sun, and receives an influence from it, 
it is also more vile; for the whole region of the earth, which 
extends to the circumference of the fire, is large. And 
though the earth is smaller than the sun, as is known to 
us from its shadow and the eclipses, still we do not know 
whether the region of the sun is greater or smaller than the 
region of the earth; however, they cannot be precisely equal, 
as no star can be equal to another. Nor is the earth the 
the smallest star, for it is larger than the moon, as we 
are taught by the experience of the eclipses, and even, as 
some people say, larger than Mercury, and possibly than 
some other stars. Thus the argument from the dimension 
to the vileness is not conclusive. 
N or can it be argued that the earth is less perfect than 
the sun and the planets because it receives an influence 
ol 

CLO S E D  
'
W O RLD to Infinite Universe 
from them: it is, as a matter of fact, quite possible that 
it influences them in its turn: 26 
It is clear therefore that it is not possible for human 
knowledge to determine whether the region of the earth is 
in a degree of greater perfection or baseness in relation to 
the regions of the other stars, of the sun, the moon and the 
rest. 
Some of the arguments in favour of the relative perfec­
tion of the earth are rather curious. Thus, being convinced 
that the world is not only unlimited but also everywhere 
populated, Nicholas of Cusa tells us that no conclusion 
as to the imperfection of the earth can be drawn from 
the alleged imperfection of its inhabitants, a conclusion 
that nobody, as far as I know, ever made, at least not 
in his time. Be that as it may, in any case Nicholas of 
Cusa asserts that,27 
. . .  it cannot be said that this place of the world [is less 
perfect because it is] the dwelling-place of men, and animals, 
and vegetables that are less perfect than the inhabitants 
of the region of the sun and of the other stars. For although 
God is the center and the circumference of all the stellar 
regions, and although in every region inhabitants of diverse 
nobility of nature proceed from Him, in order that such 
vast regions of the skies and of the stars should not remain 
void, and that not. only this earth be inhabited by lesser 
beings, still it does not seem that, according to the order 
of nature, there could be a more noble or more perfect 
nature than the intellectual nature which dwells here on 
this earth as in its region, even if there are in the other 
stars inhabitants belonging to another genus: man indeed 
does not desire another nature, but only the perfection of 
his own. 
22 
C L O S E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
But, of course, we have to admit that in the same genus 
there may be several different species which embody the 
same common nature in a more, or less, perfect way. T{us 
jt seems to Nicholas of Cusa rather reasonable to conJec­
ture that the inhabitants of the sun and the moon are 
, 
laced higher on the scale of perfection than ourselves: 
ihey are more intellectual, more spiritual than we, less 
material, less burdened by flesh. 
And, finally, the great argument from change and cor­
ruptibility to baseness is declared by Nicholas of Cusa 
F 
28 '" 
as having no more value than the rest. 
or 
. SInce 
there is one universal world, and since all the partIcular 
stars influence each other in a certain proportion," there 
is no reason to suppose that change and decay occur only 
here, on the earth, and not everywhere in the universe. 
Nay, we have every reason to suppose - though of course· 
we cannot know it - that it is everywhere the same, the 
more so as this corruption, which is presented to us as 
the particular feature of terrestrial being, is by no mens 
a real destruction, that is, total and absolute loss of eXIst­
ence. It is, indeed, loss of that particular form of existence. 
But fundamentally it is not so much outright disappear­
ance as dissolution, or resolution, of a being into its con­
stitutive elements and their reunification into something 
else, a process that may take place - and probably does 
take place - in the whole universe just because the onto­
logical structure of the world is, fundamentally, ñvery­
where the same. Indeed it eA"Presses everywhere In the 
same temporal, that is, mutable and changing, manner 
the immutable and eternal perfection of the Creator. 
As we see, a new spirit, the spirit of the Renaissance 
breathes in the work of Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa. His 
23 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
world is no longer the medieval cosmos. But it is not yet, 
by any means, the infinite universe or the moderns. 
The honor or having asserted the infinity or the uni­
verse has also been claimed by modern historians for a 
sixteenth century writer, Marcellus Stellatus Palingenius,29 
author of a widely read and very popular book, Zodiacus 
vitae, which was published in Venice, in Latin, in 1534 
(and translated into English in 1560) ; but, in my opinion, 
with even less reason than in the case of Nicholas or Cusa. 
Palingenius, who is deeply influenced by the N eoplatonic 
revival of the fifteenth century and who thererore rejects 
the absolute authority of Aristotle, though, at other times, 
he quotes him with approval, may have had some knowl­
edge or Nicholas or Cusa's world-view and have been en­
couraged by his example in denying the finitude or 
creation. Yet it is not certain, sin.ce, 
the rather energetic assertion of the impossibility or im­
posing a limit on God's creative action, we do not find in 
his teaching any rererence to the particular tenets of the 
cosmology of Nicholas of Cusa. 
Thus, for instance, when in discussing the general struc­
ture of the universe he tells us 30 
But some have thought that every starre a worlde we may 
call, 
The earth they count a darkened starre, whereas the least 
of all. 
it is obvious that it is not Nicholas or Cusa, but the ancient 
Greek cosmologists that he has in mind. It is to be noted, 
moreover, that Palingenius does not share their views. 
His own are quite different. He does not make the earth 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
a star. 
On the contrary he maintains consistently the 
opposition between the terrestrial and the celestial regions; 
and it is just the imperfection of the former that leads 
I him to the denial of its being the only populated place 
in the world. 
Indeed,31 
. . . we see 
The Seas and earth with sundry sorts, of creatures full 
to bee. 
Shall then the heavens cleare be thought, as void and empty 
made 
o rather void and empty mindes, that thus yourselves 
persuade. 
It is clear that we cannot share the errors of these 
" empty mindes." It is clear, too, that 32 
. . . creatures doth the skies containe, and every Starre 
beside 
Be heavenly townes and seates of Saints, where Kings and 
Commons bide 
Not shapes and shadows vain of things (as we have present 
here) 
But perfect Kings and people eke, all things are perfect 
there. 
Yet Palingenius does not assert the infinity of the world. 
It is true that, applying consistently the principle to 
which Professor Lovejoy has given the name of principle 
of plenitude,33 he denies the finitude of God's creation, 
and says: 34 
A sorte there are that do suppose, the end of everything 
Above the heavens to consist, and farther not to spring. 
So that beyond them nothing is: and that above the skies 
25 

C L OS E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
The N atuTe never powre to clime, but there amazed lies. 
Which unto me appeareth false: and reason does me teach, 
For if the ende of all be there, where skies no farther reach 
Why hath not God created more? Because he had not skill 
How more to make, his cunning staied and broken of his 
will? 
Or for because he had not power? but truth both these 
denies, 
For power of God hath never end, nor bounds his knowledge 
ties. 
But in the State Diuine of God and Glorious maiestie 
We must believe is nothing vaine since Godliest is the same: 
This God what so ever he could doe assuredly did frame, 
Least that his vertue were in vaine, and never should be hid. 
But since he could make endlesse things, it never must be 
thought he did. 
Nevertheless he maintains the finitude of the material 
world, enclosed and encompassed by the eight heavenly 
spheres: 35 
But learned Aristotle sayth there can no body bee, 
But that it must of bondes consist: to this I do agree, 
Because above the skies no kinde of body do we place, 
But light most pure, of bodye voide, such light as doth 
deface 
And farre excell our shining Sunne, such light as comprehend 
OUf eyes cannot, and endlesse light that God doth from 
him send. 
Wherein together with their King the Sprites that are more 
hie 
Doe dwell, the meaner sorte beneath the skies doe alwaies 
lie. 
Therefore the reigne and position of the world consists in 
three, 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Celestiall, Subcelestiall which with limits compast bee: 
The Rest no boundes may comprehend which bright aboue 
the Skye 
Doth shine with light most wonderfull. But here some will 
replye 
That without body is no light, and so by this deny 
That light can never there be found Above the Heavens by. 
But Palingenius does not accept this theory which 
makes light dependent on matter and thus material itself. 
In any case, even if it were so for natural, physical light, 
it is certain that it is not the case for God's supernatural 
one. Above the starry heavens there are no bodies. But 
light and immaterial being can well be - and are ­
present 
in 
the 
supernatural, 
boundless 
supracelestial 
regIon. 
Thus it is God's heaven, not God's world, that Palin­
genius asserts to be infinite. 

II. The New Astronomy 
and the New Metaphysics 
N. Copernicus 
Th. Digges 
G. Bruno 
& W. Gilbert 
Palingenius and Copernicus are practically contemporaries. 
Indeed, the Zodiacus vitae and the De revolutionibus 
orbium cceZestium must have been written at about the 
same time. Yet they have nothing, or nearly nothing, in 
common. They are as far a way from each other as if 
they were separated by centuries. 
As a matter of fact, they are, indeed, separated by 
centuries, by all those centuries during . which Aristotelian 
cosmology and Ptolemaic astronomy dominated Western 
thought. 
Copernicus, of course, makes full use of the 
mathematical technics elaborated by Ptolemy - one of 
the greatest achievements of the human mind 1 - and yet, 
for his inspiration he goes back beyond him, and beyond 
Aristotle, to the golden age of Pythagoras and of Plato. 
He quotes Heraclides, Ecphantus and Hiketas, Philolaos 
and Aristarchus of Samos; and according to Rheticus, his 
pupil and mouthpiece, it is 2 
. . .  following Plato and the Pythagoreans, the greatest 
o8 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
mathematicians of that divine age, that [he] thought that 
in order to determine the cause of the phenomena, circular 
motions have to be ascribed to the spherical earth. 
I need not insist on the overwhelming scientific and 
philosophical importance of Copernican astronomy, which, 
by removing the earth from the center of the world and 
placing it among the planets, undermined the very founda­
tions of the traditional cosmic world-order with its hierar­
chical structure and qualitative opposition of the celestial 
realm of immutable being to the terrestrial or sublunar 
region of change and decay. 
Compared to the deep 
criticism of its metaphysical basis by Nicholas of Cusa, 
the Copernican revolution may appear rather half-hearted 
and not very radical. 
It was, on the other hand, much 
more effective, at least in the long run; for, as we know, 
the immediate effect of the Copernican revolution was to 
spread skepticism and bewilderment 3 of which the famous 
verses of John Donne give such a striking, though some­
what belated, expression, telling us that the 4 
. . . new Philosophy calls all in doubt, 
The Element of fire is quite put out; 
The Sun is lost, and th' earth, and no mans wit 
Can well direct him where to looke for it. 
And freely men confesse that this world's spent, 
When in the Planets, and the Firmament 
They seeke so many new; then see that this 
Is crumbled out againe to his Atomies. 
'Tis all in peeces, all cohaerence gone; 
All just supply, and all Relation. 
To tell the truth, the world of Copernicus is by no 
means devoid of hierarchical features. Thus, if he asserts 
29 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
that it is not the skies which move, but the earth, it is 
not only because it seems irrational to move a tremen­
dously big body instead of a relatively small one, " that 
which contains and locates and not that which is contained 
and located," but also because " the condition of being 
at rest is considered as nobler and more divine than that 
of change and inconsistency; the latter therefore, is more 
suited to the earth than to the universe." 5 And it is on 
account of its supreme perfection and value - source of 
light and of life - that the place it occupies in the world 
is assigned to the sun: the central place which, following 
the Pythagorean tradition and thus reversing completely 
the Aristotelian and mediaeval scale, Copernicus believes 
to be the best and the most important one.6 
Thus, though the Copernican world is no more hierar­
chically structured (at least not fully: it has, so to say, 
two poles of perfection, the sun and the sphere of the fixed 
stars, with the planets in between) , it is still a well­
ordered world. Moreover, it is still a finite one. 
This finiteness of the Copernican world may appear 
illogical. Indeed, the only reason for assuming the exist­
ence of the sphere of the fixed stars being their common 
motion, the negation of that motion should lead imme­
diately to the negation of the very existence of that 
sphere; moreover, since, in the Copernican world, the fixed 
stars must be exceedingly big 7 - the smallest being larger 
than the whole Orbis magnu8 - the sphere of the fixed 
stars must be rather thick; it seems only reasonable to 
extend its volume indefinitely " upwards." 
It is rather natural to interpret Copernicus this way, 
that is, as an advocate of the infinity of the world, all 
the more so as he actually raises the question of the 
80 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
possibility of an indefinite spatial extension beyond the 
stellar sphere, though refusing to treat that problem as 
not scientific and turning it over to the philosophers. 
/ As a matter of fact, it is in this way that the Copernican 
doctrine was interpreted by Gianbattista Riccioli, by Huy­
gens, and more recently by Mr. McColley.s 
Though it seems reasonable and natural, I do not believe 
this interpretation to represent the actual views of Coper­
nicus. Human thought, even that of the greatest geniuses, 
is never completely consequent and logical. We must not 
be astonished, therefore, that Copernicus, who believed in 
the existence of material planetary spheres because he 
needed them in order to explain the motion of the planets, 
believed also in that of a sphere o! the fixed stars which 
he no longer needed. Moreover, though its existence did 
not explain anything, it still had some usefulness: the 
stellar sphere, which " embraced and contained every­
thing and itself," held the world together and, besides, 
enabled Copernicus to assign a determined position to the 
sun. 
In any case, Copernicus tells us quite. clearly that 9 
. . . the universe is spherical; partly because this form, 
being a complete whole, needing no joints, is the most 
perfect of all; partly because it constitutes the most 
spacious form which is thus best suited to contain and 
retain all things; or also because all discrete parts of the 
world, I mean the sun, the moon and the planets, appear 
as spheres. 
True, he rejects the Aristotelian doctrine according to 
which " outside the world there is no body, nor place, nor 
empty space, in fact that nothing at all exists " because 
81 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
it seems to him " really strange that something could be 
enclosed by nothing " and believes that, if we admitted 
that " the heavens were infinite and bounded only by 
their inner concavity," then we should have better reason 
to assert " that there is nothing outside the heavens, 
because everything, whatever its size, is within them," 10 
in which case, of course, the heavens would have to be 
motionless: the infinite, indeed, cannot be moved or 
traversed. 
Yet he never tells us that the visible world, the world 
of the fixed stars, is infinite, but only that it is immeasur­
able (immensum) , that it is so large that not only the 
earth compared to the skies is " as a point " (this, by the 
way, had already been asserted by Ptolemy) , but also the 
whole orb of the earth's annual circuit around the sun; 
and that we do not and cannot know the limit, the dimen­
sion of the world. 
Moreover, when dealing with the 
famous objection of Ptolemy according to which " the 
earth and all earthly things if set in rotation would be 
dissolved by the action of nature," that is, by the cen­
trifugal forces produced by the very great speed of its 
revolution, Copernicus replies that this disruptive effect 
would be so much stronger upon the hea vens as their 
motion is more rapid than that of the earth, and that, " if 
this argument were true, the extent of the heavens would 
become infinite." In which case, of course, they would 
have to stand still, which, though finite, they do. 
Thus we have to admit that, even if outside the world 
there were not nothing but space and even matter, never­
theless the world of Copernicus would remain a finite one, 
encompassed by a material sphere or orb, the sphere of 
the fixed stars - a sphere that has a centrum, a centrum 
32 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
occupied by the sun. 
It seems to me that there IS no 
other way of interpreting the teaching of Copernicus. 
Does he not tell us that 11 
. . .  the first and the supreme of all [spheres] is the sphere 
of the fixed stars which contains everything and itself and 
which, therefore, is at rest. Indeed, it is the place of the 
world to which are referred the motion and the position 
of all other stars. Some [astronomers] indeed, have thought 
that, in a certain manner, this sphere is also subjected to 
change: but in our deduction of the terrestrial motion we 
have determined another cause why it appears so. [After 
the sphere of the fixed stars] comes Saturn, which performs 
its circuit in thirty years. After him, Jupiter, which moves 
in a duodecennial revolution. Then Mars which circum­
girates in two years. The fourth place in this order is 
occupied by the annual revolution, which, as we have said, 
contains the Earth with the orb of the Moon as an epicycle. 
In the fifth place Venus revolves in nine months. Finally, 
the sixth place is held by l\lercury, which goes around in 
the space of eighty days. 
But in the center of all resides the Sun. Who, indeed, in 
this most magnificent temple would put the light in another, 
or in a better place than that one wherefrom it could at 
the same time illuminate the whole of it? Therefore it is 
not improperly that some people call it the lamp of the 
world, others its mind, others its ruler. Trismegistus [calls 
it] the visible God, Sophocles' Electra, the All-Seeing. Thus, 
assuredly, as residing in the royal see the Sun governs the 
surrounding family of the stars. 
We have to admit the evidence: the world of Copernicus 
is finite. Moreover, it seems to be psychologically quite 
normal that the man who took the first step, that of 
arresting the motion of the sphere of the fixed stars, 
33 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
hesitated before taking the second, that of dissolving it 
in boundless space; it was enough for one man to move 
the earth and to enlarge the world so as to make it 
immeasurable - immensum; to ask him to make it in­
finite is obviously asking too much. 
Great importance has been attributed to the enlarge­
ment of the 
Copernican 
world 
as 
compared to the 
mediaeval one - its diameter is at least ¨ooo times greater. 
Yet, we must not forget, as Professor Lovejoy has already 
pointed out/2 that even the Aristotelian or Ptolemaic 
world was by no means that snug little thing that we see 
represented on the miniatures adorning the manuscripts 
of the Middle Ages and of which Sir Walter Raleigh gave 
us such an enchanting description.13 Though rather small 
by our astronomical standards, and even by those of 
Copernicus, it was in itself sufficiently big not to be felt 
as built to man's measure: about ¨O,OOO terrestrial radii, 
such was the accepted figure, that is, about 1¨5,OOO,OOO 
miles. 
Let us not forget, moreover, that, by comparison with 
the infinite, the world of Copernicus is by no means greater 
than that of mediaeval astronomy; they are both as 
nothing, because inter finitum et infinitum non est pro­
portio. 
We do not approach the infinite universe by 
increasing the dimensions of our world. We may make it 
as large as we want: that does not bring us any nearer 
to it.14 
Notwithstanding this, it remains clear that it is some­
what easier, psychologically if not logically, to pass fronl 
a very 'large, immeasurable and ever-growing world to an 
infinite one than to make this jump starting with 
a 
84 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
rather big, but still determinably limited sphere: 
the 
world-bubble has to swell before bursting. It is also clear 
that by his reform, or revolution, of astronomy Copernicus 
removed one of the most valid scientific objections against 
the infinity of the universe, based, precisely, upon the 
empirical, common-sense fact of the motion of the celestial 
spheres. 
The infinite cannot be traversed, argued Aristotle; now 
the stars turn around, therefore . . . But the stars do not 
turn around; they stand still, therefore . . . It is thus not 
surprising that in a ra ther short time after Copernicus 
some bold minds made the step that Copernicus refused 
to make, and asserted that the celestial sphere, that is 
the sphere of the fixed stars of Copernican astronomy, 
does not exist, and that the starry heavens, in which the 
stars are placed at different distances from the earth, 
" extendeth itself infinitely up." 
It has been commonly assumed until recent times that 
it was Giordano Bruno who, drawing on Lucretius and 
creatively misunderstanding both him and Nicholas of 
Cusa/5 first made this decisive step. 
Today, after the 
discovery by Professor Johnson and Dr. Larkey 16 - in 
1934 - of the Perfit Description of the Caelestiall Orbes 
according to the most aunciene doctrine of the Pytha­
goreans lately revived by Copernicus and by Geometricall 
Demonstrations approued, which Thomas Digges, in 1576, 
added to the Prognostication euerlasting of his father 
Leonard Digges, this honor, at least partially, must be 
ascribed to him. Indeed, though different interpretations 
may be given of the text of Thomas Digges - and my 
own differs somewhat from that of Professor Johnson and 
Dr. Larkey - it is certain, in any case, that Thomas 
85 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Digges was the first Copernican to replace his master's 
conception, that of a closed world, by that of an open one, 
and that in his Description, where he gives a fairly good, 
though rather free, translation of the cosmological part 
of the De revolutionibus orbium cmZestium, he makes 
some rather striking additions. First, in his description 
of the orb of Saturn he inserts the clause that this orb is 
" of all others next vnto that infinite Orbe immouable, 
garnished with lights innumerable "; then he substitutes 
for the well-known Copernican diagram of the world 
another one, in which the stars are placed on the whole 
page, above as well as below the line by which Copernicus 
represented the ultima sphaera mundi. 
The text that 
Thomas Digges adds to his diagram is very curious. In 
my opinion, it expresses the hesitation and the uncer­
tainty of a mind - a very bold mind - which on the 
one hand not only accepted the Copernican world-view, 
but even went beyond it, and which, on the other hand, 
was still dominated by the religious conception - or image 
- of a heaven located in space. Thomas Digges begins 
by telling us that: 
The orbe of the starres fixed infinitely up extendeth hit 
self in altitude sphericallye, and therefore immouable. 
Yet he adds that this orbe is 
the pallace of felicitye garnished with perpetuall shininge 
glorious ligh tes innumerable, farr excelling our sonne both 
in quantity and qualitye. 
And that it is 
the Court of the great God, the habitacle of the elect, and 
of the coelestiall angelles. 
3 6  
FIGURE Ņ 
Thomas Digges's diagram 
of the in finite Copernican 
universe 
(from A P erfit Description of the 
Caelestiall Orbes, 1576) 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
The te:x;t accompanying the diagram develops this idea: 18 
Heerein can wee never sufficiently admire thys wonderfull 
and incomprehensible huge frame of goddes woorke pro­
poned to our senses, seinge first the baull of ye earth wherein 
we moue, to the common sorte seemeth greate, and yet 
in respecte of the Moones Orbe is very small, but compared 
with the Orbis magnus wherein it is carried, it scarcely 
retayneth any sensible proportion, so merueillously is that 
Orbe of Annuall motion greater than this little darke starre 
wherein we liue. But that Orbis magnus beinge as is before 
declared but as a poynct in respect of the immensity of that 
immoueable heaven, we may easily consider what little 
portion of gods frame, our Elementare corruptible worlde 
is, but neuer sufficiently be able to admire the immensity 
of the Rest. Especially of that fixed Orbe garnished with 
lightes innumerable and reachinge vp in Sphaericall altitude 
without ende. Of which lightes Celestiall it is to bee thoughte 
that we only behoulde sutch as are in the inferioure partes 
of the same Orbe, and as they are hygher, so seeme they of 
lesse and lesser quantity, even tyll our syghte beinge not 
able farder to reache or conceyve, the greatest part rest by 
reason of their wonderfull distance inuisible vnto vs. And 
this may well be thought of vs to be the glQriouse court of 
ye great god, whose vnsercheable works inuisible we may 
partly by these his visible coniecture, to whose infinit power 
and maiesty such an infinit place surmountinge all other 
both in quantity and quality only is conueniente. But 
because the world hath so longe a time bin carried with 
an opinion of the earths stabilitye, as the contrary cannot 
but be nowe very imperswasible. 
Thus, as we see, Thomas Digges puts his stars into a 
theological heaven; not into an astronomical sky. As a 
matter of fact, we are not very far from the conception 
88 
C L O S E D  W O R L D to Infinite Universe 
of Palingenius - whom Digges knows and quotes -' and, 
perhaps, nearer to him than to Copernicus. 
Palingenius, 
it is true, places his heaven fLhove the stars, whereas 
Thomas Digges puts them into it. Yet he maintains the 
separation between our world - the world of the sun and 
the planets - and the heavenly sphere, the dwelling-place 
of God, the celestial angels, and the saints. Needless to 
say, there is no place for Paradise in the astronomical 
world of Copernicus. 
That is the reason why, in spite of the very able defence 
of the priority rights or Digges made by .Professor Johnson 
in his excellent book, Astronomical Thought in Renaissance 
England, I still believe that it was Bruno who, for the first 
time, presented to us the sketch, or the outline, of the 
cosmology that became dominant in the last two centuries, 
and I cannot but agree with Professor Lovejoy, who in 
his classical Great Chain of Being tells us that/9 
Though the elements of the new cosmography had, then, 
found earlier expression in several quarters, it is Giordano 
Bruno who must be regarded as the principal representative 
of the doctrine of the decentralised, infinite and infinitely 
populous universe; for he not only preached it throughout 
western Europe with the fervour of an evangelist, but also 
first gave a thorough statement of the grounds on which it 
was to gain acceptance from the general public. 
Indeed, never before has the essential infinitude of space 
been asserted in such an outright, definite and conscious 
manner. 
Thus, already in the La Cena de le Ceneri,20 where, by 
the way, Bruno gives the best discussion, and refutation) 
of the classical - Aristotelian and Ptolemaic - objections 
89 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
against the motion of the earth that were ever written 
before Galileo,21 he proclaims that 22 " the world is infinite 
and that, therefore, there is no body in it to which it 
would pertain simpliciter to be in the center, or on the 
center, or on the periphery, or between these two ex­
tremes " of the world (which, moreover, do not exist) , 
bu t only to be among other bodies. As for the world 
which has its cause and its origin in an infinite cause 
and an infinite principle, it must be infinitely infinite 
according to its corporeal necessity and its mode of being. 
And Bruno adds: 23 
It is certain that . . .  it will never be possible to find an 
even half-probable reason, why there should be a limit to 
this corporeal universe, and, consequently, why the stars, 
which are contained in its space, should be finite in number. 
But we find the clearest, and most forceful, presentation 
of the new gospel of the unity and the infinity of the 
world in his vernacular dialogues De l'infinito universo 
e mondi and in his Latin poem De immenso et innumera­
bilibus.24 
There is a single general space, a single vast immensity 
which we may freely call Void: in it are innumerable globes 
like this on which we live and grow; this space we declare 
to be infinite, since neither reason, convenience, sense­
perception nor nature assign to it a limit. For there is no 
reason, nor defect of nature's gifts, either of active or 
passive power, to hinder the existence of other worlds 
throughout space, which is identical in natural character 
with our own space, that is everywhere filled with matter 
or at least ether.25 
We have, of course, heard nearly similar things from 
40 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Nicholas of Cusa. And yet we cannot but recognize the 
difference of accent. 
Where Nicholas of Cusa simply 
states the impossibility of assigning limits to the world, 
Giordano Bruno asserts, and rejoices in, its infinity: the 
superior determination and clarity of the pupil as com­
pared to his master is striking.26 
To a body of infinite size there can be ascribed neither 
center nor boundary. For he who speaketh of emptiness, 
the void or the infinite ether, ascribeth to it neither weight 
nor lightness, nor motion, nor upper, nor lower, nor inter­
mediate regions; assuming moreover that there are in this 
space those countless bodies such as our earth and other 
earths, our sun and other suns, which all revolve within 
this infinite space, through finite and determined spaces or 
around their own centres. Thus we on the earth say that 
the earth is in the centre; and all the philosophers ancient 
and modern of whatever sect will proclaim without preju­
dice to their own principles that here is indeed the centre. 
Yet, 
Just as we say that we are at the centre of that [uni­
versally] equidistant circle, which is the great horizon and 
the limit of our own encircling ethereal region, so doubt­
lessly the inhabitants of the moon believe themselves at 
the centre [of a great horizon] that embraces the earth, 
the sun and the other stars, and is the boundary of the 
radii of their own horizon. Thus the earth no more than 
any other world is at the centre; moreover, no points 
constitute determined celestial poles for our earth, just as 
she herself is not a definite and determined pole to any 
other point of the ether, or of the world-space; and the 
same is true of all other bodies. From various points of 
view these may all be regarded either as centres, or as points 
on the circumference, as poles, or zeniths and so forth. 
41 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus the earth is not in the centre of the Universe; it is 
central only to our surrounding space. 
Professor Lovejoy, in his treatment of Bruno, insists on 
the importance for the latter of the principle of plenitude, 
which governs his thought and dominates his meta­
physics.27 Professor Lovejoy is perfectly right, of course: 
Bruno uses the principle of plenitude in an utterly ruthless 
manner, rejecting all the restrictions by which mediaeval 
thinkers tried to limit its applicability and boldly drawing 
from it all the consequences that it implies. Thus to the 
old and famous questio disputata: why did not God create 
an infinite world? - a question to which the mediaeval 
scholastics gave so good an answer, namely, denying the 
very possibility of an infinite creature - Bruno simply 
replies, and he is the first to do it: God did. And even: 
God could not do otherwise. 
Indeed, Bruno's God, the somewhat misunderstood 
infinitas complicata of Nicholas of Cusa, could not but 
explicate and express himself in an infinite, infinitely rich, 
and infinitely extended world.28 
Thus is the excellence of God magnified and the greatness 
of his kingdom made manifest; he is glorified not in one, 
but in countless suns; not in a single earth, but in a 
thousand, I say, in an infinity of worlds. 
Thus not in vain the power of the intellect which ever 
seeketh, yea, and achieveth the addition of space to space, 
mass to mass, unity to unity, number to number, by the 
science that dischargeth us from the fetters of a most 
narrow kingdom and promoteth us to the freedom of a 
truly august reahn, which freeth us from an imagined 
poverty and straineth to the possession of the myriad riches 
of so vast a space, of so worthy a field of so many cultivated 
4o 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
worlds. This science does not permit that the arch of the 
horizon that our deluded vision imagineth over the Earth 
and that by our phantasy is feigned in the spacious ether, 
shall imprison our spirit under the custody of a Pluto or 
at the mercy of a Jove. We are spared the thought of so 
wealthy an owner and subsequently of so miserly, sordid 
and avaricious a donor. 
It has often been pointed out - and rightly, of course 
- that the destruction of the cosmos, the loss, by the 
earth, of its central and thus unique (though by no means 
privileged) situation, led inevitably to the loss, by man, 
of his unique and privileged position in the theo-cosmic 
drama of the creation, of which man was, until then, both 
the central figure and the stake. At the end of the develop­
ment we find the mute and terrifying world of Pascal's 
" libertin," 29 the senseles s  world of modern scientific phi­
losophy. A t the end we find nihilism and despair. 
Yet this was not so in the beginning. The displacement 
of the earth from the centrum of the world was not felt 
to be a demotion. Quite the contrary: it is with satis­
faction that Nicholas of Cusa asserts its promotion to 
the rank of the no hIe stars; and, as for Giordano Bruno, 
it is with a burning enthusiasm - that of a prisoner who 
sees the walls or his jail crumble - that he announces the 
bursting of the spheres that separated us from the wide 
open spaces and inexhaustible treasures of the ever­
changing, eternal and infinite universe. Ever-changing! 
\Ve are, once more, reminded of Nicholas of Cusa, and, 
once more, we have to state the difference of their funda­
mental world views - or world feelings. Nicholas of Cusa 
states that immutability can nowhere be found in the 
whole universe; Giordano Bruno goes far beyond this 
43 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
mere statement· for him motion and change are signs of 
, 
. 
perfection and not of a lack of it. An immutable unIverse 
would be a dead universe; a living one must be able to 
move and to change.so 
There are no ends, boundaries, limits or walls which can 
defraud or deprive us of the infinite multitude of things. 
Therefore the earth and the ocean thereof are fecund; 
therefore the sun's blaze is everlasting, so that eternally 
fuel is provided for the voracious fires, and moisture re­
plenishes the attenuated seas. For from infinity is born an 
ever fresh abundance of matter. 
Thus Democritus and Epicurus, who maintained that 
everything throughout infinity suffereth renewal and res­
toration understood these matters more truly than those 
who at 
'
all costs maintain a belief in the immutability of 
the Universe, alleging a constant and unchanging number 
of particles of identical material that perpetually undergo 
transformation, one into another. 
The importance for Bruno's thought of the principle of 
plenitude cannot be overvalued. Yet there are in it two 
other features that seem to me to be of as great an impor­
tance as this principle. They are: 
(a) the use of a prin­
ciple that a century later Leibniz - who certainly knew 
Bruno and was influenced by him - was to call the 
principle of sufficient reason, which supplements the prin­
ciple of plenitude and, in due time, superseded it; and (b) 
the decisive shift 
(adumbrated indeed by Nicholas or 
eusa) from sensual to intellectual cognition in itव rशlation 
to thought (intellect) . Thus, at the very begInnIng of 
his Dialogue on the Infinite Universe and the Worlds, 
Bruno (Philotheo) asserts that sense-perception, as such, 
44 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
is confused and erroneou s  and cannot be made the basis 
of scientific and philosophical knowledge. 
Later on he 
explains that whereas for sense-perception and imagina­
tion infinity is inaccessible and unrepresentable, for the 
intellect, on the contrary, it is its primary and most certain 
concept.S1 
PHILOTHEO - No corporeal sense can perceive the infinite. 
None of our senses can be expected to furnish this conclu­
sion; for the infinite cannot be the object of sense-perception; 
therefore he who demandeth to obtain this knowledge 
through the senses is like unto one who would desire to 
see with his eyes both substance and essence. And he who 
would deny the existence of a thing merely because it 
cannot be apprehended by the senses, nor is visible, would 
presently be led to the denial of his own substance and 
being. Wherefore there must be some measure in the 
demand for evidence from our sense-perception, for this 
we can accept only in regard to sensible objects, and even 
there it is not above all suspicion unless it cometh before 
the court aided by good judgment. It is the part of the 
intellect to judge yielding due weight to factors absent and 
separated by distance of time and by space intervals. And 
in this Inatter our sense-perception doth suffice us and doth 
yield us adequate testimony, since it is unable to gainsay 
us; moreover it advertiseth and confesseth its own feeble­
ness and inadequacy by the impression it giveth us of 
a finite horizon, an impression moreover which is ever 
changing. Since then we h ave experience that sense-percep­
tion deceiveth us concerning the surface of this globe on 
which we live, much more should we hold suspect the im­
pression it giveth us of a limit to the starry sphere. 
ELPINO - Of what use are the senses to us? tell me that. 
PHIL. - Solely to stimulate our reason, to accuse, to indi-
45 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to 
Universe 
cate, to testify in part . . .  truth is in but a very small 
degree derived from the senses as from a frail origin, and 
doth by no means reside in the senses. 
ELP. - Where then? 
PHIL. - In the sensible object as in a mirror; in reason, 
by process of argument and discussion. In the intellect, 
either through origin or by conclusion. In the mind, in its 
proper and vital form. 
As for the principle or sufficient reason, Bruno applies 
it in his discussion of space and of the spatially extended 
universe. Bruno's space, the space of an infinite universe 
and at the same time the 
(somewhat misunderstood) 
infinite " void " of Lucretius, is perfectly homogeneous 
and similar to itself everywhere: indeed, how could the 
" void " space be anything but uniform - or vice versa, 
how could the uniform " void " be anything but unlimited 
and infinite? 
Accordingly, from Bruno's point of view, 
the Aristotelian conception of a closed innerworldly space 
is not only false, it is absurd.32 
PHILOTHEO - If the world is finite and if nothing is 
beyond, I ask you where is the world? 
Where is the 
universe? Aristotle replieth: it is in itself. The convex 
surface of the primal heaven is universal space, which being 
the primal container is by nought contained. 
FRAcAsToRo - The world then will be nowhere. Every­
thing will be in nothing. 
PHIL. - If thou wilt excuse thyself by asserting that 
where nought is, and nothing existeth, there can be no 
question of position in space, nor of beyond, nor outside, 
yet I shall in no wise be satisfied. For these are mere words 
and excuses which cannot form part of our thought. For it 
is wholly impossible that In any sense or fantasy (even 
46 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite ,Universe 
though there may be various senses and various fantasies) , 
it is, I say, inlpossible that I can with any true meaning 
assert that there existeth such a surface, boundary or limit, 
beyond which is neither body, nor empty space, even 
though God be there. 
We can pretend, as Aristotle does, that this world en­
closes all being, and that outside this world there is 
nothing; nec plenum nec vacuum. But nobody can think, 
or even imagine it. " Outside " the world will be space. 
And this space, just as ours, will not be " void "; it will 
be filled with " ether." 
Bruno's criticism of Aristotle (like that of Nicholas of 
Cusa) is, of course, wrong. He does not understand him 
and substitutes a geometrical " space " 
for the place­
continuum of the Greek philosopher. 
Thus he repeats 
the classical objection: what would happen if somebody 
stretched his hand through the surface of the heaven? 33 
And though he gives to this question a nearly correct 
answer (from the point of view of Aristotle) , 34 
BURCHIO - Certainly I think that one must reply to this 
fellow that if a person would stretch out his hand beyond 
the convex sphere of heaven, the hand would occupy no 
position in space, nor any place, and in consequence would 
not exist. 
he rejects it on the perfectly fallacious ground that this 
" inner surface," being a purely mathematical conception, 
cannot oppose a resistance to the motion of a real body. 
Furthermore, even if it did, the problem of what is beyond 
it would remain unanswered: 35 
PHILOTHEO - Thus, let the surface be what it will, I 
must always put the question: what is beyond? If the reply 
47 

C L  0 S E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
is: nothing, then I call that the void, or empty-ness. And 
such a Void or Emptiness hath no measure nor outer 
limit thouO'h it hath an inner; and this is harder to imagine 
, 
b 
• 
• 
than is an infinite or immense universe. For if we InsIst on 
a finite universe, we cannot escape the void. And let us 
now see whether there can be such a space, in which is 
nought. 
In this infinite space is placed our universe 
(whether by chance, by necessity or by providence I do 
not now consider) . I ask now whether this space which 
indeed containeth the world is better fitted to do so than 
is another space beyond? 
FRAcAsToRo - It certainly appeareth to me not so. For 
where there is nothing there can be no differentiation; where 
there is no differentiation there is no distruction of quality 
and perhaps there is even less of quality where there is 
nought whatsoever. 
Thus the space occupied by our world, and the space 
outside it, will be the same. And if they are the same, 
it is impossible that " outside " space should be treated 
by God in any different way from that which is " inside." 
We are therefore bound to admit that not only space, but 
also being in space is everywhere constituted in the same 
way, and that if in our part of the infinite space there 
is a world, a sun-star surrounded by planets, it is the 
same everywhere in the universe. Our world is not the 
universe, but only this machina, surrounded by an infinite 
number of other similar or analogous " worlds " - the 
worlds of star-suns sषattered in the etheric ocean of the 
sky.36 
Indeed, if it was, and is, possible for God to create a 
world in this our space, it is, and it was, just as possible 
for Him to create it elsewhere. 
But the uniformity of 
48 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
space - pure receptacle of being - deprives God of any 
reason to create it here, and not elsewhere. Accordingly, 
the limitation of God's creative action is unthinkable. 
In this case, the possibility implies actuality. The infinite 
world can be; therefore it must be; therefore it is.37 
For just as it would be ill that this our space were not 
filled, that is our world w ere not to exist, then, since the 
spaces are indistinguishable, it would be no less ill if the 
whole of space were not filled. Thus we see that the uni­
verse is of indefinite size and the worlds therein without 
number. 
Or, as the Aristotelian adversary of Bruno, Elpino, now 
converted to his views, formulates it: 38 
. 
I declare that which I cannot deny, namely, that within 
infinite space either there may be an infinity of worlds 
similar to our own; or that this universe may have ex­
tended its capacity in order to contain many bodies such 
as those we name stars; or again that whether these worlds 
be similar or dissimilar to one another, it may with no less 
reason be well that one, than that another should exist. 
For the existence of one is no less reasonable than that of 
another; and the existence of many no less so than of one 
or of the other; and the existence of an infinity of them 
no less so than the existence of a large number. Wherefore, 
even as the abolition and non-existence of this world would 
be an evil, so would it be of innumerable others. 
More concretely: 39 
ELP. - There are then innumerable suns, and an infinite 
number of earths revolve around these suns, just as the 
seven we can observe revolve around this sun which is 
close to us. 
49 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
PHIL. - So it is. 
ELP. - Why then do we not see the other bright bodies 
which are the earths circling around the bright bodies 
which are suns? For beyond these we can detect no motion 
whatsoever; and · why do all the other mundane bodies 
appear always (except those known as comets) in the 
same order and at the same distance? 
Elpino's question is rather good. And the answer given 
to it by Bruno is rather good, too, in spite of an optical 
error of believing that, in order to be seen, the planets 
must be formed on the pattern of spherical mirrors and 
possess a polished, smooth, " watery " surface, for which, 
moreover, he is not responsible as it was common belief 
until Galileo: 40 
PHIL. - The reason is that we discern only the largest 
suns, immense bodies. But we do not discern the earths 
because, being much smaller they are invisible to us. Simi­
larly, it is not impossible that other earths revolve around 
our sun and are invisible to us either on account of greater 
distance or smaller size, or because they have but little 
watery surface, or because such watery surface is not 
turned toward us and opposed to the sun, whereby it 
would be made visible as a crystal mirror which receiveth 
luminous rays; whence we perceive that it is not marvellous 
or contrary to nature that often we hear that the sun has 
been partially eclipsed though the moon hath not been 
interpolated between him and our sight. 
There may be 
innumerable watery luminous bodies - that is earths con­
sisting in part of water circulating around the sun, besides 
those visible to us; but the difference in their orbits is 
indiscernible by us on account of their great distance, 
wherefore we perceive no difference in the very slow motion 
50 
C L  0 S E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
discernible of those visible above or beyond Saturn; still 
less doth there appear any order in the motion of all 
around the centre, whether we place our earth or our sun 
as that centre. 
The question then arises whether the fixed stars of the 
heavens are really suns, and centers of worlds comparable 
to ours.41 
ELP. - Therefore you consider that if the stars beyond 
Saturn are really motionless as they appear, then they are 
those innumerable suns or fires more or less visible to us 
around which travel their own neighbouring earths which 
are not discernible by us. 
One would expect a positive answer. 
But lor once 
Bruno is prudent: 42 
PHIL. - Not so for I do not know whether all or whether 
the majority is without motion, or whether some circle 
around others, since none hath observed them. Moreover 
they are not easy to observe, for it is not easy to detect 
the motion and progress of a remote object, since at a great 
distance change of position cannot easily be detected, as 
happeneth when we would observe ships in a high sea. 
But however that may be, the universe being infinite, there 
must be ultimately other suns. For it is impossible that 
heat and light from one single body should be diffused 
throughout immensity, as was supposed by Epicurus if we 
may credit what others relate of him. 
Therefore it fol­
loweth that there must be innumerable suns, of which 
many appear to us as small bodies; but that star will 
appear smaller which is in fact much larger than that 
which appeareth much greater. 
The infinity o£ the universe thuS' seems to be perfectly 
51 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
assured. 
But what about the old objection that the 
concept of infinity can be applied only to God, that is, to 
a purely spiritual, incorporeal Being, an objection which 
led Nicholas of Cusa - and later Descartes - to avoid 
calling their worlds " infinite," but only " interminate," or 
" indefinite " ?  Bruno replies that he does not deny, of 
c?urse, :he ïtter difference of the intensive and perfectly 
SImple InfinIty of God from the extensive and multiple 
infinity of the world. Compared to God, the world is as 
a mere point, as a nothing.43 
. PîIL. - We are then at one concerning the incorporeal 
InfinIte; but what preventeth the similar acceptability of 
the good, corporeal and infinite being? And why should 
íot. tzìt infinite which is implicit in the utterly simple and 
ëndlêlslble Prime Origin rather become explicit in his own 
InfinIte and boundless · image able to contain innumerable 
worlds, than become explicit within such narrow bounds? 
So that it appeareth indeed shameful to refuse to credit 
that :hys world which seemeth to us so vast may not in 
the dIVIne regard appear a mere point, even a nullity? 
Yet it is just that " nullity " of the world and of all 
the bo
.
dies that constitute it that implies its infinity. 
There IS no reason for God to create one particular kind 
of b:ings in preference to another. 
The principle of 
suffiCIent reason reinforces the principle of plenitude. 
God's creation, in order to be perfect and worthy of the 
xretor, must therefore contain all that is possible, that 
ðs, Innumerable individual beings, innumerable earths, 
Innumerable stars and suns - thus we could say that 
God needs an infinite space in order to place in it this 
infinite world. 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
To sum up: 44 
PHIL. - This indeed is what I had to add; for, having 
pronounced that the Universe must itself be infinite because 
of the capacity and aptness of infinite space; on account 
also of the possibility and convenience of accepting the 
existence of innumerable worlds like to our own; it re­
maineth still to prove it.. Now both from the circumstances 
of this efficient cause which must have produced the Uni­
verse such as it is, or rather, must ever produce it such 
as it is, and also from the conditions of our mode of 
understanding, we may easily argue that infinite space is 
similar to this which we see, rather than argue that it is 
that which we do not see either by example or by similitude, 
or by proportion, or indeed, by any effort of imagination 
which doth not· finally destroy itself. Now to begin. Why 
should we, or could we imagine that divine power were 
otiose? Divine goodness can indeed be communicated ,to 
infinite things and can be infinitely diffused; why then 
should we wish to assert that it would choose to be scarce 
and to reduce itself to nought - for every finite thing is 
as nought in relation to the infinite? Why do you desire 
that centre of divinity which can (if one may so express 
it) extend indefinitely to an infinite sphere, why do you 
desire that it should remain grudgingly sterile rather than 
extend itself as a father, fecund, ornate and beautiful? 
Why should you prefer that it should be less, or indeed by 
no means communicated, rather than that it should fulfil the 
scheme of its glorious power and being? Why should in­
finite amplitude be frustrated, the possibility of an infinity 
of worlds be defrauded? Why should be prejudiced the 
excellency of the divine image which ought rather to glow 
in an unrestricted mirror, infinite, immense, according to 
the law of its being? . . . Why wouldst thou that God 
should in power, in act and in effect (which in him are 
53 

CL 0 S E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
identical) be determined as the limit of the convexity 
of a sphere rather than that he should be, as we may say, 
the undetermined limit of the boundless? 
Let us not, adds Bruno, be embarrassed by the old 
objection that the infinite is neither accessible nor under-
, 
standable. 
It is the opposite that is true: the infinite 
is necessary, and is even the first thing that naturally 
oadit sub intelleotus. 
Giordano Bruno, I regret to say, is not a very good 
philosopher. 
The blending together of Lucretius and 
Nicholas of eusa does not produce a very consistent 
mixture; and though, as I have already said, his treat­
ment of the traditional objections against the motion 
of the earth is rather good, the best given to them berore 
Galileo, he is a very poor scientist, he does not understand 
mathematics, and his conception of the celestial motions 
is rather strange. My sketch of his cosmology is, indeed, 
somewhat unilateral and not quite complete. 
As a matter 
of fact, Bruno's world-view is vitalistic 
magical' his 
, 
. 
, 
planets are animated beings that move freely through 
space of their own accord like those of Plato or of Pattrizzi. 
Bruno's is not a modern mind by any means. Yet his 
conception is so powerful and so prophetic, so reasonable 
and so poetic that we cannot but admire it and him. 
And it has - at least in its formal features - so deeply 
influenced modern science and modern philosophy, that 
we cannot but assign to Bruno a very important place in 
the history of the human mind. 
I do not know whether Bruno had a great influence 
on his immediate contemporaries, or even whether he 
54 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
influenced them at all. Personally, I doubt it very much. 
He was, in his teaching, far ahead of his time.45 Thus his 
influence seems to me to have been a delayed one. 
It 
was only after the great telescopic discoveries of Galileo 
that it was accepted and became a factor, and an impor­
tant one, of the seventeenth century world-view. 
Kepler, as a matter of fact, links Bruno with Gilbert 
and seems to suggest that it was from the former that 
the great British scientist received his belief in the infinity 
of the universe. 
This is, of course, quite possible: the thorough criticism 
of the Aristotelian cosmology may have impressed Gilbert. 
Yet it would be the only point where the teaching of the 
Italian philosopher was accepted by him. There is, indeed, 
not much similarity (besides the animism, common to 
both) between the " magnetic philosophy " of William 
,Gilbert and the metaphysics of Giordano Bruno . Professor 
Johnson believes that Gilbert was influenced by Digges, 
and that, having asserted the indefinite extension of the 
world " of which the limit is not known, and cannot be 
known," Gilbert, " to enforce his point, adopted without 
qualification Digges' idea that the stars were infinite in 
number, and located at varying and infinite distances 
from the center of the Universe ." 46 
This is quite possible, too. Yet, if he adopted this idea ' 
of Digges, he completely rejected his predecessor's immer­
sion of the celestial bodies into the theological heavens: 
he has nothing to tell us about the angels and the saints. 
On the other hand, neither Bruno nor Digges succeeded 
in persuading Gilbert to accept, in its entirety, the astro­
nomical theory of Copernicus of which he seems to have 
admitted only the least important part, that is, the diurnal 
55 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
motion of the earth, and not the much more important 
annual one. Gilbert, it is true, does not reject this latter: 
he simply ignores it, whereas he devotes a number of very 
eloquent pages to the defence and explanation (on the 
basis of his magnetic philosophy) of the daily rotation 
of the earth on its axis and to the refutation of the 
Aristotelian and Ptolemaic conception of the motion of 
the celestial sphere, and also to the denial of its very 
existence. 
As to this latter point, we must not forget, however, 
that the solid orbs of classical - and Copernican - astron­
omy had, in the meantime, been " destroyed " by Tycho 
Brahe. Gilbert, therefore, in contradistinction to Coper­
nicus himself, can so much more easily dispense with the 
perfectly useless sphere of the fixed stars, as he does not 
have to admit the existence of the potentially useful 
planetary ones. Thus he tells us: 
But in the first place, it is not likely that the highest 
hea ven and all these visible splendours of the fixed stars 
are impelled along that most rapid and useless course. 
Besides, who is the Master who has ever made out that 
the stars which we call fixed are in one and the same 
sphere, or has established by any reasoning that there are 
any real, and, as it were, adamantine spheres? No one has 
ever proved this as a fact; nor is there a doubt but that 
just as the planets are at unequal distances from the earth, 
so are those vast and multitudinous lights separated from 
the earth by varying and very remote altitudes; they are 
not set in any sphaerick frame of firmament (as is feigned) , 
nor in any vaulted body; accordingly the intervals of some 
are, from their unfathomable distance, matter of opinion 
rather than of verification; others do much exceed them and 
56 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
are very far remote, and these being located in the heav:n 
at varying distances, either in the thinnest aether, or In 
that most subtle quintessence, or in the void; how are they 
to remain in their position during such a mighty swirl of 
the vast orbe of such uncertain substance . . . 
Astronomers have observed 1022 stars; besides these 
innumerable other stars appear minute to our senses; as 
regards still others, our sight grows dim, and they are 
hardly discernible save by the keenest eye; nor is there any 
possessing the best power of vision that will not, while the 
moon is below the horizon and the atmosphere is clear, 
feel that there are many more, indeterminable and vacil­
lating by reason of their faint light, obscured because of 
the distance. 
How immeasurable then must be the space which 
stretches to those remotest of the fixed stars! How vast 
and immense the depth of that imaginary sphere! How 
far removed from the earth must the most widely sep­
arated stars be and at a distance transcending all sight, 
all skill and thought! How monstrous then such a motion 
would be! 
It is evident then that all the heavenly bodies, set as if 
in a destined place, are there formed unto spheres, that 
they tend to their own centres and that round them there 
is a confiuence of all their parts. And if they have motion 
that motion will rather be that of each round its own 
centre, as that of the earth is, or a forward movement 
of the centre in an orbit as that of the Moon. 
But there can be no movement of infinity and of an 
infinite body, and therefore no diurnal revolution of the 
Primum Mobile.47 
57 

III. The New Astronomy 
Against the New Metaphysics 
Johannes Kepler' 8 
Rejection of Infinity 
The conception of the infinity of the universe is, of course, 
a purely metaphysical doctrine that may well - as it 
did - form the basis of empirical science; it can never be 
based on empiricism. This was very well understood by . 
Kepler who rejects it therefore - and this is very inter­
esting and instructive - not only for metaphysical, but 
also for purely scientific reasons; who even, in anticipa­
tion of some present-day epistemologies, declares it scien­
tifically meaningless.1 
As for the metaphysical reasons for which Kepler denies 
the infinity of the universe, they are derived chiefly from 
his religious beliefs. 
Indeed, Kepler, a devout though 
somewhat heretical Christian, sees in the world an ex­
pression of God, symbolizing the Trinity 2 and embodying 
in its structure a mathematical order and harmony. 
Order and harmony that cannot be found in the infinite 
and therefore perfectly formless - or uniform - universe 
of Bruno. 
Yet it is not this conception of God's creative action, 
58 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
but a conception of astronomical science, as based upon, 
and limited by, the phenomena that Kepler opposes to 
Bruno and to those who share his views. Thus, discussing 
the interpretation to be given to the appearance of a new 
star in the foot of the Serpentarius, Kepler raises the 
question whether this amazing and striking phenomenon 
does not imply the infinity of the universe. He does not 
think so, yet he knows, and tells us that,3 
. . .  there is a sect of philosophers, who (to quote the judg­
ment of Aristotle, unmerited however, about the doctrine 
of the Pythagoreans lately revived by Copernicus) do not 
start their ratiocinations with sense-perception or accommo­
date the causes of the things to experience: but who imme­
diately and as if inspired (by some kind of enthusiasm) 
conceive and develop in their heads a certain opinion about 
the constitution of the world; once they have embraced it, 
they stick to it; and they drag in by the hair [things] which 
occur and are experienced every day in order to accommo­
date them to their axioms. These people want this new star 
and all others of its kind to descend little by little from the 
depths of nature, which, they assert, extend to an infinite 
altitude, until according to the laws of optics it becomes 
very large and attracts the eyes of men; then it goes back 
to an infinite altitude and every day [becomes] so much 
smaller as it moves higher. 
Those who hold this opinion consider that the nature of 
the skies conforms to the law of the circle; therefore the 
descent is bound to engender the opposite ascent, as is the 
case with wheels. 
But they can easily be refuted; they indulge indeed in 
their vision, born within them, with eyes closed, and their 
ideas and opinions are not received by them [from valid 
experience] but produced by themselves. 
59 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
This general criticism may be sufficient. 
Yet Kepler 
does not content himself with it and continues: 4 
We shall show them that by admitting the infinity of the 
fixed stars they become involved in inextricable labyrinths. 
Furthermore we shall, if possible, take this immensity 
away from them: then, indeed, the assertion will fall of 
itself. 
I(epler knows quite well that this particular opinion con­
cerning the infinity of the world goes back to the ancient 
heathen philosophers, criticized - rightly, according to 
him - by Aristotle.5 
This particular school of the ancient heathen philosophers 
is chiefly refuted by the argument by which Aristotle demon­
stra ted the finitude of the world from motion. 
As for the moderns, he tells us that the infinity of the 
world 6 
. . .  was defended by the unfortunate Jord. Bruno. It was 
also asserted in a by no means obscure way, though he 
expressed himself as if he doubted it, by William Gilbert in 
the otherwise most admirable book De magnete. Gilbert's 
religious feeling was so strong that, according to him, the 
infinite power of God could be understood in no other way 
than by attributing to Him the creation of an infinite world. 
But Bruno made the world so infinite that [he posits] as 
many worlds as there are fixed stars. And he made this our 
region of the movable [planets] one of the innumerable 
worlds scarcely distinct from the others which surround it; 
so that to somebody on the Dog Star (as, for instance, one 
of the Cynocephals of Lucian) the world would appear from 
there just as the fixed stars appear to us from our world. 
Thus according to them, the new star was a new world. 
60 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
N either Bruno's enthusiasm for the infinity of the 
universe, nor even Gilbert's desire to enhance God's 
infinite power, is shared by Kepler. Quite the contrary, 
he feels that 7 
This very cogitation carries with it I don't know what 
secret, hidden horror; indeed one finds oneself wandering in 
this immensity, to which are denied limits and center and 
therefore also all determinate places. 
From the purely religious point of view, it would be 
sufficient, perhaps, to make an appeal to the authority 
of Moses. 
Yet the question we are discussing is not a 
dogmatic ,one; it has to be dealt with not by recourse 
to revelation, but by scientific reasoning,8 
But because this sect misuses the authority of Copernicus 
as well as that of astronomy in general, which prove - par­
ticularly the Copernican one - that the fixed stars are at 
an incredible altitude: well then we will seek the remedy 
in astronomy itself. 
Thus by the same means which seem to those philosophers 
to enable them to break out of the limits of the world 
into the immensity of infinite space, we will bring them 
back. " It is not good for the wanderer to stray in that 
infinity." 
Kepler's refutation of the infinitist conception of the 
universe may appear to the modern reader unconvincing 
and even illogical. 
Yet, as a matter of fact, it is a per­
fectly consistent and very well-reasoned argument. It is 
based on two premises, which, by the way, Kepler shared 
with his opponents. The first one is a direct consequence 
of the principle of sufficient reason and consists in ad-
61 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
mitting that, if the world has no limits and no particular, 
. determined, structure, that is, if the world-space is infinite 
and uniform, then the distribution of the fixed stars in 
this universe must be uniform, too.9 The second premise 
concerns the science of astronomy as such. It postulates 
its empirical character; it tells us that astronomy, as such, 
has to deal with observable data, that is, with the 
appearances (c/:>aWO/LEva) ; that it has to adapt its hypoth­
eses - for instance, the hypotheses concerning the celes­
tial motions - to these appearances, and that it has no 
right to transcend them by positing the existence of things 
that are either incompatible with them, or, even worse, 
of things that do not and cannot " appear." Now these 
" appearances " - we must not forget that Kepler is 
writing in 1606, that is, before the enlargement of the 
observable data by the discovery and the use of the 
telescope - are the aspects of the world that we see. 
Astronomy therefore is closely related to sight, that is, 
to optics. It cannot admit things that contradict optical 
laws. 
Let us now turn back to Kepler: 10 
To begin with, it can most certainly be learnt froln astron­
omy that the region of the fixed stars is limited downwards; 
. . .  moreover it is not true . . .  that this inferior world 
with its sun differs in no way in its aspect from any one 
of the fixed stars; that is, [that there is no difference] of 
one region or place from another. 
For, be it admitted as a principle that the fixed stars 
extend themselves in infinitum. 
Nevertheless it is a fact 
that in their innermost bosom there will be an immense 
cavity, distinct and different in its proportions from the 
spaces that are between the fixed stars. So that if it occurred 
62 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
to somebody to examine only this cavity, even [if he were] 
ignorant of the eight small bodies which fly around the 
centrum of this space at a very small distance from it, and 
did not know what they are, or how many; nevertheless 
from the sole comparison of this void with the surrounding 
spherical region, fitted with stars, he certainly would be 
obliged to conclude that this is a certain particular place 
and the main cavity of the world. Indeed, let us take, for 
instance, three stars of the second magnitude in the belt 
of Orion, distant from each other by 81', being, each one, 
of at least 2 minutes in diameter. Thus, if they were placed 
on the same spherical surface of which we are the center, 
the eye located on one of them would see the other as 
having the angular magnitude of about 21° ;  [a n1agnitude] 
that for us on the earth would not be occupied by five 
suns placed in line and touching each other. And yet these 
fixed stars are by no means those that are the nearest to 
each other; for there are innumerable smaller ones that are 
interspersed [between them]. Thus if somebody were placed 
in this belt of Orion, having our sun and the center of the 
world above him, he would see, first, on the horizon, a kind 
of unbroken sea of immense stars quasi-touching each other, 
at least to the sight; and from there, the more he raised 
his eyes, the fewer stars would he see; moreover, the stars 
will no longer be in contact, but will gradually [appear to 
be] more rare and more dispersed; and looking straight 
upward he will see the same [stars] as we see, but twice as 
small and twice as near to each other. 
Kepler's reasoning is, of course, erroneous. But only 
because the data available to him are faulty. 
In itself 
it is quite correct. Indeed, if we assume that the fixed 
stars, or at least the equally bright ones, are at an 
approximately equal distance from us, if we assume, more-
63 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
over, that their visible diameter corresponds to their real 
one, we are bound to admit that the two big stars in the 
belt of Orion, separated by the angular distance of 81', 
will be seen from each other as covering more surface of 
the sky than five suns put together; the same will be 
the case for a great number of the other fixed stars, 
and therefore the visible aspect of the sky will be, for 
the observer placed on the fixed stars, quite different 
Irom its aspect for us. This implies, of course, a variation 
in the pattern of the real distribution of the fixed stars 
in space, that is, the negation of the homogeneity and the 
uniformity of the universe. Once more, let us not forget 
that Kepler wrote before the invention of the telescope 
and did not - and even could not - know that the visible 
diameter of the fixed stars is a pure optical illusion that 
gives us no information about their size and distance. 
Not knowing it, he was entitled to conclude: 11 
For us the fact of the sky is quite different. Indeed we 
see everywhere stars of different magnitude, and [we see 
them] also equally distributed everywhere. Thus around 
Orion and the Twins we see many of them big and closely 
packed together: the eye of the Bull, the Capella, the heads 
of the Twins, the Dog, the shoulders, the belt and the foot 
of Orion. And in the opposite part of the sky there are 
equally large ones: the Lyre, the Eagle, the heart and the 
brow of the Scorpion, the Serpentarius, the arms of the 
Balance; and before them Arcturus; the head of the Virgin; 
also after them the last star of the Water Bearer and so on. 
I have just pointed out that Kepler's discussion of the 
astronomical data that enabled . him to assert the par­
ticular, unique structure of our site in the world-space was 
based on the assumption of the equidistance - from us 
64 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
- of the fixed stars. Couldn't this conclusion be avoided 
if we admitted that the stars are so far away from us ­
and therefore from each other - that, seen from each 
other, they will not appear as big as we have calculated? 
Or couldn't we go even farther and admit that our funda­
mental assumption could, possibly, be incorrect and that 
stars which appear to be near each other could, in point 
of fact, be separated by an enormous distance, the one 
being near us and the other exceedingly far a way? 
As 
we shall see, even if it were so, it would not change the 
fundamental fact of the singularity of our world-space. 
But the objection has to be dealt with. Kepler, there­
fore, proceeds: 12 
When, some time ago, I advanced these views [just 
developed] some people, to try me, vigorously defended the 
cause of infinity, which they had taken from the above­
mentioned philosophers. They asserted that, granting in­
finity, it was easy for them to separate the pairs of fixed 
stars (which we on the earth perceive as being very near 
each other) by as great a distance as that which separates 
us from them. Yet this is impossible. Even admitting that 
you can arbitrarily elevate 13 the double fixed stars [that 
are] equally distant from the center of the world, it must 
be remembered that, if we elevate the fixed stars, the void 
which is in the middle, and also the circular envelope of 
the fixed stars, increase at the same time. Indeed, [these 
people] assume thoughtlessly that, the fixed stars being ele­
vated, the void will remain the same. 
As it will not, the singular character of our site will be 
maintained.14 
But what, they say, if, of the two stars of the belt of 
Orion, we assume one to remain in its sphere, because the 
65 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
theory of parallaxes does not admit an inferior position,15 
and the other to be higher by an infinite distance? Shall 
we not, in this way, obtain that, seen from each other, they 
appear as small as they appear to us? and that there will 
be a distance between them, void of stars, equal to the 
distances between us and them? 
I answer that, perhaps, one could use this method if 
there were only two stars, or only a few of them, and if 
they were not dispersed and disseminated in a circle. Indeed, 
you either alternately remove the stars to a greater dis­
tance and let them stay where they are or [you remove 
them] all together. If alternately, you do not solve the 
problem, though you decrease somewhat the difficulty. For, 
concerning those that will remain near, the affirmation [made 
by us] will still be just as valid. The pairs of stars will 
be nearer to each other than to the sun, and their diam­
eters, as seen from each other, larger [than they are as 
seen by us]. But those that are removed higher will, of 
course, be more distant [from each other], yet nevertheless 
they will be conlparatively large [as seen from each other]. 
And I would even easily concede, without endangering my 
cause, that all the fixed stars are of the same magnitude; 
and that those which to us appear large are near to us, and 
those [which appear small] are so much farther. As sings 
JV[anilius: 15a ' Not because less bright, but because they 
are removed to a greater altitude.' 
I say: I will concede not: I will assert. For it is just as 
easy to believe that [the stars] differ really in brightness, 
in color and also in magnitude. And it is possible that both 
[opinions] are true, as is the case with the planets, of 
which SOlne are really larger than others, whereas some 
others only appear to be larger though in themselves they 
are smaller, namely because they are nearer to us. 
The consequences of these hypotheses will be seen later. 
66 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
For the moment we have to discuss the implications for 
the cpawofLEva of a really uniform distribution of the fixed 
stars in the world-space, that is, of a distribution according 
to which they would be separated from each other by 
equal distances, namely by the same distance that sep­
arates them from US.16 
But let us pass to the other member [of the argument], 
and say what would result if all the stars were separated 
from each other by the same distance, in such a way that 
the nearest ones would retain the propinquity which astron­
omy imposes as a limit to all [stars], not allowing any one 
to be nearer, and all the others would be elevated in 
respect to it, and removed to an altitude equal to the 
distance of the nearest one to us. 
As a matter of fact nothing will result from all this. It 
will never be the case that the [starry heavens] would 
appear to those whom we may imagine observing them 
from these stars as they appear to us. From which it 
follows that this place, in which we are, will always have 
a certain peculiarity that cannot be attributed to any 
other place in all this infinity. 
Once more, in order to understand Kepler's reasoning, 
we have to remember that we are not discussing the 
abstract possibility of a certain distribution or stars in 
the world-space, but the concrete distribution of stars 
corresponding to the appearance of the sky; that is, we 
are dealing with the distribution of visible stars, or those 
that we actually see. It is their distance from us that is 
in question, and it is for them that the possibility or a 
uniform distribution, which would place most of them 
at very great, and regularly increasing, distances from us, 
is denied.17 
67 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
For, if the state of affairs were such as has been said, it 
is certain that those stars that are two, three, a hundred 
times higher will also be two, three, a hundred times larger. 
Indeed, let a star be as elevated as you wish, you will 
never obtain that it would be seen by us as having a 
diameter of two minutes.18 Thus the diameter will always 
be two thousandth, one thousandth, or so of the dis­
tance fronl us; but this diameter will be a much larger 
part of the mutual distances between two fixed stars 
(since these distances are much smaller than their distance 
from us) . And though from a star near us the face of the 
sky will appear nearly the same as it does to us; yet from 
the other stars the aspect of the world will be different, 
and all the more different in that they are farther. Indeed, 
if the intervals of the pairs of stars (which to us appear as 
nearest each other) remain constant, their aspects [dimen­
sions], as seen from each other, will increase [with their 
distance from us]. For the more you remove the stars to 
an infinite altitude, the more monstrous you imagine their 
dimensions, such as are not seen from this place of our 
world. 
An observer starting from the earth and moving upwards 
to the outer spaces would, therefore, find the " appear­
ance " of the world constantly changing, and the fixed 
stars always increasing in their real as well as visible 
dimensions. Besides/9 
The same must be said concerning the space that for such 
a traveler increases continuously, every time he transfers 
the stars from one order to the next and moves them higher. 
You may say that he is building the shell of a snail, 
which becomes ever wider towards the exterior. 
You cannot, indeed, separate the stars [by moving them] 
downward; the theory of the parallaxes does not allow it 
68 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
because it puts a certain limit to the approximation; you 
cannot separate them sideways, as they possess already 
their places determined by sight; it remains thus to separate 
the stars by moving them upward, but in this case the 
space that surrounds us and in which are found no stars 
whatever except the eight small globes in the very centre 
of this void, grows at the same time. 
Thus it is obvious that we may assume the world to 
be as large as we like; still the disposition of the fixed 
stars as seen by us will be such that this our place will 
appear as possessing a certain particularity and as having 
a certain manifest property (the absence of fixed stars 
in the vast void) by which it is distinct from all other 
places. 
Kepler is perfectly right. We can make the world as 
big as we wish, and yet, if we have to restrict its contents 
to the visible stars, which moreover appear to us as finite, 
measurable bodies - not points of light - we will never 
be able to assign to them a uniform distribution that 
would " save " the phenomena. Our world will always 
be distinguished by a particular structure.20 
It is certain that, on the inside, toward the sun and the 
planets, the world is finite and, so to say, excavated. What 
remains belongs to metaphysics. For, if there is such a 
place [as our world] in this infinite body, then this place 
will be in the center of the whole body. But the fixed stars 
which surround it will not, in respect to it, be in a position 
similar [to that of our sun] as they should be if there were 
everywhere worlds similar to ours. But they will form a 
closed sphere around this [void]. This is most obvious in 
the case of the Milky Way which passes through [the 
hea venly sphere] in an uninterrupted circle, holding us in 
69 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the middle. Thus both the Milky Way and the fixed stars 
play the role of extremities. They limit this our space, and 
in turn are limited on the exterior. Is it, indeed, credible 
that, having a limit on this side, they extend on the other 
side to infinity? How can we find in infinity a centrum 
which, in infinity, is everywhere? For every point taken 
in the infinity is equally, that is, infinitely, separated from 
the extremities which are infinitely distant. From which it 
would result that the same [place] would be the center and 
would not be [the center], and many other contradictory 
things, which most correctly will be avoided by the one who, 
as he found the sky of the fixed stars limited from inside, 
also limits it on the outside. 
Yet, can we not assume that the region of the fixed 
stars is boundless and that stars follow upon stars, though 
some, or even most of them, are so far away that we do 
not see them? Assuredly we can. But it will be a purely 
gratuitous assumption, not based on experience, that is, 
on sight. 
These invisible stars are not an obj ect of 
astronomy and their existence cannot in any way be 
demonstrated. 
In any case there cannot be stars - especially visible 
ones - at an actually infinite distance from us. 
In­
deed, they should necessarily be infinitely large. 
And 
an infinitely large body is utterly impossible because it 
is contradictory. 
Once more Kepler is right. A visible star cannot be 
at an infinite distance; nor, by the way, can an invisible 
one: 21 
If there were an infinite altitude of the sphere of the fixed 
stars, that is, if some fixed stars were infinitely high, they 
would also be in themselves of an infinite corporeal bulk. 
70 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Ur;,iverse 
Imagine, indeed, a star, seen under a certain angle, for 
instance, 4'; the amplitude of such a body is always a 
thousandth part of its distance, as we know from geometry. 
Consequently if the distance is infinite, the diameter of the 
star will be the thousandth part of the infinite. But all the 
aliquot parts of the infinite are infinite. Yet at the same 
time it will be finite, because it has a form: all form is 
circumscribed by certain bounds, that is, [all form] is finite 
or limited. But we have given it a form when we have 
posited it as visible under a certain angle. 
The impossibility of a visible star's being at an infinite 
distance thus denl0nstrated, there remains the case of 
an invisible one.22 
But what, you will ask, if it were so small as not to be 
seen? I answer that the result is the same. It is necessary, 
indeed, that it occupy an aliquot part of the circumference 
that passes through it. But a circumference of which the 
diameter is infinite is itself infinite. Thus it follows that no 
star, either visible, or having vanished bec߼use of its small­
ness, is separated from us by an infinite distance. 
It remains only to ask ourselves whether an infinite 
space without stars can be posited. Kepler replies that 
such an assertion is utterly nleaningless, since wherever 
you put a star you will be at a finite distance (from the 
earth) and if you go beyond, you cannot speak of a 
distance.23 
Finally, even if you extend the place without stars to 
infinity, it is certain that wherever you put a star into it, 
you will have a finite interval and a finite circumference 
determined by the star; thus, those who say that the sphere 
of the fixed stars is infinite commit a contradiction in ad-

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
jecto. In truth, an infinite body cannot be comprehended 
by thought. For the concepts of the mind concerning the 
infinite are either about the meaning of the term " infinite," 
or about something which exceeds all conceived numerical, 
visual, tactual measure: that is, something which is not in­
finite in actu, as an infinite measure can never be thought of. 
I{epler, once more, is perfectly, or at least partially, 
right. It is quite certain that wherever you put a star 
you will find yourself at a finite distance from your 
starting point, as well as from all other stars in the 
universe. 
A really infinite distance between two bodies 
is unthinkable, just as an infinite integer is unthinkable: 
all integers that we can reach by counting (or any other 
arithmetical operation) 
are necessarily finite. Yet it is 
perhaps too rash to conclude therefore that we have no 
concept or the infinite:' does it not mean precisely - as 
Kepler ·tells us himself - that it is what is 
H beyond " 
all number and all measure? 
Furthermore, just as in spite or - or because or - the 
finiteness or all numbers we can go on counting without 
end, can we not also go on putting stars in space, all, 
or course, at finite distances, without ever coming to an 
end? 
Certainly we can, provided we abandon Kepler's 
empirical, that is, Aristotelian or semi-Aristotelian, epis­
temology which precludes this operation, and replace it 
by another: an a priori Platonic or at least semi-Platonic 
one. 
In my analysis or Kepler's objections to the infinity of 
the world I have pointed out that they were rormulated 
several years before the great astronomical (telescopical) 
discoveries of Galileo . These discoveries, which so tre-
72 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
mendously enlarged the field of observable stars and so 
deeply modified the aspect of the celestial vault 
dis­
coveries. which Kepler accepted and defended with joy, 
and whIch he supported not only with the weiO'ht of his 
undisput
.
ed authority but also by establishing the theory 
or 
,
the Iéstrument - the telescope - used by G alileo, 
obhged hIm, or course, to modify some or the views he 
had exèressed in his treatise on the new star. However, 
and thIS seems to me extremely interesting and signifi­
cant, they did not lead him to the acceptance of the 
içfinitist cosmology. 
On the contrary, they seemed to 
hIm to coæfirm his own finitistic world-view and to bring 
new data In ravor or the unicity of the solar system and 
of the essential distinction of our movinO' world and the 
motionless congeries of the fixed stars. 
Å 
Thus in his famous Di8sertatio cum nuntio sidereo he 
tells uå that at first, berore having in hand the publication 
or Gallleo, he was somewhat disturbed by the conflicting 
reports about the latter's discoveries, namely, whether 
the new stars were new planets moving around the sun 
"
"
. 
' 
näw . moons 
accompanyrng the solar planets, or, as 
hIS frIend lV[attheus Wackher believed, planets revolving 
around some fixed stars: a strong argument in favor of 
Bruno's conception of the uniformity of the world. In 
this case, indeed/4 
. . .  nothing could prevent us from believing that number­
less others would be discovered later on and . that either 
this our world were infinite as Melissos wnd the author of 
magneti: phvlosophy, William Gilbert, held, or that there 
was an .InfinIty of worlds and earths (besides this one) as 
was belIeved by Democritus and Leucippus and, among the 
moderns, by Bruno, Brutus, Wacherus and possibly also 
by Galileo. 
" 
73 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infintte Universe 
The perusal of the Nuntius tranquillized Kepler. The 
new stars were not planets: they were moons, Jupiter's 
moons. Now, if the discovery of planets - whether re­
volving around fixed stars or around the sun - would 
ha ve been extremely disagreeable for Kepler, the dis­
covery of new moons did not affect him at all. Why, 
indeed should the earth be the only planet to possess 
a moou? 
Why should the other ones not be similarly 
endowed with satellites ?  
There is no reason why the 
earth should have this privilege. Nay, Kepler thinks that 
there are good reasons why all the planets - with the 
exception perhaps of Mercury, too near the sun to need 
one - should be surrounded with moons. 
It could be said, of course, that thy earth has a moon 
because it is inhabited. Thus, if the planets had moons, 
they should be inhabited too. And why shouldn't they 
be? There is, according to Kepler - who, for our world, 
accepts the teachings of Nicholas of eusa and Bruno ­
no reason to deny this possibility. 
As for the other discoveries of Galileo, namely, those 
concerning the fixed stars, Kepler points out that they 
enhance the difference between the stars and the planets. 
Whereas the latter are strongly magnified by the tele­
scope and appear as well-defined discs, the former hardly 
increase their dimensions for, seen through the telescope, 
they are deprived of the luminous haze that surrounds 
them,25 a fact of tremendous importance because it shows 
that this haze belongs not to the seen stars but to the 
seeing eye, in other words, that it is not an objeãtive 
but a subjective phenomenon and that, whereas the VISIble 
dimensions of the planets have a determinate relation to 
their real ones, this is not the case for the fixed stars. 
74 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus we can calculate the dimensions of the planets, but 
we cannot do it, at least riot as easily, for the fixed stars. 
The explanation of this fact is easy: whereas the planets 
shine by the reflected light of the sun, the fixed stars 
shine by their own, like the sun. But if so, are they not 
really suns as Bruno has asserted? 
By no means. The 
very number of the new stars discovered by Galileo proves 
that the fixed stars, generally speaking, are much smaller 
than the sun, and that there is in the whole world not 
a single one which in dimensions, as well as in luminosity, 
can be equal to our sun. 
Indeed, if our sun were not 
incommensurably brighter than the fixed stars, or these 
so much less bright than it, the celestial vault would be 
as luminous as the sun. 
The very existence of a tremendous number of fixed 
stars which we do not see, but which observers placed 
upon one of them would, is a proof, according to I(epler, 
that his fundamental objection to the infinitist cosmology, 
namely, that for no observer in the world would the aspect 
of the sky be the same as it is for us, is even better 
grounded in the facts than he had imagined. Thus the 
conclusion formerly drawn from the analysis of the phe­
nomena accessible to the unassisted eye finds itself con­
firmed by the adjunction to them of the phenomena 
revealed by the telescope :  our moving world, with its 
sun and planets, is not one of many, but a unique world, 
placed in a unique void, surrounded by a unique con­
glomeration of innumerable fixed - in the full sense of 
the term - stars. 
Kepler thus maintains his position. Of the two possible 
interpretations of the telescopic discoveries of Galileo, that 
the new (fixed) stars are not seen by the unassisted eye 
75 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
because they are too far, and that they are not seen 
because they are too small, he resolutely adopts the 
second. 
He is wrong, of course; and yet, from the point of view 
of pure empiricism, he is blameless because there are, for 
him, on the one hand, no means of determining the inter­
vals that separate us from the stars and no reason there­
fore to assume that they are not very different in size; 
all the more so as there are, on the other hand, some 
examples - the " Medicean " planets, in fact - of celes­
tial objects imperceptible because they are too small to 
be seen. 
Let us turn now to the Epitome astronomiae Coperni­
canae, the last, and the most mature, great work of Kepler. 
We shall find the rejection of the infinity of the world 
presented just as vigorously, or perhaps even more vigor­
ously, than ever before. 
To the question 26 
What is to be held concerning the shape of the sky? 
the reply is given: 
Though we cannot perceive with our eyes the matter of 
the etheric aura, there is nothing, however, to prevent ߽s 
from believing that it is spread through the whole amplI­
tude of the world on all sides surrounding the elementary 
sphere. That the army of the stars corripletely encircles the 
earth and thus forms a certain quasi-circular vault is clear 
from the fact that, while the earth is round, men, wherever 
they go, see the stars above their heads, as we do. 
Thus if we turned around the earth, or if the earth turned 
around with us, we would see the whole troop of the stars 
76 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
arranged in a closed circuit. But that is not an answer 
to the question asked, as nobody doubts that the earth 
is surrounded by stars. 
What we have to find OMt is 
something quite different, namely, whether this quasi 
vault is more than a simple appearance, that is whether 27 
the centres of the stars are placed on the same spherical 
surface. 
At this stage of the discussion Kepler does not want to 
commit himself. Thus he gives a rather cautious answer: 
This is rather uncertain. As some of them are small, and 
others big, it is not impossible that the small ones appear 
such because they are far away in the high ether, and the 
large [do so] because they are nearer to us. Nor is it absurd 
that two fixed [stars] of different apparent magnitude be 
distant from us by the same interval. 
As for the planets, it is certain that they are not in the 
same spherical surface as the fixed stars; indeed they eclipse 
the fixed stars but are not eclipsed by these. 
But in this case, that is, if we can neither determine the 
intervals that separate us from the fixed stars nor decide 
whether their apparent magnitude is a function of their 
real size or only of their distance, why should we not admit 
that their " region " is unlimited or infinite? Indeed/8 
If there is no more certain knowledge concerning the 
fixed stars, it would seem that their region is infinite; nor 
will this our sun be anything other than one of the fixed 
stars, larger and better seen by us, because [it is] nearer to 
us than the fixed stars; and in this case around any one of 
the fixed stars there may be such a world as there is 
around us; or, which is exactly the same, among the in­
numerable places in that infinite assembly of the fixed stars 
77 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
our world with its sun will be one [place] in no way different 
from other places around other fixed stars, as [represented] 
by the adjoined figure M. 
The supposition seems reasonable or, at least, admissible. 
Yet I(epler rejects it, and does so for the same reasons 
he had twelve years before: 
from the hypothesis of 
infinity, that is, of a uniform distribution of the fixed 
stars in space, would follow an aspect of the sky that is 
not in accordance with the phenomena. For Kepler, in­
deed, the infinity of the world necessarily implies a perfect 
uniformity of its structure and contents. 
An irregular, 
irrational scattering of fixed stars in space is unthinkable; 
finite or infinite, the world must embody a geometrical 
pattern. But whereas for a finite world it is reasonable to 
choose a particular pattern, the principle or sufficient 
reason prevents the geometrically minded God of Kepler 
from doing it in an infinite one. As already explained by 
Bruno, there is no reason (or even possibility) for God 
to make a distinction between the " places " of a per­
fectly homogeneous space, and to treat them in a different 
way. Kepler thus states: 29 
This [the infinity of the world] indeed [was asserted] by 
Bruno and some others. But [even] if the centers of the 
fixed stars are not on the same spherical surface, it does 
not follow that the region in which they are dispersed is 
everywhere similar to itself. 
As a matter of fact, in the midst of it [the region of the 
fixed stars] there is assuredly a certain immense void, a 
hollow cavity, surrounded in close order by the fixed stars, 
enclosed and circumscribed as by a wall or vault; it is in 
the bosom of this immense cavity that our earth with the 
sun and the moving stars [planets] is situated. 
78 
FIGURE 3 
The figure 1V1 of Kepler 
(from the Epitome astronomiae 
Copernicanae, 1618) 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
In order to demonstrate this assertion, Kepler gives us 
a detailed description of the aspect that the sky would 
have in the case of a uniform distribution of the fixed 
stars 
(which, moreover, in this case would ha.ve to be 
assumed as being, all of them, of the same SIze) , and 
opposes this hypothetical picture to the actual one.so 
If the region of the fixed stars were everywhere similarly 
set with stars, even in the vicinity of our movable world, 
so that the region of our world and of our sun had no 
peculiar outline compared to the other regions, then only 
a few enormous fixed stars would be seen by us, and not 
more than twelve (the number of the angles of the icosa­
hedron) could be at the same distance from us and of the 
same [visible] magnitude; the following ones would be 
scarcely more numerous, yet they would be twice as dis.tant 
as the nearest ones; the next higher would be three . tImes 
as far, and so on, always increasing their distance [In the 
same manner]. 
But as the biggest of all appear so small that they can 
hardly be noted or measured by instruments, those that 
would be two or three times farther oft, if we assume them 
to be of the same true magnitude, would appear two or three 
times smaller. Accordingly we should quickly arrive at 
those which would be completely imperceptible, Thus very 
few stars would be seen, and they would be very different 
from each other. 
But what is seen by us in fact is quite different. We see, 
indeed, fixed stars of the same apparent magnitude packed 
together in a very great number. The Greek astronomers 
counted a thousand of the biggest, and the Hebrews eleven 
thousand' nor is the difference of their apparent magnitudes 
very grest. All these stars being equal to the sight, it 
,
is 
not reasonable that they should be at very unequal dIS­
tances from us. 
80 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus, as the general appearance of the fixed stars is 
everywhere nearly the same in respect to their number and 
magnitude, the visible sky is also everywhere raised above 
us by nearly the same distance. There is therefore an 
immense cavity in the midst of the region of the fixed 
stars, a visible conglomeration of fixed stars around it in 
which enclosure we are. 
' 
In the belt of Orion there are three big stars which are 
distant from each other by an interval of 83'; let us suppose 
the visible semidiameter of each to be only of one minute; 
âccordingly it will appear to the sight as being of 83', that 
IS, nearly three times the breadth of the sun, and as for 
the surface, it would be eight times larger than the sun 
itself. Consequently the appearance of the fixed stars as 
seen from each other is not the same as it is from our 
world, and accordingly we . are farther away from the fixed 
stars than the neighbouring fixed stars are from each other. 
_ .  As we see, the telescope did not change the pattern of 
Keplerian reasoning: it only made him diminish some­
what the visible dimensions of the fixed stars. 
And, 
of course, as long as this visible dimension is not com­
fletसly removed from the objective sphere to the sub­
JectIve one, ICepler's deduction can be upheld. 
Yet, it may be objected, its second premise, that of the 
unIform size of the fixed stars, is gratuitous. 
It seems 
that,S1 
The strength of this argument can be weakened by 
aÍsuming that the stars are so much larger as they are 
hlgher [farther] from the earth. For, if among the so 
numerous stars that are seen under nearly the same angle, 
some were assumed to have small bodies, and others enor­
mous ones, it would follow that the former are near us and 
the latter exceedingly far; and thus, in this case, stars which 
81 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
are seen by us as very near [to each other] could in point 
of fact be very distant. 
This is a possible assumption, but, as we know, a 
rather improbable one, since it would imply an extremely 
unlikely star distribution, a distribution, moreover, com­
pletely incompatible with our fundamental assumption 
of a homogeneous, uniform universe: 32 
In this case, this region would be conspicuous if not by 
its vacuity then by the smallness of the stars in the neigh­
bourhood of our moving world, and thus the very minute­
ness of the stars would present a kind of void, whereas the 
increasing magnitude of the stars on the exterior would play 
the role of the vault. In the universe there would be less 
stellar matter in this cavity in which our moving world 
is located, and more matter in the circumference which 
contains and limits it. Thus it would still remain true that 
this place is singular and notable compared to all the 
remaining parts of the region of the fixed stars. 
Moreover, it is more probable that those [stars] that are 
nearly of the same sensible magnitude are separated from 
us by nearly the same distance, and that a kind of hollow 
sphere is formed by the packing closely together of so 
many stars. 
The arguments already developed are more than suffi­
cient to enable us to maintain the unicity of this our 
moving and sun-centered world, and to oppose it to the 
realm of the fixed stars. 
We can, however, supplement 
them by more direct ones, and show that the phenomena 
clearly point out our (the solar system's) central position 
in the midst of the peripheral accumulation of stars. The 
appearance of the Milky Way - in spite of its resolution 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
by Galileo into an innumerable multitude of stars - still 
seems to Kepler to preclude any other conclusion. Thus, 
elaborating the demonstration outlined in the De stella 
nova, Kepler continues: 33 
Do you have any other argument demonstrating that this 
place in the midst of which are the earth and the planets is 
particularly distinguished in respect to all other places in 
the region of the fixed stars? 
The way called by the Greeks the Milky Way and by 
us the Road of " St. Jacob is spread around in the middle 
, of the orb of the fixed stars (as the orb appears to us) , 
dividing it into two apparent hemispheres; and though this 
circle is of unequal breadth, still it is, all around, not very 
dissimilar to itself. Thus the Milky Way conspicuously 
determines the place of the earth and of the moving world 
in relation to all other places in the region of the fixed stars. 
For if we assume that the earth is on one side of the 
selnidianleter of the :r"Iilky VV ay, then this ]VHlky 'Vay 
would appear to it [the earth] as a small circle or small 
ellipse . . .  it would be visible at one glance, whereas now 
not more than half of it can be seen at any moment. On 
the other hand, if we assumed that the earth were indeed 
in the plane of the Milky Way, but in the vicinity of its 
very circumference: then this part of the Milky Way 
would appear enormous, and the opposite part, narrow. 
Thus the sphere of the fixed stars is limited downwards, 
towards us, not only by the stellar orb but also by the 
circle of the Milky Way. 
Still, in spite of being thus limited " downwards," the 
sphere of the fixed stars could nevertheless extend indefi­
nitely " upwards "; the walls of the world-bubble could 
be indefinitely, or infinitely, thick. 
Once more we see 
83 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Kepler reject this supposition as groundless and perfectly 
unscientific. Astronomy, indeed, is an empirical science. 
Its field is coextensive with that of observable data. 
Astronomy has nothing to say about things that are not, 
and cannot, be seen.34 
But then is not the region of the fixed stars infinite up­
wards? Here astronomy makes no judgment, because in 
such an altitude it is deprived of the sense of seeing. 
Astronomy teaches only this: as far as the stars, even the 
least ones, are seen, space is finite. 
Kepler does not mention Galileo in this discussion, and 
we can understand why: the telescope does not change 
the situation. It allows us to see more stars than we did 
before its invention; it enables us to transcend the factual 
limitation of our sense of seeing; but it does not remove 
its essential structure. 
With as without the telescope, 
things at an infinite distance cannot be seen. The optical 
world is finite. 
Thus to the question: 35 
But is it not possible for S01ne of the visible stars to be 
separated from us by an infinite distance? 
Kepler replies: 
No; because everything that is seen, is seen by its extremi­
ties. Consequently a visible star has limits all around. But 
if the star receded to a really infinite distance, these limits 
too would be distant from one another by an infinite 
space. For everything at once, that is, the whole body of 
the star, would participate in the infinity of this altitude. 
Therefore, if the angle of vision remained the same, the 
diameter of the star, which is the line· between its limits, 
would be increased proportionally to the distance; thus the 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
diameter of a [star] twice as distant will be twice as large 
as the diameter of the nearer one, the diameter of a [star] 
distant by a finite space will be finite, but when a body is 
assumed to acquire an infinitely increased distance [its 
diameter] also becomes infinitely great. 
. 
Indeed, to be infinite and to be limited is incompatIble, 
just as it is incoInpatible to be infinite and tá havà a 
certain, that is, determ"inate, proportion to somethIng finIte. 
Consequently, nothing that is visible is separated from us 
by an infinite distance. 
So much for the visible world. But can we not assume 
that outside and beyond the world, or the part of the 
world that is seen by us, space, and stars in space, continue 
to exist without end? 
It may be meaningless from the 
point of view of astronomy, it may be metaphysics . . . .  
But is it a good one? Not according to Kepler, who held 
that this concept - that of modern science - is bad, as 
a really infinite number or finite bodies is something 
unthinkable, even contradictory: 36 
But what if there were in reality stars, of finite body, 
scattered upwards in the infinite spaces, [stars] which, be­
cause of so great a distance, were not seen by us? 
First, if they are not seen, they in no way concern 
astronomy. Then, if the region of the fixed stars is at all 
limited, namely downwards, towards our mobile world, why 
should it lack 1imits upwards? Third, though it cannot be 
denied that there can be many stars which, either because 
of their minuteness or because of their very great distance, 
are not seen nevertheless you cannot because of them assert 
, 
. 
. 
an infinite space. For if they are, individually, of a finIte 
size, they must, all of them, be of a finite number. Other­
wise, if they were of an infinite number, then, be they as 
small as you like, provided they are not infinitely so, they 
85 

C L O S E D 
W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
would be able to constitute one infinite [star] and thus there 
would be a body, of three dimensions, and nevertheless 
infinite, which implies a contradiction. For we call infinite 
what lacks limit and end, and therefore also dimension. 
Thus all number of things is actually finite for the very 
reason that it is a number; consequently a finite number of 
finite bodies does not imply an infinite space, as if engen­
dered by the multiplication of a multitude of finite spaces. 
Kepler's objection against infinity is, of course, not new: 
it is essentially that of Aristotle. Yet it is by no means 
negligible, and modern science seems rather to have dis­
carded than to have solved the problem.37 Now, even if 
we deny that there is an infinite number of stars in space, 
there still remains, for the infinitist, a last possibility: 
that of asserting a finite world immersed in an infinite 
space.3S 
Kepler does not accept this, either, and his 
reasons for rejecting it reveal the ultimate metaphysical 
background of his thinking: 39 
If you are speaking of void space, that is, of what is 
nothing, what neither is, nor is created, and cannot oppose 
a resistance to anything being there, you are dealing with 
quite another question. It is clear that [this void space], 
which is obviously nothing, cannot have an actual existence. 
If, however, space exists because of the bodies located in it 
[it will not be infinite as] it is already demonstrated that 
no body that can be located is actually infinite, and that 
bodies of finite magnitude cannot be infinite in number. 
It is therefore by no means necessary that space be infinite 
on account of the bodies located in it. And it is also 
impossible that between two bodies there be an actually 
infinite line. For it is incompatible to be infinite and to 
have limits in the two individual bodies or points that 
constitute the ends of the line. 
86 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
Space, void space, is just " nothing," a non-ens. Space, 
as such, neither is - how, indeed, could it be if it is 
nothing? - nor has it been created by God, who assuredly 
has created the world out of nothing, but did not start by 
creating " nothing." 40 
Space exists on account of the 
bodies; if there were no bodies, there would not be space. 
And if God should destroy the world, there would be no 
void space left behind. There would be simply nothing, 
just as there was nothing at all before God created the 
world. 
All that is not new, nor specific to Kepler: it is the 
traditional teaching of Aristotelian scholasticism. 
Thus 
we have to admit that Johannes Kepler, the great and 
truly revolutionary thinker, was, nevertheless, bound by 
tradition. In his conception of being, of motion, though 
not of science, Kepler, in the last analysis, remains an 
Aristotelian. 
87 

IV. Things Never Seen Before 
and Thoughts Never Thought : 
T H E  D I S C O V E R Y 
O F  N E W  S T A R S  
I N  T H E  W O R L D  S P A C E  A N D  
T H E  M A T E R I A L I Z A T I O N  O F  S P A C E  
Galileo 
& Descartes 
I have already mentioned the Sidereus Nuncius 1 of Gali­
leo Galilei, a work of which the influence - and the 
importance - cannot be overestimated, a work which 
announced a series of discoveries more strange and more 
significant than any that had ever been made before. 
Reading it today we can no longer, of course, experience 
the impact of the unheard-of message; yet we can still 
feel the excitement and pride glowing beneath the cool 
and sober wording of Galileo's report: 2 
In this little treatise I am presenting to all students of 
nature great things to observe and to consider. Great as 
much because of their intrinsic excellence as of their abso­
lute novelty, and also on account of the instrument by the 
88 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
aid of· which they have made themselves accessible to our 
senses. 
It is assuredly important to add to the great number of 
fixed stars that up to now men have been able to see by 
their natural sight, and to set before the eyes innumerable 
others which have never been seen before and which surpass 
the old and previously known [stars] in number more than 
ten times. 
It is most beautiful and most pleasant to the sight to 
see the body of the moon, distant from us by nearly sixty 
semidiameters of the earth, as near as if it were at a dis­
tance of only two and a half of these measures. 
So that 
Any one can know with the certainty of sense-perception 
that the moon is by no means endowed with a smooth and 
polished surface, but with a rough and uneven one, and, 
just like the face of the earth itself, is everywhere full of 
enormous swellings, deep chasms and sinuosities. 
Then to have settled disputes about the Galaxy or Milky 
Way and to have made its essence manifest to the senses, 
and even more to the intellect, seems by no means a matter 
to be considered of small importance; in addition to this, to 
demonstrate directly the substance of those stars which all 
astronomers up to this time have called nebulous, and to 
demonstrate that it is very different from what has hitherto 
been believed, will be very pleasant and very beautiful. 
But what by far surpasses all admiration, and what in 
the first place moved me to present it to the attention of 
astronomers and philosophers, is this: namely, that we have 
discovered four planets, neither known nor observed by any 
one before us, which have their periods around a certain 
big star of the number of the previously known ones, like 
Venus and Mercury around the sun, which sometimes pre-
89 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
cede it and sometimes follow it, but never depart from it 
beyond certain limits. All this was discovered and observed 
a few days ago by means of the perspicilli invented by me 
through God's grace previously illuminating my mind. 
To sum up: mountains on the moon, new " planets " in 
the sky, new fixed stars in tremendous numbers, things 
that no human eye had ever seen, and no human mind 
conceived before. And not only this: besides these new, 
amazing and wholly unexpected and unforeseen facts, 
there was arso the description of an astonishing invention, 
that of an Instrument - the first scientific instrument ­
the perspicillum, which made all these discoveries possible 
and enabled Galileo to transcend the limitation imposed 
by nature - or by God - on human senses and human 
knowledge.s 
N
,
o ,,:onqeळ that the Message of the Stars was, at first, 
receIved with misgivings and incredulity, and that it 
played a decisive part in the whole subsequent develop­
ment of astronomical science, which from now on became 
so closely linked together with that of its instruments 
that every progress of the one implied and involved a 
progress of the other. One could even say that not only 
astronomy, but science as such, began, with Galileo's 
invention, a new phase of its development, the phase that 
we might call the instrumental one. 
The perspicilli not only increased the number of the 
fixed, and errant, stars: they changed their aspect. I have 
already dealt with this effect of the use of the telescope. 
Yet it is worth while quoting Galileo himself on this 
subject: 4, 
First of all, this is worthy of consideration, namely that 
90 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
stars, as well fixed as errant, when they are seen through 
the perspicillum, are never seen to increase their dimensions 
in the same proportions in which other objects, and the 
moon itself, increase in size. Indeed in [the case of] the 
stars this increase appears much smaller, so that a perspi­
cillum which, for instance, is powerful enough to magnify 
all other obj ects a hundred times will scarcely render the 
stars four or five times larger. But the reason for it is this: 
namely the stars, when seen by our free and natural eye­
sight, do not present themselves to us with their real and, 
so to say, naked size, but are surrounded by a certain halo 
and fringed with sparkling rays, particularly so when the 
night is already advanced; therefore they appear much 
larger than [they would] if they were stripped of these ad­
ventitious fringes; for the angle of vision is determined not 
by the primary body of the star, but by the brightness that 
surrounds it. 
A.ccording to Galileo, this " adventitious " and " acci­
dental " 
character of the halo surrounding the stars is 
clearly demonstrated by the fact that, when they are seen 
at dawn, stars, even of the first magnitude, appear quite 
small; and even Venus, if seen by daylight, is hardly 
larger than a star of the last magnitude. Daylight, so to 
say, cuts off their luminous fringes; and not only light, 
but diaphanous clouds or black veils and colored glass 
have the same effect.5 
The perspicillum acts in the same way. First it removes 
from the stars the accidental and adventitious splendours, 
and [only] then enlarges their true globes (if indeed they 
are of a round shape) , and therefore they appear to be 
magnified in a smaller proportion [than other objects]. Thus 
a starlet of the fifth or the sixth magnitude seen through a 
perspicillum is shown only as of the first magnitude. 
91 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
This, indeed, is extremely important as it destroys the 
basis of Tycho Brahe's most impressive - for his contem:­
poraries - objection to heliocentric astronomy, according 
to which the fixed stars - if the Copernican world-system 
were true - should be as big, nay much bigger, than the 
whole orbis magnus of the annual circuit of the earth. 
The perspicillum reduces their visible diameter from 2 
minutes to 5 seconds and thus disposes of the necessity 
to increase the size of the fixed stars beyond that of the 
sun. Yet the decrease in size is more than compensated 
by an increase in number: 6 
The difference between the appearance of the planets and 
of the fixed stars seems equally worthy of notice. Planets 
indeed present their discs perfectly round and exactly de­
limited, and appear as small moons completely illuminated 
and globular; but the fixed stars are not seen as bounded 
by a circular periphery, but like blazes of light, sending 
out rays on all sides and very sparkiing; and with the per­
spicillum they appear to be of the same shape as when 
viewed by the natural sight, and so much bigger that a 
starlet of the fifth or sixth magnitude seems to equal the 
Dog, the largest of all the fixed stars. But below the stars 
of the sixth magnitude, you will see through the perspicillum 
so numerous a herd of other stars that escape the natural 
sight as to be almost beyond belief; for you may see more 
than six other differences of magnitude; of which the largest, 
those that we may call stars of the seventh magnitude or of 
the first of the invisible ones, appear with the aid of the 
perspicillum larger and brighter than stars of the second 
magnitude seen by natural sight. But in order that you 
may see one or two examples of their nearly inconceivable 
number, we decided to make out two star-pictures, so that 
92 
* 
*'" * 
* 
ß 
$ 
"* 
* 1l-
*-
p* 
* * Ý 
* 
*-t(. 
* 
'* 
* 
'if 
)f\ 
* 
* . ,A.,. 
ɒ 
* * 
--J(. 
ɓ 
/.. s.. 
*-
-:¥-
* ɗ 1f  
* 
* 
I ?(. 
ɘ *  
ɔ 
* * 
:-
* 
*" 
* 
'* 
'* 
'* 
t *  
11-
* 
'* 
* 
* 
* 
* *  
'* 
ə -Jf.  
ɕ 
""l. 
Þ 
* 
* 
: 
ď 
*-
ɖ* 
-Jf 
ń 
'* 
-K-
* 
FIGURE 4 
Galileo's star-picture of the 
shield and sword of Orion 
(from the Sidereus Nuncius, 1610) 
* 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
from these examples you may judge about the rest. At first 
we determined to depict the entire constellation of Orion 
but we were overwhelmed by the enormous multitude of 
stars and by lack of time, and have deferred this attempt 
to another occasion; for there are adjacent to, or scattered 
around, the old ones more than five hundred [new ones] 
within the limits of one or two degrees. 
As a second example we have depicted the six stars of 
Taurus, called the Pleiades (we say six, because the seventh 
is scarcely ever visible) , which are enclosed in the sky within 
very narrow boundaries, and near which are adjacent more 
than forty other visible ones, none of which is more than 
half a degree distant from the aforesaid six. 
We have already seen that the invisibility for the 
human eye of the fixed stars discovered by Galileo and 
accordingly, the role of his perspicillum in revealinO' ohem
' 
.
0
' 
could be lnterpreted in two different ways: it could be 
explained by their being (a) too small to be seen, (b) too 
far away. 
The perspicillum would act in the first case 
as a kind of celestial microscope, in enlarging, so to say, 
the stars to perceivable dimensions; in the second it 
would be a " telescope " and, so to say, bring the stars 
nearer to us, to a distance at which they become visible. 
The second interpretation, that which makes visibility a 
function of the distance, appears to Us now to be the only 
one possible. Yet this was not the case in the seventeenth 
century. As a matter of fact both interpretations fit the 
optical data equally well and a man of that period had 
no scientific, but only philosophical, reasons for choosing 
between them. And it was for philosophical reasons that 
the prevailing trend of seventeenth century thinking re­
jected the first interpretation and adopted the second. 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
There is no doubt whatever that Galileo adopted it too, 
though he very seldom asserts it. 
As a matter of fact 
he does it only once, in a curious passage of his Letter 
to Ingoli where he tells the latter that: 7 
If it is true, as is commonly held,S that the highest parts 
of the universe are reserved for the habitation of substances 
more pure and perfect [than ourselves] they [the fixed stars] 
will be no less lucid and resplendent than the sun; and yet 
their light, and I mean the light of all of them taken 
together, does not come up to the tenth part of the visible 
magnitude and of the light that is communicated by the sun; 
and of the one as well as of the other of these effects the 
sole reason is their great distance: how great therefore must 
we not believe it to be? 
Indeed, in the debate about the finiteness or the infinity 
of the universe, the great Florentine, to whom modern 
science owes perhaps more than to any other man, takes 
no part. He never tells us whether he believes the one or 
the other. He seems not to have made up his mind, or 
even, though inclining towards infinity, to consider the 
question as being insoluble. He does not hide, of course, 
that in contradistinction to Ptolemy, Copernicus and 
Kepler, he does not admit the limitation of the world 
or its enclosure by a real sphere of fixed stars. Thus in 
the letter to Ingoli already quoted he tells him: 9 
You suppose that the stars of the firmament are, all of 
them, placed in the same orb: that is something the knowl­
edge of which is so doubtful that it will never be proved 
either by you or by anybody else; but if we restrict our­
selves to conjectures and probabilities I shall say that not 
even four of the fixed stars . . .  are at the same distance 
95 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
from whichever point of the universe you may want to 
choose. 
And, what is more, not only is it not proved that they 
are arranged in a sphere but neither Ingoli himself/o 
. . .  nor any one in the world, knows, nor can possibly know, 
not only what is the shape [of the firmament] but even 
whether it has any figure at all. 
Consequently, once more in opposition to Ptolemy, 
Copernicus and Kepler, and in accordance with Nicholas 
of Cusa and Giordano Bruno, Galileo rejects the concep­
tion of a center of the universe where the earth, or the 
sun, should be placed, " the center of the universe which 
we do not know where to find or whether it exists at all." 
He even tells us that " the fixed stars are so many suns." 
Yet, in the selfsame Dialogue on the Two Greatest W orld­
Systems from which the last two quotations are taken, 
discussing ex professo the distribution of the fixed stars 
in the universe, he does not assert that the stars are 
scattered in space without end: 11 
SALVe - Now, Simplicius, what shall we do with the fixed 
stars? Shall we suppose them scattered through the im­
mense abysses of the universe, at different distances from 
one determinate point; or else placed in a surface spheri­
cally distended about a center of its own, so that each of 
them may be equidistant from the said center? 
SIMP. - I would rather take a middle way and would 
assign them a circle described about a determinate center 
and comprised within two spherical surfaces, to wit, one 
very high and concave, the other lower and convex betwixt 
which I would constitute the innumerable multitude of 
stars, but yet at diverse altitudes, and this might be called 
96 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the sphere of the universe, containing within it the circles 
of the planets already by us described. 
SALVo - But now we have all this while, Simplicius, dis­
posed the mundane bodies exactly according to the order 
of Copernicus. . . . 
We can assuredly explain the moderation of Salviati, 
who does not criticize the conception presented by Sim­
plicio - though he does not share it - and who accepts 
it, for the purpose of the discussion, as agreeing perfectly 
with Copernican astronomy, by the very nature of the 
Dialogue: a book intended for the " general reader," a 
book which aims at the destruction of the Aristotelian 
world-view in favor of that of Copernicus, a book which 
pretends, moreover, not to do it, and where, therefore, 
subjects both difficult and dangerous are obviously to be 
avoided. 
We could even go as far as to discard the outright 
negation of the infinity o f  space in the Dialogue - which 
had to pass the censorship of the Church - and to oppose 
to it the passage of the letter to Ingoli where its possibility 
is just as strongly asserted. 
In the Dialogue, indeed, 
Galileo tells us, just as Kepler does, that it is: 12 
. . .  absolutely iInpossible that there should be an infinite 
space superior to the fixed stars, for there is no such place 
in the world; and if there were, the star there situated 
would be imperceptible to us. 
Whereas in the Letter to I ngoli he writes: 18 
Don't you know that it is as yet undecided (and I believe 
that it will ever be so for human knowledge) whether the 
universe is finite or, on the contrary, infinite. And, given 
that it be truly infinite, how would you be able to say that 
97 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  ·to Infinite Universe 
. the magnitude of the stellar sphere would be proportionate 
to that of the orbis magnum, if this one, in respect to the 
universe, were rather smaller than a grain of millet in 
respect to it? 
We must not forget, however, that in the selfsame 
Dialogue where he so energetically denied the infinity of 
space, he makes Salviati tell Simplicio - just as he him­
self had told Ingoli - that: 14 
Neither you nor any one else has ever proved that the 
world is finite and figurate or else infinite and interminate. 
Moreover, we cannot reject the testimony of Galileo's 
Letter to Liceti, where, coming back to the problem of 
the finiteness and the infinity of the world, he writes: 15 
Many and subtle reasons are given for each of these views 
but none of them, to my mind, leads to a necessary con-
01 .. ";""",, 
,,ɐ .J-hɑ.J-
T _ÁÂ Ã .  
• 
d 
b.f-
h 
.J-
h' h 
.c 
h 
Ä.lUi:l.lVH, i:lV 
l,Hi:t l, .1. ߾C:ll1.i:tln In 
OU L dUOUL WHICH 01. tnt two 
answers is the true one. There is only one particular argu­
ment of mine that inclines me .more to the infinite and 
interminate than to the terminate (note that my imagina­
tion is of no help here since I cannot imagine it either 
finite or infinite) : I feel that my incapacity to comprehend 
might more properly be referred to incomprehensible in­
finity, rather than to finiteness, in which no principle of 
incomprehensibility is required. But this is one of those 
questions happily inexplicable to human reason, and similar 
perchance to predestination, free-will and such others in 
which only Holy Writ and divine revelation can give an 
answer to our reverent remarks. 
It is possible, of course, that all the pronouncements of 
Galileo have to be taken cum grano salis, and that the 
fate of Bruno, the condemnation of Copernicus in 1616, 
9 8  
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
his own condemnation in 1633 incited him to practise 
the virtue of prudence: he never mentions Bruno, either 
in his writings or in his letters; yet it is also possible - it 
is even quite probable - that this problem, like, generally 
speaking, the problems of cosmology or even of celestial 
mechanics, did not interest him very much. Indeed he 
concentrates on the question: a quo moventur projecta? 
but never asks: a quo moventur planetae? It may be, 
therefore, that, like Copernicus himself, he never took 
up the question, and thus never made the decision ­
though it is implied in the geometrization of space of 
which he was one of the foremost promoters - to make 
his world infinite. 
Some features of his dynamics, the 
fact that he never could completely free himself from 
the obsession of circularity - his planets move circularly 
around the sun without developing any centrifugal force 
in their motion - seem to suggest that his world was 
not infinite. If it was not finite it was probably, like the 
world of Nicholas of Cusa, indeterminate; and it is, 
perhaps, more than a p ure contingent coincidence that 
in his letter to Liceti he uses the expression also em­
ployed by Cusa: .interminate. 
Be this as it may, it is not G alileo, in any case, nor 
Bruno, but Descartes who clearly and distinctly formu­
lated principles of the new science, its dream de reductione 
scientiae ad mathematicam, and of the new, mathematical, 
cosmology. Though, as we shall see, he overshot the mark 
and by his premature identification of matter and space 
deprived himself of the means of giving a correct solution 
to the problems that seventeenth century science had 
placed before him. 
99 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
The God of a philosopher and his world are correlated. 
Now Descartes' God, in contradistinction to most previous 
Gods, is not symbolized by the things Re created; He does 
not express Himself in them. There is no analogy between 
God and the world; no imagines and vestigia Dei in 
mundo; the only exception is our soul, that is, a pure 
mind, a being, a substance of which all essence consists 
in thought, a mind endowed with an intelligence able 
to grasp the idea of God, that is, of the infinite (which is 
even innate to it) , and with will, that is, with infinite free­
dom. The Cartesian God gives us some clear and distinct 
ideas that enable us to find out the truth, provided we 
stick to them and take care not to fall into error. 
The 
Cartesian God is a truthful God; thus the knowledge 
about the world created by Rim that our clear and dis­
tinct ideas enable us to reach is a true and authentic 
knowledge. As for this world, He created it by pure will, 
and even if He had SOine reasons for doing it, these reasons 
are only known to Himself; we have not, and cannot have, 
the slightest idea of them. It is therefore not only hope­
less, but even preposterous to try to find out His aims. 
Teleological conceptions and explanations have no place 
and no value in physical science, just as they have no 
place and no meaning in mathematics, all the more so as 
the world created by the Cartesian God, that is, the 
world of Descartes, is by no means the colorful, multi­
form and qualitatively determined world of the Aristo­
telian, the world of our daily life and experience - that 
world is only a subjective world of unstable and inconsistऴ 
ent opinion based upon the untruthful testimony of 
confused and erroneous sense-perception - but a strictly 
uniform mathematical world, a world of geometry made 
100 
C L O S E D  W O R L D to Infinite Universe 
real about which our clear and distinct ideas give us a 
certain and evident knowledge. There is nothing else in 
this world but matter and motion; or, matter being 
identical with space or extension, there is nothing else 
but extension and motion. 
The famous Cartesian identification of extension and 
matter (that is, the assertion that " it is not heaviness, 
or hardness, or color which constitutes the nature of body 
but only extension," 16 in other words, that " nature of 
body, taken generally, does not consist in the fact that 
it is a hard, or a heavy, or a colored thing, or a thing 
that touches our senses in any other manner, but only 
in that it is a substance extended in length, breadth and 
depth," and that conversely, extension in length, breadth 
and depth can only be conceived - and therefore can 
only exist - as belonging to a material substance) implies 
very far-reaching consequences, the first being the nega­
tion of the void, which is rejected by Descartes in a 
manner even more radical than by Aristotle himself. 
Indeed, the void, according to Descartes, is not only 
physically impossible, it is essentially impossible. Void · 
space - if there were anything of that kind - would be a 
contradictio in adjecto, an existing nothing. Those who 
assert its existence, Democritus, Lucretius and their fol­
lowers, are victims of false imagination and confused 
thinking. They do not realize that nothing can have no 
properties and therefore no dimensions. To speak of ten 
feet of void space separating two bodies is meaningless: if 
there were a void, there would be no separation, and 'bodies 
separated by nothing would be in contact. And if there is 
separation and distance, this distance is not a length, 
breadth or depth of nothing but of something, that is, of 
101 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
substance or matter, a " subtle " matter, a matter that 
we do not sense - that is precisely why people who are 
accustomed to imagining instead of thinking speak of void 
space - but nevertheless a matter just as real and as 
" material " (there are no degrees in materiality) as the 
" gross " matter of which trees and stones are made. 
Thus Descartes does not content himself with stating, 
as did Giordano Bruno and Kepler, that there is no really 
void space in the world and that the world-space is every­
where filled with " ether." 
He goes much farther and 
denies that there is such a thing at all as " space," an 
entity distinct from " matter " that " fills " it. Matter 
and space are identical and can be distinguished only by 
abstraction. 
Bodies are not in space, but only among 
other bodies; the space that they " occupy " is not any­
thing different from themselves: 17 
The space or the interior locus, and the body which is 
comprised in this space are not distinct except in our 
thought. For, as a matter of fact, the same extension in 
length, breadth and depth that constitutes space, consti­
tutes also body; and the difference between them consists 
only in this, that we attribute to body a particular exten­
sion, which we conceive to change place with it every time 
that it is transported, and that we attribute to space an 
[extension] so general and so vague, that after having 
removed from a certain space the body which occupied it, 
we do not think that we have also transported the exten­
sion of that space, because it seems to us that the same 
extension remains there all the time, as long as it is of the 
same magnitude, of the same figure and has not changed 
its situation in respect to the external bodies by means of 
which we determine it. 
102 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
But that, of course, is an error. And/8 
· . .  it will be easy to recognize that the same extension 
that constitutes the nature of body constitutes also the 
nature of space so that they do not differ in any other way 
than the nature of the gender or of the species differs from 
the nature of the individual. 
We can, indeed, divest and deprive any gIven body of 
all its sensible qualities and 19 
· . .  we shall find that the true idea we have of it consists 
in this alone, that we perceive distinctly that it is a sub­
stance extended in length, breadth and depth. But just 
that is comprised in the idea we have 9f space, not only 
of that which is full of bodies, but also that one which is 
called void. 
Thus,20 
· . . the words " place " and " space " do not signify any­
thing which differs really from the body that we say to be 
in some place, and denote only its magnitude, its figure and 
the manner in which it is situated among other bodies. 
Consequently,21 
· . . there cannot be any void in the sense in which phi­
losophers take this word, namely as denoting a space where 
there is no substance, and it is evident that there is no space 
in the universe that would be such, because the extension 
of space or of the interior locus is not different from the 
extension of the body. And as from this alone, that a body 
is extended in length, breadth and depth, we have reason 
to conclude that it is a substance, because we conceive that 
it is not possible that that which is nothing should have 
an extension, we must conclude the same about the space 
103 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
supposed to be void: namely that, as there is in it some 
extension, there is necessarily also some substance. 
The second important consequence of the identification 
of extension and matter consists in the rejection not only 
of the finiteness and limitation of space, but also that 
of the real material world. 
To assign boundaries to it 
becomes not only false, or even absurd, but contradictory. 
We cannot posit a limit without transcending it in this 
very act. We have to acknowledge therefore that the real 
world is infinite, or rather - Descartes indeed refuses to 
, 
, 
use this term in connection with the world - indefinite. 
It is clear, of course, that we cannot limit Euclidean 
space. Thus Descartes is perfectly right in pursuing: 22 
We recognize moreover thai this world, or the entirety of 
the corporeal substance, has no limits in its extension. 
Indeed, wherever we imagine such limits, we always not only 
imagine beyond them some indefinitely extended spaces, 
but we even perceive them to be truly imaginable, that is, 
real; and therefore to contain in them also the indefinitely 
extended corporeal substance. This because, as we have 
already sufficiently shown, the idea of this extension which 
we conceive in such a space is obviously identical with that 
of the corporeal substance itself. 
There is no longer any need to discuss the question 
whether fixed stars are big or small, far or near; more 
exactly this problem becomes a factual one, a problem 
of astronomy and observational technics and calculation. 
The question no longer has metaphysical meaning since 
it is perfectly certain that, be the stars far or near, they 
are, like ourselves and our sun, in the midst of other 
stars without end. 
104 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
It is exactly the same concerning the problem of the 
constitution of the stars. 
This, too, becomes a purely 
scientific, factual question. 
The old opposition of the 
earthly world of change and decay to the changeless 
world of the skies which, as we have seen, was not 
abolished by the Copernican revolution, but persisted as 
the opposition of the moving world of the sun and the 
planets to the motionless, fixed stars, disappears without 
trace. 
The unification and the uniformization of the 
universe in its contents and laws becomes a self-evident 
fact 23 - " The matter of the sky and of the earth is one 
and the same; and there cannot be a plurality of worlds " 
- at least if we take the term H world " in its full sense, 
in which it was used by Greek and mediaeval tradition, 
as meaning a complete and self-centered whole. The world 
is not an unconnected multiplicity of such wholes utterly 
separated from each other: it is a unity in which - just 
as in the universe of Giordano Bruno (it is a pity that 
Descartes does not use Bruno's terminology) .- there are 
an infinite number of subordinate and interconnected 
systems, such as our system with its sun and planets, 
immense vortices of matter everywhere identical joining 
and limiting each other in boundless space.24 
It is easy to deduce that the matter of the sky is not 
different from that of the earth; and generally, even if the 
worlds were infinite, it is impossible that they should not 
be constituted from one and the same matter; and therefore, 
they cannot be many, but only one: because we understand 
clearly that this matter of which the whole of nature con­
sists, being an extended substance, must already occupy 
completely all the imaginary spaces in which these other 
105 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
worlds should be; and we do not find in ourselves the idea 
of any other matter. 
The infinity of the world seems thus to be established 
beyond doubt and beyond dispute. Yet, as a matter of 
fact, Descartes never asserts it. Like Nicholas of eusa two 
centuries before him, he applies the term " infinite " to 
God alone. God is infinite. The world is only indefinite. 
The idea of the infinite plays an important part in 
the philosophy of Descartes, so important that Cartesian­
ism may be considered as being wholly based upon that 
idea. Indeed, it is only as an absolutely infinite being 
that God can be conceived; it is only as such that He 
can be proved to exist; it is only by the possession of 
this idea that man's very nature - that of a finite being 
endowed with the idea of God - can be defined. 
Moreover, it is a very peculiar, and even unique, idea: 
it is certainly a clear and positive one - we do not reach 
infinity by negating finitude; on the contrary, it is by 
negating the infinite that we conceive finiteness, and yet 
it is not distinct. It so far surpasses the level of our finite 
understanding that we can neither comprehend nor even 
analyse it completely. Descartes thus rejects as perfectly 
worthless all the discussions about the infinite, especially 
those de compositione continui, so popular in the late 
Middle Ages, and also in the xvnth century. He tells us 
that: 25 
We must never dispute about the infinite, but only hold 
those things to which we do not find any limit, such as the 
extension of the world, the divisibility of the parts of matter, 
the number of stars, etc., to be indefinite. 
106 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus we shall never burden ourselves with disputes about 
the infinite. Indeed, as we are finite, it would be absurd 
for us to want to determine anything about it, to compre­
hend it, and thus to attempt to make it quasi-finite . There­
fore we shall not bother to answer those who would inquire 
whether, if there were an infinite line, its half would also 
be infinite; or whether an infinite number would be even 
or odd; and such like; because about them nobody seems 
to be able to think except those who believe that their 
mind is infinite. As for us, in regard to those [things] to 
which in some respects we are not able to assign any limit, 
we shall not assert that they are infinite, but we shall con­
sider them as indefinite. Thus, because we cannot imagine 
an extension so great that a still greater one could not be 
conceived, we shall say that the magnitude of possible things 
is indefinite. And because a body cannot be divided into so 
many parts that further division would not be conceivable, 
we shall admit that quantity is indefinitely divisible. And 
because it is impossible to imagine such a number of stars 
that we should believe God could not create still more, we 
shall assume that their number is indefinite. 
In this way we shall avoid the Keplerian objections 
based upon the absurdity of an actually infinite distance 
between ourselves and a given star, and also the theo­
logical objections against the possibility of an actually 
infinite creature. We shan restrict ourselves to the asser­
tion -that, just as in the series of numbers, so in world­
extension we can always go on without ever coming to 
an end: 26 
All these [things] we shall call indefinite rather than 
infinite: on the one hand that we may reserve the concept 
of infinity for God alone, because in Him alone we not only 
do not recognize any limits whatsoever, but also understand 
107 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
positively that there are none; and on the other hand 
because, concerning these things, we do not understand in 
the same positive way that, in certain respects, they have no 
limits, but only in a negative way that their limits, if they 
had any, cannot be found by us. 
The Cartesian distinction between the infinite and the 
indefinite thus seems to correspond to the traditional one 
between actual and potential infinity, and Descartes' 
world, therefore, seems to be only potentially infinite. 
And yet . . .  what is the exact meaning of the assertion 
that the limits of the world cannot be found by us? Why 
can they not? Is it not, in spite of the fact that we do 
not understand it in a positive way, simply because there 
are none? Descartes, it is true, tells us that God alone is 
clearly understood by us to be infinite and infinitely, 
that is absolutely, perfect. As for other things: 27 
We do not recognize them to be so absolutely perfect, 
because, though we sometimes observe in them properties 
that seem to us to have no limits, we do not fail to recog­
nize that this proceeds from the defect of our understanding 
and not from their nature. 
But it is hard to admit that the impossibility of con­
ceiving a limit to space must be explained as a result 
of a defect of our understanding, and not as that of an 
insight into the nature of the extended substance itself. 
It is even harder to believe that Descartes himself could 
seriously espouse this opinion, that is, that he could really 
think that his inability to conceive, or even imagine, a 
finite world could be explained in this way. This is all 
the more so as somewhat farther on, in the beginning 
of the third part of the Principia Philo8ophiae, from which 
108 
.C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the passages we have .quoted are taken, we find Descartes 
telling us that in order to avoid error/8 
We have to observe two things carefully: the first being 
that we always keep before our eyes that God's power ߿nd 
goodness are infinite, in order that this should make us 
understand that we must not fear to fail in imagining His 
works too great, too beautiful or too perfect; but that, on 
the contrary, we can fail if we suppose in them any bound­
aries or limits of which we have certain knowledge. 
The second of these necessary precautions is that,29 
We must always keep before our eyes that the capacity 
of our mind is very mediocre, and that we must not be so 
presumptuous as it seems we should be if we supposed that 
the universe had any limits, without being assured of it by 
divine revelation or, at least, by very evident natural 
reasons; because it would [mean] that we want our thoughts 
to be able to imagine something beyond that to which God's 
power has extended itself in creating the world . . . .  
which seems to teach us that the limitations of our reason 
n1ani£est themselves in assigning limits to the world, and 
not in denying outright their existence. 
Thus, in spite 
of the fact that Descartes, as we shall see in a moment, 
had really very good reasons for opposing the " infinity " 
of God to the " indefiniteness " of the world, the common 
opinion of his time held that it was a pseudo-distinction, 
made for the purpose of placating the theologians. 
That is, more or less, what Henry More, the famous 
Cambridge Platonist and friend of Newton, was to tell him. 
109 

v. Indefinite Extension or 
Infinite Space 
Descartes 
& Henry More 
Henry More was one of the first partisans of Descartes 
in England even though, as a matter of fact, he never was 
a Cartesian and later in life turned against Descartes 
and even accused the Cartesians of beiÜg promoters of 
atheism.1 More exchanged with the French philosopher 
a series of extremely interesting letters which throws a 
vivid light on the respective positions of the two thinkers.2 
More starts, naturally, by expressing his admiration for 
the great man who has done so much to establish truth 
and dissipate error, continues by complaining about the 
difficulty he has in understanding some of his teachings, 
and ends by presenting some doubts, and even some 
objections. 
Thus, it seems to him difficult to understand or to 
admit the radical opposition established by Descartes 
between body and soul. How indeed can a purely spiritual 
soul, that is, something which, according to Descartes, 
has no extension whatever, be joined to a purely material 
1 1 0  
C L O S  E D
W
 
0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
body, that is, to something which is only and solely 
extension? Is it not better to assume that the soul, 
though immaterial, is also extended; that everything, even 
God, is extended? How could He otherwise be present 
in the world? 
Thus More writes: 3 
First, you establish a definition of matter, or of body, 
which is much too wide. It seems, indeed, that God is an 
extended thing (res) , as well as the Angel; and in general 
everything that subsists by itself, so that it appears that 
extension is enclosed by the same limits as the absolute 
essence of things, which however can vary according to the 
variety of these very essences. As for myself, I believe it 
to be clear that God is extended in His manner just be­
cause He is omnipresent and occupies intimately the whole 
machine of the world as well as its singular particles. How 
indeed could He communicate motion to matter, which He 
did once, and which, according to you, He does even now, if 
He did not touch the matter of the universe in practically 
the closest manner, or at least had not touched it at a cer­
tain time? Which certainly He would never be able to do if 
He were not present everywhere and did not occupy all the 
spaces. God, therefore, extends and expands in this manner; 
and is, therefore, an extended thing (res) . 
Having thus established that the concept of extension 
cannot be used for the definition of matter since it is too 
wide and embraces both body and spirit which both are 
extended, though in a different manner (the Cartesian 
demonstration of the contrary appears to More to be 
not only false but even pure sophistry) , More suggests 
secondly that matter, being necessarily sensible, should 
be defined only by its relation to sense, that is, by tangi-
III 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
bility. But if Descartes insists on avoiding all reference 
to sense-perception, then matter should be defined by the 
ability of bodies to be in mutual contact, and by the 
impenetrability which matter possesses in contradistinc­
tion to spirit. The latter, though extended, is freely 
penetrable and cannot be touched. Thus spirit and body 
can co-exist in the same place, and, of course, two - or 
any number of - spirits can have the same identical 
location and " penetrate " each other, whereas for bodies 
this is impossible. 
The rejection of the Cartesian identification of extension 
and matter leads naturally to the rejection by Henry More 
of Descartes' denial of the possibility of vacuum. Why 
should not God be able to destroy all matter contained 
in a certain vessel without - as Descartes asserts - its 
walls being obliged to come together? Descartes, indeed, 
explains that to be separated by " nothing " is contra-
d· 
, 
h 
'l..
,J "  
-1-
"
 ' ,1  " 
!Ctory and tt at to attnuute ullnenSlons l,O 
VOlu 
space 
is exactly the same as to attribute properties to nothing; 
yet More is not convinced, all the more so as " learned 
Antiquity " - that is Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius ­
was of quite a different opinion. It is possible, of course, 
that the walls of the vessel will be brought together by 
the pressure of matter outside them. But if that happens, 
it will be because of a natural necessity and not because 
of a logical one. Moreover, this void space will not be 
absolutely void, for it will continue to be filled with God's 
extension. It will only be void of matter, or body, properly 
speaking. 
In the third place Henry More does not understand 
the " singular subtlety " of Descartes' negation of the 
existence of atoms, of his assertion of the indefinite divisi-
llZ 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
bility of matter, combined with the use of corpuscular 
conceptions in his own physics. To say that the admission 
of atoms is limiting God's omnipotence, and that we 
cannot deny that God could, if He wanted to, divide the 
atoms into parts, is of no avail: the indivisibility of atoms 
means their indivisibility by any created power, and that 
is something that is perfectly compatible with God's own 
power to divide them, if He wanted to do so, There are 
a great many things that He could have done, but did 
not, or even those that He can do but does not. Indeed, 
if God wanted to preserve his omnipotence in its absolute 
status, He would never create matter at all: for, as matter 
is always divisible into parts that are themselves divisible, 
it is clear that God will never be able to bring this 
division to its end and that there will always be some­
thing which evades His omnipotence. 
Henry More is obviously right and Descartes himself, 
though insisting on God's omnipotence and refusing to 
have it limited and bounded even by the rules of logic 
and mathematics, cannot avoid declaring that there are a 
great many things that God cannot do, either because to 
do them would be, or imply, an imperfection (thus, for 
instance, God cannot lie and deceive) , or because it would 
make no sense. It is just because of that, Descartes asserts, 
that even God cannot make a void, or an atom. True, 
according to Descartes, God could have created quite a 
different world and could have made twice two equal to 
five, and not to four. On the other hand, it is equally true 
that He did not do it and that in this world even God 
cannot make twice two equal to anything but four. 
From the general trend of his objections it is clear that 
the Platonist, or rather N eoplatonist, More was deeply 
11 3  

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
influenced by the tradition of Greek atomism, which is 
not surprising in view of the fact that one of his earliest 
works bears the revealing title, Democritus Platonis­
sans .
. ,4 
What he wants is just to a void the Cartesian geometri­
zation of being, and to maintain the old distinction 
between space and the things that are in space; that are 
moving in space and not only relatively to each other; that 
occupy space in virtue of a special and proper quality or 
force - impenetrability - by which they resist each other 
and exclude each other from their " places." 
Grosso modo, these are Democritian conceptions and 
that explains the far-reaching similarity of Henry More's 
objections to Descartes to those of Gassendi, the chief 
representative of atomism in the XVllth century.5 Yet 
Henry More is by no means a pure Democritian. He 
does not reduce being to matter. And his space is not 
the infinite void of Lucretius: it is full, and not full of 
" ether " like the infinite space of Bruno. It is full of 
God, and in a certain sense it is God Himself as we shall 
see more clearly hereafter. 
Let us now come to More's fourth and most important 
objection to Descartes: 6 
Fourth, I do not understand your indefinite extension of 
the world. Indeed this indefinite extension is either sim­
pliciter infinite, or only in respect to us. If you understand 
extension to be infinite simpliciter, why do you obscure your 
thought by too low and too modest words? If it is infinite 
only in respect to us, extension, in reality, will be finite; 
for our mind is the measure neither of the things nor of 
truth. And therefore, as there is another simpliciteJ' infinite 
expansion, that of the divine essence, the matter of your 
1 1 4  
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
vortices will recede from their centers and the wh?le 
fabric of the world will be dissipated into atoms and graIns 
of dust.7 
Having thus impaled Descartes on the horns of the 
dilemma, More continues: 8 
I admire all the more your modesty and your fear of 
admitting the infinity of matter as you recognize, ?n tne 
other hand, that matter is divided into an actually InfinIte 
number of particles. And if you did not, you could be 
compelled to do so, 
by arguments that Descartes would be bound to accept.9 
To the perplexity and objections of his English admirer 
and critic Descartes replies 
10 - and his answer is sur­
prisingly mild and courteous - that it is an error , to 
define matter by its relation to senses, because by doࡗng 
so we are in danger of missing its true essence, whIch 
does not depend on the existence of Inen and which would 
be the same if there were no men in the world; that, 
moreover if divided into sufficiently small parts, all matter 
becomes mtterly insensible; that his proof of the identity 
of extension and matter is by no means a sophism but is 
as clear and demonstrative as it could be; and that it is 
perfectly unnecessary to postulate a special prope:tࡘ of 
impenetrability in order to define matter because It IS a 
mere consequence of its extension. 
Turning then to More's concept of immaterial or 
spiritual extension, Descartes writes: 11 
I am not in the habit of disputing about words, and 
therefore if somebody wants to say that God is, in some 
sense, extended because He is everywhere, I shall not 
1 1 5  

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
object. But I deny that there is in God, in an Angel, in 
our soul, and in any substance that is not a body, a true 
extension, such as is usually conceived by everybody. For 
by an extended thing everybody understands something 
[which is] imaginable (be it an ens rationis or a real thing) , 
and in which, by imagination, can be distinguished different 
parts of a determined magnitude and figure, of which the 
one is in no way the other; so that it is possible, by imagina­
tion, to transfer any one of them to the place of another, 
but not to imagine two of them in the same place. 
Nothing of that kind applies to God, or to our souls, 
which are not objects of imagination, but of pure under­
standing, and have no separable parts, especially no parts 
of determinate size and figure. Lack of extension is pre­
cisely the reason why God, the human . soul, and any 
number of angels can be all together in the same place. 
As for atoms and void, it is certain that, our intelligence 
being finite and God's power infinite, it is not proper 
for us to impose limits upon it. Thus we must boldly 
assert " that God can do all that we conceive to be possible, 
but not that He cannot do what is repugnant to our 
concept." Nevertheless, we can judge only according to 
our concepts, and, as it is repugnant to our manner of 
thinking to conceive that, if all matter were removed 
from a vessel, extension, distance, etc., would still remain, 
or that parts of matter be indivisible, we say simply that 
all that implies contradiction. 
Descartes' attempt to save God's omnipotence and, 
nevertheless, to deny the possibility of void space as 
incompatible with our manner of thinking, is, to say the 
truth, by no means convincing. The Cartesian God is a 
Deus verax and He guarantees the truth of our clear and 
1 1 6  
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
distinct ideas. Thus it is not only Ûepugnant 
,
to our 
thouO'ht but impossible that somethIng of whIch we 
clearly jee that it implies co.ntraiiction be real. There 
are no contradictory objects In thIS world, though there 
could have been in another. 
,
. 
, 
C
'
 
to More's criticism of his dIstInctIon be-
omIng now 
... 
h' 
" . fi 't " and " indefinite " Descartes assures lID 
tween 
In nl e 
, 
that it is not because of 12 
an affectation of modesty, but as a precaution, anh, in 
kl. opinion a necessary one, that . I . call certain thmgs 
indefinite rather than infinite. For It IS God alone whom 
I understand positively to be infinite; as for the others, s,uch 
as the extension of the world, the number of parts Into 
which matter is divisible, and so on, whether they are 
simpliciter infinite or not, I confess not to know, I only 
know that I do not discern in them any end, and therefore, 
, 
t to me I say they are indefinite, And though our 
In respec
, 
. 
"''' 
'"'Á "f 
-I- ,,-I-h 
it must 
mind is not the measure of thlnbࠀ vÀ 
v 
l,f u vU, 
, 
dly be the measure of things that we affirm or q.eny. 
assure 
, 
'd 
t th 
t 
What indeed is more absurd or more inconsl. era e 
an 
0 
wish to make a judgment about things whICh we confess 
to be unable to perceive with our mind? 
Thus I am surprised t hat you not Únly. seÙm Øo want go 
do so, as when you say that if extensI×n IS ÈnfiÉlie only Èn 
respect to us then extension in truth wÈlf be .fiÊÈte, etc., ?ut 
h 
.
.
 
beyond this one a certaIn dIVIne extensIOn, 
t at you ImagIne 
. 
'
d' 
which would stretch farther than the extensIOn of bo Ies, 
and thus suppose that God has partes extra parteË, and that 
He is divisible, and, in short, attribute to HIm all the 
essence of a corporeal being. 
Descartes indeed, is perfectly justified in pointing out 
, 
d h' . 
space 
that More has somewhat misunderstoo 
1m: 
a 
117 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
beyond the world of extension has never been admitted 
by him as possible or imaginable, and even if the world 
had these limits which we are unable to find, there cer­
tainly would be nothing beyond them, or, better to say, 
there would be no beyond. Thus, in order to dispel 
completely More's doubts, he declares: 13 
When I say that the extension of matter is indefinite, 
I believe it to be sufficient to prevent any one imagining a 
place outside it, into which the small particles of my vortices 
could escape; because wherever this place be conceived, it 
would already, in my opinion, contain some matter; for, 
when I say that it is indefinitely extended, I am saying that 
it extends farther than all that can be conceived by man. 
But I think, nevertheless, that there is a very great 
difference between the amplitude of this corporeal extension 
and the amplitude of the divine, I shall not say, extension, 
because properly speaking there is none, but substance or 
essence; and therefore I call this one simpliciter infinite, and 
the other, indefinite. 
Descartes is certainly right in wanting to maintain 
the distinction between the " intensive " infinity of God, 
which not only excludes all limit, but also precludes all 
multiplicity, division and number, from the mere endless­
ness, indefiniteness, of space, or of the series of numbers, 
which necessarily include and presuppose them. This 
distinction, moreover, is quite traditional, and we have 
seen it asserted not only by Nicholas of Cusa, but even 
by Bruno. 
Henry More does not deny this distinction; at least 
not completely. In his own conception it expresses itself 
in the opposition between the material and the divine 
extension. Yet, as he states it in his second letter to 
1 1 8  
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Dࡈscartes/4 it has nothing to do with Descartes.' assertion 
that there may be limits to space and with hIS ࡉttempt 
to build a concept intermediate between the fiࡊIte and 
the infinite; the world is finite or infinite, teretu:n nÌn 
datur. And if we admit, as we must, that God IS In:finite 
and everywhere present, this " everywhere " can ?ࡋly 
mean infinite space. In this case, pursues More, re-editIng 
an argument already used by Bruno, there musࡌ als? b
1
ࡍ 
matter everywhere, that is, the world must be InfinIte. 
You can hardly ignore that it is either simplicitÌr infin.ite 
or, in point of fact, finite, though you cannot as easIly decIde 
whether it is the one or the other. That, however, your 
vortices are not disrupted and do not come ap˘rt s.eems to 
be a rather clear sign that the world is really In:finIt.e. For 
my part, I confess freely that though. I ca˙ boldly gIve ˚y 
approval to this axiom: The world zs finzte, or not finzte, 
or what is here the same thing, infinite, I cannot, neverthe­
l
'
 1! 
11 
;]¾ 
-I- n ..-. --1  +1-.0 ɏn-hnltv of Rnv t.hinQ' whatsoever. 
less, lUllY linuc;fS l>a.uu 
LJ.L 'V  
............ u vJ 
¾¿ 
-À-.; 
---
u
.
 
• 
But here there comes to my imagination what Juhus
.
Scah˛er 
wrote somewhere about the contraction and the dIlatatIOn 
of the Angels: namely, that they cannot extend themsel.ves 
in infinitum, or contract themselv.es to an imperc˜p.tIble 
(ovo€J-16nra) point. Yet if one recognIzes God to be pOSItively 
infinite (that is, existing everywhere) , as you yourself 
rightly do, I do not see whether it is per˝itted to the un­
biassed reason to hesitate to admit forthwIth also that He 
is nowhere idle, and that with the same right, and ˞ith :he 
same facility with which [He created] this m˟tter 1n whIch 
we live, or that to which our eyes and our mInd can reach, 
He produced matter everywhere. 
Nor is it absurd or inconsiderate to say that, if the exteࡎ­
sion is infinite only quoad nos, it will, in truth and In 
reality, be finite: 16 
119 

C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
I will add that this consequence is perfectly m.anifest, 
because the particle " only " (tantum) clearly excludes all 
real infinity of the thing which is said to be infinite only in 
respect to us, and therefore in reality the extension will be 
finite; moreover my mind does perceive these things of 
which I judge, as it is perfectly clear to me that the world 
is either finite or infinite, as I have just mentioned. 
As for Descartes' contention that the impossibility of 
the void already results from the fact that " nothing " 
can have no properties or dimensions and therefore can­
not be measured, More replies by denying this very 
premise: 17 
. . .  for, if God annihilated this universe and then, after 
a certain time, created from nothing another one, this inter­
mundium or this absence of the world would have its 
duration which would be measured by a certain number 
of days, years or centuries. There is thus a duration of 
something that does not exist, which duration is a kind of 
extension. Consequently, the amplitude of nothing, that 
is of void, can be measured by ells or leagues, just as the 
duration of what does not exist can be measured in its 
inexistence by hours, days and months. 
We have seen Henry More defend, against Descartes, 
the infinity of the world, and even tell the latter that his 
own physics necessarily implies this infinity . Yet it seems 
that, at times, he feels himself assailed by doubt. He is 
perfectly sure that space, that is, God's extension, is 
infinite. On the other hand, the material world may, 
perhaps, be finite. After all, nearly everybody believes it; 
spatial infinity and temporal eternity are strictly parallel, 
and so both seem to be absurd. Moreover Cartesian cos­
mology can be put in agreement with a finite world. Could 
l+O 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Descartes not tell what would happen, in this case, if 
somebody sitting at the extremity of the world pushed 
his sword through the limiting wall? On the one 
,
hand, 
indeed, this seems easy, as there would be nothIng to 
resist it; on the other, impossible, as there would be no 
place where it could be pushed,18 
19 . 
Descartes' answer to this second letter of More 
IS 
much shorter, terser, less cordial than to the firsd onÖ. 
One feels that Descartes is a bit disappointed In cIS 
correspondent who obviously does not under
,
stand hIÕ, 
Descartes', great discovery, that of the essentIal ÔPPOÓI­
tion between mind and extension, and who persIsts In 
attributing extension to souls, angels, and even to God, 
He restates 20 
, . , that he does not conceive any extension of substaÒce 
in God, in the angels, or in our mind, but only aÑ extensIOn 
of power, so that an angel can proportionate thIS pÐwer to 
a greater or smaller part of corporeal substance; for If there 
were no body at all, this power of God or of an angÏl would 
not correspond to any extension whateve
,
r. To attrIbute to 
substance what pertains only to power IS an effect of the 
same prejudice which makes us suppose all .subsÎance, even 
that of God, to be something that can be ImagIned. 
If there were no world, there would be no time either. 
To More's contention that the intermundium would last 
a certain time, Descartes replies: 21 
I believe that it implies a contradiction to conceive a dura­
tion between the destruction of the first world and the 
creation of the second one; for, if we refer this duration Ír 
something similar to the succession of God's ideas, tblS 
will be an error of our intellect and not a true perceptIOn 
of something. 
121 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Indeed, it would mean introducing time into God, and 
thus making God a temporal, changing being. It would 
mean denying His eternity, replacing it by mere sempi­
ternity - an error no less grave than the error of making 
Him an extended thing. For in both cases God is menaced 
with losing His transcendence, with becoming immanent 
to the world. 
Now Descartes' God is perhaps not the Christian God, 
but a philosophical one.22 He is, nevertheless, God, not 
the soul of the world that penetrates, vivifies and moves 
it. Therefore he maintains, in accordance with mediaeval 
tradition, that, in spite of the fact that in God power and 
essence are one - an identity pointed out by More in 
favour of God's actual extension - God has nothing in 
common with the material world. He is a pure mind, 
an infinite mind, whose very infinity is of a unique and 
incomparable non-quantitative and non-dimensional kind7 
of which spatial extension is neither an image nor even 
a symbol. The world therefore, must not be called infinite; 
though of course we must not enclose it in limits: 23 
It is repugnant to my concept to attribute any limit to 
the world, and I have no other measure than my percep­
tion for what I have to assert or to deny. I say, therefore, 
that the world is indeterminate or indefinite, because I do 
not recognize in it any limits. But I dare not call it infinite 
as I perceive that God is greater than the world, not in 
. respect to His extension, because, as I have already said, 
I do not 'acknowledge in God any proper [extension], but in 
respect to His perfection. 
Once more Descartes asserts that God's presence in the 
world does not imply His extension. As for the world 
l++ 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
itself which More wants to be either simpliciter finite, or 
simpliciter infinite, Descartes still refuses to call it infinite. 
And yet, either because he is somewhat angry with More, 
or because he is in a hurry and therefore less careful, he 
practically abandons his former assertion about the possi­
bility of the world's having limits (though we cannot fiÌd 
them) and treats this conception in the same manneË In 
which he treated that of the void, that is, as nonsenSIcal 
and even contradictory; thus, rejecting as meaningless the 
question about the possibility of pushing a sword through 
the boundary or the world, he says: .24 
It is repugnant to my mind, or what amounts to the saÊe 
thing, it implies a ,contradiction, that the world be fin.lte 
or limited, because I cannot but conceive a space outSIde 
the boundaries of the world wherever I presuppose them. 
But, for me, this space is a true body. I do not care if it is 
¹º n ¿;J h...,. A.+h n",a ; VY\ o rr;n o l"U 
o n rl  +lul t therefore the world 
Ct:L.l.lGU UJ' 
V \.J¼½'-'.l. t.J 
.l».1..1.U>5.i.¼½LtI.L .J '  
».I..L'-'L 
v ... .a.'"' '' 
... ---
is believed to be finite; indeed, I know from what prejudices 
this error takes its origin. 
Henry More, needless to say, was not convinced - one 
philosopher seldom convinces another. He persisted, there­
fore, in believing " with all the ancient Platonists " that 
aU substance, souls, angels and God are extended, and 
that the world, in the most literal sense of this word, is 
in God just as God is in the world. More accordingly 
sent Descartes a third letter/5 which he answered,26 and 
a fourth,27 which he did not.28 I shall not attempt to 
examine them here as they bear chiefly on questions 
which, though interesting in themselves - for example, 
the discussion about motion and rest - are outside our 
subject. 
1+3 

C L O S  E D W O  R L D to Infinite Universe 
Summing up, we can say that we have seen Descartes, 
under More's pressure, move somewhat from the position 
he had taken at first: to assert the indefiniteness of the 
world, or of space, does not mean, negatively, that perhaps 
it has limits that we are unable to ascertain; it means, 
quite positively, that it has none because it would be 
contradictory to posit them. But he cannot go farther. 
He has to maintain his distinction, as he has to maintain 
the identification of extension and matter, if he is to 
maintain his contention that the physical world is an 
object of pure intellection and, at the same time, of 
imagination - the precondition of Cartesian science ­
and that the world, in spite of its lack of limits, refers 
us to God as its creator and cause. 
Infinity, indeed, has always been the essential charac­
ter, or attribute, of God; especially since Duns Scotus, 
who could accept the famous Anselmian a priori proof 
of the existence of God (a proof revived by Descartes) 
only after he had " colored " it by substituting the con­
cept of the infinite being (ens infinitum) for the An­
selmian concept of a being than which we cannot think of 
a greater (ens quo maius cogitari nequit) . Infinity thus -
and it is particularly true of Descartes whose God exists 
in virtue of the infinite " superabundance of His essence " 
which enables Him to be I-lis own cause (causa sui) and 
to give Himself His own existence 29 - means or implies 
being, even necessary being. Therefore it cannot be attri­
buted to creature. The distinction, or opposition, between 
God and creature is parallel and exactly equivalent to 
that of infinite and of finite being. 
1 24 
VI. God and Space, Spirit and Matter 
Henry More 
The breaking off of the correspondence with - and the 
death of - Descartes did not put an end to Henry More's 
preoccupation with the teaching of the great French phi­
losopher. We could even say that all his subsequent 
development was, to a very great extent; determined by 
his attitude towards Descartes: an attitude consisting 
in a partial acceptance of Cartesian mechanism joined to 
a rejection of the radical dualism between spirit and 
matter which, for Descartes, constituted its metaphysical 
background and basis. 
Henry More enjoys a rather bad reputation among 
historians of philosophy, which is not surprising. In some 
sense he belongs much more to the history of the hermetic, 
or occultist, tradition than to that of philosophy proper; 
in some sense he is not of his time: he is a spiritual con­
temporary of Marsilio Ficino, lost in the disenchanted 
world of the " new philosophy " and fighting a losing 
battle against it. And yet, in spite of his partially ana­
chronistic standpoint, in spite of his invincible trend 
towards syncretism which makes him jumble together 
125 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to 
Universe 
Plato and Aristotle, Democritus and the Cabala, the 
thrice great Hermes and the Stoa, it was Henry More 
who gave to the new science - and the new world view ­
some of the most important elements of the metaphysical 
framework which ensured its development: this because, 
in spite of his unbridled phantasy, which enabled him to 
describe at length God's paradise and the life and various 
occupations of the blessed souls and spirits in their post­
terrestrial existence, in spite of his amazing credulity 
(equalled only by that of his pupil and friend, fellow of 
the Royal Society, Joseph Glanvill/ the celebrated author 
of the Scepsis scientific a) , which made him believe in magic, 
in witches, in apparitions, in ghosts, Henry More suc­
ceeded in grasping the fundamental principle of the new 
ontology, the infinitization of space, which he asserted 
with an unflinching and fearless energy. 
It is possible, and even probable, that, at the time of 
his Letters to Descartes (1648) , Henry More did not yet 
recognize where the development of his conceptions was 
ultimately to lead him, all the more so as these conceptions 
are by no means " clear " and " distinct." Ten years later, 
in his Antidote against A theism 2 and his I mmortality of 
the Soul S he was to give them a much more precise and 
definite shape; but it was only in his Enchiridium meta­
physicum/ ten years later still, that they 'were to acquire 
their final form. 
As we have seen, Henry More's criticism of Descartes' 
identification of space or extension with matter follows 
two main lines of attack. On the one hand it seems to him 
to restrict the ontological value and importance of exten­
sion by reducing it to the role of an essential attribute 
of matter alone and denying it to spirit, whereas it is an 
126 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
attribute of being as such, the necessary precondition of 
any real existence. There are not, as Descartes asserts, 
two types of substance, the extended and the unextended. 
There is only one type: all substance, spiritual as well as 
material, is extended. 
On the other hand, Descartes, according to More, fails 
to recognize the specific character both of matter and of 
space, and therefore misses their essential distinction as 
well as their fundamental relation. Matter is mobile in 
space and by its impenetrability occupies space; space is 
not mobile and is unaffected by the presence, or absence, 
of matter in it. Thus matter without space is unthinkable, 
whereas space without matter, Descartes notwithstanding, 
is not only an easy, but even a necessary idea of our mind. 
Henry More's pneumatology does not interest us here; 
still, as the notion of spirit plays an important part in 
his - and not only his - interpretation of nature, and is 
used by him - and not only by him - to explain natural 
processes that cannot be accounted for or " demonstrated " 
on the basis of purely mechanical laws (such as magnetism, 
gravity and so on), we shall have to dwell for a moment 
on his concept of it. 
Henry More was well aware that the notion of " spirit " 
was, as often as not, and even more often than not, pre­
sented as impossible to grasp, at least for the human mind,1) 
But for mine own part, I think the nature of a spirit 
is as conceivable and easy to be defined as the nature of 
anything else. For as for the very Essence or bare Substance 
of any thing whatsoever, he is a very Novice in speculation 
that does not acknowledge that utterly unknowable; but 
for the Essential and Inseparable Properties, they are as 
intelligible and explicable in a Spirit as in any other Subject 
127 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
whatever. As for example, I conceive the intire Idea of a 
Spirit in generall, or at least of all finite, created and sub­
ordinate Spirits, to consist of these severall powers or 
properties, viz. Self-penetration, Self-motion, Self-contraction 
and Dilatation, and Indivisibility; and these are those that 
I reckon more absolute: I will adde also what has relation 
to another and that is power of Penetrating, Moving and 
Altering the Matter. These Properties and Powers put 
together make up the Notion and Idea of a Spirit whereby 
it is plainly distinguished from a Body whose parts cannot 
penetrate one another, is not Self-moveable, nor can contract 
nor dilate it self, is divisible and separable one part from 
another; but the parts of a Spirit can be no more separable, 
though they be dilated, than you can cut off the Rayes of 
the Sun by a pair of Scissors made of pellucid Crystall. 
And this will serve for the settling of the Notion of a Spirit. 
And out of this description it is plain that Spirit is a notion 
of more Perfection than a Body, and therefore more fit to 
be an Attrib·ute of what is absolutely Perfect than a Body is. 
As we see, the method used by Henry More to arrive 
at the notion or definition of spirit is rather simple. We 
have to attribute to it properties opposite or contrary 
to those of body: penetrability, indivisibility, and the 
faculty to contract and dilate, that is, to extend itself 
without loss of continuity, into a smaller or larger space. 
This last property was for a very long time considered 
as belonging to matter also, but Henry More, under the 
conjoint influence of Democritus and Descartes, denies it 
to matter, or body, which is, as such, incompressible and 
always occupies the same amount of space. 
In The Immortality of the Soul Henry More gives us 
an even clearer account both of his notion of spirit and 
1À8 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
of the manner In which this notion can be determined. 
Moreover he attempts to introduce into his definition a 
sort of terminological precision. Thus, he says,6 " by 
Actual Divisibility I understand Discerpibility, gross 
tearing or cutting of one part from the other." It is 
quite clear that this " discerpihility " can only belong 
to a body and that you cannot tear away and remove a 
piece of a spirit. 
As for the faculty of contraction and dilation, More 
refers it to the " essential spissitude " of the spirit, a 
kind of spiritual density, fourth mode, or fourth dimen­
sion of spiritual substance that it possesses in addition 
to the normal three of spatial extension with which 
bodies are alone endowed.7 Thus, when a spirit con­
tracts, its " essential spissitude " increases; it decreases, 
of course, when it dilates. We cannot, indeed, imagine 
the " spissitude " but this "fourth Mode," Henry More 
tells US,8 " is as easy and familiar to my Understanding 
as that of the Three dimensions to my sense or Phansy." 
The definition of spirit is now quite easy: 9 
I will define therefore a Spirit in generall thus: A sub­
stance penetrable and indiscerpible. The fitness of which 
definition will be better understood, if we divide Substance 
in generall into these first Kindes, viz. Body and Spirit and 
then define Body A Substance impenetrable and discerpible. 
Whence the contrary Kind to this is fitly defined, A Sub­
stance penetrable and indiscerpible. 
Now I appeal to any man that can set aside prejudice, 
and has the free use of his Faculties, whether every term of 
the Definition of a Spirit be not as intelligible and congruous 
to Reason, as in that of a Body. For the precise Notion of 
. Substance is the same in both, in which, I conceive, is com-
1À9 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
prised Extension and Activity either connate or communi­
cated. For Matter it self once moved can move. other 
Matter. And it is as easy to understand what Penetrable 
is as Impenetrable, and what Indiscerpible is as Discerpible; 
and Penetrability and Indiscerpibility being as immediate to 
Spirit as Impenetrability or Discerpibility to Body, there is 
as much reason to be given for the Attributes of the one 
as of the other, by Axiome 9.10 And Substance in its precise 
notion including no more of Impenetrability than of Indis­
cerpibility we may as well wonder how one kind of Sub­
stance holds out its parts one from another · so as to make 
them impenetrable to each other (as Matter, for instance 
does the parts of Matter) as that parts of another substance 
hold so fast together that they are by no means Discerpible. 
And therefore the holding out in one being as difficult a 
business to conceive as the holding together in the other 
this can be no prejudice to the notion of a Spirit. 
' 
I am rather doubtful whether the modern reader -
even if he puts aside prejudice and makes free use of 
his faculties - will accept Henry More's assurance that 
it is as easy, or as difficult, to form the concept of spirit 
as that of matter, and whether, though recognizing the 
difficulty of the latter, he will not agree with some of 
More's contemporaries in " the confident opinion " that 
" the very notion of a . Spirit were a piece of Nonsense 
and perfect Incongruity." 
The modern reader will be 
right, of course, in rejecting More's concept, patterned 
obviously upon that of a ghost. And yet he will be 
wrong in assuming it to be pure and sheer · nonsense. 
In the first place, we must not forget that for a man 
of the seventeenth century the idea of an extended, 
though not material, entity was by no means something 
strange or even uncommon. Quite the contrary: these 
180 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
entities were represented in plenty in their daily life 
as well as in their scientific experience. 
To begin with, there was light, assuredly immaterial 
and incorporeal but nevertheless not only extending 
through space but also, as Kepler does not fail to point 
out, able, in spite of its immateriality, to act upon 
matter, and also to ' be acted upon by the latter. Did 
not light offer a perfect example of penetrability, as 
well as of penetrating power? Light, indeed, does not 
hinder the motion of bodies through it, and it can also 
pass through bodies, at least some of them; furthermore, 
in the case of a transparent body traversed by light, it 
shows us clearly that matter and light can coexist in 
the same place. 
The modern development of optics did not destroy 
but, on the contrary, seemed to confirm this conception: 
a real image produced by mirrors or 'lenses has certainly 
a determinate shape and location in space. Yet, is it 
body? Can we disrupt or " discerp " it, cut off and take 
away a piece of this image? 
As a matter of fact, light exemplifies nearly all the 
properties of More's " spirit," those of " condensation " 
and " dilatation " included, and even that of " essential 
spissitude " that could be represented by the intensity 
of light's varying, just like the " spissitude," "rith its 
" contraction " and " dilatation." 
And if light were not sufficiently representative of this 
kind of entity, there were magnetic forces that to William 
Gilbert seemed to belong to the realm of animated much 
more than to purely material being: 11 there was attrac­
tion (gravity) that freely passed through all bodies and 
could be neither arrested nor even affected by any. 
181 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Moreover, we must not forget that the " ether," which 
played such an important role in the physics of the 
nineteenth century (which maintained as firmly or even 
more firmly than the seventeenth the opposition between 
" light " and " matter," an opposition that is by no means 
completely overcome even now) , displayed an ensemble 
of properties even more astonishing than the " spirit " 
of Henry More. And finally, that the fundamental entity 
of contemporary science, the " field," is something that 
possesses location and extension, penetrability and indis­
cerpibility . . . .  So that, somewhat anachronistically, of 
course, one could assimilate More's " spirits," at least 
the lowest, unconscious degrees of them, to some kinds 
of fields.lla 
But let us now come back to More. The greater pre­
cision achieved by him in the determination of the con­
cept of spirit led necessarily to a stricter discrimination 
between its extension and the space in which, like every­
thing else, it finds itself, concepts that were somehow 
merged together into the divine or spiritual extension 
opposed by More to the material Cartesian one. Space 
or pure immaterial extension will be distinguished now 
from the " spirit of nature " that pervades and fills it, 
that acts upon matter and produces the above-mentioned 
non-mechanical effects, an entity which on the scale of 
perfection of spiritual beings occupies the very lowest 
degree. This spirit of nature is 
12 
A Substance incorporeal but without sense or animadver­
sion, pervading the whole matter of the Universe, and exer­
cising a plastic power therein, according to the sundry pre­
dispositions and .occasions of the parts it works upon, raising 
such Phenomena in the world, by directing the parts of the 
132 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
matter, and their motion, as cannot be resolved into mere 
mechanical power. 
Among these phenomena unexplainable by purely 
mechanical forces, of which Henry ]}lore knows, alas, a 
great number, including sympathetic cures and consoÉÈnce 
of strings (More, needless to say, is a rataer bad phYSICISt) , 
the most important is gravity. FollOWIng Descartes, he 
no longer considers it an essential p:operty of body, or 
even as Galileo still did, an unexplaInable but real ten­
denc, of matter; but - and he is Çight - he aÆcepts 
neither the Cartesian nor the HobbeSIan explana`Ion of 
it. Gra vity cannot be explained by pure mechanICS and 
therefore, if there were in the world no other, nor:-mechan­
ical, forces, unattached bodies on our mOVIng earth 
would not remain on its surface, but fly away and lose 
. 
f 
f 
themselves in space. That they do not IS a proÅ 
0" 
+h& &v;C'+e"f'\{oĎ ࡏn n!1tlll"e of a " more than mechanlcal, 
'-' 
v 
v..:l.¶· \J 
.L¸V"""·
..L 
.l. .. IL.)l! V "-'L.&. 
" spiritual " agency. 
More writes accordingly in the preface to T he I m-
mortality of the Soul/3 
I have not only confuted their [Descartes' and Hobbes'] 
Reasons, but also from Mechanical principles granted on all 
sides and confirrned by Experience, demonstrated that the 
Descent of a stone or a bullet, or any such likÄ heavy Body 
is enormously contrary to the Laws of MechanlCks; and that 
according to them they would necessarily, if they lye lo?se, 
recede from the Earth and be carried away out of our sȍght 
into the farthest parts of the Aire, if some Power more than 
Mechanical did not curb that Motion, and force them down­
wards towards the Earth. So that it is plain that we have 
not arbitrarily introduced a Principle but that it is 
,
forced 
upon us by the undeniable evidence of Demonstratwn. 
133 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
As a matter of fact the Antidote against Athei81n had 
already pointed out that stones and bullets projected , 
upwards return to earth - which, according to the laws 
of motion, they should not do; for,14 
. 
. 
µ . if we consider more particularly what a strong tug a 
massive Bullet, suppose of lead or brass must needs give 
(according to that prime Mechanicall law of motion per-
sisting in a straight line) to recede from the superficies of 
the Earth, the Bullet being in so swift a Motion as would 
dispatch some fifteen Miles in one Minute of an Hour; it 
must needs appear that a wonderful Power is required to 
curb it, regulate it, or remand it back to the Earth and 
, 
keep it there, notwithstanding the strong Reluctancy of 
that first Mechanical law of Matter that would urge it to 
recede. Whereby is manifested not only the marvellous 
Power of Unity in I ndiscerpibility in the Spirit of Nature 
but that there is a peremptory and even forcible Execu­
tion of an all-comprehensive and eternal Council for the 
Ordering and the Guiding of the Motion of Matter in the 
Universe to what is the Best. And this phenomenon of 
Gravity is of so good and necessary consequence, that there 
could be neither Earth nor Inhabitants without it, in this 
State that things are. . 
Indeed, without the action of a non-mechanical prin­
ciple all matter in the universe would divide and disperse; 
there would not even be bodies, because there would be 
nothing to hold together the ultimate particles composing 
them. And, of course, there would be no trace of that 
purposeful organization which manifests itself not only 
in plants, animals and so on, but even in the very arrange­
ment of our solar system. All that is the work of the spirit 
of nature, which acts as an instrument, itself unconscious, 
of the divine will. 
184 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
So much for the spirit of nature that pervades the whole 
universe and extends itself in its infinite space. But what 
about this space itself? the space that we cannot conceive 
if not infinite - that is, necessary - and that we cannot 
" disimagine " (which is a confirmation of its necessity) 
from our thought? Being immaterial it is certainly to be 
considered as spirit. Yet it is a " spirit " of quite a special 
and unique kind, and J\1ore is not quite sure about its 
exact nature. Though, obviously, he inclines towards a 
very definite solution, namely towards the identification 
of space with the divine extension itself, he is somewhat 
diffident about it. Thus he writes: 15 
If there were no Matter but the Immensity of the Divine . 
Essence only occupying all by its Ubiquity, then the Re­
duplication, as I may so speak, of his indivisible substance, 
whereby he presents himself intirely everywhere, would be 
the Subject of that Diffusion and Measurability . . .
. 
for which the Cartesians require the presence of matter, 
asserting that material extension alone can be measured, 
an assertion which leads inevitably to the affirmation of 
the infinity and the necessary existence of matter. But 
we do not need matter in order to have measures, and 
More can pursue: 16 
And I adde further, that the perpetual observation of this 
infinite Amplitude and Mensurability, which we cannot dis­
imagine in our Phancie but will necessary be, may be a more 
rude and obscure notion offered to our mind of that neces­
sary and self-existant Essence which the Idea of God does 
with greater fulness and distinctness represent to us. For 
it is plain that not so much as our Imagination is engaged 
to an appropriation of this Idea of Space to corporeal 
1 85 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Univer8e 
Matter, in that it does not naturally conceive any impene­
trability or tangibility in the Notion thereof; and therefore . 
it may as well belong to a Spirit as a Body. Whence as I 
said before, the Idea of God being such as it is, it will both 
justly and necessarily cast this ruder notion of Space upon 
that infinite and eternal spirit which is God. 
There is also another way of answering this Objection, 
which is this; that this Imagination of Space is not the 
imagination of any real thing, but only of the large and 
immense capacity of the potentiality of the Matter, which 
we can not free our Minds from but must necessarily 
acknowledge that there is indeed such a possibility of Matter 
to be measured upward, downward, everyway in infinitum, 
whether this corporeal Matter were actually there or no; 
and that though this potentiality of Matter and Space be 
measurable by furloughs, miles, or the like, that it implies 
no more real Essence or Being, than when a man recounts 
so many orders or Kindes of the Possibilities of things, the 
compute or number of then1 will infer the reality of their 
Existence. 
But if the Cartesians would urge us further and insist 
upon the impossibility of measuring the nothingness of 
void space,17 
. . .  it may be answered, That Distance is no real or 
Physical property of a thing but only notional; because 
more or less of it may accrue to a thing when as yet there 
has been nothing at all done to that to which it does accrue. 
And if they urge still further and contend, that . . . dis­
tance must be some real thing . . .  I answer briefly that 
Distance is nothing else but the privation of tactual union 
and the greater distance the greater privation . . . ;  and 
that this privation of tactual union is measured by parts, 
as other privations of qualities by degrees; and that parts 
186 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Univer8e 
and degrees, and such like notions, are not real things 
themselves any where, but our mode of conceiving them, 
and therefore we can bestow them upon Non-entities as 
well as Entities. . . 
. 
But if this will not satisfie, 'tis no detriment to our cause. 
For if after the removal of corporeal Matter out of the 
world, there will be still Space and distance, in which this 
very matter, while it was there, was also conceived to lye, 
and this distant Space cannot but be something, and yet 
not corporeal, because neither impenetrable nor tangible, it 
must of necessity be a substance Incorporeal, necessarily 
and eternally existent of it self: which the clearer Idea of 
a Being absolutely perfect will more fully and punctually 
inform us to be the Self-subsisting God. 
We have seen that, in 1655 and also in 1662, Henry 
More was hesitating between varioÃs . solÂ_ionÁ of the 
problelIl of space. Ten years later hIS decIsIon IS rnade, 
and the Enchiridium metaphysicum (1672) not only 
asserts the real existence of infinite void space against 
all possible opponents, as a real precondition of all possible 
existence, but even presents it as the best and most evi­
dent example of non-material - and therefore spiritual ­
reality and thus as the first and foremost, though of 
course not unique, subject-matter of metaphysics. 
Thus Henry More tells us that " the first method for 
proving the uncorporeal things " must be based on 18 
. . . the demonstration of a certain unmovable extended 
[being] distinct from the movable matter, which commonly 
is called space or inner locus. That it is something real 
and not imaginary, as many people assert, we shall prove 
later by various arguments. 
137 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Henry More seems to have completely forgotten his 
own uncertainty concerning the question; in any case he 
does not mention it and pursues: 19 
First, it is so obvious that it hardly needs proof, as it 
is confirmed by the opinions of nearly all the philosophers, 
and even of all men in general, but particularly of those 
who, as it is proper, believe that matter was created at a 
certain time. For we must either acknowledge that there is 
a certain extended [entity] besides matter, or that God 
could not create finite matter; lindeed, we cannot conceive 
finite matter but as surrounded on all sides by something 
infinitely extended. 
Descartes remains, as we see, the chief adversary of 
Henry More; indeed, as More discovered meanwhile, by 
his denial both of void space and of spiritual extension, 
Descartes practically excludes spirits, souls, and even God, 
from his world; he simply leaves no plaoe for them in it. 
To the question " where?," the fundamental question 
which can be raised concerning any and every real being 
- souls, spirits, God - and to which Henry More believes 
he can give definite answers (here, elsewhere or - for 
God - everywhere), Descartes is obliged, by his principles, 
to answer: nowhere, nullibi. Thus, in spite of his having 
invented or perfected the magnificent a priori proof of the 
existence of God, which Henry More embraced enthu­
siastically and was to maintain all his life, Descartes, by 
his teaching, leads to materialism and, by his exclusion of 
God from the world, to atheism. From now on, Descartes 
and the Cartesians are to be relentlessly criticized and to 
bear the derisive nickname of nullibi8t8. 
Still, there are not only Cartesians to be combatted. 
138 
C L O S  E D 
W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
There is also the last cohort of Aristotelians who believe 
in a finite world, and deny the existence of space outside 
it. They, too, have to be dealt with. On their behalf 
Henry More revives some of the old mediaeval arguments 
used to demonstrate that Aristotelian cosmology was 
incompatible with God's omnipotence. 
It cannot be doubted, of course, that if the world were 
finite and limited by a spherical surface with no space 
outside it,20 
it would follow, secondly, that not even divine omnipotence 
could make it that this corporeal finite world in its ulti­
mate surface possess mountains or valleys, that is, any pro­
minences or cavities. 
Thirdly, that it would be absolutely impossible for God 
to create another world; or even two small bronze spheres 
at the same time, in the place of these two worlds, as the 
..-,,1 0c< "of 
+ ho 
-n o ",.., 11 01 
O "<T a c<  
.... 71"\1,1£1 f'v"ll1f'irlp hp(,f!1!ߺe of the 
.pv]'-" Vɋ 
Io.U'-
'p<NɌ <Nɍ]'-Ɏ 
0.,-".\ 
.. , ,;:> 
.. vu.Ńu. 
² 
³³³ ___ ´ 
, _ _ __ _ _ 
lack of an intermediate space. 
Nay, even if God could create a world out of these 
small spheres, closely packed together (disregarding the 
difficulty of the space that would be left void between 
them) , He would be unable to set them in motion. These 
are conclusions which Henry More, quite rightly, believed 
to be indigestible even for a camel's stomach. 
Yet Henry More's insistence on the existence of space 
" outside " the world is, obviously, directed not only 
against the Aristotelians, but also against the Cartesians 
to whom he wants to demonstrate the possibility of the 
limitation of the material world, and at the same time, 
the mensurability, that is, the existence of dimensions 
(that now are by no means considered as merely " no-
139 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
tional " determinations) in the void space. It seems that 
More, who in his youth had been such an inspired and 
enthusiastic adherent of the doctrine of the infinity of 
the world (and of worlds) , became more and more 
adverse to it, and would have liked to turn back to the 
" Stoic " conception of a finite world in the midst of an 
infinite space, or, at least, to join the semi-Cartesians and 
reject Descartes' infinitization of the material world. !Ie 
even goes so far as to quote, with approval, the CartesIan 
distinction of the indefiniteness of the world and the 
infinity of God; interpreting it, of course, as meaning the 
real finiteness of the world opposed to the infinity of space. 
This, obviously, because he understands now much better 
than twenty years previously the positive reason of the 
Cartesian distinction: infinity implies necessity, an infinite 
world would be a necessary one. . . . 
But we must not anticipate. Let us turn to another 
sect of philosophers who are at the same time lVlore's 
enemies and allies .21 
But also those philosophers who did not believe in the 
creation of matter nevertheless acknowleged [the existence 
of] Space, such are Leucippus, Democritus, Demetrius, Metro­
dorus, Epicurus and also all the Stoics. Some people add 
Plato to these. As for Aristotle, who defined place (Locus) 
as the nearest surface of the ambient body, he was in this 
question deserted by a great number of his disciples who 
rightly observed that in this case he was not in agreeme.nt 
with himself, as indeed he attributed to place propertIes 
that could not pertain to any thing but to the space occu­
pied by any body; that is, Equality and Immobility. 
It is, moreover, worth while mentioning that those phi­
losophers who luade the world finite (such as Plato, Aristotle 
140 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
and the Stoics) acknowledged Space outside the world, or 
beyond it, whereas those who [believe in] infinite worlds 
and infinite matter, teach that there is even inside the 
world an intermixed vacuum; such are Democritus and all 
the Ancients who embraced the atomic philosophy, so that 
it seems to be entirely confirmed by the voice of nature 
that there is ߻()aT'rJp."a n xwpr-tov, a certain interval or space 
really distinct from mundane matter. As for the posteriors, 
this is sufficiently known. Whereas concerning the Stoics, 
Plutarch testifies that they did not admit any void inside 
the world, but an infinite one outside. And Plato says in 
his Phaedrus that above the supreme heaven where he places 
the purest souls, there is a certain Supracelestial place 
(locus), not very different from the abode of the blessed 
of the Theologians. 
As the admission of an infinite space seems thus to be, 
with very few exceptions, a common opinion of mankind, 
. 
. 
. 
. 
d 
1 
It may appear unnecessary to InSIst upon It an to ma.ree 
it an object of discussion and demonstration. More ex­
plains therefore that 22 
I should assuredly be ashamed to linger so long upon so 
easy a question if I were not compelled to do it by the 
great name of Descartes, who fascinates the less prudent 
to such an extent that they prefer to rave and rage with 
Descartes, than to yield to most solid arguments if the 
Principles of Philosophy are opposed to them. Among the 
most important [tenets] that he himself mentions is that 
one I have so diligently combatted [elsewhere], namely, that 
not even by Divine virtue could it happen that there 
should be in the Universe any interval which, in reality, 
would not be matter or body. Which opinion I have always 
considered false; now however I impugn it also as impious. 
And in order that it should not appear as not completely 
141 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
overcome, I shall present and reveal all the subterfuges by 
which the Cartesians want to elude the strength of my 
demonstra tions, and I shall reply to them. 
I must confess that Henry More's answers to the " prin­
cipal means that the Cartesians used in order to evade 
the strength of the preceding demonstrations " are some­
times of very dubious value. And that " the refutation 
of them all " is, as ,often as not, no better than some of 
his arguments. 
Henry More, as we know, was a bad physicist, and he 
did not always understand the precise meaning of the 
concepts used by Descartes - for instance, that of the 
relativity of motion. And yet his criticism is extremely 
interesting and, in the last analysis, juSt.23 
The first way to escape the strength of our Demonstra­
tions is derived from the Cartesian definition of motion 
which is as follows :  [motion is] in all cases the translation 
of a body front the vicinity of those bodies which imme­
diately touch it and are considered as at rest, into the 
vicinity of others. 24 
From this definition, objects Henry More, it would follow 
that a small body firmly wedged somewhere between the 
axis and the circumference of a large rotating cylinder 
would be at rest, which is obviously false. Moreover, in 
this case, this small body, though remaining at rest, would 
be able to come nearer to, or recede from, another body 
P, placed immobile, outside the rotating cylinder. Which 
is absurd as " it supposes that there can be an approach 
of one body to another, quiescent, one without local 
motion." 
Henry More concludes therefore: 25 
142 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
that the preceding definition is gratuitously set up by 
Descartes and, because it is opposed to solid demonstrations, 
it is manifestly false. 
More's error is obvious. It is clear that, if we accept 
the Cartesian conception of the relativity of motion, we 
no longer have any right to speak of bodies as being 
absolutely " in motion " or " at rest " but have always to 
add the point or frame of reference in respect to which 
the said body is to be considered as being at rest or in 
motion. And that, accordingly, there is no contradiction 
in stating that the selfsame body may be at rest in respect 
to its surroundings and in motion in respect to a body 
placed farther away, or vice versa. And yet Henry More 
is perfectly right: the extension of the relativity of motion 
to rotation - at least if we do not want to restrict our­
selves to pure kinematics and are dealing with real, 
physical objects - is illegitimate; moreover, the Cartesian 
definition, with its more than Aristotelian insistence on 
the vicinity of the points of reference, is wrong and in­
compatible with the very principle of relativity. It is, 
by the way, extremely probable that Descartes thought 
it out not for purely scientific reasons, but in order to 
escape the necessity of asserting the motion of the earth 
and to be able to affirm - with his tongue in his cheek ­
that the earth was at rest in its vortex. 
It is nearly the same concerning More's second argu­
ment against the Cartesian conception of relativity, or, 
as More calls it, " reciprocity " of motion. He claims 26 
That the Cartesian definition of motion is rather a descrip­
tion of place; and that if motion were reciprocal, its nature 
would compel one body to move by two contrary motions 
and even to move and not to move at the same time. 
143 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus for instance, let us take three bodies, CD, EF 
and AB, and let EF move towards H, whilst CD nl0ves 
I 
G 
I CD \  
H 
towards G, and AB remains fixed to the earth. Thus it 
does not move and yet moves at the same time: who can 
say anything more absurd? And is it not evident 27 
that the Cartesian definition of motion is repugnant to all 
the faculties of the soul, the sense, the imagination and 
the reason. 
Henry More, it is clear, cannot transform the concept 
of motion into that of a pure relation. He feels that 
when bodies move, even if we consider them as moving 
in respect to each other, something happens, at least to 
one of them, that is unilateral and not reciprocal: it really 
moves, that is, changes its place, its internal locus. It 
is in respect to this " place " that motion has to be con­
ceived and not in respect to any other, and therefore 28 
the supposition of the Cartesians that local motion is relative 
to the place where the body is not, and not [to the place] 
where it is, is absurd. 
In other terms, relative motion implies absolute motion 
and can only be understood on the basis of absolute motion 
and thus of absolute space. Indeed, when a cylindrical 
body is in circular motion, all its internal points not only 
change their position in respect to its surrounding surface, 
or a body placed outside it: they move, that is, pass 
144 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
t^Ɇrough.some extension, describe a trajectory in this exten­
SIon whICh, therefore, does not move. Bodies do not take 
their places with them, they go from one place to another. 
The pl¿c¾ of a body, its internal locus, is not a part of the 
body:. It IS something entirely distinct from it, something 
that IS by no means a mere potentiality of matter: a 
pote½tiality c.annot be separated from the actual being of 
a thIng, but IS an entity, independent of the bodies that 
are and move in it. And even less is it a mere " phansy," 29 
as Dr. Hobbes has tried to assert. 
Having thus established, to his own satisfaction the 
perf¼c] legitimacy and validity of the concept of \pace 
»s dIstInct froº matter and refuted their merging together 
In the CartesIan conception of " extension " Henry More 
proceeds to the determination of the nature and the 
ontological status of the correspondinO' entity. 
" Q.ɇ Ɉ ɉɊ " _ __ " . __ . 
7 
.. 
• 
, .0 
IJP
.
ctce, 
ur 
lIlner lOCUS," IS somethIng extended. Now, 
extensIon, as the Cartesians are perfectly right in. asserting, 
cannot be an extension of 1Wthing: distance between two 
bodies is something real, or, at the very least a relation 
which implies a fundamentum reale. The Ca[esians, on 
the ¹ther ha¸d, are wrong in believing that void space is 
nothIng. It IS something, and even very much so. Once 
more, it is not a fancy, or a product of imagination, but 
À perfec_ly ɟeal enࡐity. The ancient atomists were right 
In assertIng ItS realIty and calling it an intelligible nature. 
The reality of space can be demonstrated also in a 
somewhat different Inanner; it is certain 30 
. . .  that a real attribute of any subject can never be found 
anywh.ere ?ut where some real subject supports it. But 
extensIOn IS a real attribute of a real subject (namely 
1 45 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
matter) , which [attribute] however, is found elsewhere 
[namely there where no matter is present], and which . is 
independent of our imagination. Indeed we are unable not 
to conceive that a certain immobile extension pervading 
everything in infinity has always existed and will exist in 
all eternity (whether we think about it or do not think 
about it) , and [that it is] nevertheless really distinct from 
matter. 
It is therefore necessary that, because it is a real attribute, 
some real subject support this extension. This argumenta­
tion is so solid that there is none that could be stronger. 
For if this one fails, we shall not be able to conclude with 
any certainty the existence in nature of any real subject 
whatever. Indeed, in this case, it would be possible for 
real attributes to be present without there being any real 
subject or substance to support them. 
Henry More is perfectly right. On the basis of tradi­
tional ontology - and no one in the seventeenth century 
(except, perhaps, Gassendi, who claims that space and 
time are neither substances nor attributes but simply 
space and time) is so bold or so careless as to reject it 
or to replace it by a new one - his reasoning is utterly 
unobjectionable. Attributes imply substances. They do 
not wander alone, free and unattached, in the world. They 
cannot exist without support, like the grin of the Cheshire 
cat, for this would mean that they would be attributes 
of nothing. Even those who, like Descartes, modify tradi­
tional ontology by asserting that the attributes reveal to 
us the very nature, or essence, of their substance - Henry 
More sticks to the old view that they do not - maintain 
the funda.mental relationship: no real attribute without 
real substance. Henry More, therefore, is perfectly right, 
146 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
too, in pointing out that his argumentation is built on 
exactly the same pattern as the Cartesian and 31 
. . .  that this is the very same means of demonstration as 
Descartes uses to prove that Space is a substance though 
it becomes false, in his case, insofar as he concludes that 
it is a corporeal one. 
Moreover, Henry More's conclusion from extension to 
the underlying and supporting substance is exactly parallel 
to that of Descartes 31 
. . .  though he [Descartes] aims at another goal than my­
self. Indeed, from this argument he endeavors to conclude 
that the Space that is called void is the very same corporeal 
substance as that called matter. I, on the contrary, since 
I have so clearly proved that Space or internal place (locus) 
is really distinct from matter, conclude therefrom that it is 
a certain incorporeal subject or spirit, such as the Pytha­
goreans once asserted it to be. .LA 
... nd so, through that same 
gate through which the Cartesians want to expel God from 
the world, I, on the contrary (and I am confident I shall 
succeed most happily) contend and strive to introduce 
Him back. 
To sum up: Descartes was right in looking for sub­
stance to support extension. He was wrong in finding it 
in matter. The infinite, extended entity that embraces 
and pervades everything is indeed a substance. But it 
is not matter. It is Spirit; not a spirit, but the Spirit, 
that is, God. 
Space, indeed, is not only real, it is something divine. 
And in order to convince ourselves of its divine character 
we have only to consider its attributes. Henry More pro­
ceeds therefore to the 32 
147 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
Enumeration of about twenty titles which the metaphy­
sicians attribute to God and which fit the immobile extended 
[entity] or internal place (locus) . 
When we shall have enumerated those names and titles 
appropriate to it, this infinite, immobile, extended [entity] 
will appear to be not only something real (as we have just 
pointed out) but even something Divine (which so cer­
tainly is found in nature) ; this will give us further assurance 
that it cannot be nothing since that to which so many and 
such lnagnificent attributes pertain cannot be nothing. Of 
this kind are the following, which metaphysicians attribute 
particularly to the First Being, such as: One, Simple, Im­
mobile, Eternal, Complete, Independent, Existing in itself, 
Subsisting by itself, Incorruptible, Necessary, Immense, Un­
created, Uncircumscribed, Incomprehensible, Omnipresent, 
Incorporeal, All-penetrating, All-embracing, Being by its 
essence, Actual Being, Pure Act. 
There are not less than twenty titles by which the Divine 
Numen is wont to be designated, and which perfectly fit 
this infinite internal place (locus) the existence of which 
in nature we have demonstrated; omitting moreover that 
the very Divine N umen is called, by the Cabalists, 
MAKOl\1, that is, Place (locus) . 
Indeed it would be 
astonishing and a kind of prodigy if the thing about which 
so much can be said proved to be a mere nothing. 
Indeed, it would be extremely astonishing if an entity 
eternal, uncreated, and existing in and by itself should 
finally resolve into pure nothing. This impression will 
only be strengthened by the analysis of the 
H titles " 
enumerated by More, who proceeds to examine them 
one by one: 88 
How this infinite extended [entity] distinct from matter 
is One, Simple, and Immovable. 
148 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
But let us consider the individual titles and note their 
congruence. This Infinite Extended [entity] distinct from 
matter is justly called One, not only because it is some­
thing homogeneous and everywhere similar to itself, but 
because it is to such an extent one, that it is absolutely 
impossible that of this one there be many, or that it become 
many, as it has no physical parts out of which it could be 
multiplied or in which, truly and physically, it could be 
divided, or in which it could be condensed. Such indeep. 
is the internal, or, if you prefer, innermost locus. From 
which it follows that it is aptly called Simple, since, as I 
have said, it has no physical parts. As for what pertains to 
those diversities of which a logical distribution can be made, 
there is absolutely no thing so simple that they would not 
be found in it. 
But from the Simplicity its Immobility is easily deduced. 
For no Infinite Extended [ entity] which is not co-augmented 
from parts, or in any way condensed or compressed, can be 
moved, either part by part, or the whole [of it] at the same 
time, as it is infinite, nor [can it be] contracted into a lesser 
space, as it is never condensed, nor can it abandon its place, 
since this Infinite is the innermost place of all things, inside 
or outside which there is nothing. And from the very fact 
that something is conceived as being moved, it is at once 
understood that it cannot be any part of this Infinite Ex­
tended [entity] of which we are speaking. It is therefore 
necessary that it be immovable. Which attribute of the 
First Being Aristotle celebrates as the highest. 
Absolute space is infinite, immovable, homogeneous, in­
divisible and unique. These are very important properties 
which Spinoza and Malebranche discovered almost at the 
same time as More, and which enabled them to put 
extension - an intelligible extension, different from that 
149 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
which is given to our imagination and senses - into their 
respective Gods; properties that Kant - who, however, 
with Descartes, missed the indivisibility - was to re­
discover a hundred years later, and who, accordingly, was 
unable to connect space with God and had to put it into 
ourselves. 
But we must not wander away from our subject. Let 
us come back to More, and More's space.34 
It is indeed justly called Eternal, because we can in no 
way conceive but that this One, Immovable and Simple 
[entity] was always, and will be always. But this is not the 
case for the movable, or for what has physical parts, and 
is condensed or compressed into parts. Accordingly, Eter­
nity, at least the necessary one, implies also the perfect 
simplicity of the thing. 
We see it at once: space is eternal and therefore un­
created. But the things that are in space by no means 
participate in these properties. Quite the contrary: they 
are temporal and mutable and are created by God in the 
eternal space and at a certain moment of the eternal time. 
Space is not only eternal, simple and one. It is also 35 
. . .  Complete because it does not coalesce with any other 
thing in order to form one entity [with it]; otherwise it 
would move with it at the same time as [that thing], which 
is not the case of the eternal locus. 
It is indeed not only Eternal but also Independent, not 
only of our Imagination, as we have demonstrated, but of 
anything whatever, and it is not connected with any other 
thing or supported by any, but receives and supports all 
[things] as their site and place. 
It must be conceived as Existing by itself because it is 
totally independent of any other. But of the fact that it 
150 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
does not depend on anything there is a very manifest sign, 
namely, that whereas we can conceive all other things as 
destructible in reality, this Infinite Immovable Extended 
[entity] cannot be conceived or imagined destructible. 
Indeed, we cannot " disimagine " space or think it 
away. We can imagine, or think of, the disappearance of 
any object from space; we cannot imagine, or think of, the 
disappearance of space itself. It is the necessary presup­
position of our thinking about the existence or non-exis­
tence of any thing whatever.36 
But that it is Immense and Uncircumscribed is patent, 
because wherever we might want to imagine an end to it, 
we cannot but conceive an ulterior extension which exceeds 
these ends, and so on in infinitum. 
Herefrom we perceive that it is incomprehensible. How 
indeed could a finite mind cOlnprehend that which is not 
comprehended by any limit? 
Henry More could have told us, here too, that he was 
using, though of course for a different end, the famous 
arguments by which Descartes endeavoured to prove the 
indefinity of materiࡑl extension. Yet he may have felt 
that not only the goal of the argument, but also its very 
meaning, opposed it to that of Descartes. Indeed, the 
progressus in infinitum was used by Henry More not for 
denying, but for asserting the absolute infinity of the 
extended substance, which 37 
. . . is also uncreated, because it is the first of all, for it 
is by itself (a se) and independent of anything else. And 
Omnipresent because it is immense or infinite. But Incor­
poreal because it penetrates matter, though it is a substance, 
that is, an in-itself subsisting being. 
151 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Furthermore it is All-pervading because it is a certain 
immense, incorporeal [entity], and it embraces all the singu­
lar [things] in its immensity. 
It is even not undeservedly called Being by essence in 
contradistinction to being by participation, because Being by 
itself and being Independent it does not obtain its essence 
from any other thing. 
Furthermore, it is aptly called being in act as it cannot 
but be conceived as existing outside of its causes. 
The list of " attributes " common to God and to space, 
enumerated by Henry More, is rather impressive; and we 
cannot but agree that they fit fairly well. After all, this 
is not surprising: all of them are the formal ontological 
attributes of the absolute. Yet we have to recognize 
Henry More's intellectual energy that enabled him not 
to draw back before the conclusions of his premises; and 
the courage with which he announced to the world the 
spatiality of God and the divinity of space. 
As for this conclusion, he could not avoid it. Infinity 
implies necessity. Infinite space is absolute space; even 
more, it is an Absolute. But there cannot be two (or 
many) :;tbsolute and necessary beings. Thus, as Henry 
More could not accept the Cartesian solution of the 
indefiniteness of extension and had to make it infinite, 
he was eo ipso placed before a dilemma: either to make 
the material world infinite and thus a 8e and per se, 
neither needing, nor even admitting, God's creative action; 
that is, finally, not needing or even not adlnitting God's 
existence at all. 
Or he could - and that was exactly what he actually 
did - separate matter and space, raise the latter to the 
dignity of an attribute of God, and of an organ in which 
152 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
and through which God creates and maintains His world, 
a finite world, limited in space as well as in time, as an 
infinite creature is an utterly contradictory concept. That 
is something that Henry More acknowledges not to have 
recognized in his youth 'when, seized by some poetic furor, 
he sanD' in his Democritus Platoni8sans a hymn to the 
b 
infinity of the worlds. 
To prove the limitation in time is not very difficult: 
it is sufficient, according to More, to consider that nothing 
can belong to the past if it did not become " past " after 
having been " present "; and that nothing can ever be 
" present " if it did not, before that, belong to the future. 
It follows therefrom that an past events have, at some 
time, belonged to the future, that is, that there was a 
time when all of them were not yet " present," not yet 
existent, a time when everything was still in the future 
and when nothing was real. 
It is much more difficult to prove the limitation of the 
spatial extension of the (material) world. Most of the 
arguments alleged in favor of the finiteness are rather 
weak. Yet it can be demonstrated that the material 
world must, or at least can, be terminated, and therefore 
is not really infinite. 
And, in order not to dissimulate anything, this seems to 
be the best argument for demonstrating that the Matter 
of the World cannot be absolutely infinite but only indefinite, 
as Descartes has said somewhere, and to reserve the name 
of infinite for God alone. Which must be asserted as well 
of the Duration as of the Amplitude of God. Both are in­
deed absolutely infinite; those of the World, however, only 
indefinite . . .  that is, in truth, finite. In this way God is 
duly, that is, infinitely, elevated above the Universe, and 
153 
) 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
is understood to be not only by an infinite eternity older 
than the W orld( but also by immense spaces larger and 
more ample than it. 
The circle is closed. The conception that Henry More 
ascribed to. Descartes - though falsely - and so bitterly 
criticized in his youth, has demonstrated its good points. 
An indeterminately vast but finite world merged in an 
infinite space is the only conception, Henry More sees 
it now, that enables us to maintain the distinction between 
the contingent created world and the eternal and a se 
and per se existing God. 
By a strange irony of history, the K€v6v of the godless 
atomists became for Henry More God's own extension, 
the very condition of His action in the world. 
1 54 
VII. Absolute Space, Absolute Time 
and Their Relations to God 
M alebranche 
Newton 
& Bentley 
Henry More's conception of space, which makes it an 
attribute of God, is by no means - I have said it already, 
but I should like to insist upon it - an aberrant, odd 
and curious invention, a" fancy," of a Neoplatonic mystic 
lost in the world of the new science. Quite the contrary. 
It is, in its fundamental features, shared by a number of 
the great thinkers of his time, precisely those who iden­
tified themselves with the new scientific world-view. 
I need not insist on Spinoza who, though he denied 
the existence of void space and maintained the Cartesian 
identification of extension and matter, carefully distin­
guishes between extension, as given to the senses and 
represented by the imagination, and extension as per­
ceived by the understanding - the former, being divisible 
and movable (and corresponding to the Cartesian in­
definitely extended world) , constituting the sempiternal 
many-fold of ever-changing and finite modi, the latter, 
truly and fully infinite and therefore indivisible, consti-
105 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to 
Universe 
tuting the eternal and essential attribute of the a se 
and per se existing Being, that is, of God. 
Infinity belongs unavoidably to God, not only to the 
very dubious God of Spinoza, but also to the God of the 
Christian religion. Thus, not only Spinoza, the by no 
means pious Dutch philosopher, but also the very pious 
Father Malebranche, having grasped the essential infinity 
of geonletrical space, is obliged to connect it with God. 
The space of geometers or, as Malebranche calls it, the 
" intelligible extension," is, according to Christ Himself, 
who appears as one of the interlocutors of the Christian 
Meditations of Malebranche/ 
. . .  eternal, immense, necessary. It is the immensity of the 
Divine Being, as infinitely participable by the corporeal 
creature, as' representative of an immense matter; it is, in a 
word, the intelligible idea of possible worlds. It is what your 
mind contemplates when you think about the infinite. It is 
by means of this intelligible extension that you know the 
visible world. 
Malebranche, of course, does not want to put matter 
into God and to spatialize God in the manner in which 
Henry More or Spinoza did it. He distinguishes therefore 
the idea of space, or " intelligible extension," which he 
places in God, from the gross material extension of the 
world created by God.2 
But you have to distinguish two kinds of extension, the 
one intelligible, and the other material. 
The intelligible extension is " eternal, necessary, infinite," 
whereas the 3 
other kind of extension is that which is created; it is 
156 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the matter out of which the world is built. . . . This world 
began and can cease to be. It has certain limits that it 
cannot lack. . . . Intelligible extension appears to you 
eternal, necessary, infinite; believe what you see; but do 
not believe that the world is eternal, or that the matter 
that composes it is immense, necessary, eternal. Do not 
attribute to the creature what pertains only to the Creator, 
and do not confuse My [Christ's] substance which God 
engenders by the necessity of His Being with My work 
which I produce with the Father and the Holy Spirit by an 
entirely free operation. 
It is just the confusion between the intelligible extension 
and the created one that induces some people to assert 
the eternity of the world and to deny its creation by God. 
For,4 
there is another reason which leads men to believe that 
matter is uncreated; indeed, when they think about exten­
sion they cannot prevent themselves from regarding it as a 
necessary being. For they conceive that the world has been 
created in immense spaces, that these spaces never had a 
beginning, and that God Himself cannot destroy them. 
Thus, confusing matter with these spaces, as matter effec­
tively is nothing else but space or extension, they regard 
matter as an Eternal being. 
This is, as a matter of fact, a rather natural error as 
Malebranche himself does not fail to point out to his 
Divine Master; he recognizes, of course, that his doubts 
are removed, and that he now sees the distinction that 
formerly escaped him. Still 5 
I beg you, had I not some reason to believe that exten­
sion is eternal? Must one not judge things according to 
one's ideas, and is it even possible to judge otherwise? And, 
157 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
as I cannot prevent myself from regarding intelligible exten­
sion as immense, eternal, necessary, had I not grounds for 
thinking that material extension has the same attributes? 
By no means. In spite of the Cartesian axiom hinted 
at by Malebranche (in the role of the discipulus of the 
dialogue) , according to which we are entitled to assert of 
the thing what we clearly perceive to belong to its idea, 
the reasoning attributing infinity and eternity to material 
extension was illegitimate; thus the Divine Master replies: 6 
We must, my dear Disciple, judge things according to their 
ideas; it is only thus that we have to judge them. But that 
concerns their essential attributes, and not the circumstances 
of their existence. The idea you have of extension represents 
it to you as divisible, mobile, impenetrable: judge without 
fear that it has essentially these properties. But do not 
judge that it is immense, or that it is eternal. It may not 
exist at all, or possess very narrow limits. [The contem­
plation of the idea of extension] gives you no reason to 
believe that there is [in existence] even one foot of material 
extension, though you have present in your mind an infinite 
immensity of intelligible extension; and much less are you 
entitled to judge that the world is infinite as some phi­
losophers assert. Do not judge either that the world is 
eternal because you regard intelligible extension as a neces­
sary being of which the duration has no beginning and 
cannot have an end. For, though you must judge the essence 
of things according to the ideas which represent them, you 
must never judge by them of their existence. 
The Disciple of Malebranche's dialogue is fully con­
vinced - who, indeed, would not be by such a Master? 
Nobody else, alas, shared his conviction. 
Antoine Arnauld considered the Malebranchian dis-
158 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
tinction between " intelligible " and " created " extension 
as perfectly spurious and corresponding only and solely 
to the Cartesian distinction between (real) extension given 
to the senses and the same real extension as object of pure 
understanding. According to him Malebranche's " intelli­
gible extension " was simply the infinite extension of the 
material universe. Thirty years later, Dortous de Mairan 
made fundamentally the same reproach, though he formu­
lated it in a somewhat difIerent and much nastier manner: 
according to him Malebranche's " intelligible extension " 
was indistinguishable from that of Spinoza. 
. . ,7 
But not only philosophers shared, more or less, Henry 
More's conception of space: it was shared by Newton, 
and this, because of the unrivaled influence of Newton 
on the whole subsequent development, is, indeed, of over­
whelming importance. 
It may seem strange, at first glance, to link together 
Henry More and Isaac Newton. . . . And yet, this link 
is perfectly established.8 Moreover, as we shall see, More's 
explicit teaching will throw some light on the implicit 
premises of Newtonian thinking, a light all the more 
necessary as Isaac Newton, in contradistinction not only 
to Henry More but also to Rene Descartes, is neither a 
professional metaphysician like the former, nor, like the 
latter, at once a great philosopher and a great scientist: 
he is a professional scientist, and though science, at that 
time, had not yet accomplished its disastrous divorce from 
philosophy, and though physics was still not only desig­
nated, but also thought of, as " natural philosophy," it is 
nevertheless true that his primary interests . are in the 
field of " science," and not of " philosophy." He deals, 
159 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
therefore, with metaphysics not ex professo, but only 
insofar as he needs it to establish the foundations of his 
intentionally empirical and allegedly positivistic mathe­
matical investigation of nature. Thus the metaphysical 
pronouncements of Newton are not very numerous and, 
Newton being a very cautious and secretive person as well 
as a very careful writer, they are rather reticent and 
reserved. And yet they are sufficiently clear so as not to 
be misunderstood by his contemporaries. 
Newton's physics, or, it would be better to say, Newton's 
natural philosophy, stands or falls with the concepts of 
absolute time and absolute space, the selfsame concepts 
for which Henry More fought his long-drawn-out and 
relentless battle against Descartes. Curiously enough, the 
Cartesian conception of the only relative, or relational, 
character of these and connected notions is branded by 
Newton as being " vulgar " and as based upon " prejudices." 
Thus in the famous scholium which follows the Defi­
nitions "that are placed at the very beginning of the 
Principia, Newton writes: 9 
Hitherto I have laid down the definitions of such words 
as are less known, and explain the sense in which I would 
ha ve them to be understood in the following discourse. I do 
not define time, space, place, and motion as being well 
known to all. Only I must observe 'that the vulgar conceive 
those quantities under no other notions but from the rela­
tions they bear to sensible objects. And thence arise certain 
prejudices, for the removing of which, it will be convenient 
to distinguish them into absolute and relative, true and 
apparent, mathematical and common. 
Absolute, true and mathematical time and space - for 
Newton these qualifications are equivalent and determine 
160 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the nature both of the concepts in question and of the 
entities corresponding to them - are thus, in a manner 
of which we have already seen some examples, opposed 
to the merely common-sense time and space. As a matter 
of fact, they could just as well be called " intelligible " 
time and space in contradistinction to " sensible." Indeed, 
according to the " empiricist " N ewton/o " in philoso­
phical disquisitions we ought to abstract from our senses 
and consider things themselves, distinct from what are 
only sensible measures of them." Thus: 11 
It may be that there is no such thing as an equable motion 
whereby time may be accurately measured. All motion may 
be accelerated and retarded, but the flowing of absolute time 
is liable to no change. The duration or perseverance of the 
existence of things remains the same; whether the motions 
are swift or slow, or none at all:. and therefore it ought to be 
distinguished from what are only sensible measures thereof. 
Time is not only not linked with motion - like Henry 
More before him, Newton takes up against Aristotle the 
N eoplatonic position - it is a reality in its own right: 12 
Absolute, true and m athematical time, of itself and from 
its own nature, flows equably without regard to anything 
external, 
that is, it is not, as Descartes wants us to believe, some­
thing which pertains only to the external, material world 
and which would not exist if there were no such world, 
but something which has its own nature (a rather equiv­
ocal and dangerous assertion which Newton later had to 
correct by relating time, as well as space, to God) , " and 
by another name is called duration "; that is, once more, 
time is not, as Descartes wants us to believe, something 
161 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
subjective and distinct from the duration which he, Des­
cartes, identifies with the amount of reality of the created 
being. Time and duration are only two names for the 
same objective and absolute entity. 
But, of course/3 
. . . relative, apparent and common time, is some sensible 
and external (whether accurate or unequable) measure of 
duration by the means of motion, which is commonly used 
instead of true time: such as an hour, a day, a month, a 
year. 
It is just the same concerning space: 14 
Absolute space, in its own nature, without regard to any-
thing external, remains always similar and immovable, 
that is, space is not Cartesian extension which moves 
around, and which by Descartes is identified with, bodies. 
This is, at most, relative space, which is mistaken for the 
absolute space that subtends it by both Cartesians and 
Aristotelians.15 
Relative space is some movable dimension or measure of 
the absolute spaces; which our senses determine by its posi­
tion to bodies, and which is vulgarly taken for immovable 
space; such is the dimension of a subterraneous, an aereal, or 
celestial space, determined by its. position in respect 9f the 
earth. Absolute and relative space are the same in figure 
and magnitude; but they do not remain always numerically 
the same, 
because relative space, which is, so to speak, attached to 
the body, moves with that body through absolute space.16 
For if the earth, for instance, moves, a space of our air, 
which relatively and in respect of the earth always remains 
162 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the same, will at one time be one part of the absolute space 
into which the air passes; and another time will be another 
part of the same and so, absolutely understood, it will be 
perpetually mutable. 
Just as we have distinguished absolute, immovable 
space from the relative spaces that are and move in it, 
so we have to make a distinction between absolute and 
relative places which bodies occupy in space. 
Thus, 
elaborating More's analysis of this concept and his criti­
cism of the traditional as well as the Cartesian concep­
tions, Newton states: 17 
Place is a part of space which a body takes up and is, 
according to the space, either absolute or relative. I say, a 
part of space; not the situation nor the external surface of 
the body. For the places of equal solids are always equal; 
but their surfaces, by reason of their dissimilar figures, 'are 
often unequal. Positions properly have no quantity; nor are 
they so much the places themselves as the properties of 
places. The motion of the whole is the same with the sum 
of the motions of the parts; that is, the translation of the 
whole, out of its place, is the same thing with the sum of 
the translations of the parts out of their places; and there­
fore the place of the whole is the same as the sum of the 
places of the parts, and for that reason it is internal and in 
the whole body. 
Place - locus - is thus something which is in the 
bodies, and in which bodies are in their turn. And as 
motion is a process in which bodies change their places, 
not taking them along with them but relinquishing them 
for others, the distinction between absolute and relative 
spaces implies necessarily that of absolute and relative 
motion, and vice versa, is implied by it: 18 
163 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Absolute motion is the translation of a body from one 
absolute place into another, and relative motion the transla­
tion from one relative place into another. Thus in a ship 
under sail the relative place of a body is that part of the ship 
which the body possesses, or that part of the cavity which 
the body fills and which therefore moves together with the 
ship, and relative rest is the continuance of the body in the 
same part of the ship or of its cavity. But real, absolute 
rest is the continuance of the body in the same part of that 
immovable space in which the ship itself, its cavity, and all 
that it contains is moved. Wherefore, if the ship is really 
at rest, the body, which relatively rests in the ship, will 
really and absolutely move with the same velocity which 
the ship has on .. the earth. But if the earth also moves, the 
true and absolute motion of the body will arise, partly from 
the true motion of the earth in immovable space, partly 
from the relative motion of the ship on the earth; and if the 
body moves also relatively in the ship, its true motion will 
arise, partly from the true motion of the earth in immovable 
space and partly from the relative motions as well of the 
ship on the earth as of the body in the ship; and from these 
relative motions will arise the relative motion of the body 
on the earth. As if that part of the earth where the ship 
is was truly moved toward the east with a velocity of 10,000 
parts, while the ship itself, with a fresh gale and full sails, 
is carried toward the west with a velocity expressed by 10 
of those parts, but a sailor walks in the ship toward the east 
with 1 part of the said velocity; then the sailor will be moved 
truly in immovable space toward the east, with a velocity 
of 10,001 parts, and relatively on the earth toward the west, 
with a velocity of 9 of those parts. 
As for the inner structure of space, it is characterized by 
Newton in terms that strongly remind us of the analysis 
made by Henry More: 19 
164 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
As the order of the parts of time is immutable, so also is 
the order of the parts of space. Suppose those parts to be 
moved out of their places, and they will be moved (if the 
expression may be allowed) out of themselves. For times 
and spaces are, as it were, the places as well of themselves 
as of all other things. All things are placed in time as to 
order of succession and in space as to order of situation. It 
is from their essence or nature that they are places, and 
that the primary places of things should be movable is 
absurd. These are therefore the absolute places, and trans­
lations out of those places are the only absolute motions. 
N ewton, it is true, does not tell us that space is " indi-
visible " or " indiscerpible "; 20 yet it is obvious that to 
" divide " Newton's space, that is, actually and really to 
separate its " parts," is just as impossible as it is impos­
sible to do so with More's, an impossibility that does 
not preclude the making of " abstract " or " logical " 
distinctions and divisions, or prevent us from distin­
guishing inseparable " parts " in absolute space and from 
asserting its indefinite, or even infinite " divisibility." 
Indeed, for Henry More, as well as for Newton, the 
infinity and the continuity of absolute space imply the 
one as well as the other. 
Absolute motion is motion in respect to absolute space, 
and all relative motions imply absolute ones: 21 
. . . all motions, from places in motion, are no other than 
parts of entire and absolute motions; and every entire 
nlotion is composed of the motion of the body out of its 
first place and the motion of this place out of its place; and 
so on, until we come to some immovable place, as in the 
before-mentioned example of the sailor. Wherefore entire 
and absolute motions cannot be otherwise determined than 
165 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
by immovable places; and for that reason I did before refer 
those absolute motions to immovable places, but relative ones 
to movable places. Now no other places are immovable but 
those that, from infinity to infinity, do all retain the same 
given position one to another, and upon this account must 
.ever remain unmoved and do thereby constitute immovable 
space. 
" From infinity to infinity retain the same position . . . .  " 
What does infinity mean in this place? Obviously not only 
the spatial, but also the temporal: absolute places retain 
trom eternity to eternity their positions in the absolute, 
that is, infinite and eternal space, and it is in respect to 
this space that the motion ot a body is defined as being 
absolute. 
Alas, absolute .motion is very difficult, or even impos­
sible, to determine. We do not perceive space - it is, as 
we know, inaccessible to our senses. We perceive things in 
space, their motions in respect to other things, that is, their 
relative motions, not their absolute -motions in respect to 
space itsel£. Moreover, motion itsel£, or in itself, the status 
of motion, though utterly opposed to the status ot rest, is 
nevertheless (as we see it clearly in the fundamental case 
ot uniform, rectilinear, inertial motion) absolutely indis­
tinguishable from the latter. 
It is only by their causes and effects that absolute and 
relative motions can be distinguished and determined: 22 
The causes by which true and relative motions are dis­
tinguished, one from the other, are the forces impressed 
upon bodies to generate motion. True motion is neither 
generated nor altered but by some force impressed upon the 
body moved, but relative motion may be generated or 
altered without any force impressed upon the body. For it 
166 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
is sufficient only to impress some force on other bodies with 
which the former is compared that, by their giving way, 
that relation may be changed in which the relative rest or 
motion of this other body did consist. Again, true motion 
suffers always some change from any force impressed upon 
the moving body, but relative motion does not necessarily 
undergo any change by such forces. For if the same forces 
are likewise impressed on those other bodies with which the 
comparison is made, that the relative position may be pre­
served, then that condition will be preserved in which the 
relative motion consists. And therefore any relative motion 
may be changed when the true motion remains unaltered, 
and the relative may be preserved when the true suffers 
some change. Thus, true motion by no means consists in 
such relations. 
Thus it is only in the cases where our determination of 
the torces acting upon the bodies is not based upon 
the perception ot the change of the mutual relations ot 
the bodies in question that we are actually able to dis­
tinguish absolute motions trom relative ones, or even trom 
rest. Rectilinear motion, as we know, does not offer us 
this possibility. But circular or rotational motion does. 23 
The effects which distinguish absolute from relative motion 
are the forces of receding from the axis of circular motion. 
For there are no such forces in a circular motion purely 
relative, but in a true and absolute circular motion they 
are greater or less, according to the quantity of the motion. 
Rotational or circular motion, everywhere on the earth 
as in the skies, gives birth to centrifugal torces, the deter­
mination ot which enables us to recognize its existence 
in a given body, and even to measure its speed, without 
taking into account the positions or behavior of any 
167 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
other body outside the gyrating one. The purely relative 
conception finds its limit - and its refutation - in the 
case of circular motion and, at the same time, the Car­
tesian endeavor to extend this conception to celestial 
motions appears as it really is: a clumsy attempt to 
disregard the facts, a gross misinterpretation or misrepre­
sentation of the structure of the universe.24 
There is only one real circular motion of any one revolving 
body, corresponding to only one power of endeavoring to 
recede from its axis of motion, as its proper and adequate 
effect; but relative motions, in one and the same body, are 
innumerable, according to the various relations it bears to 
external bodies, and, like other relations, are altogether 
destitute of any real effect, any otherwise than they may 
perhaps partake of that one only true motion. And there­
fore in their system who suppose that our heavens, revolving 
below the sphere of the fixed stars, carry the planets alonD' 
• 
b 
WIth them, the several parts of those heavens and the 
planets, which are indeed relatively at rest in their heavens, 
do yet really move. For they change their position one to 
another (which never happens to bodies truly at rest) and, 
being carried together with their heavens, partake of their 
motions and, as parts of revolving wholes, endeavour to 
recede from the axis of their motions. 
The Newtonian discovery of the absolute character of 
rotation - in contradistinction to rectilinear translation ­
constitutes a decisive confirmation of his conception of 
space; it makes it accessible to our empirical knowledge 
and, without depriving it of its metaphysical function 
and status, it ensures its role and its place as a funda­
mental concept of science. 
The Newtonian interpretation of circular motion as 
168 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
motion " relative " to absolute space, and, of course, the 
very idea of absolute space with its physico-metaphysical 
implications, met, as we know, with rather strong opposi­
tion. For two hundred years, from the times of Huygens 
and neibniz to those of Mach and Duhem, it was sub­
jected to searching and vigorous criticism.24a It has, in 
my opinion, withstood victoriously all the assaults, which 
is, by the way, not so very surprising: it is indeed the 
necessary and inevitable consequence of the " bursting 
of the sphere," the " breaking of the circle," the geometri­
zation of space, of the discovery or assertion of the laV\T 
of inertia as the first and foremost law or axiom of motion. 
Indeed, if it is the inertial, that is, the rectilinear unifonn 
motion that becomes - just like rest - the " natural " 
status of a body, then the circular one, which at any 
point of its trajectory changes its direction though main­
taining constant its angular velocity, appears, from the 
point of view of the law of inertia, not as a uniform, but 
as a constantly accelerated motion. But acceleration, in 
contradistinction to mere translation, has always been 
something absolute, and it remained so until 1915, when, 
for the first time in the history of physics, the general 
relativity theory of Einstein deprived it of its absolute­
ness. Yet as, in so doing, it reclosed the universe and 
denied the Euclidean structure of space, it has, by this 
very fact, confirmed the correctness of the Newtonian 
conception. 
Newton thus was perfectly right in stating that we are 
able to determine the absolute rotational or circular motion 
of bodies without needing, for that purpose, a term of 
reference represented by a body at absolute rest; though 
he was wrong, of course, in his pious hope of being able, 
1 69 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
finally, to achieve the determination of all " true " motions. 
The difficulties that stood in his path were not merely -
. 
as he believed them to be - very great. They were 
insurmountable.25 
It is indeed a matter of great difficulty to discover and 
effectively to distinguish the true motions of particular 
bodies from the apparent, because the parts of that im­
movable space in which those motions are performed do 
by no means come under the observation of our senses. 
Yet the thing is not altogether desperate; for we have 
some arguments to guide us, partly from the apparent 
motions, which are the differences of the true motions; 
partly from the forces, which are the causes and effects of 
the true motions. For instance, if two globes, kept at a 
given distance one from the other qy means of a cord that 
connects them, were revolved about their common center 
of gravity, we might, from the tension of the cord, discover 
the endeavor of the globes to recede from the axis of their 
motion, and from thence we might compute the quantity of 
their circular motions. And then if any equal forces should 
be impressed at once on the alternate faces of the globe to 
augment or diminish their circular motions, from the increase 
or decrease of the tension of the cord we might infer the 
increment or decrement of their motions, and thence would 
be found on what faces those forces ought to be impressed 
that the motions of the globes might be most augmented; 
that is, we might discover their hindmost faces, or those 
which, in the circular motion, do follow. But the faces 
which follow being known, and consequently the opposite 
ones that precede, we should likewise know the determina­
tion of their motions. And thus we might find the quantity 
and the determination of this circular motion, even in an 
immense vacuum, where there was nothing external or 
170 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
sensible with which the globes could be compared. But 
now, if in that space some remote bodies were placed that 
kept always a given position one to another, as the fixed 
stars do in our regions, we could not indeed determine from 
the relative translation of the globes among those bodies 
whether the motion did belong to the globes or to the bodies. 
But if we observed the cord and found that its tension was 
that very tension which the motion of the globes required, 
we might conclude the motion to be in the globes and the 
bodies to be at rest; and then, lastly, from the translation 
of the globes among the bodies, we should find the .deter­
mination of their motions. But how we are to obtaIn the 
true motions from their causes, effects, and apparent dif­
ferences, and the converse, shall be explained at large in 
the following treatise. For to this end it was that I com­
posed it. 
The real distinction between space and matter, though 
it involves the rejection of the Cartesian identification 
of the essence of matter with extension, does not, as we 
know, necessarily imply the acceptance of the existence 
of an actual vacuum: we have seen Bruno, and Kepler 
too, assert that space is everywhere full of " ether." As 
for Newton, though he, too, believes in an ether that fills 
at least the space of our " world " (solar system) , his 
ether is only a very thin and very elastic substance, a kind 
of exceedingly rare gas, and it does not completely fill 
the world space. It does not extend itself to infinity as 
is sufficiently clear from the motion of comets: 26 
. . .  for though they are carried in oblique paths and some­
times contrary to the course of the planets, yet they mo·e 
every way with the greatest freedom, and preserve theIr 
motion for an exceeding long time, even when contrary 
171 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
to the course of the planets. Hence also it is evident that 
the celestial spaces are void of resistance, 
and as unresisting matter, that is, matter deprived of the 
vis inertiae, is unthinkable, it is obvious that the celestial 
spaces are void also of matter. Moreover, even where it 
is present, Newtonian ether does not possess a continuous 
structure. It is composed of exceedingly small particles 
between which, of course, there is vacuum. Elasticity, 
indeed, implies vacuum. In a Cartesian world, that is, in 
a world constituted by a continuously-spread unifornl 
matter, elasticity would be impossible. Nay, if all spaces 
were equally full (as they must be according to Descartes) 
even motion would not be possible.27 
All spaces are not equally full; for if all spaces were 
equally full, then the specific gravity of the fluid which fills 
the region of the air, on account of the extreme density of 
the matter, would fall nothing short of the specific gravity 
of quicksilver, or gold, or any other the most dense body; 
and, therefore, neither gold nor any other body could de­
scend in air; for bodies do not descend in fluids, unless they 
are specifically heavier than the fluids. And if the quantity 
of matter in a given space can, by any rarefaction, be di­
minished, what should hinder a diminution to infinity? 
Matter, according to N ewton, who shares the atomic 
conceptions of his contemporaries (and even improves 
upon them in a very interesting manner) , has an essen­
tially granular structure. It is composed of small, solid, 
particles and therefore 28 
if all the solid particles of all bodies are of the same density 
and cannot be rarefied without pores, then a void space, or 
vacuum, must be granted. 
1 7Ʌ 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
As for matter itself, the essentia,I properties that Newton 
ascribes to it are nearly the same as those that have been 
listed by Henry More,29 'by the old atomists and the 
modern partisans of corpuscular philosophy: extension, 
hardness, impenetrability, mobility, to which is added ­
a most important addition - inertia, in the precise, new 
meaning of this word. In a curious combination of anti­
Cartesian empiricism and ontological rationalism, Newton 
wants to admit as essential properties of matter only those 
that are ( a) empirically given to us, and (b) can be 
neither increased nor diminished. Thus he writes in the 
third of his Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy, by which 
he replaced the third fundamental Hypothesis of the first 
edition of the Principia: 30 
The qualities of bodies, which admit neither intensifica­
tion nor remission of degrees, and which are found to belong 
to all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be 
esteemed the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever. 
For since the qualities of bodies are only known to us 
by experiments, we are to hold for universal all such as 
universally agree with experiments, and such as are not 
liable to diminution can never be quite taken away. We 
are certainly not to relinquish the evidence of experiments 
for the sake of dreams and vain fictions of our own devising; 
nor are we to recede from the analogy of Nature, which is 
wont to be simple and always consonant to itself. We in 
no other way know the extension of bodies than by our 
senses, nor do these reach it in all bodies; but because we 
perceive extension in all that aߴe sensible, therefore we 
ascribe it universally to all others also. That abundance of 
bodies are hard we learn by experience; and because the 
hardness of the whole arises from the hardness of the parts, 
we therefore justly infer the hardness of the undivided 
173 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
particles, not only of the bodies we feel, but of all others. 
That all bodies are impenetrable, we gather not from reason, 
but from sensation. The bodies which we liandle we find 
impenetrable, and hence conclude impenetrability to be a 
universal property of all bodies whatsoever. That all bodies 
are movable and endowed with certain powers (which we 
call the inertia) of persevering in their motion, or in their 
rest, we only infer from the like properties observed in the 
bodies which we have seen. The extension, hardness, im­
penetrability, mobility, and inertia of the whole result from 
the extension, hardness, impenetrability, mobility, and iner­
tia of the parts and hence we conclude the least particles 
of all bodies to be also all extended, and hard and impene­
trable, and movable, and endowed with their proper inertia. 
And this is the foundation of all philosophy. Moreover, that 
the divided but contiguous particles of bodies may be sep­
arated from one another is a luatter of observation; and, 
in the particles that remain undivided, our minds are able 
to distinguish yet lesser parts, as is mathematically demon­
strated. But whether the parts so distinguished and not 
yet divided may, by the powers of Nature, be actually 
divided and separated from one another we cannot certainly 
determine. Yet had we the proof of but one experiment 
that any undivided particle, in breaking a hard and solid 
body, suffered a division, we might by virtue of this rule 
conclude that the undivided as well as the divided particles 
may be divided and actually separated to infinity. 
Lastly, if it universally appears, by experiments and as­
tronomical observations, that all bodies about the earth 
gravitate toward the earth, and that in proportion to the 
quantity of matter which they severally contain; that the 
moon likewise, according to the quantity of its matter, 
gravitates toward the earth; that, on the other hand, our 
sea gravitates toward the moon; and all the planets one 
174 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
toward another; and the comets in like manner toward the 
sun: we must, in consequence of this rule, universally allow 
that all bodies whatsoever are endowed' with a principle of 
, mutual gravitation. For the argument from the appearances 
concludes with more force for the universal gravitation of 
all bodies than for their impenetrability, of which, among 
those in the celestial regions, we have no experiments nor 
any manner of observation. Not that I affirm gravity to be 
essential to bodies; by their vis insita I mean nothing but 
their inertia. This is immutable. Their gravity is dimin­
ished as they recede from the earth. 
We see, therefore, that Newton, no more than Galileo 
or even Descartes, includes gravity, or mutual attraction, 
in the essential properties of bodies in spite of the fact 
that its empirical foundations are nluch stronger than 
those of such a fundamental property as impenetrability. 
Newton seems to suggest that the reason for this exclusion 
consists in the variability of gravitation as opposed to the 
immutability of the inertia. But this is by no means the 
case. The weight of a body " gravitating " toward the 
earth is indeed diminished as it recedes from it: but the 
attractive force of the earth - or any other body - is 
constant, and, just as in the case of inertia, proportional 
to its mass, and it is as such that it appears in the famous 
inverse square formula of universal gravitation. This IS 
so because 31 
. . .  it is reasonable to suppose that forces which are 
directed to bodies should depend upon the nature and 
quantity of those bodies, as we see they do in magneticaJ 
experiments. And when such cases occur, we are to com­
pute the attractions of the bodies by assigning to each of 
their particles its proper force, and then finding the sum 
of them all. 
175 

CL O S E D  W O RLD to Infinite Universe 
Thus the attraction of a body is a function, or sum, of 
the attractions of its (atomic) particles, just as its mass 
is the sum of the masses of the selfsame particles. And 
yet it is not an " essential property " of the body, or of 
its particles. As a matter of fact it is not even an adven­
titious property of them; it is in no sense their property. 
It is an effect of some extraneous force acting upon them 
according to a fixed rule. 
It is - or should be - a well-known fact that Newton 
did not believe in attraction as a real, physical force. No 
more than Descartes, Huygens or Henry More could he 
admit that matter is able to act at a distance, or be 
animated by a spontaneous tendency. The empirical cor­
roboration of the fact could not prevail against the rational 
impossibility of the process. Thus, just like Descartes or 
Huygens, he tried at first to explain attraction - or to 
explain it away - by reducing it to some kind of effect 
of purely mechanical occurrences and forces. But in con­
tradistinction to the lormer, who believed that they were 
able to devise a mechanical theory of gravity, Newton 
seems to have become convinced of the utter futility of 
such an attempt. He discovered, for example, that he 
could indeed explain attraction, but that in order to do so 
he had to postulate repulsion, which, perhaps, was some­
what better, but not very much so. 
Fortunately, as Newton knew full well, we need not have 
a clear conception of the way in which certain effects are 
produced in order to be able to study the phenomena 
and to treat them mathematically. Galileo was not obliged 
to develop a theory of gravity - he even claimed his right 
to ignore completely its nature - in order to establish a 
mathematical dynamics and to determine the laws of fal1.32 
1 76 
C L O S E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Thus nothing prevented Newton from studying the laws 
of " attraction " or " gravitation " without being obliged 
to give an account of the real forces that produced the 
centripetal motion of the bodies. It was perfectly suffi­
cient to assume only that these forces - whether physical 
or metaphysical - were acting according to strict mathe­
matical laws (an assumption fully confirmed by the 
observation of astronomical phenomena and also by well­
interpreted experiments) and to treat these " forces " as 
mathematical forces, and not as real ones. Although only 
part of the task, it is a very necessary part; only when 
this preliminary stage is accomplished can we proceed 
to the investigation of the real causes of the phenomena. 
This is precisely what Newton does in the book so 
significantly called not Principia Philosophiae, that is, Prin­
ciples of Philosophy (like Descartes') , but Philosophiae 
naturalis principia 1nathematica, that is, MATHEMATICAL 
Principles of NATURAL Philosophy. He warns us that: 33 
I here use the word " attraction " in general for any en­
deavor whatever made by bodies to approach each other, 
whether that endeavor arise from the action of the bodies 
themselves, as tending to each other or agitating each other 
by spirits emitted; or whether it arises from the action of 
the ether or of the air, or of any medium whatever, whether 
corporeal or incorporeal, in any manner impelling bodies 
placed therein toward each o ther. In the same general sense 
I use the word impulse, not defining in this treatise the 
species or physical qualities of forces, but investigating the 
quantities and mathematical proportions of them, as I ob­
served before in the definitions. In mathematics we are 
to investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions 
consequent upon any conditions supposed; then, when we 
1 77 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
enter upon physics, we compare these proportions with the 
phenomena of Nature, that we may know what conditions 
of these forces answer to the several kinds of attractive 
bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue more 
safely concerning the physical species, causes, and propor­
tion of the forces. 
In his Letters (written five years after the publication 
of the Principia) to Richard Bentley who, like nearly 
everybody else, missed the warning just quoted and inter­
preted Newton in the way that became common in the 
eighteenth century, namely as asserting the physical reality 
of attraction and of attractive force as inherent to matter, 
Newton is somewhat less reserved. He first tells Bentley 
(in his second letter) : 34 
You sometimes speak of gravity as essential and inherent 
to matter. Pray do not ascribe that notion to me, for the 
cause of gravity is what I do not pretend to know and 
therefore would take more time to consider of it. 
In the third one, he practically comes into the open. 
Though he does not tell Bentley what he, Newton, believes . 
the force of attraction to be in rerum, he tells him that: 35 
It is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter should, 
without mediation of something else which is not material, 
operate upon and affect other matter without mutual con­
tact, as it must be if gravitation, in the sense of Epicurus, 
be essential and inherent in it. And this is one reason why 
I desired you would not ascribe innate gravity to me. That 
gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to matter, 
so that one body may act upon another at a distance 
through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, 
by and through which their action and force may be con-
178 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to 1nfinite Universe 
veyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity 
that I believe no man who has in philosophical matters a 
competent faculty of thinking can ever fall into it. G:avity 
must be caused by an agent acting constantly accordIng to 
certain laws, but whether this agent be material or im­
material I have left to the consideration of my readers. 
As we see, Newton does not pretend any longer not to 
know the cause of gravity; he only informs us that he 
left this question unanswered, leaving it to h¶s readers 
to find out themselves the solution, namely that the 
" agent " which " causes " gravity cannot be material, 
but must be a spirit, that is, either the spirit of nature 
of his colleague Henry More, or, more simply, God - a 
solution that, rightly or wrongly, Newton was too cautious 
to announce himself. But that Dr. Bentley could not ­
and did not - fail to understand. 
As for Dr. Bentley (or more exactly Mr. Richard Bent­
ley, M. A. - he became DD. in 1696) , who did not know 
much physics - he was by training a classicist - and ob­
viously did not grasp the ultimate implications of Newton's 
natural philosophy, he espouses it wholeheartedly, as far, 
at least, as he understands it, and turns it into a weapon 
for the Confutation of A theism in the Boyle Lectures 
which he gave in 1692. 
. 
Richard Bentley follows so closely, and even so servlleZy, 
Newton's teaching, or lessons - he copied nearly verbatzm 
the letters he received from him, adding, of course, some 
references to the Scriptures and a good deal of rhetoric ­
that the views he expresses can be considered as repre­
senting, in a large measure, those of Newton himself. 
The atheists Mr. Bentley deals with are essentially the 
179 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
materialists, more precisely those of the Epicurean brand, 
and it is rather amusing to see that Bentley accepts the 
fundamentals of their conception, that is, the corpuscular 
theory of matter, the reduction of material being to atoms 
and void, not only without the apparent hesitations and 
cautious reserve of Newton, but even as something that 
goes without saying and without discussion. He only 
objects, as it has always been done, that it is not enough, 
and that they cannot explain the orderly structure of our 
universe without superadding to matter and motion some 
purposeful action of a non-material cause: the fortuitous 
and disorderly motion of atoms cannot transform chaos 
into a cosmos. 
Yet, if the pattern of his reasoning is quite traditional ­
but we must not blame Mr. Bentley for that: it is also 
the Newtonian pattern and, moreover, did not Kant him­
self tell us a century later that the physico-teleological 
proof of the existence of God is the only one that has any 
value? - the contents of the demonstration are adapted 
to the present-day (Bentley's present day) level of scien­
tific philos?phy. 
Thus, for instance, he accepts without the slightest 
criticism the contemporary version of Giordano Bruno's 
conception of the universe: an infinite space with an im­
mense number of star-suns. Bentley maintains, of course, 
that the stars are finite in number - he thinks he can 
prove it - and would even like them to be arranged in 
space so as to build a " firmament." But if this cannot 
be done, he will accept their dispersion in the boundless 
void. Bentley, indeed, insists upon the void. He needs it, 
of course, as we shall see in a moment, in order to be able 
to demonstrate the existence and the action, in the world, 
180 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
of non-material, non-mechanical forces - first and fore­
most of the Newtonian universal attraction - but he is 
also somehow elated and ravished by the idea that this 
our world is chiefly composed of void spaces, and he 
indulO'es in calculations that show that the amount of 
b 
• 
matter in the universe is so small as practIcally not to be 
worth speaking of: 86 
Let us allow, then, that all the matter of the system of 
our sun may be 50,000 times as much as the whole mass 
of the earth; and we appeal to astronomy, if we are not 
liberal enough and even prodigal in this concession. AnY 
let us suppose further, that the whole globe of the earth IS 
entirely solid and compact, without any void interstices; 
notwithstanding what hath been shewed before, as to the 
texture of gold itself. Now, though we have made such 
ample allowances, we shall find, notwithstanding, that tbe 
void space of our system is immensely bigger than all Its 
corporeal mass. For, to proceed upon supposition, that all 
the matter within the firmament is 50,000 times bigger than 
the solid globe of the earth; if we assume the diameter of 
the orbis magnus (wherein the earth moves about the sun) 
to be only 7,000 times as big as the diameter of the earth, 
(though the latest and most accurate observations make it 
thrice 7,000) , and the diameter of the firmament to be only 
100,000 times as long as the diameter of the orbis magnus 
(though it cannot possibly be less than that, but may be 
vastly and unspeakably bigger) , we must pronounce, after 
such large concessions on that side, and such great abate­
ments on ours, that the sum of empty spaces within the 
conca ve of the firmament is 6,860 million million million 
times bigger than' all the matter contained in it. 
And first, because every fixed star is supposed by astron-
181 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
omers to be of the same nature with our sun, and each 
may very possibly have planets about them, though, by 
reason of their vast distance, they may be invisible to us; 
we will assume this reasonable supposition, that the same 
proportion of void space to čatter, which is found in our 
sun's region within the sphere of the fixed stars, may 
competently well hold in the whole mundane space. I am 
aware that Xn this computation we must not assign the 
whole capacIty of that sphere for the region of our sun, 
but allow half of its diameter for the radii of the several 
regions of the next fixed stars; so that, diminishing our 
former number, as this last consideration requires, we may 
safely affirm, from certain and demonstrated principles, 
that the empµy space of our solar region (comprehending 
half of the dIameter of the firmament) is 8,575 hundred 
thousand million million times more ample than all the 
corporeal substan.ce in it. And we may fairly suppose, that 
the same proportIOn may hold through the whole extent of 
the universe. 
It is clear that with this Immense void at their dis-
posal: 37 
. . . evey single particle would have a sphere of void space 
around It 8,575 hundred thousand million million times 
bigger than the dimension of that particle. 
Accordingly, Democritian atoms, whatever their initial 
disposition in space, would pretty soon be completely dis­
persed and would be unable to form even the most simple 
bodies, and much less, of course, such an artful and well­
ordered system as, for instance, our solar world. Fortu­
nately for its - and for our - existence, atoms are not 
free and independent of each other but are bound together 
by mutual gravitation. 
189l 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Now this is already a refutation of atheism - Bentley, 
as we have seen, has learnt from Newton that gravitation 
cannot be attributed to matter - as it is clear 38 
that such a mutual gravitation or spontaneous attraction 
can neither be inherent and essential to matter, nor ever 
supervene to it, unless impressed and infused into it by a 
divine power, 
just because action at a distance 39 
. . . is repugnant to common sense and reason. 'Tis utterly 
inconceivable, that inanimate brute matter, without the 
mediation of some immaterial being, should operate upon 
and affect other matter without mutual contact; that dis­
tant bodies should act upon each other through a vacuum, 
without the intervention of something else, by and through 
which the action may be conveyed from one to the other. 
We will not obscure and perplex with multitude of words 
what is so clear and evident by its own light, and must 
needs be allowed by all that have competent use of thinking, 
and are initiated into, I do not say the mysteries, but the 
plainest principle::; of philosophy. Now, mutual gravitation 
or attraction, in our present acceptation of the words, is 
the same thing with this, 'tis an operation, or virtue, or 
influence of distant bodies upon each other through an 
empty interval, without any effluvia, or exhalations, or other 
corporeal medium to convey and transmit it. This power, 
therefore, cannot be innate and essential to matter: and if 
it be not essential, it is consequently most manifest, since 
it doth not depend upon motion or rest, or figure or position 
of parts, which are all the ways that matter can diversify 
itself, that it could never supervene to it, unless impressed 
and infused into it by an immaterial and divine power. 
Now, if we admit, as we must do, that this mutual 
183 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
attraction cannot be explained by any " material and 
mechanical agent," the indubitable reality of this power 
of mutual gravitation 40 
· . . would be a new and invincible argument for the being 
of God, being a direct and positive proof that an immaterial 
living mind doth inform and actuate the dead matter and 
support the frame of the world. 
Moreover, even if reciprocal attraction were essential 
to matter, or if it were simply a blind law of action of 
some immaterial agent, it would not suffice to explain the 
actual fabric of our world, or even the existence of any 
world whatever. Indeed, under the unhampered influence 
of mutual gravitation, would not all matter convene 
together into the middle of the world? 
Bentley seems to have been rather proud of having 
found that God not only pulled or pushed bodies towards 
each other, but also counteracted His action - or, more 
simply, suspended it - in the case of the fixed stars at 
, 
least of the outermost ones, which He prevented in this 
manner from leaving their places and maintained at rest. 
Alas, Newton explained to him that his reasoning im­
plied a finite world and that there was no reason to deny 
its possible infinity, that the difficulties Bentley found in 
the concept of an infinite sum or series were not contra­
dictions, and that his refutation of the infinity (or eternity) 
of the world was a paralogism. Newton confirmed, how­
ever, that even in the case of an infinite world the mere 
and pure action of gravity could not explain its structure, 
and that choice and purpose were clearly apparent in the 
actual distribution of the heavenly bodies in space, as 
well as in the mutual adjustment of their masses, velocities 
and so on: 41 
184 
C L O S 1TI D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
As to your first query, it seems to me that if the matter 
of our sun and planets, and all the matter of the universe, 
were evenly scattered throughout all the heavens, and 
every particle had an innate gravity towards all the rest, 
and the whole space throughout which this matter was 
scattered was but finite; the matter on the outside of this 
space would, by its gravity, tend towards all the matter 
on the inside, and, by consequence, fall down into the middle 
of the whole space, and there compose one great spherical 
mass. But if the matter was evenly disposed throughout 
an infinite space, it could never convene into one mass; but 
some of it would convene into one mass, and some into 
another, so as to make an infinite number of great masses, 
scattered at great distances from one to another throughout 
all that infinite space. And thus might the sun and fixed 
stars be formed, supposing the matter were of a lucid 
nature. But how the matter should divide itself into two 
sorts, and that part of it which is fit to compose a shining 
body should fall down into one mass and make a sun, and 
the rest which is fit to compose an opaque body should 
coalesce, not into one great body, like the shining matter, 
but into many little ones; or if the sun at first were an 
opaque body like the planets, or the planets lucid bodies 
like the sun, how he alone should be changed into a shining 
body, whilst all they continue opaque, or all they be changed 
into opaque ones, whilst he remains unchanged; I do not 
think explicable by mere natural causes, but am forced to 
ascribe it to the counsel and contrivance of a voluntary 
Agent. 
To your second query, I answer, that the motions which 
the planets now have could not spring from any natural 
cause alone, but were impressed by an intelligent Agent. 
For since comets descend into the region of our planets, 
185 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
and here move all manner of ways, going sometimes the 
same way with the planets, sometimes the contrary way, 
and sometimes in cross ways, in planes inclined to the plane 
of the ecliptic, and at all kinds of angles, 'tis plain that 
there is no natural cause which could determine all the 
planets, both primary and secondary, to move the same way 
and in the same plane, without any considerable variation: 
this must have been the effect of counsel. Nor is there any 
natural cause which could give the planets those just degrees 
of velocity, in proportion to their distances from the sun 
and other central bodies, which were requisite to make them 
move in such concentric orbs about those bodies. 
To make this system, therefore, with all its motions, required 
a cause which understood and compared together the quan­
tities of matter in the several bodies of the sun and planets, 
and the gravitating powers resulting from thence; the 
several distances of the primary planets from the sun, and 
of the secondary ones from Saturn, Jupiter, and the earth; 
and the velocities with which these planets could revolve 
about those quantities of matter in the central bodies; and 
to compare and adjust all these things together, in so great 
a variety of bodies, argues that cause to be, not blind and 
fortuitous, but very well skilled in mechanics and geometry. 
Having learnt his lesson, Bentley writes therefore: 42 
.
. . we affirm, that though we should allow that reciprocal 
attraction is essential to matter, yet the atoms of a chaos 
could never so convene by it as to form the present system; 
or, if they could form it, yet it could neither acquire these 
revolutions, nor subsist in the present condition, without 
the conservation and providence of a divine Being. 
1. For, first, if the matter of the universe, and conse­
quently the space through which it's diffused, be supposed 
186 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
to be finite, (and I think it might be demonstrated to be so, 
but that we have already exceeded the just measures of a 
sermon,) then, since every single particle hath an innate 
gravitation toward all others, proportioned by matter and 
distance; it evidently appears, that the outward atoms of 
the chaos would necessarily tend inwards, and descend from 
all quarters toward the middle of the whole space. For, in 
respect to every atom, there would lie through the middle 
the greatest quantity of matter and the most vigorous 
attraction; and those atoms would there form and con­
stitute one huge spherical mass, which would be the only 
body in the universe. It is plain, therefore, that upon this 
supposition the matter of the chaos could never compose 
such divided and different masses as the stars and planets 
of the present world. 
Furthermore, even if the matter of the chaos could build 
the separate bodies of the planets, they " could not pos­
sibly acquire such revolutions in circular orbs, or in 
ellipses very little eccentric," as they actually perform, 
by the mere action of the forces of inertia and gravity, 
and finally, " if we should grant . . .  that these circular 
revolutions could be naturally attained," it still requires 
a divine power and providence to preserve them, and, 
generally speaking, to preserve the fabric of the world. 
For even if we admitted that the combination of inertia 
, 
and gravity would suffice for the maintaining of the orbital 
motion of the planets, what about the fixed stars? What 
prevents them from coming together? " If the fixed stars 
' . ' . are supposed to have no power of gravitation, 'tis 
plain proof of divine Being " as it shows the non-natural 
character of gra vitation. "And 'tis as plain a proof of a 
divine Being if they have the power of gravitation." For, 
187 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
in that case, only a divine power can compel them to 
remain in their assigned places. But what if the world 
were not finite, but infinite? According to Bentley it 
does not make a very great difference: 43 
. . .  in the supposition of an infinite chaos, 'tis hard indeed 
to determine what would follow in this imaginary case 
from an innate principle of gravity. But, to hasten to a 
conclusion, we will grant for the present, that the diffused 
matter might convene into an infinite number of great 
masses, at great distances from one another, like the stars 
and planets of this visible part of the world. But then it 
is impossible that the planets should naturally attain these 
circular revolutions, either by principle of gravitation, or by 
impulse of ambient bodies. It is plain there is no difference 
as to this, whether the world be infinite or finite; so that 
the same arguments that we have used before may be 
equally urged in this supposition. 
In spite of these clear proofs of God's purposeful action 
in the world, there are, as we know, people who refuse 
to be convinced by them and who argue that an infinite 
world can have no purpose. What indeed can be the use­
fulness of these innumerable stars that are not even seen 
by us, either by the unassisted eye or through the strongest 
telescope? But, replies Bentley, embracing the pattern of 
reasoning based on the principle of plenitude, " We must 
not confine and determine the purposes in creating all 
mundane bodies merely to human ends and uses." For, 
though, as it is evident, they are not created for our sakes, 
they are certainly not made for their own: 44 
For matter hath no life nor perception, is not conscious of 
its own existence, not capable of happiness, nor gives the 
188 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
sacrifice of praise and worship to the Author of its being. 
It remains, therefore, that all bodies were formed for the 
sake of intelligent minds: and as the earth was principally 
designed for the being and service and contemplation of 
men, why may not all other planets be created for the like 
uses, each for their own inhabitants which have life and 
understanding? If any man will indulge himself in this 
speculation, he need not quarrel with revealed religion upon 
such account. The holy Scriptures do not forbid him to 
suppose as great a multitude of systems, and as much 
inhabited as he pleases. . . .  God Almighty, by the in­
hausted fecundity of his creative power, may have made 
innumerable orders and classes of rational minds; some in 
their natural perfections higher than human souls, others 
inferior. 
An indefinitely extended and populated world, immersed 
in an infinite space, a world governed by the wisdom and 
moved by the power of an Almighty and Omnipresent 
God, such is, finally, the universe of the very orthodox 
Richard Bentley, future Bishop of Worcester and Master 
of Trinity College. Such is, doubtlessly too, the universe 
of the very heretical Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, 
Isaac Newton, Fellow of the Royal Society and of the same 
Trinity College.45 
1 89 

VIII. The Divinization of Space 
Joseph Raphson 
N ewton, as far as I know, never quoted More; nor did 
he make an explicit reference to his teachings. Yet the 
relations between the theories of the two Cambridge men 
could not, of course, escape their contemporaries. It is 
therefore not surprising that, fifteen years after the 
publication of the Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy, their connection was openly proclaimed by 
Joseph Raphson, a promising young mathematician, 
Master of Arts and Fellow of the Royal Society/ in an 
extremely interesting and valuable Appendix which he 
added, in 1702, to the second edition of his Universal 
Analysis of Equations.2 
In this Appendix, which bears the title On the real 
space or the Infinite Being, Joseph Raphson, who ob­
viously has neither Newton's subjective inclination for 
reticence and secrecy, nor his objective reasons for pruࡒ 
dence, dots all the i's and crosses all the t's. 
Starting with a historical account of the development 
of the conception of space which begins with Lucretius 
and culminates in Henry More's criticism of the Cartesian 
190 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
identification of extension with matter, his characteriza­
tion of matter by impenetrability, and his demonstration 
of the existence of an immovable and immaterial exten­
sion, Raphson states his conclusion: 3 
Thus · from every motion (extended and corporeal) , even 
from the [only] possible ones follows necessarily [the exis­
tence of] an immovable and incorporeal extended [entity], 
because everything which moves in the extension must 
necessarily move through extension. The extension of the 
real motion demonstrates the real existence of this immov­
able extended [entity], because otherwise it [the motion] 
can be neither expressed nor conceived, and because that 
which we cannot but conceive is necessarily true. It could 
be argued in the same manner concerning the supposed 
motion of figures in geometry. The possibility of these 
motions demonstrates the hypothetical nec.essity of this 
immovable extended [entity], and the reality of the physi­
cal motions, the absolute. 
There is an unmistakable Spinozistic flavor in Raphson's 
terminology and manner of speaking. Yet, though deeply 
influenced by Spinoza,4 Raphson is by no means Spinozist. 
On the contrary, More's distinction between the infinite, 
immovable, immaterial extension and the material, mobile 
and therefore finite one is, according to hilTI, the sole and 
only means of avoiding the Spinozistic identification of 
God with the world. But let us proceed with Raphson's 
presentation of Henry More's theories. 
The existence of motion implies, indeed, not only the 
distinction between the immovable, immaterial extension 
and the material one, and thus the rejection of the Car­
tesian identification; it implies also the rejection of the 
Cartesian negation of vacuum: in a world completely and 
191 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
continuously filled with matter rectilinear motion would 
be utterly impossible, and even circular motion would 
be extremely difficult to achieve.5 The real existence of 
really void spaces can thus be considered as fully 
demonstrated. Wherefrom we can draw the following 
corollaries: 6 
1. The universal mass of movable [bodies] (or of the 
world) must necessarily be finite, because, on account of 
the vacuum and the mobility, each and every system of it 
may be compressed into a smaller place; the finitude of the 
ensemble of these systems, that is, of the world, follows 
herefrom necessarily, though the human mind will never 
be able to arrive at its limit. 
2. All the finite [beings] existing separately can be com­
prehended by a number. It is possible that no created mind 
is able to comprehend it. Nevertheless, to their numerating 
Author, they will be in a finite number: this can also be 
shown as follows: let, for example, (a) be the minimum of 
what can exist, then (a) infinitely multiplied will turn out 
to be infinite; indeed, if it gave a finite sum 
the true minimum (or atom) would not be (a) but 
another infinitely smaller, or infinitely small, body. This, 
however, as Raphson states, is H against the hypothesis." 
Of course we are not studying here the composition of 
space: we are dealing with impenetrable extended beings, 
that is, with bodies. 
3. Herefrom can be argued the falsity of the teaching of 
Spinoza, who, misusing his 6th definition, makes it so wide 
as to force matter, insofar as it expresses essence, to express 
the essence of the Infinite Being, and to be one of its 
attributes. I recognize, however, and I can demonstrate, 
that everything of which the essence implies an absolute 
1991 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
infinity pertains necessarily to the absolutely Infinite Being; 
it is in this way that I derive my idea of the absolutely 
Infinite Being, which involves the supreme and absolute 
necessity. 
The error of Spinoza is thus at once elucidated and 
corrected. Raphson obviously thinks that Spinoza was 
perfectly right in following the (Cartesian) principle of 
attributing to God all that is essentially infinite; right 
also in rej ecting the Cartesian distinction between the 
infinite and the indefinite and in claiming lor His extension 
actual and not only potential infinity. But he is wrong 
in accepting the Cartesian identification of extension 
and matter. Owing to Henry More's criticism of Des­
cartes, Raphson believes he is able to escape the Spino­
zistic conclusion by attributing the infinite, immaterial 
extension to God, and reducing matter to the status of 
creature. 
Matter, as we know, is characterized by Raphson by 
its mobility (which implies finitude) and impenetrability. 
As for the immaterial extension, or more simply, space, 
its properties, nature and existence are derived by him 
more geometrico " from the necessary and natural con­
catenation of simple ideas." 7 
Space is defined as 8 " the innermost extended [entity] 
(whatever it be) which is the first by nature and the 
very last to be obtained by continuous division and 
separation "; Raphson informs us that it is an imperfect 
definition or description o f  the defined object; it does not 
tell us anything about its essence, but, on the other hand, 
it has the advantage of being immediately acceptable as 
designating something the existence of which is perfectly 
evident and indubitable. Moreover, the analysis of the 
193 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
ideas used in this definition will lead us towards impor­
tant consequences, namely towards the affirmation of the 
existence of a real space really distinct from matter. 
The investigation starts with a postulate, according to 
which a " given idea " always enables us to derive from 
it the properties of the object, even making abstraction 
of its existence. Three corollaries are added, and these 
tell us that: 9 
All finite extended can be divided (if only by the mind) 
or, what is the same, be conceived as divided. 
And it is (even if only for the concept) movable and 
possesses an actual figure. 
And [its] parts can be separated or removed from each 
other (if only by the mind) , or be conceived as being 
removed. 
An axiom then asserts that: 10 
Between things separated or removed from each other 
there is always a distance (be it great or small) , that is 
something extended. 
A series of propositions now follows in quick succes­
sion: 11 
I .  Space (or the innermost extended) is by its nature, 
and absolutely, indivisible, nor can it be conceived as 
divided 
- which, if division means separation and mutual removal 
of parts, that is, divisibility means discerpibility, is, 
of course, a cogent consequence of the above-quoted 
corollaries. 
2. Space is absolutely, and by its nature, immovable 
194 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
- motion indeed implies divisibility. 
8. Space is actually infinite 
- which, vice versa, implies, immediately and by neces­
sity, its absolute immovability. 
4. Space is pure act. 
5. Space is all-containing and all-penetrating. 
To pave the way to further development, that is, to 
the identification of space with an attribute of God, 
Raphson adds that 12 
0
0
 0 doubtlessiy this is the reason why for the Hebrews the 
name of this Infinite was M akom; as it is that of St Paul's 
, it is nearer to us than we are to ourselves.' It is to this 
Infinite that assuredly must be referred a great number 
of passages of the Holy Scripture as well as the hidden 
wisdom of the old Hebrews about the highest and incom­
prehensible amplitude of the Ensoph; as well as the teaching 
of the Gentiles about the all permeant, the all-embracing 
etc. 
But let us not think that space is a kind of immaterial 
stuff - Raphson, obviously, wants to oppose space to 
More's spirit: 13 
It is patent that space is not penetrated by anything: 
being infinite and undivided it penetrates everything by its 
innermost essence, and therefore cannot itself be penetrated 
by anything, nor even can it be conceived as p enetrated. 
It is clear thus that 14 
6. Space is incorporeal. 
7. Space is immutable. 
1 95 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
8. Space is one in itself, [and therefore] . . .  it is the 
most simple entity, not composed of any things and not 
divisible into any things. 
9. Space is eternal [because] the actually infinite cannot 
not be . . .  in other words, that it cannot not be is essen­
tial to the actually infinite. 
It was therefore always. 
This means that it is, or has, a necessary being, that the 
eternity of the infinite is the same thing as its existence, 
and that both imply the same necessity.15 
10. Space is incomprehensible to us, [just because it is 
infinite]. 
11. Space is most perfect in its kind [genus]. 
12. Extended things can neither be nor be conceived 
without it. And therefore 
13. Space is an attribute (namely the immensity) of the 
First Cause. 
This last proposition, according to Raphson, can also 
be demonstrated in a much easier and more direct way: 
as, indeed, the First Cause 16 
. . . can neither give anything that it does not possess, nor 
be the cause of any perfection that it does not contain 
(in a certain manner) in the same degree if not in a 
greater one; and as there can be nothing in rerum natura 
except extended and unextended [things]; and as we have 
demonstrated that extension is perfection, existing every­
where, and is even infinite, necessary, eternal, etc., it follows 
necessarily that it must be found in the First Cause of the 
extended [things] without which the extended [things] can­
not exist. Which it was proper to demonstrate. For the 
true and reciprocal reason of the omniform, true and actual 
infinity is found to consist in' the most absolute unity, just as, 
196 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
vice versa, the highest reason of the unity culminates in 
and is absorbed by the infinity. For whatever expresses 
the actual, and in its kind most absolute, infinity, neces­
sarily expresses the essence of the First Cause, the Author 
of everything that is. 
It is rather curious to see Raphson use the Cartesian 
and even Spinozistic logic and patterns of reasoning to 
promote Henry More's metaphysical doctrine. Yet it 
cannot be denied that by these means Raphson suc­
ceeded in giving it a much higher degree of consistency 
than it had from its author. Henry More, indeed, could 
only present us with a list of " titles " applicable both to 
space and to God. Raphson shows their inner connection; 
moreover, by identifying infinity, on the one hand, with 
highest perfection, and, on the other hand, by trans­
forming extension itself into perfection, he makes the 
attribution of extension to God logically as well as meta­
physically unavoidable. 
Having established the attribution to the First Cause 
of infinite space (which taken abstractly is the object 
of geometry, and taken as reality is the very immensity 
of God) , Raphson now goes on to a more careful con­
sideration of their connection: 11 
That its [the First Cause's] true and essential presence is 
a necessary prerequisite as well of the essential being as 
of the real existence of all things is recognized by a number 
of contemporaries. But, how this essential and intimate 
presence can be explained in the hypothesis of the non­
extension [of the First Cause] without a manifest contra­
diction has not yet been made clear; and it will never be 
possible to make it clear. Indeed, to be present by essence 
in places diverse and distant from each other, for instance 
197 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to 
Universe 
in the . globe of the Moon and in that of the earth, and 
also in the intermediate space, what else is it but, precisely, 
to extend oneself? Now, we have demonstrated that this 
extension is truly real, indivisible, immaterial (or, if you 
wish, spiritual) . What else is there to be desired in order 
to infer its perfection, supreme and infinite of its kind 
(insofar as it is an inadequate concept of the Infinite 
Being) ? 
I do not see, concludes Raphson, by what other name 
than extension or space this essential omnipresence of 
the First Cause could be expressed. 
The philosophers were right, of course, in removing 
from the First Cause the imperfect, divisible, material 
extension. Yet, by the rejection from it of all kinds of 
extension, they opened up the way towards atheism, or 
rather hylotheism, to a great many people, namely, to 
those who did not want to be hemmed in by ingenuous 
circuits of ambiguous circumlocutions and embarrassed 
by obscure and unintelligible notions and terms. Such 
are Hobbes and some others: because they did not find 
anywhere in the world this infinite and eternal, unex­
tended Supreme Being, they thought that it did not exist 
at all, and boldly proposed their opinions to the world. 
So too had ,some of the ancients, who insisted upon the 
incomprehensibility of the Supreme Being. The explana­
tion of all these aberrations is to be sought, according 
to Raphson, in the misunderstanding of the very essence 
of extension that has been falsely held to be necessarily 
something imperfect and lacking all unity and reality. 
In truth, ·however, extension, as such, is something posi­
tive and denotes a very real perfection. Accordingly, as 
generally 18 
198 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
everything positive and substantial that is found in the 
essence of things as their primary and constitutive attribute, 
such as extension in matter, etc., must necessarily be really 
and truly present in the First Cause, and be in it in a 
degree of infinite excellence in the manner most perfect of 
its kind, 
the infinite extension must be truly and really, and not 
only metaphorically, attributed to the First Cause. 
The First Cause appears thus as the twofold source, or 
cause, of the perfections of the created things that it 
contains, as the Schoolmen say, in an eminent and 
transcendent manner.19 
For (as they say) it gives nothing that it does not have 
(in a more perfect manner) in itself· 
Consequently they assert that God is a thinking Being: 
how could, indeed, a thinking being (like ourselves) pro­
ceed from a non-thinking one? But we can reverse the 
question and, with exactly the same right, ask: how can 
an extended being come forth from an unextended one? 
The Schoolmen, of course, want both perfections to be 
contained in the First Cause in the transcendent manner. 
As for extension, such as it is in matter, they justly argue 
that it is imperfect. We, however, and we can quote good 
authorities in favor of this opinion, for instance, Father 
Malebr;;tnche, regard cogitation, or thought (such as it is 
in human minds, or in the created spirits) , to be just as 
imperfect in comparison to that of the Absolutely Infinite 
Being. And though, perhaps, cogitation in finite thinking 
beings is much more perfect than extension, as it is in 
matter, it is doubtless removed by the same interval, 
that is, by an infinite one, from the source of these 
199 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
perfections in the First Cause, and, in relation to it, they 
are both equally imperfect.20 
The infinite amplitude of extension expresses the immense 
diffusion of being in the First Cause, or its infinite and 
truly interminate essence. This [amplitude] is that origi­
nary extensive perfection, which we have found, so im­
perfectly counterfeited, in matter. 
The infinite (whatever it be) and most perfect energy, 
everywhere indivisibly the same, which produces and per­
petually conserves everything (and which this never-suffi­
ciently-to-be-admired series of Divine Ratiocination, that is, 
the whole fabric of nature, more than sufficiently demon­
strates to us a posteriori), is this intens,ive perfection, which 
though [distant from it] by an infinite interval in kind as 
well as in degree, we, miserable examples of the infinite 
Archetype, flatter ourselves to imitate. 
Raphson's assertions are to be taken verbatim: exten­
sion as such is a perfection, even gross, material extension. 
The modus of its realization in bodies is, to be sure, 
extremely defective, precisely as our discoursive thought 
is an extremely defective modus of cogitation; but, just 
as in spite of its discoursiveness our thought is an imi­
tation of, and a participation in, God's cogitativeness, so 
in spite of its divisibility and mobility our bodily exten­
sion is an imitation of, and a participation in, God's own 
and perfect extensiveness. 
As for the latter, we have already proved that: 21 
. . .  this internal or truly innermost locus penetrates every­
thing by its essence and, undivided, is most intimately 
present in everything; that it cannot be, or even be thought 
of, as penetrated by any thing, and that it is infinite, most 
200 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
perfect, one and indivisible. Hence it clearly appears by what 
infinite interval are distant from it all other things that 
have only an evanescent being and, to use the elegant 
expression of the Prophet (Isaiah, 40), are as nothing to this 
Infinite and Eternal and, so to speak, essential (ovauhaTov) 
Being. They are, as it were, light shadows of the true 
Reality and even if they were everywhere, they would 
by no means express even in the lowest degree that 
Infinity which we understand to be supremely positive and 
supremely real in the First Cause. 
Thus, even if it were infinitely extended - which it is 
not - matter would never be identical with the divine 
extension and would never be able to become an attribute 
of God. Joseph Raphson is to such a degree elated and 
ravished by the contemplation of the idea of infinity that 
we could apply to him (though modifying it somewhat) 
the expression used by Moses Mendelssohn for Spinoza: 
he is drunk with infinity. He goes so far as - paradoxi­
cally - to reject Henry More's reassertion of the funda­
mental and primary validity of the category or question: 
" where? " 
In infinity it has no meaning. 
The infinite 
is not something, a sphere, of which the center is every­
where and the limits nowhere; it is something of which 
the center is nowhere also, something that has neither 
limits nor center, something in respect to which the 
question" where? " cannot be asked, as in respect to it 
everywhere is nowhere; nullibi.22 
In respect to this immense locus a system of finite bodies, 
be it ever so large, is truly said to be nowhere. 
It is 
indeed utterly immeasurable; here, there, in the middle, etc. 
vanish in it completely. 
201 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Raphson is obviously right. In the infinite homogeneous 
space all " places " are perfectly equivalent and cannot 
be distinguished from each other: they all have the same 
" position " in respect to the whole.23 
The illustrious Guericke has very well written about it 
in his Magdeburgian Experiments, p. 65 : If in this immen­
sity (which has no beginning, nor end, nor middle) some­
body marched for an infinitely long [time], and traversed 
innumerable thousands of miles, he would, in relation to 
this immensity, be in the same place; and if he repeated 
his action and arrived ten infinities farther, he would never­
theless be in this immensity in the same way and in the 
same place and would not be a single step nearer to the 
end, or the fulfillment of his intention, because in the Im­
measurable (Immensum) there is no relation. All relations 
in it are conceived in reference to ourselves or to some other 
created thing. Indeed this immense locus is truly every­
where; and everything that has its finite where? (as they are 
wont to speak about spirits) has it as a relation to some 
other finite [thing]; but in relation to the Immensity it is 
truly nowhere. 
Yet, if Raphson insists so strongly upon the infinity 
of uncreated space in contradistinction to the finitude of 
the created world, it is by no means his intention to 
assign to this latter determinate, or even determinable ­
by us - dimensions. Quite the contrary: in infinite space 
there is room enough for a practically indeterminate and 
.indefinitely large world. Thus he tells us that if 24 
. . . there can be absolutely no reason why [the world] 
should extend itself to the infinity of its immense locus, 
as it does not possess an absolute plenitude and is com­
posed of movable parts . . .  whereas the absolutely Infinite 
202 
C L O S E D  W O R L D to Infinite Universe 
is utterly immovable and absolutely one or full of itself 
. . . [nevertheless] . . .  how great the universe is or how 
far it extends, is completely hidden to us. 
Raphson himself would 25 
. . .  easily believe that it can be immeasurable in respect 
to our capacity of understanding, and that we shall never 
be able to comprehend it. Indeed, it does not follow that 
we can comprehend by our cogitation all magnitude that is 
not infinite, or that we should ever be able to depict it in 
our mind as so large that the universe could not, in truth, 
be even larger. We can, for instance, conceive a series of 
numbers, disposed in a straight line, to extend from this 
our earth to the Dog-Star, or to any one in the Milky 
Way or to whatever visible limit, the unity of these 
[numbers] expressing the distance between the earth and 
that limit; we can also conceive this number to be squared, 
raised to the third, fourth, and so on, power, until the 
index of this power becomes equal to the first number, or 
to its first root; we can finally consider this power as a 
root of others, progressing in the same manner. And yet 
it is, perhaps, as nothing compared to the magnitude of 
the universe which can, and possibly does, surpass the 
capacity of any finite numbering [mind], not only ours, 
and cannot be comprehended by any other than its im­
mense Author. Yet it is certain that it cannot be infinite 
in that absolute manner in which the First Cause is, insofar 
as it is considered as the immense locus of things. 
We see it thus quite clearly: the difference between the 
infinite and the finite is not a difference between " more " 
and " less "; it is not a quantative, but a qualitative one, 
and, though studied by mathematicians, it is fundamen­
tally a metaphysical difference. It is this difference which, 
203 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
fully understood, enables us not to lapse into the error 
of a pantheistic confusion of the Creator God with the 
created world, and it is this selfsame difference which 
provides us with a firm ground for the study of the nearly 
infinite variety of created things. Indeed, those 26 
who will [study] this part of the universe, visible to us, not 
only in books, but who will diligently read and carefully 
contemplate [the book of Nature], using his own observa­
tions and the [analysis] of the constitution of the skies, 
will hardly fail to recognize not only that there can be 
a plurality of worlds, but that, in truth, there are a 
nearly infinite number of systems, various laws of motion, 
exhibiting various (nearly innumerable) phenomena and 
creatures. 
Why, even on this earth there are so many and such varied 
creatures, endowed with so many different faculties, pos­
sibly even with some that are completely unknown to 'us. 
How many more could there be elsewhere that can be 
called into being by the infinite combinative art of the 
Infinite Architect. 
As for us, the only doors open to the true cogitation of 
the universe are observation and experience. By the first 
we arrive at the system of visible motions of the world; 
by the second we discover the forces, the (sensible) 
qualities and mutual relations of bodies. Mathematics 
(mathematical physics) and chemistry are the sciences 
that arise on these empirical foundations. As for the 
" hypotheses " that go beyond these empirical data, they 
may be plausible, and even, sometimes, useful for the 
investigation of truth; yet they breed prejudices and 
therefore cause more harm than good. Hypothesomania, 
204 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
the invention of new hypotheses, belongs to poetical and 
fictitious philosophy, not to the pursuit of knowledge. 
For the latter, according to Raphson, the method es­
tablished . by the supreme philosopher, Newton, in his 
Principia, consisting in the study of the phenomena of 
nature by means of experiments and rational mechanics, 
reducing them to forces the action of which - though 
their nature is hidden from us - is obvious and patent 
in the world. 
As we see, empiricism and metaphysics, and even a 
very definite kind of metaphysics, the creationist, are 
closely linked together. What other means, indeed, but 
observation and experience can we possibly use for the 
study of a world freely created by an Infinite God? 
Raphson concludes therefore: 27 
N either can Human Philosophy theoretically compose the 
smallest mouse or the simplest plant, nor can human praxis 
build them, much less the whole universe. These are prob­
lems worthy of the Primordial Wisdom and Power which 
produces these things. As for us, they offer us only a 
progress in aeiernum of our knowledge both of the things 
themselves and of the perpetually geometrizing God. 
205 

IX. God and the World : 
S P A C E ,  M A T T E R ,  E T H E R  A N D  S P I R I T  
Isaac Newton 
It is difficult to tell what the reasons were that 
determined Newton to enlarge, in the Latin edition 
(translation) of his Opticks, the number of Queries 
appended by him to the third book of his work, and to 
include among the additional ones two rather long and 
extremely important and interesting papers which, in con­
tradistinction to the purely technical Queries of the first 
English edition, deal, not with optical, but with method­
ological, epistemological and metaphysical problems.1 
The publication of Raphson's book could not have been 
the motive: the De spatio reali was published in 1702, 
the Latin translation of the Opticks in 1706; but the 
English edition appeared in 1704 and if Newton wanted 
to make his position clear in relation to Raphson's, he 
could, and should have done it in 1704. It is possible, 
in my opinion - though it is only a conjecture - that 
it was the publication of Dr. George Cheyne's Philosoph-
206 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
ical Principles of Natural Religion that gave Newton 
the incentive, usually lacking, to come into the open.2 
Now, be this as it may, it is these Queries (which, 
curiously enough, seem to have been ignored by Berkeley) 
which build the subject of the famous polemics between 
Leibniz and Clarke. It is, indeed, in these Queries (21 
and 22) that, in a much more precise and clear manner 
than anywhere else - the General Scholium of the second 
edition of the Principia not excluded - Newton states his 
conceptions about the purpose and aim of philosophy and 
develops, at the same time, his general world-view: an 
extremely interesting and fairly consistent system of " cor­
puscular philosophy " - already sketched in his letters 
to Bentley - asserting the fundamental unity of matter 
and light, and 'presenting the material components of the 
universe, that is, hard, indivisible particles, as constantly 
acted upon by quite a system of various non-material 
I attractive and repulsive forces. Thus Query 20 (28 in 
the second edition) explains at length the physical (astro­
nomical) inadmissibility of the plenum (a completely 
full space would oppose such a strong resistance to motion 
that it would be practically impossible and would have 
ceased long ago) , as well as the physical (astronomical) 
admissibility of the celestial spaces' being filled with an 
extremely thin, rare and tenuous ether, of which the den­
sity can be made as small as we wish (is not our air " at 
the height of 70, 140, 210 miles 100,000, 100,000,000,000 
or 100,000,000,000,000 times rarer, and so on " than on 
the earth?) , which implies the granular structure of this 
ether, the existence of a vacuum and the rejection of a 
continuous medium, and concludes: 3 
207 

C L O  S E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
And for rejecting such a Medium, we have the Authority 
of those oldest and most celebrated Philosophers of Greece 
and Phoenicia, who made a Vacuum, and Atoms, and the 
Gra vity of Atoms, the first Principles of their Philosophy; 
tacitly attributing Gravity to some other Cause than dense 
Matter. Later Philosophers banish the Consideration of 
such a Cause out of natural Philosophy, feigning Hypo­
theses for explaining all things mechanically, and referring 
other Causes to Metaphysicks: Whereas the main Business 
of natural Philosophy is to argue from Phaenomena with­
out feigning Hypotheses, and to deduce Causes from Effects, 
till we come to the very first Cause, which certainly is not 
mechanical; and not only to unfold the Mechanism of the 
World, but chiefly to resolve these and such like Questions. 
What is there in places almost empty of Matter, and whence 
is it that the Sun and Planets gravitate towards one another, 
without dense Matter between them? Whence is it that 
Nature doth nothing in vain; and whence arises all that 
Order and Beauty which we see in the World? To what 
end are Comets, and whence is it that Planets move all 
one and the same way in Orbs concentrick, while Comets 
move all manner of ways in Orbs very excentrick; and what 
hinders the fix'd Stars from falling upon one another? How 
came the Bodies of Animals to be contrived with so much 
Art, and for what ends were their several Parts? Was the 
Eye contrived without Skill in Opticks, and the Ear with­
out Knowledge of Sounds? How do the Motions of the Body 
follow from the Will, and whepce is the instinct in Animals? 
Is not the Sensory of Animals that place to which the 
sensitive Substance is present, and into which the sensible 
Species of Things are carried through the Nerves and Brain, 
that there they may be perceived by their immediate 
presence to that Substance? And these things being rightly 
dispatch'd, does it not appear from Phaenoߵena that there 
208 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
is a Being incorporeal, living, intelligent, omnipresent, who 
in infinite Space, as it were in his Sensory, sees the things 
themselves intimately, and thoroughly perceives them, and 
comprehends them wholly by their immediate presence to 
himself: Of which things the Images only carried through 
the Organs of Sense into our little Sensoriums, are there 
seen and beheld by that which in us perceives and thinks. 
And though every true Step made in this Philosophy brings 
us not immediately to the Knowledge of the first Cause, 
yet it brings us nearer to it, .and on that account is to be 
highly valued. 
As for Que/ty 28 (81) , it starts with the question: 4 
Have not the small Particles of Bodies certain Powers, 
Virtues, or Forces, by which they act at a distance, not only 
upon the Rays of Light for reflecting, refracting, and in­
flecting them, but also upon one another for producing a 
great Part of the Phaenornena of Nature? For it's well 
known, that Bodies act one upon another by the Attrac­
tions of Gravity, Magnetism, and Electricity; and these 
Instances shew the Tenor and the Course of Nature, and 
make it not improbable but that there may be more attrac­
tive Powers than these. For Nature is very consonant and 
conformable to her self. 
Newton does not tell us outright - any more than he 
does in the Principia - what these various " Powers " 
are. Just as in the Principia, he leaves that question 
open, though, as we know, he holds them to be non­
mechanical, immaterial and even " spiritual " energy 
extraneous to matter. 5 
How these Attractions may be perform'd, I do not here 
consider. What I call attraction may be perform'd by 
impulse, or by some other means unknown to me. I use 
:09 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
that Word here to signify only in general any Force by 
which Bodies tend towards one another, whatsover be the 
Cause. For we must learn from the Phaenomena of Nature 
what Bodies attract one another, and what are the Laws 
and Properties of the Attraction, before we enquire the 
Cause by which the Attraction is perform'd. The Attrac­
tions of Gravity, Magnetism, and Electricity, reach to very 
sensible distances, and so have been observed by vulgar 
Eyes, and there may be others which reach to so small 
distances as hitherto escape Observation; and perhaps elec­
trical Attraction may reach to such small distances, even 
without being excited by Friction. 
Whatever these " Powers " may be, they are, in any 
case, real forces and perfectly indispensable for the 
explanation -' 
even a hypothetical one - of the existence 
of bodies, that is, of the sticking together of the material 
particles that compose them; a purely materialistic pat­
tern of nature is utterly impossible (and a purely mater­
ialistic or mechanistic physics, such as that of Lucretius 
or of Descartes, is impossible, too) : 6 
The Parts of all homogeneal hard Bodies which fully 
touch one another, stick together very strongly. And for 
explaining how this may be߶ some have invented hooked 
Atoms, which is begging the Question; and others tell us 
that Bodies are glued together by rest, that is, by an occult 
Quality, or rather by nothing; and others, that they stick 
together by conspiring Motions, that is, by relative rest 
amongst themselves. I had rather infer from their Cohesion, 
that their Particles attract one another by some Force, 
which in immediate Contact is exceeding strong, at small 
distances performs the chymical Operations above-men­
tion'd, and reaches not far from the Particles with any 
sensible Effect. 
+lO 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
It could be argued, of course (and was to be argued 
by Leibniz) that Newton is wrong to stick to the classical 
atomic conception of hard, impenetrable, indivisible last 
components of matter, a conception which implies great 
difficulties for dynamics. It is indeed, impossible to say 
what would happen if two absolutely hard bodies should 
collide. Let us take, for instance, two perfectly similar 
and perfectly hard, that is, absolutely unyielding and 
indeformable, bodies, and let them approach each other 
- the classical case of dynamics - with the same speed. 
What will they do after the impact? Rebound, as elastic 
bodies would do? Or stop each other as would be the case 
with inelastic ones? As a matter of fact, they should 
not do either - yet, tertium non datur. As we know, 
Descartes, in order to preserve the principle of conserva­
tion of energy, asserted the rebounding. But he was 
obviously wrong. If we admit, however, that they would 
stop each other, that is, that motion is lost in every im­
pact, would not the world-machine run down very quickly 
and very quickly come to a stop? Should we not, in 
order to avoid these difficulties, discard completely the 
atomic conception and admit, for instance, that matter 
is infinitely divisible or that its " last " components are 
not hard atoms but soft, or elastic, particles, or even 
" physical monads "? Newton, therefore, continues 7 
All bodies seem to be composed of hard Particles: for 
otherwise Fluids would not congeal; as Water, Oils, Vinegar, 
and Spirit or Oil of Vitriol do by freezing; Mercury by 
fumes of Lead; Spirit of Nitre and Mercury, by dissolving 
the l\1:ercury and evaporating the Flegm; Spirit of Wine 
and Spirit of Urine, by d eflegming and mixing them; and 
Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Salt, by subliming them 
211 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
together to make Sal-amoniac. Even the Rays of Light 
seem to be hard Bodies; .!or otherwise they would not retain 
different Properties in their different Sides. And therefore 
Hardness may be reckon'd the Property of all uncom­
pounded Matter. At least, this seems to be as evident as 
the universal Impenetrability of Matter. For all Bodies, so 
far as Experience reaches, are either hard, or may be 
harden'd; and we have no other Evidence of universal 
Impenetrability, besides a large Experience without an 
experimental Exception. Now if compound Bodies are so 
very hard as we find some of them to be, and yet are very 
porous, and consist of Parts which are only laid together; 
the simple Particles which are void of Pores, and were 
never yet divided, must be much harder. For such hard 
Particles being heaped together, can scarce touch one 
another in more than a few Points, and therefore must be 
separable by much less Force than is requisite to break a 
solid Particle, whose Parts touch in all the Space between 
them, without any Pores or Interstices to weaken their 
Cohesion. And how such very hard Particles which are only 
laid together, hold and that so firmly as they do, without 
the assistance of sOlnething which causes them to be at­
tracted or press'd towards one another, is very difficult to 
conceive. 
This " something," as we know, and as it is clear from 
the very texts I am quoting, cannot be other, smaller, 
" ethereal " particles, at least not in the last analysis, 
because the same question, that is, the question about 
their interaction, can obviously be raised concerning the 
" ethereal " particles themselves, and cannot be answered 
by postulating an ultra-ether, which moreover, would 
, imply the existence of an ultra-ultra-ether, and so on. 
C I. 0 S E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Forces of attraction, and also of repulsion are therefore 
fundamental, though non-material, elements of nature: 8 
There are therefore Agents in Nature able to make the 
Particles of Bodies stick together by very strong Attrac­
tions. And it is the Business of experimental Philosophy to 
find them out. 
Thus we see it once more: good, empirical and experi­
mental natural philosophy does not exclude from the 
fabric of the world and the furniture of heaven immaterial 
or transmaterial forces. It only renounces the discussion 
of their nature, and, dealing with them simply as causes 
of the observable effects, treats them - being a mathe­
matical natural philosophy - as mathematical causes or 
forces, that is, as mathematical concepts or relations. It 
is, on the contrary, the a priori philosophy of the classical 
Greek atomists, who at least recognized the existence of 
void space and probably even the non-mechanical charac­
ter of gravity, and of course that of Descartes, that is 
guilty of this exclusion and of the impossible attempts 
to explain everything by matter and motion. As for 
Newton himself, he is so deeply convinced of the reality 
of these immaterial, and, in this sense, transphysical 
forces that this conviction enables him to devise a most 
, 
extraordinary and truly p rophetic picture of the general 
structure of material beings: 9 
Now the smallest Particles of Matter may cohere by 
the strongest Attractions, and compose bigger Particles of 
weaker Virtue; and many of these may cohere and com­
pose bigger Particles whose Virtue is still weaker, and so 
on for divers Successions, until the Progression end in the 
biggest Particles on which the Operations in Chymistry, 
213 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
and the Colours of natural Bodies depend, and which by 
cohering compose Bodies of a sensible Magnitude. If the 
Body is compact, and bends or yields inward to Pression 
without any sliding of its Parts, it is hard and elastick, 
returning to its Figure with a Force rising from the mutual 
Attraction of its Parts. If the Parts slide upon one another, 
the Body is malleable or soft. If they slip easily, and are 
of a fit Size to be agitated by Heat, and the Heat is big 
enough to keep them in Agitation, the Body is fluid; and 
if it be apt to stick to things, it is humid; and the Drops 
of every fluid affect a round Figure by the mutual Attrac­
tion of their Parts, as the Globe of the Earth and Sea affects 
a round Figure by the mutual Attraction of its Parts by 
Gravity. 
Moreover, as I have already hinted before, the admis­
sion of various immaterial forces acting upon or dis­
tributed around the bodies or particles according to strict 
mathematical laws - or to express it in a more modern 
way: the admission of the existence of different fields of 
forces connected with · bodies and particles - enables us, 
and that is an invaluable advantage, to superimpose 
them one upon the other, and even to transform them 
into their contraries. Indeed/o 
Since Metals dissolved in Acids attract but a small quan­
tity of the Acid, their attractive Force can reach but to a 
small distance from them. And as in Algebra, where 
affirmative Quantities vanish and cease, there negative ones 
begin; so in Mechanicks, where Attraction ceases, there a 
repulsive Virtue ought to succeed. And that. there is such 
a Virtue, seems to follow from the Reflexions and Inflexions 
of the Rays of Light. For the Rays are repelled by Bodies 
in both these Cases, without the immediate Contact of the 
+14 
C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
reflecting or inflecting Body. It seems also to follow from 
the Emission of Light; the Ray so soon as it is shaken off 
from a shining Body by the vibrating Motion of the Parts 
of the Body, and gets beyond the reach of Attraction, being 
driven away with exceeding great Velocity. For that Force 
which is sufficient to turn it back in Reflexion, may be 
sufficient to emit it. It seems also to follow from the Pro­
duction of Air and Vapour. The Particles when they are 
shaken off from Bodies by Heat or Fermentation, so soon 
as they are beyond the reach of the Attraction of the Body, 
receding from it, and also from one another with great 
Strength, and keeping at a distance, so as sometimes to 
take up above a Million of Times more space than they did 
before in the form of a dense Body. Which vast Contraction 
and Expansion seems unintelligible, by feigning the Particles 
of Air to be springy and ramous, or rolled up like Hoops, 
or by any other means than a repulsive Power. 
Thus, the admission of immaterial " virtues " offers us 
an immediate and elegant solution of the most important 
and crucial problem of elasticity, or " springiness " of 
bodies; and vice versa, this very solution demonstrates 
the impossibility of explaining this property of bodies by 
purely mechanical means (as Descartes and Boyle tried 
to do) and therefore confirms the insufficiency of pure 
materialism not only for philosophy in general, but also 
for natural philosophy. As a matter of fact, without the 
immaterial Powers and Virtues, there would not be any 
Nature to philosophize about, because there would be 
no cohesion, no unity and no motion; or if there were, 
at the beginning, it would have ceased long ago. On the 
contrary, if we admit the double, material as well as 
immaterial, structure of Nature,ll 
+15 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
. Nature will be very conformable to her self and very 
simple, performing all the great Motions of the heavenly 
Bodies by the Attraction of Gravity which intercedes those 
Bodies, and almost all the small ones of their Particles 
by some other attractive and repelling Powers which inter­
cede the Particles. The vis inertiae is a passive Principle 
by which Bodies persist in their Motion or Rest, receive 
Motion in proportion to the Force impressing it, and resist 
as much as they are resisted. By this Principle alone there 
never could have been any Motion in the World. Some 
other Principle was necessary for putting Bodies into 
Motion; and now they are in Motion, some other Prin­
ciple is necessary for conserving the Motion. For from the 
various Composition of two Motions, 'tis very certain that 
there is not always the same quantity of Motion in the 
World. For if two Globes joined by a slender Rod, revolve 
about their common Center of Gravity with an uniform 
Motion, while that Center moves on uniformly in a right 
Line drawn in the Plane of their circular Motion; the Sum 
of the Motions of the two Globes, as often as the Globes 
are in the right Line described by their common Center of 
Gravity, will be bigger than the Sum of their Motions, 
when they are in a Line perpendicular to that right Line. 
By this Instance it appears that Motion may be got or 
10st.l1a But by reason of the Tenacity of Fluids, and Attri­
tion of their Parts, and the Weakness of Elasticity in Solids, 
Motion is much more apt to be lost than got, and is always 
upon the Decay. For Bodies which are either absolutely 
hard, or so soft as to be void of Elasticity, will not rebound 
from one another. Impenetrability makes them only stop. 
If two equal Bodies meet directly in vacuo, they will by the 
La ws of Motion stop where they meet, and lose all their 
Motion, and remain in rest, unless they be elastick, and 
receive new Motion from their Spring. 
9116 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
Yet, even if they be elastic, they cannot be absolut´Iy 
elastic, and thus, by each and every impact, some motIon 
(that is, momentum) will be lost. And if the world 
were full, as the Cartesians want it to be, then the 
" vortical " motion assumed by Descartes would cease 
very quickly, because 12 
. . .  unless the Matter were void of all Tenacity and Attri­
tion of Parts, and Communication of Motion (which is 
not to be supposed,) the Motion would constantly ?ecay. 
Seeing therefore the variety of Motion that we find In the 
World is always decreasing, there is a necessity of con­
serving it and recruiting it by active Principles, 
that is, in the last analysis by the constant action in the 
world of the Omnipresent and All-powerful God. Newton 
therefore continues: 13 
All these thinD'S being consider'd, it seems probable to 
me that God iW the Beginning form'd Matter in solid, 
maVsy, hard, impenetrable, moveable Particles, of such Sizes 
and Figures, and with such other Properties, and in such 
Proportion to Space, as most conducted to the End for 
which he form'd them; and that these primitive Particles 
being Solids, are incomparably harder thart any porous 
Bodies compounded of them; even so very hard, as never 
to wear or break in pieces; no ordinary Power being able 
to divide what God himself made one in the first Creation. 
While the Particles continue entire, they may compose 
Bodies of one and the same Nature and Texture in all 
Ages: But should they wear away, or break in pieces, the 
Nature of Things depending on them, would be changed. 
Water and Earth, composed of old worn Particles and Frag­
ments of Particles, would not be of the same Nature and 
Texture now, with Water and Earth composed of entire 
2 1 7  

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Particles in the Beginning. And therefore, that Nature may 
be lasting, the Changes of corporeal Things are to be placed 
only in the various Separations and new Associations and 
Motions of these perman߷nt Particles; compound Bodies 
being apt to break, not in the midst of solid Particles, but 
where those Particles are laid together, and only touch in a 
few Points. 
It seems to me farther, that these Particles have not only 
a Vis inertiae, accompanied with such passive Laws of 
Motion as naturally result from that Force, but also that 
they are moved by certain active Principles. . . . 
and it is the action of these principles, Of, more exactly, 
the action of Go.d by means of these principles that gives 
to the world its structure and order, and it is this struc­
ture and order that enables us to recognize that the world 
is an effect of choice, and not chance or necessity. Natural 
philosophy - at least the good one, that is, the New­
tonian and not the Cartesian - thus transcends itself 
and leads us to God: 14 
. . .  by the help of these Principles, all material Things 
seem to have been composed of the hard and solid Particles 
above-mention'd, variously associated in the first Creation 
by the Counsel of an intelligent Agent. For it became him 
who created them to set them in order. And if he did so, 
it's unphilosophical to seek for any other Origin of the 
World, or to pretend that it might arise out of Chaos by 
the mere Laws of Nature; though being once form'd, it 
may continue by those Laws for many Ages. For while 
Comets move in very excentrick Orbs in all manner of 
Positions, blind Fate could never make all the Planets 
move one and the same way in Orbs concentrick, some 
inconsiderable Irregularities excepted, which may have risen 
¿18 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
from the mutual Actions of Comets and Planets upon one 
another, and which will be apt to increase, till this Systenl 
wants a Reformation. Such a wonderful Uniformity in the 
Planetary System must be allowed the Effect of Choice. 
And so must the Uniformity in the Bodies of Animals . . . . 
All that, and much more besides/5 
. . .  can be the effect of nothing else than the Wisdom and 
Skill of a powerful ever-living Agent, who being in all Places, 
is more able by his Will to move the Bodies within his 
boundless uniform Sensorium, and thereby to form and 
reform the Parts of the Universe, than we are by our Will 
to move the parts of our own Bodies. And yet we are not 
to consider the World as the Body of God, or the several 
Parts thereof, as the Parts of God. I-Ie is an uniform Being, 
void of Organs, Members or Parts, and they are his 
Creatures subordinate to him, and subservient to his Will; 
and he is no more the Soul of them, than the Soul of Man 
is the Soul of the Species of Things carried through the 
Organs of Sense into the place of its Sensation, where it 
perceives them by means of its immediate Presence, without 
the Intervention of any third thing. The Organs of Sense 
are not for enabling the Soul to perceive the Species of 
Things in its Sensorium, but only for conveying them 
thither; and God has no need of such Organs, he being 
everywhere present in the Things themselves. And since 
Space is divisible in infinitum, and Matter is not necessarily 
in' all places, it may be also allow'd that God is able to 
create Particles of Matter of several Sizes and Figures, and 
in several Proportions to Space, and perhaps of different 
Densities and Forces, and thereby to vary the Laws of 
Nature, and make Worlds of several sorts in several Parts 
of the Universe. At least, I see nothing of Contradiction 
in all this, 
219 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
concludes Newton, who could have added that in the 
Principia he had already shown - without insisting upon 
it - that the inverse square law of attraction, the actual 
law of this world, was by no means the only possible ­
although the most convenient one - and that God, had 
He wanted to, could have adopted another. As he could 
have quoted his friend Robert Boyle who believed that 
God had actually tried out, in different worlds, different 
laws of motion; or Joseph Raphson who had just expressed 
the same opinion. Yet he did not. As he did not quote 
Henry More when he made infinite space the sensoriurn 
of the nevertheless transcendent God. 
220 
x. Absolute Space and Absolute Time : 
G O D ' S  F R A M E 
O F  A C T I O N  
Berkeley 
& Newton 
It is certainly Raphson's interpretation, or, it would be 
better to say, Raphson's disclosure of the metaphysical 
background of N ewtonianism, that Bishop Berkeley had 
in mind, when, in 1710, in his Principles of Human Knowl­
edge, he not only made a vigorous attack upon its funda­
mental concepts, absolute space and absolute time, but 
also pointed out the great danger that they implied from 
the theological point of view. One of the chief advantages 
of the radical immaterialistic and sensualistic empiricism 
advocated by Berkeley is, according to him, the possi­
bility it gives us of getting rid of these entities, asserted 
in 1 
. . .  a certain celebrated treatise of mechanics: in the 
entrance of which justly admired treatise, time, space and 
motion, are distinguished into absolute and relative, true 
and apparent, mathematical and vulgar; which distinction, 
as it is at large explained by the author, doth suppose 
those quantities to have an existence without the mind; and 
221 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to 
Universe 
that they are ordinarily conceived with relation to sensible 
things, to which nevertheless, in their own nature, they 
bear no relation at all. 
" This celebrated author," continues Berkeley, who 
offers us a very precise account (largely in Newton's 
words) of the theory he is about to criticize, holds that '2 
. . .  there is an absolute space, which being unperceivable 
to sense, remains in itself similar and immovable, and rela­
tive space to be the measure thereof, which being movable, 
and defined by its situation in respect of sensible bodies, 
is vulgarly taken for immovable space. 
Berkeley, of course, does not accept this theory; an 
unperceivable reality is unthinkable and " philosophic 
considerations of rrnotion doth not imply the being oJ 
absolute space distinct from what is perceived by sense 
and related to bodies," Newton's assertions to the con­
trary notwithstanding. Moreover, and though last, not 
least,S 
What is here laid down seems to put an end to all those 
disputes and difficulties which have sprung up amongst the 
learned concerning the nature of pure space. But the chief 
advantage arising from it is, that we are freed from that 
dangerous dilemma, to which several who have employed 
their thoughts on this subject imagine themselves reduced, 
to wit, of thinking either that real space is God, or else 
that there is something beside God which is eternal, un­
created, infinite, indivisible, immutable. ߸oth of which may 
justly be thought pernicious and absurd notions. It is cer­
tain that not a few divines, as well as philosophers of great 
note, have, from the difficulty they found in conceiving 
either limit or annihilation of space, concluded it must be 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
divine. And some of late have set themselves particularly 
to show, that the incommunicable attributes of God agree 
to it. Which doctrines, how unworthy soever it may seem 
of the divine nature, yet I do not see how we can get clear 
of it, ߹o long as we adhere to the received opinions. 
Berkeley's attack, though it certainly did not affect 
Newton as strongly as was thought by some of his 
historians, seems nevertheless to have been the reason, 
or at least one of the reasons - the second being Leibniz's 
accusation of introducing, by his theory of universal gravi­
tation, the use of a senseless occult quality into natural 
philosophy 4 - that induced Newton to add to the second 
edition of his Principia the famous General Scholium 
which expresses so forcefully the religious conceptions 
that crown and support its empirico-mathematical con­
struction and thus reveal the real meaning of his " phi­
losophical " method. It seems to me rather probable that 
he wanted to dissociate himself from the somewhat 
compromising allies hinted at by Berkeley 4a and, by 
exposing his views in his own manner, to demonstrate ­
as Bentley had already attempted to do - that natural 
philosophy, that is, his natural philosophy, leads neces­
sarily not to the denial but to the affirmation of God's 
existence and of his action in the world. At the same time 
he obviously does not want to disavow or reject them, 
and in spite of Berkeley's warning, he asserts not only 
the existence of absolute time and space but also their 
necessary connection with God. 
Compared to the statements made by Newton in his 
letters to Bentley - and much more so if compared to 
Bentley's elaboration of these statements and Newton's 
o\vn developments in the Queries of the Opticks - N e\v-
2À3 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
ton's pronouncements in the General Scholium, at least 
those concerning God's action in the world, are not very 
explicit. Thus, Newton does not tell us anything about 
the necessity of God's continuous concourse for the 
preservation of its structure; he seems even to admit that, 
once started, the motion of the heavenly bodies could 
continue forever; it is only at their beginning that God's 
direct intervention appears indispensable. On the other 
hand, the actual structure of the world (that is, of the 
solar system) is, of course, asserted to be the result of a 
conscious and intelligent choice: 5 
. . . in the celestial spaces where there is no air to resist 
their motions, all bodies will move with the greatest free­
dom; and the planets and comets will constantly pursue 
their revolutions in orbits given in kind and position, 
according to the laws above explained; but though these 
bodies may, indeed, continue in their orbits by the mere 
laws of gravity, yet they could by no means have at first 
derived the regular position of the orbits themselves from 
those laws. 
The six primary planets are revolved about the sun in 
circles concentric with the sun, and with motions directed 
towards the same parts, and almost in the. same plane. 
Ten moons are revolved about the earth, Jupiter, ana 
Saturn, in circles concentric with them, with the same 
direction of motion, and nearly in the planes of the orbits 
of those planets; but it is not to be conceived that mere 
mechanical causes could give birth to so many regular 
motions, since the comets range over all parts of the heavens 
in very eccentric orbits; for by that kind of motion they 
pass easily through the orbs of the planets, and with great 
rapidity; and in their aphelions, where they move the slow­
est, and are detained the longest, they recede to the greatest 
ÀÁ4 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
distances from each other, and hence suffer the least dis­
turbance from their mutual attractions. This most beautiful 
system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed 
from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and power­
ful Being. And if the fixed stars are the centres of other 
like systems, these, being formed by the like wise counsel, 
must be all subject to the dominion of One; especially since 
the light of the fixed stars is of the same nature with the 
light of the sun, and from every system light passes into all 
the other systems; and lest the systems of the fixed stars 
should, by their gravity, fall on each other, he hath placed 
those systems at immense distances from one another . 
Newton's God is not merely a " philosophical " God, 
the impersonal and uninterested First Cause of the Aris­
totelians, or the - for Newton - utterly indifferent and 
world-absent God of Descartes. He is - or, in any case, 
Newton wants him to be - the Biblical God, the effective 
Master and Ruler of the world created by him: 6 
This Being governs all things, not as the soul of the 
world, but as Lord over all; and on account of his dominion 
he is wont to be called Lord God 7raVrOKparwp or Universal 
Ruler; for God is a relative word, and has a respect to 
servants; and Deity is the dominion of God not over his 
own body, as those imagine who fancy God to be the soul 
of the world, but over servants. The Supreme God is a 
Being eternal, infinite, absolutely perfect; but a being, how­
ever perfect, without dominion, cannot be said to be Lord 
God; for we say, my God" your God, the God of Israel, the 
God of Gods, the Lord of Lords; but we do not say, my 
Eternal, your Eternal, the Eternal of Israel, the Eternal of 
Gods; we do not say, my Infinite, or my Perfect: these arc 
titles which have nq respect to servants. The word God 
usually signifies Lord; but every Lord is not a God. It is 
À¿5 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the dominion of a spiritual being which constitutes a God: 
a true, supreme, or imaginary God. And from this true 
dominion it follows that the true God is a living, intelligent, 
and powerful Being; and from his other perfections, that 
he is supreme, or most perfect. lIe is eternal and infinite, 
omnipotent and omniscient; that is, his duration reaches 
from eternity to eternity; his presence from infinity to 
infinity; he governs all things, and knows all things that 
are or can be done. 
His duration reaches from eternity to eternity; his pres­
ence from infinity to infinity . . .  the Newtonian God is,' 
patently, not above time and space: His eternity is sempi­
ternal duration, His omnipresence is infinite extension. 
This being so, it is clear why Newton insists: 7 
He is not eternity and infinity, but eternal and infinite; 
he is not duration or space, but he endures and is present. 
And yet, like the God of Henry More and of Joseph 
Raphson, he not only " endures forever and is every­
where present "; but it is " by existing always and every­
where " that " he constitutes duration and space." It is 
not surprising therefore that 8 
since every particle of space is always, and every indivisible 
moment of duration is everywhere, certainly the Maker and 
Lord of all things cannot be never and nowhere. Every soul 
that has perception is, though in different times and in 
different organs of sense and motion, still the same indi­
visible person. There are given successive parts in duration, 
coexistent parts in space, but neither the one nor the other 
in the person of a man, or his thinking principle; and much 
less can they be found in the thinking substance of God. 
Every man, so far as he is a thing that has perception, is 
ÀÀ6 
C L O S  E D  W' 0 R L D to Infinite . Universe 
one and the same man during his whole life, in all and each 
of his organs of sense. 
And that,9 
He is omnipresent not virtually only, but also substan­
tially; for virtue cannot subsist without substance+ In him 
are all things contained and moved; yet neither affects the 
other: God suffers nothing from the motion of bodies; bodies 
find no resistance from the omnipresence of God. It is 
allowed by all that the Supreme God exists necessarily; and 
by the same necessity he exists always and everywhere. 
Thus " in Him we live, we move and we are," not 
metaphorically or metaphysically as St. Paul meant it, 
but in the most proper and literal meaning of these words. 
We - that is, the world - are in God; in God's space, 
and in God's time. And it is because of this ubiquitous 
and sempiternal co-presence with things that God is able 
to exercise His dominion upon them; and it is this 
dominion or, more exactly, the effect of this dominion 
that reveals to us His otherwise unknowable and incom­
prehensible essence: 10 
We know him only by his most wise and excellent contri­
vances of things, and final causes; we admire him for his 
perfections; but we reverence and adore him on account of 
his dominion: for we a dore him as his servants; and a god 
without dominion, providence, and final causes, is nothing 
else but Fate and Nature. Blind metaphysical necessity, 
which is certainly the same always and everywhere, could 
produce no variety of things. All that diversity of natural 
things which we find suited to different times and places 
could arise from nothing but the ideas and will of a Being 
necessarily existing. But, by way of allegory, God is said 
ÀÀ7 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
to see, to speak, to laugh, to love, to hate, to desire, to give, 
to receive, to rejoice, to be angry, to fight, to frame, to 
work, to build; for all our notions of God are taken from 
the ways of mankind by a certain similitude, which, though 
not perfect, has some likeness, however. And thus much con­
cerning God; to discourse of whom from the appearances 
of things, does certainly belong to Natural Philosophy. 
Thus much for God; or for Berkeley. As for gravity, 
or for Leibniz, Newton explains that he does not intro­
duce into philosophy " occult qualities " and magical 
causes, but, on the contrary, restricts his investigation to 
the study and analysis of observable, patent phenomena, 
renouncing, at least for the time being, the causal explana­
tion of the experientially and experimentally established 
laws: 11 
Hitherto we have explained the phenomena of the heavens 
and of our sea by the power of grav,ity, but have not yet 
assigned the cause of this power. This is certain, that it 
must proceed from a cause that penetrates to the very 
centres of the sun and planets, without suffering the least 
diminution of its force; that operates not according to the 
quantity of the surfaces of the particles upon which it acts 
(as mechanical causes used to do) , but according to the 
quantity of the solid matter which they contain, and propa­
gates its virtue on all sides to immense distances, decreasing 
always as the inverse square of the distances. . . . But 
hitherto I have not been able to discover the cause of those 
properties of gravity from phenomena, and I feign no hypo­
theses; for whatever is not deduced from the phenomena 
is to be called an hypothesis; and hypotheses, whether 
metaphysical or physical, whether of occult qualities or 
mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy. In 
this philosophy particular propositions are inferred from the 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
phenomena, and afterwards rendered general by induction. 
Thus it was that the impenetrability, the mobility, and the 
impulsive force of bodies, and the laws of molion and of 
gravitation, were discovered. And to us it is enough that 
gravity does really exist, and act according to the laws 
which we have explained, and abundantly serves to account 
for all the motions of the celestial bodies, and of our sea. 
" I  feign no hypotheses 
. . . " 12 Hypotheses non fingo 
. . . a phrase that became extremely famous and . also 
like all, or nearly all, celebrated utterances torn out of 
their context, completely perverted in its meaning. " I  
feign no hypotheses." Of course not; why should Newton 
" feign hypotheses," that is, fictitious and fanciful con­
ceptions not deduced from phenomena and having there­
fore no basis in reality? Hypotheses, H whether of occult 
qualities or mechanical have no place in experimental 
philosophy " - of course not, as this kind of hypothesis 
is, by definition, either false or at least unable to conduce 
to experiments and be checked and confirmed (or dis­
proved) by them. Gravity is not a hypothesis, or an 
" occult " quality. The existence of gravity, insofar as it 
is a statement about the behaviour of bodies, or about 
the existence of centripetal forces in consequence of which 
bodies, instead of moving in straight lines (as they should, 
according to the principle or law of inertia), are deflected 
and move in curves, is a patent fact; the identification 
of the cosmical " force " which determines the motion of 
planets with that in consequence to which bodies fall, 
that is move towards the center of the earth, is certainly 
, 
an important discovery. But the assumption of the 
existence in bodies of a certain force which enables them 
to act upon" other bodies and to attract them is not a 

C L O S  E D W O R  L D  to Infinite Universe 
hypothesis either. Not even one that makes use of occult 
qualities. It is mere and pure nonsense. 
As for " mechanical " hypotheses, that is, those of Des­
cartes, Huygens and Leibniz, they have no place in experi­
mental philosophy simply because they attempt to do 
something that cannot be done, as Newton hints rather 
broadly, indeed at the very beginning of the General 
Scholium where he shows that " the hypothesis of vortices 
is pressed with many difficulties." Mechanical - feigned 
- hypotheses, as his pupil and editor Roger Cotes ex­
plains in his famous preface to the second edition of 
the Principia, are the special and favorite dish of the 
Cartesians, who, moreover, are conduced by them into 
the assumptions of truly and really " occult " properties 
and realities. Thus having explained the sterility of 
Aristotelian and scholastic philosophy of nature, Cotes 
continues: 18 
Others have' endeavored to apply their labors to greater 
advantage by rejecting that useless medley of words [of the 
scholastic natural philosophy]. They assume that all matter 
is homogeneous, and' that the variety of forms which is 
seen in bodies arises from some very plain and simple rela­
tions of the component particles. And by going from simple 
things to those which are more compounded they certainly 
proceed right, if they attribute to those primary relations 
no other relations than those which Nature has given. 
But when they take a liberty of imagining at pleasure 
unknown figures and magnitudes, and uncertain situations 
and motions of the parts, and moreover of supposing occult 
fluids, freely pervading the pores of bodies, endued with an 
all-performing subtility, and agitated with occult motions, 
they run out into dreams and chimeras, and neglect the 
true constitution of things, which certainly is not to be 
fl30 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
derived from fallacious conjectures, when we can scarce 
reach it by the most certain observations. 
Those who 
assume hypotheses as first principles of their speculations, 
although they afterwards proceed with the greatest accu­
racy from those principles, may indeed form an ingenious 
romance, but a romance it will still be. 
As for Leibniz, whom Cotes does not mention by name, 
yet clearly, though somewhat parodistically, hints at, he 
is no better than the Cartesians; or perhaps even worse, 
as he assumes the existence around " the comets and 
planets . . .  of atmospheres . . .  which by their own 
nature move around the sun and describe conic sections " 
(an unmistakable allusion to the " harmonic circulation " 
of the great German mathematician and arch-foe of New­
ton) , a theory which Cotes declares to be a " fable " as 
fantastic as that of the Cartesian vortices, and of which 
he presents a rather witty and biting parody: 14 
Galileo has shown that when a stone projected moves in 
a parabola, its deflection into that curve from its rectilinear 
path is occasioned by the gravity of the stone towards the 
earth, that is, by an o ccult quality. But now somebody, 
more cunning than he, may come to explain the cause after 
this manner. He will suppose a certain subtile matter, not 
discernible by our sight, our touch, or any other of our · 
senses, which fills the spaces which are near and contiguous 
to the surface of the earth, and that this matter is carried 
with different directions, and various, and often contrary, 
motions, describing parabolic curves. Then see how easily 
he may account for the deflection of the stone above spoken 
of. The stone, says he, floats in this subtile fluid, and fol­
lowing its motion, can't choose but describe the same figure. 
But the fluid moves in parabolic curves, and therefore the 
fl31 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
stone must move in a parabola, of course. Would not the 
acuteness of this philosopher be thought very extraordinary, 
who could deduce the appearances of Nature from mechani­
cal causes, matter and motion, so clearly that the meanest 
man may understand it? Or indeed should not we smile to 
see this new Galileo taking so much mathematical pains to 
introduce occult qualities into philosophy, from whence they 
have been so happily excluded? But I am ashamed to dwell 
so long upon trifles. 
Trifles? As a matter of fact, we are not dealing with 
trifles. The use of " hypotheses " constitutes, indeed, a 
deep and dangerous perversion of the very meaning and 
aim of natural philosophy: 15 
The business of true philosophy is to derive the natures 
of things from causes truly existent, and to inquire after 
those laws on which the Great Creator actually chose to 
found this most beautiful Frame of the World, not those 
by which he might have done the same, had he so pleased. 
Yet the partisans of mechanical hypotheses, that is, 
once more, the Cartesians - and Leibniz - not only for­
get this fundamental rule, they go much farther and, by 
the denial of void space as impossible, they impose upon 
God a certain determinate manner of action, restrict his 
power and freedom, and subject him, thus, to necessity; 
finally, they deny altogether that the world was freely 
created by God. A teaching not only infamous, but also 
false (as Newton has shown) : 16 
Therefore they will at last sink into the mire of that 
infamous herd who dream that all things are gove:r:ned by 
fate and not by providence, and that matter exists by the 
necessity of its nature always and everywhere, being infinite 
232 
C L O S  E D W 0 R I..j D to Infinite Universe 
and eternal. But supposing these things, it must be also 
everywhere uniform; for variety of forms is entirely incon­
sistent with necessity. It must be also unmoved; for if it 
be necessarily moved in any determinate direction, with any 
determinate velocity, it will by a like necessity be moved 
in a different direction with a different velocity; but it can 
never move in different directions with different velocities; 
therefore it must be unmoved. Without all doubt this 
world, so diversified with that variety of forms and motions 
we find in it, could arise from nothing but the perfectly 
free will of God directing and presiding over all. 
From this fountain it is that those laws, which we call 
the laws of Nature, have flowed, in which there appear 
many traces indeed of the most wise contrivance, but not 
the least shadow of necessity. These therefore we must 
not seek from uncertain conjectures, but learn them from 
observations and experiments. He who is presumptuous 
enough to think that he can find the true principles of 
physics and the laws of natural things by the force alone 
of his own mind, and the internal light of his reason, must 
either suppose that the world exists by necessity, and by 
the same necessity follows the laws proposed; or if the order 
6f Nature was established by the will of God, that himself, 
a miserable reptile, can tell what was fittest to be done. 
All sound and true philosophy is founded on the appearance 
of things; and if these phenomena inevitably draw us, 
against our wills, to such principles as most clearly mani­
fest to us the most excellent counsel and supreme dominion 
of the All-wise and Almighty Being, they are not therefore 
to be laid aside because some men may perhaps dislike 
them. These men may call them miracles or occult qualities, 
but names maliciously given ought not to be a disadvantage 
to the things themselves, unless these men will say at last 
that all philosophy ought to be founded in atheism. Phi-
233 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
losophy must not be corrupted in compliance with these 
men, for the order of things will not be changed. 
We see now clearly why we must not feign hypotheses. 
Hypotheses, especially mechanical ones, implying the re­
jection of void space and the assertion of infinity and 
therefore of the necessity of matter, are not only false; 
they lead straight away towards atheism. 
Mechanical hypotheses concerning gravity, as a matter 
of fact, deny God's action in the world and push him out 
of it. It is indeed, practically certain - and this knowl­
edge makes the " feigning of hypotheses " completely non­
sensical - that the true and ultimate cause of gravity 
is the action of the " spirit " of God. Newton therefore 
concludes his General Sckolium: 17 
And now we might add something concerning a certain 
most subtle spirit which pervades and lies hid in all gross 
bodies; by the force and action of which spirit the particles 
of bodies attract one another at near distances, and cohere, 
if contiguous; and electric bodies operate to greater dis­
tances, as well repelling as attracting the neighbouring cor­
puscles; and light is emitted, reflected, refracted, inflected, 
and heats bodies; and all sensation is excited, and the 
members of animal bodies move at the command of the 
will, namely, by the vibrations of this spirit, mutually propa­
gated along the solid filaments of the nerves, from the 
outward organs of sense to the brain, and from the brain 
into the muscles. But these are things that cannot be 
explained in few words, nor are we furnished with that 
sufficiency of experiments which is required to an accurate 
determination and demonstration of the laws by which this 
electric and elastic spirit operates. 
XI. The Work-Day God 
and the God of the Sabbath 
Newton 
& Leibniz 
Newton's veiled and Roger Cotes' open counterattack 
upon the " plenists " did not remain unanswered. If the 
Cartesians, properly speaking, did not react, Leibniz, in 
a letter to the Princess of Wales/ written in November 
1715, replied to the accusations formulated by Cotes by 
expressing to his august correspondent his misgivings 
concerning the weakening of religion and the spread of 
materialism and godless philosophies in England, where 
some people attributed materiality not only to souls but 
even to God, where Mr. Locke doubted the immateriality 
and the immortality of the soul, and where Sir Isaac 
Newton and his followers professed rather low and un­
worthy ideas about the power and wisdom of God. 
Leibniz wrote: 2 
Sir Isaac Newton says, that Space is an Organ, which God 
makes use of to perceive Things by. But if God stands in 
need of any Organ to perceive Things by, it will follow, 
that they do not depend altogether upon him, nor were 
produced by him. 
Á35 

C L O S E D  W O R L D , to Infinite Universe 
Sir Isaac Newton, and his Followers, have also a very 
odd Opinion concerning the Work of God. According to 
their Doctrine, God Almighty wants to wind up his Watch 
from Time to Time: Otherwise it would cease to move. 
He had not, it seems, sufficient Foresight to make it a 
perpetual Motion. Nay, the Machine of God's making, is 
so imperfect, according to these Gentlemen, that he is 
obliged to clean it now and then by an extraordinary Con­
course, and even to mend it, as a Clockmaker mends his 
Work; who must consequently be so much the more unskil­
ful a Workman, as he is often obliged to mend his Work 
and to set it Right. According to My Opinion, the same 
Force and Vigour remains always in the World, and only 
passes from one part of Matter to another, agreeably to 
the Laws of Nature, and the beautiful pre-established Order. 
An accusation of the kind formulated by Leibniz could 
not, of course, be left without refutation. Yet, as it was 
obviously below the dignity and standing of Sir Isaac ­
who, moreover, hated an polemics and public discus­
sions - to do it himself, the task fell upon the shoulders 
of Dr. Samuel Clarke, the faithful pupil and friend oࡓ 
Newton, who translated his Opticks into Latin,3 and, as 
far back as 1697, stuffed with Newtonian footnotes his 
translation of Rohault's Cartesian Physics. A long-drawn­
out and extremely interesting correspondence resulted, 
which ended only with the death of Leibniz, and which 
throw'S a vivid light upon the conflicting positions of the 
two philosophers (Leibniz and Newton) as well as upon 
the fundamental issues that were in question. 
Thus, Dr. Clarke, though recognizing the deplorable 
fact that there were, in England as elsewhere, persons 
who denied even natural religion or corrupted it entirely, 
+86 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
explained that it was due to the spread of false material­
istic philosophies (which were also responsible for the 
materialization of the soul and even God, mentioned by 
Leibniz) ; pointed out that these people were most effec­
tively combatted by the mathematical philosophy, the 
only philosophy which proves that matter is the smallest 
and the least important part of the universe.4 As for Sir 
Isaac Newton, he does not say that space is an organ 
which God uses in order to perceive things, nor that God 
needs any means for perceiving them. Quite the con­
trary, he says that God, being everywhere, perceives them 
by his immediate presence in the very space where they 
are. And it is just in order to explain the immediacy of 
this perception that Sir Isaac Newton - comparing God's 
perception of things with the mind's perception of ideas 
- said that infinite space is, so to speak, as the sensorium 
of the Omnipresent God.4a 
From the point of view of the Newtonian, Leibniz's 
reproach of belittling God's power and wisdom by 
obliging Him to repair and to wind up the world clock 
is both unfair and unjustified; on the contrary, it is just 
by His constant and vigilant action, by conferring on the 
world new energy that prevents its decay into chaotic 
disorder and immobility, that God manifests His presence 
in the world and the blessing of His providence. A Car­
tesian, or a Leibnizian God, interested only in conserving 
in its being a mechanical clockwork set once and forever, 
and endowed, once and forever with a constant amount 
of energy, would be nothing better than an absent God. 
Clarke therefore states rather wickedly that the assimila­
tion of the world to a perfect mechanism moving without 
God's intervention,5 
+87 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
. is the Notion of Materialism and Fate, and tends 
(under pretence of making God a Supra-Mundane Intelli­
gence) to exclude Providence and God's Government in 
reality out of the World. And by the same Reason that a 
Philosopher can represent all Things going on from the 
beginning of the Creation, without any Government or 
Interposition of Providence, a Sceptick will easily Argue 
still farther Backwards, and suppose that Things have from 
Eternity gone on (as they now do) without any true Crea­
tion or Original Author at all, but only what such Arguers 
call All-Wise and Eternal Nature. If a King had a Kingdom 
wherein all Things would continually go on without his 
Government or Interposition, or without his Attending to 
and Ordering what is done therein; It would be to him, 
merely a Nominal Kingdom; nor would he in reality deserve 
at all the Title of King or Governor. And as those Men, 
who pretend that in an Earthly Government Things may 
go on perfectly well without the King himself ordering or 
disposing of any Thing, may reasonably be suspected that 
they would like very well to set the King aside: so who­
soever contends, that the Course of the World can go on 
without the Continual direction of God, the Supreme Gov­
ernor; his Doctrine does in Effect tend to exclude God out 
of the World. 
Confronted with Dr. Clarke's reply that rather unex­
pectedly placed him under the obligation to defend him­
self against Clarke's sly insinuations, Leibniz struck back 
by pointing out that " mathematical " principles are not 
opposed to, but identical with, those of materialism and 
have been claimed by Democritus and Epicurus as well 
as by Hobbes; that the problem dealt with is not a mathe­
matical but a metaphysical one, and that metaphysics, 
in contradistinction to mere mathematics, has to be based 
238 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite UnivefSe 
on the principle of sufficient reason; that this principle, 
applied to God, necessarily implies the consideration of 
God's wisdom in planning and creating the universe, and 
that, vice versa, the neglect of this principle (Leibniz 
does not say so outright, yet he suggests that such is the 
case of the Newtonians) leads directly to the world-view 
of Spinoza, or, on the other hand, to a conception of God 
closely resembling that of the Socinians,5a whose God is 
so utterly lacking in foresight that He has " to live from 
day to day." The N ewtonians point out that, according 
to them, and in contradistinction to the materialists, 
matter is the least important part of the universe, which 
is chiefly constituted by void space. But after all, Demo­
critus and Epicurus admitted void space just as Newton 
does, and if they differed from him in believing that 
there was much more matter in the world than there is 
according to Newton, they were in this respect preferable 
to the latter; indeed, more matter means more oppor­
tunities for God to exercise His wisdom and power, and 
that is a reason, or at least one of the reasons, why, in 
truth, there is no void space at aU in the universe, and 
that space is everywhere full of matter. 
But to come back to Newton. 
In spite of all the 
explanations of his friends,6 
I find [writes Leibniz] in express Words, in the Appendix 
to Sir Isaac Newton's Opticks, that Space is the Sensorium 
of God. But the Word Sensorium hath always signified the 
Organ of Sensation. He, and his Friends, may now, if they 
think fit, explain themselves quite otherwise: I shall not be 
against it. 
And as for the accusation of making the world a self-
239 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
sufficing mechanism and reducing God to the 'status of 
an intelligentia 8upra-mundana, Leibniz replies that he 
never did so, that is, that he never denied that the created 
world needed God's continuous concourse, but only as­
serted that the world is a clock that does not need 
mending, since, before creating it, God saw, or foresaw, 
everything; and that he never excluded God from the 
world, though he did not, as his adversaries seem to do, 
transform Him into the soul of the world. Indeed, if 
God has, from time to time, to correct the natural 
development of the world, he can do it either by supe.r­
natural means, that is, by a miracle (but to explaill 
natural things and processes by niiracles is absurd) ; or 
He can do it in a natural way: in this case God is 
included in nature and becomes anima mundi. Finally/ 
The comparison of a King, under whose Reign every 
thing should go on without his Interposition, is by no me³ns 
to the present Purpose; since God preserves every thIng 
continually, and nothing can subsist without him. His King­
dom therefore is not a N aminal one. 
Otherwise we should have to say that a Prince who has 
so well educated his subjects that they never infringe his 
laws is a Prince only in name. 
Leibniz does not express, as yet, his ultimate objec­
tions to Newton; the fundamental opposition appears 
nevertheless pretty clearly: the God of Leibniz is not 
the Newtonian Overlord who makes the world as he 
wants it and conti²ues to act upon it as the Biblical God 
did in the first six days of Creation. He is, if I may con­
tinue the simile, the Biblical God on the Sabbath Day, 
the God who has finished his work and who finds it good, 
(40 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
nay, the very best of all possible worlds, and who, there­
fore, has no more to act upon it, or in it, but only to 
conserve it and to preserve it in being. This God is, at 
the same time - once more in contradistinction to the 
Newtonian one - the supremely rational Being, the prin­
ciple of sufficient reason personified, and for this very 
reason, He can act only according to this principle, that 
is, only in order to produce the greatest perfection and 
plenitude. He cannot therefore - any more than the God 
of Giordano Bruno with whom (in spite of His being a 
mathematician and a scientist) He has a great deal in 
common - either make a finite universe, or suffer void 
space either inside or outside the world. 
It is hardly surprising that, having read Leibniz's 
answer to his criticism, Dr. Clarke felt himself compelled 
to reply: Leibniz's hints were too damaging,8 his tone too 
superior, and, moreover, his insistence on the implications 
of the term " sensorium," somewhat hastily and perhaps 
unhappily used by N ewton, far too nlenacing to allow 
Clarke to leave Leibniz in the position of having had the 
last word. 
Starting thus from the beginning, Clarke explains 9 that 
the " principles of rna thema tical philosophy " are by no 
means identical with, but radically opposed to, those of 
materialism, precisely in that they deny the possibility 
of a purely naturalistic explanation of the world and 
postulate - or demonstrate - its production by the pur­
poseful action of a free and intelligent Being. And as for 
Leibniz's appeal to the principle of sufficient reason, it is 
true that nothing exists without sufficient reason: where 
there is no cause, there is also no effect; yet the said 
(41 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
sufficient reason can be simply the will of God. Thus, for 
instance, if one considers why a system, or a certain piece, 
of matter is created in one place, and another one in 
another, and not vice versa, there can be no other reason 
for that than the pure will of God. It it were not so ­
that is, if the principle of sufficient reason were taken 
absolutely, as Leibniz does - and if this will could never 
act unless predetermined by some cause, as a balance 
cannot move unless some weight make it turn, God would 
have no liberty of choice, which would be replaced by 
necessity. 
As a matter of fact, Dr. Clarke subtly suggests that 
Leibniz, indeed, deprives his God of all liberty. ·· Thus 
he forbids him to create a limited quantity of matter 
. . ' .  yet by the same argument one could prove that 
the number of men or of any kind of creatures whatso­
ever should be infinite (which, of course, would imply the 
eternity and necessity of the world) . 
As for the (N ewtonian) God, he is neither an intelU­
gentia mundana, nor an intelligentia supra-mundana; nor 
is he an anima mundi, but an intelligence which is every­
where, in the world and outside it, in everything, and 
above everything. And he has no organs as Leibniz per­
sists in insisting .10 
The Word Sensory does not properly signify the Organ, 
but the Place of Sensation. The Eye, the Ear, &c. are 
Organs, but not Sensoria. 
Moreover, Newton does not say that place is a sensorium, 
but calls it thus only by way of comparison, in order 
to indicate that God really and effectively perceives things 
in themselves, where they are, being present to them, 
24Á 
C L O S  E ·D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
and not purely transcendent - present, acting, forming 
and reforming (which last term, just as the term " cor­
recting," must be understood in respect to us, or to God's 
works, not indeed as implying change in God's designs) : 
thus if 11 
the present Frame of the Solar System (for instance) 
according to the present Laws of Motion, will in time fall 
into Confusion; and perhaps, after That, will be amended 
or put into a new Form 
it will be new in respect to us, or to itself, not new in 
respect to God whose eternal plan implied just such an 
intervention in the normal course ot events. To forbid 
God to do that, or to declare all God's action in the world 
to be miraculous or supernatural, means excluding God 
from the government of the world. It may be, concedes 
Clarke, that in this case He would still remain its Creator' , 
He would certainly no longer be its governor. 
The second paper of Dr. Clarke made Leibniz angry. 
Why, he complains, did they grant me this impQrtant 
principle that nothing happens without a sufficient reason 
why it should be so rather than otherwise, but they grant 
it only in words, not in fact. Moreover, they use against 
me one of my own demonstrations against real absolute 
space, that idol (in the sense of Bacon) of some modern 
Englishmen. Leibniz is right, of course: to say, as Clarke 
does, that God's will is, as such, a sufficient reason for 
anything, is to reject the principle, and to reject also the 
thorough-going rationalism which supports it. And to 
use the conception of homogeneous, infinite, real space as 
a basis for the demonstration that God's free (that is, 
À43 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
unmotivated, irrational) will can, and must, be considered 
as a " sufficient reason " for something, is to insult the 
intelligence; and to force Leibniz to discuss the problem 
of space (something he did not very much want to do) : 12 
These Gentlemen maintain therefore, that Space is a real 
absolute Being. But this involves them in great difficulties; 
for such a Being must needs be Eternal and Infinite. Hence 
Some have believed it to be God himself, or, one of his 
Attributes, his Immensity. But since Space consists of Parts, 
it is not a thing which can belong to God. 
All that, as we know, is perfectly true. Nevertheless 
Leibniz's criticism of the Newtonian or, more generally, 
the absolutist conception of space, forgets that those who 
hold it deny that space consists of parts - partes extra 
partes - and assert, on the contrary, that it is indivisible. 
Leibniz is perfectly right, too, in asserting that 13 
Space is Something absolutely Uniform; and, without the 
Things placed in it, One Point of Space does not absolutely 
differ in any respect whatsoever from Another Point of 
Space. Now from hence it follows, (supposing Space to be 
Something in it self, besides the Order ' of Bodies among 
themselves,) that it is impossible there should be a Reason, 
why God, preserving the same Situations of Bodies among 
themselves, should have placed them in Space after one 
certain particular manner, and not otherwise; why every 
thing was not placed the quite contrary way, for instance, 
by changing East into West. 
Yet the conclusions drawn by Leibniz and by Clarke 
from the same, hypothetically admitted facts are dia­
metrically opposed. 'Leibniz believes that in this case 
' 
, 
that is, in the absence of reasons for choice, God would 
n44 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
not be able to act; and vice versa, from the fact of the 
choice and of acting, he deduces the rejection of the 
fundamental hypothesis, that is, the existence of an abso­
lute space, and proclaims that space, like motion, is purely 
relative, or even more, is nothing else but the order of 
coexistence of bodies and would not exist if there were 
none, just as time is nothing else but the orde± of. succes­
sion of things and events, and would not eXIst If there 
were no things or events to be ordered. 
The Newtonian, on the other hand, concludes the free­
dom of God, that is, the non-necessity of a determining 
reason or motive for God's choice and action. For Leibniz, 
of course, this unmotivated choice is vague indifference, 
which is the contrary of true freedom; but for the New­
tonian, it is the absolutely motivated action of the Leib­
nizian God which is synonymous with necessity. 
The N ewtonians assert that, left to itself, the motive 
force of the universe would decrease and finally disappear. 
But, objects Leibniz,14 
if active Force should diminish in the Universe, by the 
Natural Laws which God has established; so that there 
should be need for him to give a new Impression in order 
to restore that Force, like an Artist, Mending the Imper­
fections of his Machine; the Disorder would not only be 
with respect to Us, but also with respect to God himself. He 
might have prevented it and taken better M°asures to 
avoid such an Inconvenience: And therefore, Indeed, he 
has actually done it. 
The Newtonians protest against Leibniz's assertion that 
they make nature a perpetual miracle. And yet, if God 
wanted to make a free body revolve around a fixed center, 
though not acted upon by any other creature, He would 
+45 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
not be able to achieve it without a miracle since such a 
motion cannot be explained by the nature of bodies. For 
a free body naturally moves away from a curved line 
along its tangent. Thus mutual attraction of bodies is 
something miraculous as it cannot be explained by their 
nature. 
From now on the discussion broadens and deepens. 
The H papers " become longer and longer. The skirmish 
develops into a pitched battle. Leibniz and Clarke go at 
each other hammer and tongs. It is true that, to a large 
extent, they simply repeat, or elaborate, the same argu­
ments - philosophers, I have already said it, seldom, 
if ever, convince each other, and a discussion between two 
philosophers resembles as often as not a " dialogue de 
sourds " - and yet they come more and more into the 
open, and the fundamental issues come more and more 
to the foreground. 
Thus, for instance, in his third paper, Dr. Clarke ࡔe­
objects to Leibniz that it is preposterous to subject God 
to the law of strict motivation and to deprive Him of 
the faculty of making a choice between two identical 
cases. 
Indeed, when God creates a particle of matter 
in one place rather than in another, or when He places 
three identical particles in a certain order rather than in 
another, He cannot have any reason for doing so except 
His pure will. The perfect equivalence of the cases, a 
consequence of the identity of material particles and of 
the isomorphism of space, is no more a reason for denying 
God's freedom of choice than it is an objection to the 
existence of an absolute, real and infinite space. And as 
Â46 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
for its relation to God, misrepresented by Leibniz, Clarke 
states the correct, Newtonian, that is, More's, doctrine: 15 
Space is not a Being, an eternal and infhiite Being, but a 
Property [attribute], or a consequence of :the Existe¯ce of a 
Being infinite and eternal. Infinite Space, IS UmmensȎty: But 
Immensity is not God: And therefore InfinIte Space, IS not 
God. Nor is there any Difficulty in what is here alleged 
about Space having Parts. For Infinite Space is 0.ne, abso­
lutely and essentially indivisible: And to suppose It parted, 
is a contradiction in Terms; because there must be Space 
in the Partition it self; which is to suppose it parted, an? 
yet not parted at the same time. The Immensity or Omn't­
presence of God, is no luore a dividing of his Su.bs®anc.e 
into Parts; than his Duration, or continuance of eXIstIng IS 
a dividing of his existence into Parts. There is no difficulty 
here, but what arises from the figurative Abuse of the 
Word, Parts. 
It is not Newton's admission, it is Leibniz's denial, of 
absolute space that leads to difficulties and absurdities. 
Indeed, if space were only relative, and nothing ?ut the 
order and arrangement of things, then a mere dIsplace­
ment of a system of bodies from one place to another 
(for instance of our world to the region of the farthest 
fixed stars) Tould be no change at all, and it would 
follow therefrom· that the two places would be the same 
place . . . .  
16 It would follow also that, if God should move 
the whole world in a straight line, then, whatever the 
speed of this motion, the world would rࡕmain in She 
same place, and that nothing would happen If that mohon 
were suddenly stopped.17 
And if time were only an order of succession, then it 
would follow that, if God had created the · world some 
Â47 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
millions of years earlier, it would, nevertheless, have been 
created at the same time. 
We shall see in a moment what Leibniz has to object 
to in Dr. Clarke's reasonings (he will find them meaning­
less) ; as for us, we have to admit that they are by 
no means as absurd as may seem at first glance; they 
only represent, or imply, a formal breach 
(already 
accomplished by Henry More) with the main philosophico­
theological tradition to which Leibniz remains funda­
mentally faithful: the Newtonians, as we know, do not 
attach time and space to creation but to God, and do 
not oppose God's eternity and immensity to sempiternity 
and spatial infinity, but, on the contrary, identify them. 
Clarke thus explains: 18 
God, being Omnipresent, i$ really present to everything, 
Essentially and Substantially. His Presence manifests it 
self indeed by its Operation, but it could not operate if it 
was not There. 
Nothing, indeed, can act without being there; not even 
God: there is no action at a distance; not even for God. 
Yet as God is everywhere " there," He can, and does, act 
everywhere, and therefore, Leibniz's assertion to the con­
trary notwithstanding, He can achieve without miracle, 
but by His own -or some creature's - action that a body 
be deflected from the tangent and can even make a body 
turn around a fixed center instead of running away along 
the tangent; whether God in order to produce this effect 
acts Himself, or through a creature, is of no avail: in 
neither case would it be a miracle as Leibniz pretends. 
It is clear that, for Clarke, Leibniz's assertion _. as well 
as his rejection as " imperfection " of the diminution of 
248 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
the moving power in the world - is based on the assump­
tion of the necessary self-sufficiency of nature; a concep­
tion, as we know, utterly unacceptable for the N ew!onians 
who see in it a means of excluding God from the world. 
But let us come back to Clarke's objection to Leibniz's 
conception of space. The first argument of Samuel Clarke 
is not very good, as the displacement imagined by him 
would be not only absolute but also relative to the aggre­
gate of the fixed stars. But the second one is perfectly 
valid: in the infinite universe of Newtonian physics any, 
and every, body can be considered as possessing - or nࡖt 
possessing - a uniform, rectilinear motion in a certaul 
direction, and though the two cases would he perfectly 
indistinguishable one from another, the passage from the 
one to the other would be accompanied by very deter­
mined effects. And if the motion were not uniform but 
accelerated, we should even be able to perceive it (some­
thing that would not happen if motion and space were 
only relative) : all that is an inevitable consequence of the 
Newtonian principle of inertia. 
Clarke, of course, does not stop here. For him - as for 
Bentley or Raphson - the radical distinction of matter 
and space implies the belief in the possible and perhaps 
even real finitude of the universe. Why, indeed, should 
matter, which occupies so small a part of space, be infinite? 
Why should we not admit, on the · contrary, that· God has 
created a determined amount of it, just as much as was 
needed for this very world, that is, for the realization 
of the aims that God had in creating it? 
The fourth paper of Leibniz leads us directly to the 
deepest metaphysical problems. Leibniz starts by as-
249 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
serting with the utmost energy the absolute panarchy of 
the principle of sufficient reason: no action without choice, 
no choice without determining motive, no motive without 
a difference between the conflicting possibilities; and 
therefore - an affirmation of overwhelming importance ­
no two identical objects or equivalent situations are real, 
or even possible, in the world.19 
As for space, Leibniz reasserts just as vigorously that 
space is a function of bodies and that, where there are 
no bodies, there is also no space.20 
The same reason, which shows that extra-mundane Space 
is imaginary, proves that All empty Space is an imaginary 
thing; for they differ only as greater and less. 
This does not mean, of course, that, according to Leibniz, 
the world and space are both limited in extension, as 
was thought by the mediaeval philosophers who spoke 
about the " imaginary " space " outside " of the world; 
but, on the contrary, that void space, be it outside or 
inside the world, is pure fiction. 
Space, everywhere, is 
full; indeed,21 
There is no possible Reason, that can limit the quantity of 
Matter; and therefore such limitation can have no place. 
Now, let us fancy a Space wholly empty, God could have 
placed some Matter in it, without derogating in any respect 
from all other things; Therefore he hath actually placed 
SOIne Matter in That Space: Therefore, there is no Space 
wholly Empty: Therefore All is full.22 The same Argument 
proves that there is no Corpuscle, but what is Subdivided.23 
Moreover, the idea of void space is a metaphysically 
impossible idea, against which Leibniz erects objections 
5250 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
analogous to, and probably derived from, those that Des­
cartes opposed to Henry More: 24 
If Space is a property or Attribute, it must be the 
Property of some Substance. But what Substance will that 
Bounded empty Space be an Affection or Property of, which 
the Persons I am arguing with, suppose to be between 
Two Bodies? 
This is a reasonable question, but a question to which 
Henry More had already given an answer, which Leibniz 
however chooses to disregard; he continues therefore: 25 
If Infinite Space is Immensity, finite Space will be the 
Opposite to Immensity, that is, 'twill be JJlensurability, or 
limited Extension. Now Extension must be the Affection of 
some thing extended. But if That Space be empty, it will 
be an Attribute without a Subject, an Extension without 
any thing extended. Wherefore by making Space a Property, 
the Author falls in with My Opinion, which makes it an 
Order of things, and not any thing absolute. 
By no means; of cours e  there is no attribute without 
substance; but as we know, tor the "Author " that sub­
stance is God. Leibniz does not admit it, and develops 
the awkward consequences of the absolutist conception: 26 
If Space is an absolute reality; far from being a Property 
or an Accident opposed to Substance, it will have a greater 
reality than . Substances themselves. God cannot destroy it, 
nor even change it in any respect. It will be not only 
immense in the whole, but also Immutable and Eternal in 
every part. There will be an infinite number of Eternal 
things besides God. 
As we know, it is just what the Newtonians, or the Henry 
251 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
]Vlore-ists assert, denying, of course, that space is some­
thing " besides '" God. But their teaching, according to 
Leibniz, implies contradictions: 27 
To say that Infinite Space has no Parts, is to say that 
it does not consist of finite Spaces; and that Infinite Space 
might subsist, though all finite Spaces should be reduced to 
nothing. It would be as if one should say, in the Cartesian 
Supposition of a material extended unlimited World that 
such a World might subsist, though all the Bodies of which 
it consists, should be reduced to nothing. 
By no means; Leibniz does not understand the difference 
between his own conception of space - a lattice of quan­
titative relations - and that of Newton, for whom space 
is a unity which precedes and makes possible all relations 
that can be discovered in it. 
Or, more probably, since 
it is rather difficult to believe that there was something 
that Leibniz did not understand, he does understand, 
but does not admit the conception of Newton. Thus he 
writes: 28 
If Space and Time were .anything absolute, that is, if they 
were any thing else, besides certain Orders of Things; then 
indeed my assertion would be a Contradiction. But since it 
is not so, the Hypothesis [that Space and Time are any 
thing absolute] is c()ntradictory, that is 'tis an impossible 
Fiction. 
As for the examples and counter-objection of Dr. Clarke, 
Leibniz deals with them in a rather off-hand manner. 
Thus he reasserts that those who fancy that the active 
powers decrease by themselves in the world do not know 
the principal laws of nature; that to imagine God moving 
. the world in a straight line is to compel him to do some-
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
thing wholly meaningless, an action without rime or 
reason, that is, an action that it is impossible to attribute 
to God. 
Finally, concerning attraction, which Clarke 
endeavors 
to 
present 
as 
something natural, Leibniz 
repeats: 29 
'Tis also a supernatural thing, that Bodies should attract 
one another at a distance, without any intermediate Means; 
and that a Body should move round, without receding in 
the Tangent, though nothing hinders it from so receding. 
For these Effects cannot be explained by the Nature of 
things. 
Leibniz's repeated appeal to the principle of sufficient 
reason did not, needless to say, convince or even appease 
Clarke. Quite the contrary: it seemed to him to confirm 
his worst apprehensions. In the fourth reply he writes: 30 
This Notion leads to universal Necessity and Fate, by 
supposing that Motives have the same relation to the Will 
of an Intelligent Agent; as Weights have to a Balance; so 
that of two things absolutely indifferent, an Intelligent 
Agent can no more choose Either, than a Balance can movc 
it self when the Weights on both sides are Equal. But the 
Difference lies here 
in the distinction, disregarded by Leibniz, between a free 
and intelligent being, who is a self-determining agent, and 
a mere mechanism, which, in the last analysis, is always 
passive. If Leibniz were right about the impossibility of 
a plurality of identical objects, no creation would ever 
have been possible; matter, indeed, has one identical 
nature, and we can always suppose that its parts have 
the same dimension and fi.gure.31 
In other terms: the 
253 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
atomic theory is utterly incompatible with Leibniz's con­
ception; which is, of course, perfectly true. For Leibniz 
there cannot be in the world two identical objects; more­
over Leibniz, like Descartes, denies the existence of last, 
indivisible, hard particles of matter, without which New­
tonian physics is inconceivable. 
Leibniz's linking space (and time) with the world, and 
his assertion of the fictitious (imaginary) character of 
void space and " void " time seem to Clarke utterly 
unreasonable; and also full of danger. It is perfectly clear 
that 32 
Extra-mundane Space, (if the material would be Finite 
in its Dimensions,) is not imaginary, but Real. Nor are 
void Spaces in the W orId, merely imaginary. 
I t is the same in respect to time: 33 
Had God created the World but This Moment, it would 
not have been created at the Time it was created. 
The denial of the . possibility for God to give motion to 
the world is no more convincing: 34 
And if God has made (or can make) l\latter Finite in 
Dimensions, the material Universe must consequently be 
in its Nature Moveable; For nothing that is finite, is 
immoveable. 
Leibniz's criticism of the concept of void space is, for 
Clarke, based on a complete misunderstanding of its 
nature and on misuse of metaphysical concepts: 35 
Space void of Body, is the Property [attribute] of an 
incorporeal Substance. Space is not Bounded by Bodies, but 
exists equally within and without Bodies. 
Space is not 
254 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
inclosed between Bodies; but Bodies, existing in unbounded 
Space, are, themselves only, terminated by their own 
Dilnensions. 
Void Space, is not an Attribute without a Subject, 
because, by void Space, we never mean Space void of 
every thing, but void of Body only. In All void Space, God 
is certainly present, and possibly many other Substances 
which are not Matter; being neither Tangible, nor Objects 
of any of Our Senses. 
Space is not a Substance, but a Property [attribute]; And 
if it be a Property [attribute] of That which is necessary, it 
will consequently (as all other Properties [attributes] of 
That which is necessary must do) , exist more necessarily, 
though it be not itself a Substance, than those Substances 
Themselves which are not necessary. Space is immense, 
and immutable, and eternal; and so also is Duration. Yet 
it does not at all from hence follow, that any thing is 
eternal hors de Dieu. For Space and Duration are not 
hors de Dieu, but are caused by, and are immediate and 
necessary Consequences of His Existence. And without 
them, his Eternity and Ubiquity (or Omnipresence) would 
be taken away. 
Having thus established the ontological status of space 
as an attribute of God, Clarke proceeds to the demonstra­
tion that its attribution to God does not constitute a slur 
on His perfection: thus it does not make God divisible. 
Bodies are divisible, that is, can be broken up into parts ,36 
but infinite Space, though it may by Us be partially appre­
hended, that is, may in our Imagination be conceived as 
composed of Parts; yet Those Parts (improperly so called) 
being essentially indiscerpible 37 and immoveable from each 
other, and not partable without an express Contradiction 
À55 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
in Terms, Space consequently is in itself essentially One, 
and absolutely indivisible. 
It is this space which is a precondition of motion; and 
motion in the true and full sense of the word, is absolute 
motion, that is, motion in respect to this space, in which 
places, though perfectly similar, are nevertheless different. 
The reality of this motion proves, at the same time, the 
reality of absolute space: 38 
It is largely insisted on by Sir Isaac Newton in his 
Mathematical Principles (Definit. 8) where, from the Con߱ 
sideration of the Properties, Causes and Effects of Motion, 
he shows the difference between real Motion, or a Bodie's 
being carried from one part of Space to another; and 
relative Motion, which is merely a change of the Order or 
Situation of Bodies with respect to each other. 
The problem of time is exactly parallel to that of space: 39 
It was no impossibility for God to make the World sooner 
or later than he did: Nor is it at all impossible for him to 
destroy it sooner or later than it shall actually be destroyed. 
As to the Notion of the World's Eternity; They who suppose 
Matter and Space to be the same, must indeed suppose the 
World to be not only Infinite and Eternal, but necessarily 
so; even as necessarily as Space and Duration, which depend 
not only on the Will, but on the Existence of God. But 
they who believe that God created Matter in what Quan­
tity, and at what particular Time,. and in what particular 
Spaces he pleased, are here under no difficulty. For the 
Wisdom of God may have very good reasons for creating 
This World, at That Particular Time he did. 
Clarke's reasoning follows the well-trodden path: In­
finity implies necessity, and therefore: 40 
Ã56 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
That God Cannot limit the Quantity of Matter, is an 
Assertion of too great consequence, to be admitted without 
Proof. If he cannot limit the ' Duration of it neither, then 
the material World is both infinite and eternal. necessarily 
and independently upon God. 
Thus we see it once more: the acceptance of absolute 
space as an attribute of God and as the universal con­
tainer or receptacle of everything is the means - the only 
one - to avoid infinity, that is, self-sufficiency of matter, 
and to save the concept of creation: 41 
Space is the Place of All Things, and of All Ideas: Just as 
Duration is the Duration of All Things, and of All Ideas 
. . .
. 
This has no Tendency to make God the Soul of the World. 
Far from making God immersed in the world and thus, 
as Leibniz insinuates, dependent upon the world, the 
Newtonian conception is, according to Clarke, the only 
one that makes Him fully and truly independent of it; 
fully and truly free: 42 
There is no Union between God and the World. The Mind 
of Man might with greater propriety be stiled The Soul 
of the I mages of things which he perceives, than God can 
be stiled the Soul of the World, to which he is present 
throughout, and acts upon it as he pleases, without being 
acted upon by it. 
And it is just because of this independence of God from 
the world that 43 
. . . If no Creatures existed, yet the Ubiquity of God, and 
Continuance of his Existence, would make Space and Dura­
tion to be exactly the same as they are Now. 
Finally, coming back to Leibniz's persistence in mis-
+57 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
understanding Newton's theory 
of 
attraction and in 
wanting to make it a miracle, Clarke (who pointed out 
tha t Leibniz's own theory of the " pre-established har­
mony " between the non-communicating and non-acting­
upon-each-other mind and body has much more right to 
imply a perpetual miracle) explains/4 
That One Body should attract another without any inter­
mediate Means, is indeed not a Miracle, but a Contra­
diction: For 'tis supposing something to act where it is not. 
But the Means by which Two Bodies attract each other, 
may be invisible and intangible, and of a different nature 
from mechanism; and yet, acting regularly and constantly, 
may well be called natural; being much less wonderful than 
Animal-motion, which yet is never called a Miracle. 
Indeed, it is only from the point of view of the Cartesio­
Leibnizian rigid dualism of mind and body, with its 
negation of 
all intermediate entities and consequent 
reduction of material nature to a pure, self-sustaining 
and self-perpetuating mechanism, that the intervention 
in nature of non-mechanical and therefore non-material 
agencies becomes a miracleर 
For Clarke, as for Henry 
More before him, this dualism is, of course, unacceptable. 
Matter does not constitute the whole of nature, but is 
only 
a part of it. 
Nature, therefore, includes both 
mechanical (strioto sensu) and non-mechanical forces and 
agencies, just as " natural " as the purely mechanical 
ones, material as well as immaterial entities which " fill " 
and pervade space and without which there would be 
no unity or structure in the world, or better to say, there 
would not be a world. 
The world, of course, is not an organism, like the animal, 
fl58 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
and possesses no " soul." Yet it can no more be reduced 
to pure mechanism than the animal, in spite of Descartes. 
The vigorous (or, from Leibniz's point of view, obsti­
nate) defense by Dr. Clarke of his (untenable) position; 
the assurance with which he not only accepted the (absurd 
and damaging) 
consequences deduced by Leibniz from 
his premises - the eternity of space - but even went 
beyond them by openly proclaiming that space ( and time) 
were necessary and uncreated attributes of God; the lack 
of insight (or perfidy) 
with which he persisted in mis­
interpreting and misrepresenting Leibniz's principle of 
sufficient reason by identifying the supreme freedom of 
his supremely perfect God, unable to act except according 
to His supreme wisdom (that is, for the realization of the 
absolutely best universe unerringly recognized by Him 
amona' the infinite number of possible ones) , with the 
o 
. 
fatality, necessity and p assivity of a perfect mechanIsm, 
convinced Leibniz that he had to devote even more space 
and effort to the refutation of his adversary; and to the 
correction of the image that the latter presented of Leib-
. , 
. 
nIZ s own VIews. 
Thus . the fifth ( and last) paper addressed by Leibniz 
to the Princess of Wales became a lengthy treatise, the 
full analysis of which w ould lead us too far from our topic. 
It is, for us, sufficient to state that it starts with an 
admirable explanation of the difference between a motive, 
which inclines without compelling and thus preserves the 
spontaneity and the freedom of the subject, and a real 
cause, which necessarily produces its effect, and 
,
of the 
infinite distance that s eparates the moral - that IS, free 
259 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
- necessity of a fully motivated action from the unfree 
and passive necessity of a mechanism. 
Freedom, indeed, for Leibniz, as for most philosophers 
means doing what is good, or best, or what one ought tR 
do, not simply doing what one wants to.45 The laymen, 
alas - and Newton is no better than they - cannot 
make that distinction; they do not recognize freedom in 
the absolute determination of God's action. The laymen 
and 
,
the. theologians, therefore, accuse the philosopherP 
of reJectऱng freedom in favor of necessity, and attribute to 
God actIons utterly . unworthy of Him. 
It is 
however 
evident that it is unreasonable to ask God tO act in Q 
purposeless irrational manner even if 
strictly speaking , 
He
. 
is able - being all-powerful - to
ल 
perform such aN 
actIon. Thus, for instance: 46 
Abs.olutely speaking, it appears that God can make the 
materIal Universe finite in Extension; but the contrary 
appears more agreeable to his Wisdom. 
And it is, of course, even less " agreeable to his Wisdom " 
to move the world in a straight line - why, indeed, should 
God do such a meaningless thing? 47 
And. therefore the Fiction of a material finite Universe 
mov­ng forw¬rd in an infinite empty Space cannot bM 
admItteL. It IS altogether unreasonable and impracticable. 
Fo, besIdes that there is no real Space out of the material 
KnIverse, such· an Action would be without any Design in 
It
,
: .It would be working without doing any thing, agendo 
nzhtl agere. There would happen no Change, which could 
b.e observed «y Any Person whatsoever. These are Imagina­
tIons of Phzlosophers who have incomplete notions, who 
make Space an absolute Reality. 
260 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Leibniz had already s aid it in his preceding paper, and 
even in stronger terms. 
Yet, in that paper he did not' 
tell us all his reasons for rejecting this kind of motion. 
He did not mention precisely the most important one, 
namely that such a motion would be unobservable. It is 
perfectly clear that, if we accept the principle of observ­
ability, absolute motion, or at least absolute uniform 
motion in a straight line, which everybody agrees to be 
unobservable, will be ruled out as meaningless, and only 
relative motion will be acceptable.
Y et in that case, the 
Newtonian formulation of the principle of inertia, stating 
tha t a body remains in its status of rest or uniform 
motion irrespective of what happens to others, and would 
remain in its status of motion or rest even if no other body 
existed, or if all of them were destroyed by God, will 
have to be rejected as meaningless and therefore impos­
sible. But as it is only in such a case that the principle 
of inertia is fully valid, it is not only Newton's formu­
lation of it, but the principle itself that becomes meaning­
less. 
These are rather far-reaching consequences of an 
innocent-looking principle, fully confirmed by the recent 
discussions about relativity, that are, as a matter of fact, 
an aftermath of the largely forgotten discussions of the 
XVllth century. 
Leibniz, of course, does not require that any and every 
motion be actually observed; yet, according to him, it 
must be possible to do so, and that for a rather sur­
prising reason, a reason that shows us the depth of Leib­
niz's opposition to N ewton, and the fidelity of Leibniz 
to old Aristotelian conceptions which modern science has 
been at such p ains to reject and to reform: for Leibniz, 
indeed, motion is still conceived as a change, and not as 
a status: 48 
261 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
. Motion does not indeed depend upon being Observed; 
but it does depend upon being. possible to be Observed. 
There is no Motion, when there is no Change that can be 
Observed. And when there is no Change that can be 
Observed, there is no Change at all. The contrary Opinion 
is grounded upon the Supposition of a real absolute Space, 
which I have demonstratively confuted by the Principle of 
the want of a sufficient Reason of things. 
The principle of observability confirms the relative 
character of motion and space. But relations - another 
far-reaching statement - have no " real ", but only an 
" ideal ", existence. Therefore,49 
since Space in it self is an I deal thing, like Time; Space 
out of the World must needs be imaginary, as the School­
men themselves have acknowledged. The case is the Same 
with empty Space within the World; which I take also to 
be imaginary, for the' reason before alleged. 
The Schoolmen, to tell the truth, meant something 
quite different, and Leibniz knows it better than anyone: 
they conceived the world as finite and wanted to deny 
the existence of real space (and time) outside the world 
- Leibniz, on the contrary, denies the limitation of the 
universe. But in a sense he is right to appeal to them: 
for both time and space are intramundane and have no 
existence outside - or independently from - the created 
world. How, indeed, could time be something in itself, 
something real or even eternal? 50 
It cannot be said, that Duration is Eternal; but that 
Things, which continue always, are Eternal. 
Whatever 
exists of Time and Duration, perishes continually: And 
how can a thing exist Eternally, which, (to speak exactly) , 
Q6Q 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
does never exist at all? For, how can a thing exist, wherªof 
no Part .does ever exist? Nothing of Time does ever eXIst, 
but Instants' and an Instant is not even it self a part of 
Time. WhoJver considers These Observations, will easily 
apprehend that Time can only be an Id©al thi¨g, And tIe 
Analogy between Time and Space, wIll eaSIly make It 
appear that the one is as merely Ideal as the other. 
Yet we must not unduly stress the parallelism betwee,n 
space and time in order not to be conduced
, 
to admIt 
either the infinity of time, that is, the eternIty of the 
world, or the possibility of a finite universe: 51 
. .  , the World's having a Beginning, does not derogate 
from the Infinity of its Duration a parte post; b§t Boun,ds 
of the Universe would derogate from the InfinIty of. Its 
Extension, And therefore it is more reasonable to admIt. 
a 
Beginning of the World, than to admit any BounLs of It; 
that the Character of its infinite Author, may be In Both 
Respects preserved. 
However, those who have admitted the Eternity of the 
World, or, at least, (as some famous Divines have done) 
the possibility of its Eternity, did not, for all that, den:y 
its dependence upon God; as the Author here lays to theIr 
Charge, without any Ground, 
The N ewtonians, of course, do not accept these Leib­
nizian " axioms " (and we have just seen that they have 
very good reasons for not doing so, as they overthrow 
the very foundations of their physics) , and try to save 
absolute space by relating it to God, Leibniz, therefore, 
reminds us of his already formulated objections, which 
he repeats in the pious hope that, finally, he will, succeed 
in convincing his opponent (or, at least, the PrIncess of 
Q63 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Wales) how utterly impossible it is to confer an absolute 
existence on void space.52 
I objected, that Space, taken for something real and 
absolute without Bodies, would be a thing eternal, impas­
sible, and independent upon God. The Author endeavours 
to elude this Difficulty, by saying that Space is a property 
[attribute] of God. 
I objected further, that if Space be a property [attribute], 
and infinite Space be the Immensity of God; finite Space 
will be the Extension or Mensurability of something finite. 
And therefore the Space taken up by a Body, will be the 
Extension of that Body. Which is an absurdity; since a 
Body can change Space, but cannot leave its Extension. 
Rather amusing to see Leibniz use against Clarke the 
same arguments that Henry More used against Descartes. 
But let us continue: 53 
If infinite Space is God's Im'mensity, infinite Time will be 
God's Eternity; and therefore we must say, that what is in 
Space, is in God's Immensity, and consequently in his 
Essence; and that what is in Time, is also in the Essence 
of God. Strange Expressions; which plainly show, that the 
Author makes a wrong use of Terms. 
Assuredly, at least if we follow the traditional scholastic 
conceptions. But the Newtonians, as we know, reinterpret 
these terms and expressly identify God's immensity with 
infinite extension and God's eternity with infinite dura­
tion. 
They will therefore acknowledge that everything 
is in God, without being obliged to put everything in his 
essence. But Leibniz insists: 54 
I shall give another Instance of This. God's Immensity 
makes him actually present in all Spaces. But now if God 
264 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
is in Space, how can it be said that Space is in God, or 
that it is a Property [attribute] of God? We have often 
heard, that a Property [attribute] is in its Subject; but we 
never heard, that a Subject is in its Property [attribute], 
In Like manner, God exists in all Time. How then can 
Time be in God; and how can it be a Property [attribute] 
of God? These are perpetual Alloglossies. 
Once more, the Newtonians would object that the pre­
position in is obviously taken in two different meanings, 
and that nobody has ever interpreted the attribute being 
in the substance as a spatial relation; that, moreover, 
they only draw a correct conclusion from God's omni­
presence, which everybody admits, and God's simplicity, 
which everybody admits also, by refusing' to recognize, 
in God, a separation between His substance and His power 
and asserting therefore His substantial presence every­
where. They would deny Leibniz's contention that 55 
It appears that the Author confounds Immensity or the 
Extension of Things, with the Space according to which 
that Extension is taken. Infinite Space, is not the Imlnen­
sity of God; Finite Space, is not the Extension of Bodies: 
As Time is not their Duration. Things keep their Exten­
sion; but they do not always keep their Space. Every 
Thing has its own Extension, its own Duration; but it has 
not its own Time, and does not keep its own Space. 
Of course not. But for the Newtonians, it means pre­
cisely that time and space do not belong to things, nor 
are relations based upon the existence of things, but 
belong to God as a framework in which things and events 
have and take place. Leibniz knows it, of course, but he 
cannot admit this conception: 56 
265 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
Space is not the Place of all Things; for it is not the 
Place of God. Otherwise there would be a thing co-eternal 
with God, and independent upon him; nay, he himself 
would depend upon it, if he has need of Place. 
If the reality of Space and Time, is necessary to the 
Immensity and Eternity of God, if God must be in Space; 
if being in Space is a Property [attribute] of God; he will, 
in some measure, depend upon Time and Space, and stand 
in need of them. For I have already prevented That Sub­
terfuge, that Space and Time are Properties [attributes] of 
God. 
Still, Leibniz knows that his own position implies diffi­
culties (they are not proper to it, but are those of the 
whole scholastic tradition) : if space and time are only 
innerworldly entities, and did not exist before Creation, 
must we not assume that the creation of the world brought 
about change in God; and that, before it, He was neither 
immense nor omnipresent? is not, therefore, God, in his 
own conception, dependent upon creatures? Leibniz writes 
then: 57 
'Tis true, the Immensity and Eternity of God would 
subsist, though there were no Creatures; but those Attri­
butes would have no dependence either on Times or Places. 
If there were no Creatures, there would be neither Time 
nor Place, and consequently no actual Space. The Immen­
sity of God is independent upon Space, as Eternity is 
independent upon Time. 
These attributes signify only, 
that God would be present and co-existent with all the 
Things that should exist. 
A perfect answer . . . .  Alas, the Newtonian will not 
accept it, and will persist in his affirmation that though, 
of course, God cannot be co:.present with things that do 
:66 
C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
not exist, their existence or non-existence does not make 
him more, or less, present in those places where these 
things, once created, will co-exist with him. 
Ha ving dealt with the general problem of space and 
time, Leibniz passes to the re-examination of the particu­
lar problem of attraction. Dr. Clarke's explanation did not 
satisfy him; quite the contrary. A miracle is not defined 
by its being an exceptional and rare happening: a miracle 
is defined by the very nature of the event. Something 
that cannot be explained naturally, that is, something 
that cannot result from the interplay of natural forces, 
that is, forces derived from the nature of things, is and 
remains a miracle. 
Now the nature of things does not 
admit action at a distance. 
Attraction therefore would 
be a miracle, though a perpetual one. 
Moreover, accord­
ing to Leibniz, the suggestion made by Dr. Clarke to 
explain it by the action of non-mechanical, " spiritual " 
forces, is even worse; this, indeed, would mean going 
back behind Descartes, renouncing science for magic. 
Once more we see expressed in this . debate the radical 
opposition of two conflicting views or nature, and of 
science: .  Leibniz can accept neither the N ewt()nian con­
ception of the insufficiency of the material nature nor the 
provisional positivism 
of his conception 
of 
" mathe­
matical philosophy ": 58 
I objected, that an Attraction, properly so called, or in 
the Scholastic Sense, would be an Operation at a Distance, 
without any Means intervening. The Author answers here, 
that an attraction without any means intervening would be 
indeed a Contradiction. Very well! But then what does he 
mean, when he will have the Sun to attract the Globe of 
267 

C L O S E D W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
the Earth through an empty Space? 
It is God himself 
that performs it? But this would be a Miracle, if ever there 
was any. This would surely exceed the Powers of Creatures. 
Or, are perhaps some immaterial Substances, or some 
spiritual Rays, or some Accident without a Substance, or 
some Kind of Species I ntentionalis, or some other I know 
not what, the Means by which this is pretended to be 
performed? Of which sort of things, the Author seems to 
have still a good stock in his Head, without explaining 
himself sufficiently? 
That Means of communication (says he) is invisible, 
intangible, not Mechanical. I-Ie might as well have added, 
inexplicable, unintelligible, precarious, groundless, and un߲ 
exampled. 
If the Means, which causes an Attraction properly so 
called, be constant, and at the same time inexplicable by 
the Powers of Creatures, and yet be true; it must be a 
perpetual Miracle: And if it is not miraculous, it is false. 
'Tis a Chimerical Thing, a Scholastic occult quality. 
The Case would be the same, as in a Body going round 
without receding in the Tangent, though nothing that can 
be explained, hindered it from receding. 
Which is an 
Instance I have already alleged; and the Author has not 
thought fit to answer it, because it shows too clearly the 
difference between what is truely Natural on the one side, 
and a. chimerical occult Quality of the Schools on the other. 
Once more Dr. Clarke replied. He was, needless to say, 
not convinced. Leibniz's subtle distinctions did not suc­
ceed in hiding the brute fact that his God was subjected 
to a strict and unescapable determinism. He lacked not 
only the true freedom that belongs to a spiritual being 
but even the spontaneity (Leibniz, moreover, seemed to 
Clarke to confound the two) belonging to an animal 
268 
C L O S  E D W O  R L D to Infinite Universe 
one: He was no more than a pure mechanism enchained 
by an absolute necessity. 
If Dr. Clarke had the gift 
of foreseeing things, he would say: a mere calculating 
machine! 
Leibniz's renewed attack on Newton's conceptions of 
time, space and motion is not more successfuL59 
It is affirmed, that Motion necessarily implies a Relative 
Change of Situation in one Body, with regard to other 
Bodies; And yet no way is shown to avoid this absurd 
Consequence, that then the Mobility of one Body depends 
on the Existence of other Bodies; and that any single Body 
existing Alone, would be incapable of Motion; or that the 
Parts of a circulating Body (suppose the Sun) would lose 
the vis centrifuga arising from their circular Motion, if all 
the extrinsick Matter around them were annihilated, 'tis 
affirmed that the Infinity of Matter is an Effect of the Will 
of God. 
And yet, if it were true that - as taught by Descartes ­
a finite universe is contradictory, is it not clear that, in 
this case, God neither is, nor was, able to limit the 
quantity of matter and therefore did not create, and can 
not destroy it? Indeed,60 
if the Material Universe CAN possibly, by the Will of God, 
be finite and Moveable: (which this learned Author here 
finds himself necessitated to grant, though he perpetually 
treats it as an impossible supposition;) then Space (in 
which That Motion is performed) is manifestly independent 
upon Matter. But if, on the contrary, the material Uni­
verse Cannot be finite and moveable and Space cannot be 
independent upon Matter; then (I say) it follows evidently, 
that God neither Can nor ever Could set Bounds to Matter; 
and consequently the material Universe must be not only 
269 

C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
boundless, but eternal also, both a parte ante and a parte 
post necessarily and independent of the Will of God. 
As for the relation between space, body and God, 
Clarke restates his position with perfect clarity: 61 
The space occupied by a body is not the extension of 
that body; but the extended body exists in this space. 
There is no bounded space; but our imagination con­
siders in the space, which has no limits and cannot have 
any, such a part, or such a quantity that it judges con­
venient to consider. 
Space is not the affection of one or several bodies, nor 
that of any bounded thing, and it does not pass from one 
subject to another, but it is always, and without variation, 
the immensity of an immense being, which never ceases to 
be the same. 
Bounded spaces are not properties of bounded substances; 
they are only parts of the infinite space in which the 
bounded substances exist. 
If matter were infinite, infinite space would no more be a 
property of this infinite body than finite spaces are prop­
erties of finite bodies. But, in ' this case, infinite matter 
would be in infinite space as finite bodies are in it now. 
Immensity, as well as Eternity, is essential to God. The 
Parts of Immensity, (being totally of a different Kind from 
corporeal, partable, separable, divisible, moveable Parts, 
which are the ground of Corruptibility) ,  do no more hinder 
Immensity from being essentially One, than the Parts of 
Duration hinder Eternity from being essentially One. 
God himself is not subjected to any change by the 
diversity and the change of things that are in him, and 
which in him have life, motion and being. 
This strange Doctrine is the express Assertion of St. Paul, 
as well as the plain Voice of Nature and Reason. 
270 
C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
God is not in space or in time; but his existence is th߳ 
cause of space and time. And when we say, in conformity 
with the language of the vulgar, that God exists in all the 
spaces and in all the times, 
These Words mean only that he is Omnipresent and 
Eternal, that is, that Boundless Space and Time are neces­
sary Consequences of his Existence; and not, that Space 
and· Time are Beings distinct from him, and IN which he 
exists. 
Moreover,62 
to say that Immensity does not signify Boundless Space, 
and that Eternity does not signify Duration or Time with­
out Beginning and End, is (I think) affirming that Words 
ha ve no meaning. 
As for . the criticism of attraction, Clarke, of course, 
maintains his point of view: miracles are rare and mean­
ingful events produced by God for definite reasons; a 
perpetual miracle is a contradiction in terms; and if not, 
then the pre-established Harmony of Leibniz is a much 
greater one. Moreover - Clarke is rather astonished that 
Leibniz does not understand '  this - in Newtonian science 
or mathematical philosophy, attraction (whatever be its 
ultimate physical or metaphysical explanation) 
appears 
only as a phenomenon, as a general fact and as a mathe­
matical expression. Therefore,63 
it is very · unreasonable to call A ttraction Č Miracle and an 
unphilosophical Term; after it has been so often distinctly 
declared, that by That Term we do not mean to express 
the Cause of Bodies tending towards each other, but barely 
the EfJȏct, or the Phaenomenon it self, and the Laws or 
Proportions of that Tendency, discovered by Experience 
271 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
which clearly shows 
that the Sun attracts the Earth, through the intermediate 
void Space; that is that the Earth and Sun gravitate towards 
each other, or tend (whatever be the Cause of that Ten­
dency) towards each other, with a Force, which is in a 
direct proportion of their Masses, or Magnitudes and Den­
sities together, and in an inverse duplicate proportion of 
their Distances. 
But, of course, there is much more behind this Leib­
nizian opposition to attraction than a mere unwillingness 
to adopt the point of view of " mathematical " philosophy 
with its admission into the body of science of incompre­
hensible and inexplicable " facts " imposed upon us by 
empiricism: what Leibniz really aims at is the self-suffi­
ciency of the world-mechanism, and there is very little 
doubt that the law of conservation of the vis viva achieves 
it in a still better way than the Cartesian law of con­
servation of motion. 
The Newtonian world - a clock running down - re­
quires a constant renewal by God of its energetic endow­
ment; the Leibnizian one, by its very perfection, rules 
out any intervention of God into its perpetual motion. 
Thus it is not surprising that for Dr. Clarke the fight 
for void space, hard atoms and absolute motion becomes 
a fight for God's Lordship and presence, and that he 
asks Leibniz why 64-
. . .  so great Concern should be shown, to exclude God's 
actual Government of the World, and to allow his Provi­
dence to act no further than barely in concurring (as the 
Phrase is) to let all Things do only what they would do 
of themselves of mere Mechanism. 
XII. Conclusion : 
T H E  D I V I N E  A R T I F E X  
A N D  T H E  D IE U  FA INEA N T  
Why, indeed? 
Leibniz, who was much more interested 
in morals than in physics and in man than in the cosmos, 
could have answered that it was the only means to avoid 
making God responsible for the actual management, or 
mismanagement, of this our world. God j ust did not do 
what He wanted, or would like to do. There were laws, 
and rules, that He could neither change nor tamper with. 
Things had natures that H e  could not modify. He had 
made a perfect mechanism in the working of which He 
could not interfere. 
Could not and should not, as this 
world was the best of all the possible· worlds that He 
could create. God, therefore, was blameless for the evils 
that He could not prevent or amend. 
After all, this 
world was only the best possible world, not a perfectly 
good one; that was not possible. 
Leibniz might have said this in reply to Clarke. But he 
did not read Clarke's fifth reply. 
He died before he 
received it. Thus their fight, a fight in which both sides 
fought pro majore Dei gloria, ended as abruptly as it 
started. The outcome of the Homeric struggle was not 
conclusive; neither side, as we have seen, budged an inch. 
Yet in the decades that followed, Newtonian science and 
, 
Ʉ73 

C L O S  E D W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Newtonian philosophy gained more and more ground, 
gradually overcoming the resistance of the Cartesians and 
the Leibnizians who, though opposing each other on many 
points, made a common front against the common foe. 
At the end of the century Newton's victory was com­
plete. The Newtonian God reigned supreme in the infinite 
void of absolute space in which the force of universal 
attraction Iinked together the atomically structured bodies 
of the immense universe and made them move around in 
accordance with strict mathematical laws. 
Yet it can be argued that this victory was a Pyrrhic 
one, and that the price paid for it was disastrously high. 
Thus, for instance, the force of attraction which, for 
N ewton, was a proof of the insufficiency of pure mech­
anism, a demonstration of the existence of higher, non,. 
mechanical powers, the manifestation of God's presence 
and action in the world, ceased to play this role, and 
became a purely natural force, a property of matter, that 
enriched mechanism instead of supplanting it. 
As Dr. 
Cheyne explained quite reasonably, attraction was as­
suredly not an essential property of body, but why should 
not God have endowed matter with unessential properties? 
Or, as Henry More and Roger Cotes - and later, Vol­
taire - pointed out, since we possess no knowledge of the 
substances of things, and know nothing about the link 
that connects property with substance, even in the cases 
of hardness or impenetrability, we cannot deny that 
attraction belongs to matter just because we do not 
understand how it works. 
As for the dimensions of the material universe which 
N ewtonians at first had opposed to the actual infinity 
of absolute space, the relentless pressure of the principles 
fZ74 
C L O S E D  W O R L D  to Infinite Universe 
of plenitude and sufficient reason, by which Leibniz 
managed to infect his successful rivals, made it co-exten­
sive with space itself. 
God, even the Newtonian one, 
could obviously not limit His creative action and treat 
a certain p art of infinite homogeneous space - though 
able to distinguish it from the rest - in a way so utterly 
different from the others. 
Thus the material universe, 
in spite of filling only an exceedingly small part of the 
infinite void, became just a s  infinite as this. The same 
reasoning which prevented God from limiting His creative 
action in respect to space could, just as well, be applied 
to time. 
An infinite, immutable and sempiternal God 
could not be conceived as behaving in a different manner 
at different times, and as limiting His creative action to 
a 
'
small stretch of it. 
Moreover, an infinite universe 
existing only for a limited duration seems illogical. Thus 
the created world became infinite both in Space and in 
Time. But an infinite and eternal world, as Clarke had 
so strongly objected to Leibniz, can hardly admit creation. 
It does not need it; it exists by virtue of this very infinity. 
Furthermore, the gradual dissolution of . traditional on­
tology under the impact of the new philosophy under­
mined the validity of the inference from the attribute to 
its supporting substance. 
Space, consequently, lost pro­
gressively its attributive or substantial character; from 
the ultimate stuff which the world was made of 
(the 
substantial space of Descartes) or the attribute of God, 
the frame of his presence and action 
(the space of 
Newton) , it became more and more the void of the 
atomists, neither substance nor accident, the infinite, 
uncreated nothingness, the frame of the absence of all 
being; consequently also of God's. 
fl75 

C L O S  E D  W 0 R L D to Infinite Universe 
Last but not least, the world-clock made by the Divine 
Artifex was much better than Newton had thought it 
to be. Every progress of 
Newtonian science brought 
new proofs for Leibniz's contention: the moving force of 
the universe, its vis viva, did not decrease; the world-clock 
needed neither rewinding, nor mending. 
The Divine Artifex had therefore less and less to do 
in the world. He did not even need to conserve it, as 
the world, more and more, became able to dispense with 
this service. 
Thus the mighty, energetic God of Newton who actually 
" ran " the universe according to His free will and decision, 
became, in quick succession, a conservative power, an 
intelligentia supra-mundana, a " Dieu faineant." 
Laplace who, a hundred years after Newton, brought 
the New Cosmology to its final perfection, told Napoleon, 
who asked ' him about the role of God in his System of 
the Wo1'ld: " Sire, je n'ai pas eu besoin de cette hypo­
these." But it was not Laplace's System, it was the world 
described in it that no longer needed the hypothesis God. 
The infinite Universe of the New Cosmology, infinite in 
Duration as well as in Extension, in which eternal matter 
in accordance with eternal and necessary laws moves end­
lessly and aimlessly in eternal space, inherited all the 
ontological attributes of Divinity . Yet only those - all 
the others the departed God took away with Him. 
276 
Notes 
INTRODUCTION AND CHAPTER I 
. 
h 
d 
orld New York, 19^5; 
Cf A N Whitehead Science and t e mo ern w
,
 
. 
. 
1 . 
E
' 
A 
. 
B¦rtt 
The m:taphysical foundations of modern phyS'l-cal sc·e¸c¹, 
N
·
· 
. 
York ' 19C16' J 
H. Randall, The making of the modern m
Ct.n , 
ew 
,
N
,
.
 
h
'
 
f being 
am-
B 
t 
19^6' Arthur O. Lovejoy's classical Great c at.n ċ 
, 
os on, 
, 
Etudes Galileennes ParIS, 1939 . 
bridge, Mass., 1936, and my own
. 
' 
'
h' torically linked 
The cosmos conception is only practIcally, that 
.
1S, 
IS 
b 
'
letely 
^. 
. 
ld
' 
Yet It can 
e comp 
together with the geocentrIc wor -Vlew. 
divorced from the latter as, for example, by Kepler. 
t' 
f 
m the 
f 
t' 
f the space concep Ion 
ro 
3. The full story of the tra?s orma IOn
.
o 
d 
h 
hi tor 
of the Platonic 
Middle Ages to modern bmes should mclu e t e 
s 
Y 
h 
C 
b ' dge 
Fl 
f 
A 
demy to t e
am rl 
and N eoplatonic revival from the 
oren me 
ca . 
d the 
Platonists as well as that of the atomic conceptions 
.
of matteH Galileo 
discussions about the vacuum following the expenments 
0 
'
. 
' 
Torricelli and Pascal. But this would double the volum
.
e of t
d
hlS wO
.
rk 
f 
th 
definIte an 
preCIse 
and besides 
distract us somewhat 
rom 
e very 
. 
f 
' 
, 
. 
h 
M reover 
or some 
line of development which we are followmg 
ere. 
0 
• 
l
' 
b 
k 
f 
f 
d rs to the classlCa 
00 S 0 
of these problems we can re er our rea e 
d B r 
Kurd Lasswitz, Geschichte des A tomistik, ^ vols., Hamb
p
ur
h
g
il
un h '  er:ci 
E k 
t
'
 
blem in der 
osop ·e u 
1890 and Ernst Cassirer, Das 
r enn mspro 
II 
t 
the 
W·
' 
h it der neuen Zeit ^ vols., Berlin, 1911, as we 
as 
0 
wsensc a
. 
' 
L' 
erience barometrique, ses ante-
recent works of Cornehs de Waard, 
exp 
. 
. 
B 
" E tab-
. 
. 
Th 
1936 and MISS MarIe 
oas, 
s 
cedents et ses explwatwns, 
ouars, 
, 
S 
. 
I 
hil 
h
"
 Osiris vol 
x 
1 95^. 
ee now 
lishment of the mechamca 
p 
osop y, 
, 
. 
.
,
 
C 
b '  d e 
Max Jammer, Concepts of space, Harvard Umv. Press'
d ;=eFEu!D 
Mass 
1954 and Markus Fierz, " Ueber den Ursprung un 
f 
0/4 
." 
I 
R '
"
 
Gesnerus vol. XI, asc. i) 
, 
von Newtons Lehre vom abso uten 
aum, 
' 
.
,
 d 
t· 
f Telesio PattrlZzl an 
1954, especially for the space 
concep Ions 
0 
Campanella.
' 
D h 
Le systeme 
On the Greek conceptions of the universe cf. Pierre 
u em
L
, ,
. fi
't 
i 
4
. 
.. P 
. 
1 913 1914- R Mondolfo, 
m m 0 ne 
du monde, vol . I and II, 
ans, 
, 
" 
. 
.
'
 
l '  ue 
pensiero dd Greci, Firenze, 1934, and Charles Mugler, Devemr cyc t.q 
et la pluralite des mondes, Paris, 1953. 
277 

N O T E S  
5 .  The MS of De rerum natura was disco 
d ' 
. 
and influence , cf J H 
S 
d 
H
' 
vere 
m 141 7. On Its reception 
. 
. 
. 
an ys 
zstory of 
l 
. 
l 
h l 
h 
bridge, 1908 
d G H 
.
' 
. 
c asszca 
sc 0 ars ip, Cam-
1935. 
, an
. 
adzltz, Lucretzus and his influence, New York, 
6. The first Latin t
i t' 
f
'
 
losophorum by ǐ
ns
b 
a lǑn 0 
C
¥IOǒenes Laertius' De vita et moribus pki-
was immediately :p;iǓ::ǔ . nCǕlUs
b 
appǖared in Venice in 1475 and 
7 
Th
' 
' 
m 
urn erg m 1476 and 1479 
. 
e atomIsm of the ancients at least ' 
h 
. 
Epicurus and Lucretius ...:- it 'm 
b 
m t
. 
e aspect
. 
presented to us by 
critus, but we know v 
l'ttl 
aY
b 
e that It was dIfferent with Demo-
ery I 
e a out Demoer't 
' 
theory, and though som 
f '  
1 us - was not a sCIentific 
e 0 
ItS precepts 
as fo 
. 
t 
h 
' 
enjoins us to explain the celestial 
h
'
 
r ms ance, t at which 
terrestrial ones, seem to I 
d 
h 
P eǗomeǘa on the pattern of the 
by modern science it h 
ea 
to t
b
e umficatIon of the world achieved 
d 
,
as never 
een able to 
. ld 
f 
d
'
 
evelopment of a ph sics' 
. 
Yle 
a 
oun atIon for 
by Gassendi remaineB e' f 
not even 
.
m modern times: indeed, its revival 
Ii
' 
'
"
 
p r ectly sterIle. The explanation of this t 'l't 
es, m my opmlOn, m the ext
' 
s erl I y 
tion; it is only when thO 
rem 
I.
e sensualIsm of the Epicurean tradi-
, 
IS sensua Ism w 
. 
t d b 
modern science and l' 
I 
d 
as reJec e 
y the founders of 
that atomism _ in th 
ep aee
k 
by a mǙthematical approach to nature 
b
e wor s of Gahleo 
R
B
I
 N 
ecame a scientificall 
I'd 
.
,
. 
oy e, 
ewton, etc. -
y va 1 
conceptIon 
and L 
t' 
d E 
appeared as forerunners of 
d 
.
'
 
ucre lUS an 
picurus 
rno ern SCIence 
It is 
'bi 
f 
even probable 
that 
. 
I' k' 
. 
POSSI e, 0 ,  course, and 
, 
,
m
 m mg mathem f 
. h 
. 
science revived the deepest . t 'f 
a Iǚm w:t 
atomIsm, modern 
8. Cf Ren ' D 
m ul IOns and mtentlOns of Democritus 
. 
e 
escartes,
" Lettre it. Chanut " J 
. , 
Adam Tannerv vol 
v p 50 
P
'
 
' 
une 6, 1 647, Oeuvres, ed. 
. 
" ,
. 
,
. 
sq., 
ans, 1903. 
9. NIcholas of Cusa (Nicholas K b 
Cues (or Cusa) on the Mosel;eA 
s
H:
r Chr
.
ypffs) was born in 14.01 in 
Padua, then theology in C I
,
 A 
studIed law and mathematIcs in 
member of the Council 
f ; 
0
f"
e. 
s archdeacon of Liege he was a 
bring about a unio 
f
O 
th
ase
E 
(1437) , was sent to Constantinople to 
G 
n 0 
e 
astern and We t 
h 
h 
ermany as papal legate 
(1440 
s ern c urc es, and to 
Nicholas V to the 
d' 
I 
) .  In 1448 he was raised by Pope 
car ma ate and in 1450 h 
. 
of Britten 
He died Au 
t n' 1 
e was appomted Bishop 
VansteenbǛrghe Le Car@
s 
l N
' 
. 4
l
64. 
d
On Nicholas of Cusa cf. Edmond 
N . 
' 
ma 
teo as 
e Oues Pa ' 
19C10 H 
wolas of Cusa 
Lond 
190 
. 
" 
rls, 
Ƀ ;  enry Bett, 
, 
on, 
a2' Maunce d 
G 
d'll 
de Nicolas de Oues, Paris, 1941' 
e 
an 1 ac, La philosophie 
10. Cf. Ernst Hoffmann Da 
U
"
 
h 
' 
s 
mversum von Nikol 
0 
t e T extbeilage by Raym 
d Kl'b 
k 
as von 
ues, especially 
f 
on 
. 
I ans y pp 41 
h' h 
' 
o Nicholas of Cusa . 
. . 
. 
" 
. 
sq., W lC 
gIves the text 
th 
m a crItIcal edItIOn as well as th 
b'br 
h 
e problem, 
The booklet of E 
H ff 
e 
I IOgrap y of 
. 
0 mann appeared 
as " Cusanus 
278 
N O T E S  
Studien, I " in the Sitzungsberickte der Heidelberger Akademie der 
Wissensckaften, Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, Jahrgang 1929/1980, 3. 
Abhandlung, Heidelberg, 1980. 
1 1 .  Cf. De docta ignorantia, 1. II, cap, ii, p. 99 . I am following the text of 
the latest, critical, edition of the works of Nicholas of Cusa by E, 
Hoffmann-R. Klibansky (Opera omnia, JuS8U et auctoritate Academiae 
litterarum Heidelbergensii ad codicum fidem edita, vol. I, Lipsiae, 1932) . 
There is, now, an English translation of the De docta ignorantia by "Fr:· ". 
Germain Heron: Of 
learned ignorance by Nicholas Cusanus, London, \ 
1954, I have, nevertheless, preferred to give my own translation of the
! I, 
texts I am quoting. 
12. Ibid., p. 99 sq. 
18. Ibid., p. 1 00. 
14. Ibid., p. 100 sq. It is to be remembered, however, that the conception 
of the relativity of motion, at least in the sense of the necessity to 
relate motion to a resting reference-point (or body) is nothing new and 
can already be found in Aristotle; cf. P . Duhem, Le mouvement absolu 
et le mouvement relatif, Montlignon, 1909; the optical relativity of 
motion is studied at length by Witello (d. Opticae libri decem, p. 1 67, 
Basilae, 1572) and, even more extensively, by Nicole Oresme, (d. Le 
livre du ciel et de la terre, ed. by A, D. Meuret and A. J. Denomy, 
C. S. B., pp. 271 sq., Toronto, 1943) . 
1 5 .  Ibid., p. 102. 
1 6 . Ibid., p. 1 02 sq. 
1 7. 
De docta ignorantia, 1. II, cap. 12, p. 1 03. 
18. cr. the famous passage of Virgil, Provehimur portu terraeque urbesque 
recedunt, quoted by Copernicus. 
19. This famous saying which describes God as a spkaera cuius centrum 
ubique, circumferentia nullibi appears for the first time in this form 
in the pseudo-Hermetic Book of the XXIV philosophers, an anonymoUS 
compilation of the XIIth century; cr. Clemens Baemker, Das pseudo­
hermetische Buck der XXIV Meister (Beitrage zur Geschichte del' 
Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, fasc. xxv) , Munster, 1928; 
Dietrich Mahnke, Unendliche Sphaere und Allmittelpunct, Halle/Saa1e, 
1937. In this Book of the XXIV philosophers, the above-mentioned 
formula forms the proposition II. 
20 . He is, however, referred to by Giovanni Francesco Pico in his EXa7nen 
doctae vanitatis gentium (Opera, t. II, p. 778, Basileae, 1578) and Celio 
Calcagnini in his Quod coelum stet, terra moveatur, vel de perenni motu 
terrae (Opera aliquot, p. 895, B asileae, 1544) ; cr. R. Klibansky, op. cit" 
p. 41. 
^79 

N O T E S  
21 . Cf. L. A. Birkenmajer, Mikolaj Kopernik, vol. I, p. 248, Cracow, 1900. 
Birkenmajer denies any influence of Nicholas of Cusa on Copernicus. 
On the medieval " forerunners " of Copernicus cf. G. McColley, " The 
theory of the diurnal rotation of the earth," Isis, XXVI, 1987. 
22. De docta ignorantia, II, 12, p. 104. 
28. Nicholas of Cusa's conception could be treated as an anticipation of 
that of Sir William Herschell; and even of more modern ones. 
24. De docta ignorantia, II, 12, p. 104. 
25. Ibid., p. 105. 
26. Ibid., p. 107. Once more, one could see in this conception of Nicholas 
of Cusa a prefiguration of the theory of the mutual attraction of the 
heavenly bodies. 
27. Ibid., p. 107. 
28. Ibid., p. 108 sq. 
29. Marcellus Stellatus Palingenius, whose true name was Pier Angelo . 
Manzoli, born at La SteIIata some time between 1500 and 1503, wrote, 
under the title of Zodiacus vitae, a didactical poem, which was printed 
in Venice 
(probably) 
in 1534, rapidly became e4tremely popular, 
especially among Protestants, and was even translated into English, 
French and German. 
The English translation (Zodiake of life) by 
Barnaby Goodge, appeared in 1560 (the first three books) , and in 1565 
the entire poem was printed. It seems that Palingenius was at a certain 
time suspected of heresy, but it was only 15 years after his death 
(he died in 1543) that, in 1558, the Zodiacus vitae was put on the 
Index librorum prohibitorum. 
Under Pope Paul II his bones were 
disinterred and burnt; cf. F. W. Watson, The Zodiacus Vitae of Mar­
cellus Palingenius Stellatus: An old school book, London, 1908 and F. R. 
Johnson, A stronomical thought in Renaissance England, pp. 145 sq., 
Baltimore, 1937. 
80. Zodiacus vitae, 1. VII, Libra, II. 497-99; Engl. transl., p. 118; d. A. O. 
Lovejoy, The great chain of being, pp. 115 sq., Cambridge, Mass., 1986; 
F. R. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 147 sq. 
31 . Zodiacus vitae, 1. IX, Aquarius, n. 601-8 (transl., p. 218) . 
82. Ibid., 1. XI, A quarius, n. 612-616 (transl., p. 21$) . 
88. A. O. Lovejoy, The great chain of being, p. 52 and passim. 
84. Zodiacus vitae, 1. XII, Pisces, II. 20-85 (transl., p. 228) . 
85. Ibid., II. 71-85 (trans!', p. 229) . The world-view of Palingenius is beau­
tifully expressed by Edmund Spenser in his Hymn of heavenly beauty 
(quoted by E. M. W. Tillyard, The Elizabethan world picture, p. 45, 
London, 1948) : 
Far above these heavens which here we see, 
280 
N O T E S  
Be others far exceeding these in light, 
Not bounded, not corrupt, as these same be, 
But infinite in largeness and in height, 
Unmoving, incorrupt and spotless bright 
That need no sun t'illuminate their spheres 
But their own native light far passing theirs 
And as these heavens still by degree arise 
UntiU they come to their first mover's boĀnd, 
That in his mighty compass doth comprIse 
And carry all the rest with him around; 
So those likewise do by degree redound 
And rise more fair till they at last arrive 
To the most fair, whereto they all do strive. 
\ 
CHAPTER II 
) 
In the technical sense of the word, Copernicus is a Ptolemean. 
//' 
1 .  
. 
. 
I 
rng the excellent 
2. Cf. Joachim Rheticus, Narratw prtma. 
am quo 1. 
translation of E. Rosen in his Three Copernican treatzses, p. 147, New 
York, 1939. 
. 
. 
E 
l 
d 
245-
8. F. R. Johnson, A stronomical thought tn Renatssance 
ng an , pp. 
49, Baltimore, 1987; d. A. O. Lovejoy, op. cit., pp'. 
1 09 sq. 
John Donne, Anatomy of the world, First AnnIversary (1611) ed., 
4. 
N 
h Press 
p. 202. 
The disastrous effects of the seventeenth 
onesuc 
, 
d' d 
. h 
t 
re 
century's spiritual revolution have recently been stu Ie . WIt āea c? 
and some nostalgic regret by a number of scholars; d. 'lnter
. 
alm, E. . ' 
W. Tillyard, The Elizabethan world picture, Lon¤oĂ, 1948; £ICtor HarrIS, 
All coherence gone, Chicago, 1949; Miss MarJone H. NIcolson, The 
breaking of the circle, Evanston, Ill., 1950; S. L. Bethell, The cult>răl 
revolution of the XVllth century, London, 1951 . For a nonԨnostĄ glC 
treatment d. A. O. Lovejoy, The great chain of being, and BaSIl Wllley, 
The seventeenth century background, Cambridge, 198¢. 
5. Nicolaus Copernicus, De revolutionibu8 orbium coelestǁąĆ, 1. I, cap. VIII. 
6. According to the mediaeval conception the central pOSItion of the earth 
is the lowest possible; only Hell is " lower " than our earthly abode. 
For the pre-modern, that is ,  pre-telescopic astronomy, fixed stars 
7. possess a visible and even measurable diameter. Since, oć the other 
hand, they are rather far away from us and in the CopĈrnIcaĉ concep­
tion Ċven exceedingly far (d. infra, pp. 92-9) , their real dImenSIOns must 
be extremely large. 
281 

N O T E S  
8. Cf. Grant McColley, " The seventeenth century doctrine of a plurality 
of worlds," Annals of Science, I, 1936, and " Copernicus and the infinite 
universe," Popular Astronomy, 
XLIV, 
1936; cf. Francis R. Johnson, 
op. cit., pp. 107 sq. 
9. Nicolaus Copernicus, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, 1. I, cap. I. 
10. Ibid., 1. I, cap. VIII. 
1 1 .  Ibid., 1. I, cap. x. 
1-. A. O. Lovejoy, op. cit., pp. 99 sq. 
13. Cf. Sir Walter Raleigh, The historie of the world, London, 165-, pp. 
93 sq.; cf. Bethell, op. cit., pp. 46 sq. 
14. Cf. infra, p. 94. 
15. Giordano Bruno understands them as teaching the infinity of the uni­
verse. I have already examined the case of Nicholas of Cusa; as for 
Lucretius, he asserts, indeed, the infinity of space and that of the 
rworlds, but maintains the finiteness of our visible world and the existence 
of a limiting heavenly sphere, outside of which, but inaccessible to our 
perception, there are other identical or analogous " worlds." Anachronis­
tically we could consider his conception as prefigurating the modern 
conception of island-universes dispersed in an infinite space, though 
with a very important difference: the Lucretian worlds are closed and 
not connected with each other. 
16. Cf. Francis R. Johnson and Sanford V. Larkey, " Thomas Digges, the 
Copernican system and the idea of the infinity of the universe," The 
Huntington Library Bulletin, n. 5 
(1934) , and Francis R. Johnson, 
op. cit., pp. 164 sq.; cf. also A. O. Lovejoy, op. cit., p. 116. 
1 8. A 
Perfit Description, sigs N 3-N 4; cf. Johnson-Larkey, pp. 88 sq.; 
Johnson, pp. 165·167. 
19. A. O. Lovejoy, op. cit., p. 116. Giordano Bruno was born in Nola (near 
Naples) in 1548, became a Dominican in 1566, but, ten years later in 
1576, on account of some rather heretical views held by him on trans­
substantiation and the Immaculate Conception, had to leave both the 
order and Italy. In 1579 he came to Geneva (where he could not stay) , 
then to Toulouse, and to Paris (I581) where he lectured on the logical 
system of Raymundus Lullus (and wrote some philosophical works, i. e. 
De umbris idearum and a satiric comedy, Il Candelajo) ;  in 1583 he went 
to England where he lectured and published some of his best works, 
such as La Cena de le Ceneri, De la causa, principio et uno and De 
l'infinito universo e mondi. From 1585 to 159- Bruno wandered in 
Europe (Paris, Marburg, Wittenberg, Prague, Helmstadt, Zurich) , pub­
lishing the De immenso et innumerabilibus in 1591 . Finally, in 159- he 
accepted an invitation to Venice. 
Denounced and arrested by the 
-O. 
-l . 
--. 
N O T E S  
b 
ht to Rome where he remained 
Inquisition (in 1593) , he was 
'l
ro
h
ug 
s excom:Uunicated and burnt 
. 
d f 
years untI 
e wa 
impnsone 
or seven 
, 
1600 
Cf 
Dorothea Waley Singer 
at the stake on February 17, 
. 
. 
Giordano Bruno, his life and thought, New York, 1 950 . 
Written in 1 584. 
.. 
d " Galileo and the scientific 
Cf 
Et des Galileenes, In, p. 11 sq., an 
. 
943 
, my 
u 
XVII h 
t 
" The Philo'sophical Remew, 1 
.
. 
I t' 
of the 
t 
cen ury, 
. 
d 
revo u lOn 
C 
. d' 1 terzo Opere Italwne, e . 
Giordano Bruno, La Cena de le 
enen, 
In . 
, 
G. Gentile, vol. I, p. 73, Bari, 1907. 
-3. Ibid., pp. 73 sq. 
,
'tt 
'n 1584' the De immenso 
-4 
The De l'infinito universo e mondǂ was ÿn 
D
en þ 
, 
bilibus ·immenso 
. 
, , 
t 
t the full tItle, 
e 'tnnumera 
, 
et innumerabilzbus, or 0 ŭuo e 
d' l'b ' . 
t 
in 1591 . I shall base 
et infigurabili: sive de umverso et muý '/,s 
z n oc °
d
' . 
d quote it in the 
h 
D 
l" fi 't 
umverso e mon z an 
my exposition on t e 
.
e 
tn m 
0 
Dorothea Waley Singer, adjoined to 
excellent recent transla¡lOŮ of Mrs 
k New York, 1950, I shall give the 
he
r
r Giorda
.
fir
no
st
B
t
r
o
u;= :<
i;::: a:rd c:entile (Opere Italiane, vol. I) ; then to 
re erence 
Mrs. Singer's translation. 
.
,
 
h 
lly void' it is 
, 
. 
. d' b t this VOId IS now ere rea 
, 
-5. Bruno s space IS a -;01 , 
u 
um with nothing filling it would mean 
everywhere full of bemg, A vacu . 
sin against the 
. .
' 
f G d's creative actlOn and, moreover, a 
a hmltatIOn 0 
0 
. 1 f b'd 
God to treat any part of 
. 
. 1 
of sufficient reason whlC 1 
or 1 s 
ůŰW e 
h 
space in a manner different from any ot er. 
. 
f De immenso 
-6. De l'inf. univ. e mondi, p. 309 sq., transl., p. -80, c . 
Opera latina, vol. I, part I, p. -59 .  
-7. A .  O .  Lovejoy, op. cit:, p .  19, 
1 
. -46) . 
8 
De l'inf. universo, dedlc. epIstle, p .  -75 (trans ., 
P 
. fi ' m'effraye "  
:9 The famous phrase " Ie silence eernel de 
.
ces es98;e:
s:::eI7 
by Pascal's 
does not express Pascal's own feellllg.-
,ű IS u.su 
h· t
'
 
but that of the atheistlc 
hbertm. 
IS onans -
De tinf. universo, p. -74 (transl., p. -45) . 
. 
4 Opera, 
30. 
( 
I 
-50) ' cf De 'tmmenso, I, , 
31. De l'inf. universo, p. -80 
trans ., p. 
" 
I, I, p. -14 .  
-
Ib'd 
-81 (transl. p. -51) . 
. 
f 
3-. 
t
., p. 
, 
. 
finitude of the UnIverse - or 0 
33. This very famous argument agal
h
llst th6, 
't 
of philosophical tradition 
space - is a good example of t e con mUl Y
b 
. 
't from Lucretius 
and discussion. Giordano Bruno probaby 
orrow
l 
s 
d
l 
widely used in 
1 
968
) 
but It was a rea y 
(De rerum natura, . I, V. 
sq, , 
I 
n 
f the 
d. 
. 
f the XIII.XIVth centuries about the p ura 1 y 0 
the 
ISCUSSlOns 0 
. 
. 
uoted in chap. III, 
worlds and the possibility of the VOId (cf. my paper
)
q 
d 
by Locke 
40) and will be used by Henry More (d. infra, p. 139 an even 
288 

N O T E S  
(cf. An essay on human understanding, 1. II, §§13, :I) . According to the 
Commentaire exegetique et critique of A. Ernout and L. Robin to their 
edition of the De rerum natura (p. 1 80 sq., Paris, 19:5) , the argument 
originates with Architas and is used by Endemios in his Physics (cf. 
H. Diels, Fragmente der Vorsocmtiker, c. xxxv, A :4, Berlin, 191:) . 
What is more important, it is to be found in Cicero, De natura deorum, 
I, :O, 54; cf. Cyril Bailey, Lucretius, De rerum natura, vol. II, pp. 958 sq., 
Oxford, 1947. 
34. De l'inf. universo, p. :8: (trans!., p. :53) . 
35. Ibid., p. :83 (transl., p. :54) ; cf. A crotismus Camoeracensis, Opera, I, 
I, pp. 133, 134, 140. 
36. Cf. Acrotismus Camoeracensis, p. 175. 
37. D e  l'inf. univ., p. :86 (transl., p. :56) . 
38. Ibid., p. :89 (transl., p. Ǿ59) . 
39. Ibid., p. 334 (trans!., p. 304) ; cf. De immenso, Opera, I, I, p. :18. 
40. Ibid., p. 335 (trans!., p. 304) ; cf' De immenso, Opera, I, I, p. :90; I, II, 
p. 66. 
41. Ibid., p. 336 (transl., p. 305) ; cf. De immenso, I, II, p. 121. 
4:. Ibid., p. 336 (transl., p. 305) . 
43. Ibid., ' p. :86 (trans!., p. :57) . 
44. 
Ibid., p. :89 (transl., p. :60) . 
45. As a scientist he was, sometimes, far behind it. 
46. Cf. F. R. Johnson, Astronomical thought in Renaissance England, p. :16. 
47. G. Guillielmi Gilberti Colcestrensis, medici Londinensis, De magnete, 
magnetisque corporibus, et de magno magnete tellure physiologia nova, 
c. VI, cap. III; pp. 9115 sq., London, 1600; Gilbert's work was translated 
by P. Fleury Mottelay in 1 89: and by Sylvanus P. Thompson in 1900. 
The Mottelay translation was reprinted in 1941 as one of " The Classics 
of the St. John's Program " under the title: William Gilbert 0'/ Col­
chester, physician of London, On the load stone and magnetic bodies 
and on the great magnet the Earth; cf. pp. 319 sq. According to J. L. E. 
Dreyer, A history of astronomy from Thales to Kepler, :nd ed., New 
York, 1953, p. 348, Gilbert, in his posthumous work, De mundo nostro 
sublunari philosophia nova (Amstelodami, 1651) , " appears to hesitate 
between the system of Tycho and Copernicus." This is not quite exact, 
since Gilbert, in contradistinction to Tycho Brahe, (a) asserts the 
rotation of the earth which Tycho Brahe rejects, and (b) denies the 
existence of a sphere, of fixed stars, and even the finitude of the universe 
still taught by Brahe. Thus Gilbert tells us that though the majority 
of the philosophers placed the earth in the center of the world, there 
is no reason to do so (1. Ǿ, cap. II, De telluris locoƵ p. 115) : " Telluris 
284 
N O T E S  
vero globum in centro universi manentem omnis fere philosophorum 
turba collocavit. At si motum aliquem habuerit praeter diurnam revolu­
tionem (ut nonnulli existimant) erronem etiam illam oportet esse; sin 
in suo sede volveretur tantum, non in circulo, planetarum ritu moveretur. 
Non tam en inde, aut ullis aliunde depromptis rationibus, certo persua­
detur earn in universae ' rerum naturae centro, aut circa centrum, 
permanere." He adds, indeed (ibid., p. 117) , that " Non est autem quo 
persuaderi possit in centro universi magis terram reponi quam Lunam, 
quam Solem; nec ut in motivo mundo horum unum in centro sit, 
necesse esse," and that, moreover, the world itself has no center (p. 119) . 
On the other hand, though he puts the sun and not the earth in the 
center of the moving world (p. 120) : " locus telluris 'non in medio quia 
planetae in motu circulari tellurem non observant, tanquam centrum 
motion urn, sed Solem magis," and tells us that the sun (p. 158) " maxi­
mam vim egendi et impellendi habet, qui etiam motivi mundi centrum 
est," he does not tell us outright that the earth belongs to this " moving 
world " of the planets. 
Though he quotes Copernicus and even tells us that Copernicus erred 
in ascribing to the earth three m otions, instead of two (around its axis 
and around the sun) , the third one, that which, according to Copernicus, 
turned the axis of the earth in order to keep it pointing always in the 
same direction being not a motion at all, but lack of it (p. 165) : " Ter­
tius motus a Copernico inductus non est motus omnino, sed tell uris est 
directio stabilis," he does not assert the truth of the heliocentric world­
view. 
He tells us, indeed (1. I, cap. xx, De vacuo separato) , that the Aris­
totelian objections against the void are worthless, that things can just 
as well move in the void space as remain immobile in it and that the 
earth can very well be a planet and turn around the sun like the others; 
that, nevertheless, he does not want to discuss this question (1. I, cap. 
xx, De vacuo separato, p. 49) : " Cujus rei veritatem sic habeto. ' Omnia 
quiescunt in vacuo posita; ita quies plurimis glob is mundi. At nonnulli 
globi et infinitis viribus et actu aliorum corporum aguntur circa quaedam 
corpora, ut planetae circa Solem, Luna circa Tellurem et erga Solem. 
" Quod si Sol in medio quiescit ut Canis, ut Orion, ut Arcturus, tum 
planetae, tum etiam teUus, a Sole aguntur in orbem, consentientibus 
propter bonum ipsis globorum formis: si vero tellus in medio quiescat 
(de cujus motu annuo non est huius loci disceptare) aguntur circa 
ipsam cetera moventia." 
It is possible, of course, that Gilbert really considered that the dis­
cussion of the annual motion of the earth was out of place in a book 
fZ85 

N O T E S  
devoted to the development of a new philosophy of our sublunar world. 
Yet it is difficult to admit that, if he was fully convinced of the truth 
of the Copernican astronomy, he would so consistently avoid saying it, 
even when asserting its daily rotation, as, for instance in chap. VI of 
book II of the Philosophia nova (p. 135) : " Terram circumvolvi diurno 
motu, verisimile videtur: an vero circulari aliquo motu annuo cietur, 
non hujus est loci inquirere." It seems, thus, that Gilbert was either 
not very much interested in the problem, or sceptical about the possi­
bility to reach a solution and that he hesitated between an improved 
Copernicanism (such as Kepler's) and an improved Tycho Brah-ism 
(such as Longomontanus') . 
CHAPTER III 
1 . .  In pointing out the analogy between Kepler's views and those of some 
modern scientists and philosophers of science I am not committing an 
anachronism: epistemology and logic are, indeed, nearly as old as 
science . itself and empiricism or positivism are by no means new 
inventions. 
:. The sun represents, symbolizes, and perhaps even embodies God the 
Father, the stellar vault, the Son, and the space in between, the Holy 
Ghost. 
S. Cf. De stella nova in pede Serpentarii, cap. XXI, pp. 687 (Opera omnia, 
ed. Frisch, vol. II, Frankofurti et Erlangae, 1859) . The De stella nova 
was published in 1606. 
4. Ibid., p. 688. 
5. Ibidem. 
6. Ibidem. 
7. Ibidem. 
8. 
Ibidem. 
9. A perfectly reasonable assumption, and quite analogous to that of con-
temporary astronomy, about the distribution of galaxies. 
10. De stella nova, p. 689. 
11. Ibidem. 
1:. Ibidem. 
IS. The sky being " above " us, the stars are " elevated " in respect to us; 
thus to place them at a greater distance from us (or the centre of the 
world) is to give them a greater " elevation." 
14. Ibid., pp. 689 sq. 
:86 
N O T E S  
15. The absence of stellar parallaxes imposes a minimum to the distance 
separating us from the fixed stars. 
15a. Marcus Manilius, a Stoic, who lived in the Augustan age, author of a 
great astrological poem, Astronomicon libri quinque, which was edited 
by Regiomontanus in Niirnberg in 1 47S. 
16. Ibid., p. 690. 
17. Ibidem. 
18. Two minutes is the magnitude of the visible diameter of a star for the 
unassisted eye. 
19. Ibidem. 
:O. Ibid., p. 691. 
:1. Ibidem. 
::. 
Ibidem. 
:S. Ibidem. 
:4. J. Kepler, Dissertatio cum Nuntio Sidereo nuper ad mortales misso a 
Galileo Galilei, p. 490 (Opera omnia; vol. II) , Frankoforti et Erlangae, 
1859. Wacherus = the Imperial Councillor Wackher von Wackenfels 
who was the first to inform Kepler about the discoveries of Galileo. 
Brutus = the Englishman Edward Bruce who was a partisan of Giordano 
Bruno and who, some years before (Nov. 5, 160S) , sent to Kepler a 
letter (from Venice) in which he expressed his belief in the infinity of 
the world; according to Bruce fixed stars were suns surrounded by planets 
like our sun, and, like our sun, endowed with a rotational motion. 
Bruce's letter is quoted by Frisch, Opera omnia, vol. II, p. 568, and 
published by Max Caspar in his edition of Kepler (Johannes Kepler, 
Gesammelte Werke, vol. IV, p. 450, Miinchen, 1938) . 
:5. The fixed stars, as seen by a Galilean telescope, do not appear as light-
points; they still have visible dimensions; cf. supra, p .  191 . 
. 
:6. Epitome astronomiae Copernicanae, liber I, pars II, p. 136 (Opera omma, 
vol. VI, Frankoforti et Erlangae, 1866) . 
:7. 
Ibidem. 
:8. Ibidem. 
:9. Ibid., p. lS7. 
30. Ibidem. 
Sl. Ibid., p. 138. 
S:. Ibidem. 
33. Ibidem. 
34. 
Ibidem. 
35. Ibidem. 
86. Ibid., p. 139. 
37. Contemporary cosmology, on the other hand, seems to have recognized 
:87 

N O T E S  
the value of the old doubts about the possibility of an actually infinite 
world, and turned back to a finitist conception. 
38. That is the conception ascribed by Plutarch (or Pseudo-Plutarch) to the 
Stoics. 
39. Ibid., p. 139. 
40. Cf. m y  paper, " Le vide et l'espace infini au XIVeme siecle," Archives 
d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du Moyen-Age, XVII, 1949. 
CHAPTER IV 
1. Galileo Galilei, Sidereus nuncius . . .  Venetiis, 1610; there is an English 
translation by E. S. Carlos, The sidereal messenger, London, 1880. Large 
parts of this translation are reprinted in Harlow Shapley and Helen E. 
Howarth, A source b ook in astronomy, New York, 19:9. Though not 
using this translation I refer to it whenever possible. The expresssion 
Sidereus Nuncius was used by Galileo as meaning: the message of the 
stars. Yet Kepler understood it as meaning: the messenger of stars. 
This mistranslation became generally accepted and was corrected only 
in the recent edition of the Nuncius by Mrs. M. Timpanaro-Cardini, 
Florence, 1948. 
2. Cf. Sidereus nuncius, pp. 59 sq. 
(Opere, Edizione Nazionale, 
v. III, 
Firenze, 189:) , Source book, p. 41 . 
3. On the discovery of the telescope cf. Vasco Ronchi, Galileo e il canno-
chiale, Udine, 1942, and Storia della luce, : ed., Bologna, 1952. 
4. Sidereus nuncius, p. 75, Source book, p. 46. 
5. Ibid., p. 76. 
6. Ibid., p. 78. 
7. Galileo Galilei, Letter to Ingoli, p. 526. Opere, Ed. Naz., vol. VI, Firenze, 
1896. 
8. It is interesting to note that the conception according to which heavenly 
bodies are inhabited is referred to by Galileo as " commonly held." 
9. Letter to Ingoli, p. 525. 
10. Ibid., p. 518. 
11. Galileo Galilei, Dialogo sopra i due ma8simi sistemi del mondo (Opere, 
Ed. Naz., vol. VII) , p. 44; Firenze, 1897; cr. also p. 333. The Dialogue 
is easily available now in the excellent modernization of the old Salusbury 
translation by Professor Giorgio di Santillana, Galileo Galilei, Dialogue 
on the great world systems, Chicago, 1953, as well as in the new trans­
lation by Stillman Drake, Galileo Galilei, Dialogue concerning the two 
:88 
N O T E S  
chief world systems, Ptolemaic 
and Copernican, Berkeley and Los 
Angeles, 1953. 
a. Dialogo, p. 306. 
13. Letter to Ingoli (Opere, vol. VI) , pp. 518, 5:9. 
14. Dialogo, loco cit. 
15. Cf. Letter to Liceti, of February 10, 1 640; Opere, vol. XVIII, pp. :93 sq., 
Firenze, 1906. 
16. Cf. R. Descartes, Principia philosophiae, part II, §4, p. 4:. (Oeuvres, ed. 
Adam Tannery, vol. VIII, Paris, 1 905.) 
17. Principia philosophiae, pt. II, §10, p. 45. 
18. Ibid., §11, p. 46. 
19. Ibid., §13, p. 47. 
:O. Ibid., §13, p. 47. 
:1 . Ibid., §16, p. 49. 
2:. Ibid., §:1, p. 5:. 
:3. Ibid., §::, p. 5:. 
:4. Ibidem. 
:5. Principia philosophiae, p. I, §:6, p. 54. 
:6. Ibid., §27, p. 55. 
:7. Ibidem. 
:8. Principia philo'sophiae, p. III, §1, p. 80. 
:9 . Ibid., §2, pp. 81 sq. 
CHAPTER V 
1 .  Cf. Miss Marjorie H. Nicolson, " The early stages of Cartesianism in 
England," Studies in Philology, vol. XXVIII, 1929. Henry More accepted 
Cartesian physics, though only partially, and the Cartesian rejection of 
substantial forms, but he never abandoned his belief in the existence, 
and action, of " spiritual " agents in nature and never adopted the 
Cartesian strict opposition of matter - reduced to extension - to spirit, 
defined by self-consciousness and freedom. Henry More, accordingly, 
believes in animals ' having souls and in souls ' having a non-material 
extension; cf. also Miss Nicolson's The breaking of the circle, Evanston, 
Ill., 1950. 
2. These letters were published by Clersellier in his edition of the corre­
spondence of Descartes (Lettres de M. Descartes ou sont traittees les 
plus belles questions de la morale, de la physique, de la medecine et des 
mathematiques . . .  Paris, 1 657) and republished by Henry More 
289 

N O T E S  
himself (with a rather angry preface) in his Collection of severall phil­
osophical writings of 1662. I am quoting them according to the text 
of the Adam-Tannery edition of the works of Descartes (Oeuvres, vol. v, 
Paris, 1903) . 
3. Letter to Descartes, II-XII, 1648, pp. 238 sq. 
4. In this work, written in 1646, he shows himself an enthusiastic follower 
of the Lucretian-Brunonian doctrine of the infinity of worlds; cf. Lovejoy, 
op. cit., pp. 125, 347. 
5. On Gassendi see K. Lasswitz, op. cit., and R. P. Gaston Sortais, La 
philosophie moderne, depuis Bacon jusqu'd Leibniz, vol. II, Paris, 1922; 
also Pierre Gassendi, sa vie et son oeuvre, Paris, 1955. Gassendi is not 
an original thinker and does not play ' any role in the discussion I am 
studying. He is a rather timorous mind and accepts, obviously for 
theological reasons, the finitude of the world immersed in void space; 
yet, by his revival of Epicurean atomism and his insistence upon the 
existence of the void, he undermined the very basis of the discussion, 
that is, the traditional ontology which still dominated the thought not 
only of Descartes and More but also of Newton and Leibniz. 
6. Letter to Descartes, p. 242. 
7. In the Cartesian world vortices which surround fixed stars limit each 
üther and prevent each other from spreading and dissolving under the 
mfluence of centrifugal force; if they were limited in number, and 
therefore in extension, then, first the outermost ones and then all the 
others would be dispersed and dissipated. 
8. Letter to Descartes, p. 242. 
9. Namely, by arguments based upon the consideration of God's omnip-
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
otence. 
Descartes to Henry More, 5, II, 1649, pp. 267 sq. 
Ibid., pp. 269 sq. 
Ibid., p. 274. 
Ibid., ,po 275. 
Se:ond letter o f  H .  More t o  Descartes, 5, III, 49; pp. 298 sq. 
lbƶd., pp. 304 sq. 
Ibid., p. 305. 
Ibid., p. 302. More's argument against Descartes is a re-edition of 
Plotinus' argument against Aristotle. 
Ibid., p. 312; d. supra. 
Seûond letter of Descartes to Henry More, 15, IV, 1649; pp. 340 sq. 
Ibtd., p. 342. 
Ibid., p. 343. 
290 
N O T E S  
22. Such was, in any case, the opinion of Pascal. Yet, after all, what is the 
God of a philosopher supposed to ' be if not a philosophical God? 
23. Ibid., p. 344. 
24. Ibid., p. 845. 
25. Dated the 23rd of July, 1649 (Oeuvres, vol. v, pp. 376 sq.) . 
26. At least, he started writing an answer - in August 1649 - though he 
did not send it to Henry More. 
27. Dated the ԩlst of October, 1649, vol. v, pp. 434 sq. 
28. It is possible, of course, that, as he went to Sweden on Sept. 1 ,  1649 
and died there on Feb. 11, 1650, Descartes did not receive this last 
letter of Henry More. 
29. Cf. my Essai sur les preuves de l'existence de Dieu chez Descartes, Paris, 
1928, and " Descartes after three hundred years," The University of 
Buffalo Studies, vol. XIX, 1951. 
CHAPTER VI 
1 .  Henry More has not received the monographical treatment to which he 
is . undoubtedly entitled. On him, and on the Cambridge Platonists in 
general, d. John Tulloch, Rational theology and Christian philosophy 
in England in the X VIllth century, vol. II, Edinburgh and London, 
1 874; F. J. Powicke, The Cambridge Platonists, London, 1926; J. H. 
Muirhead, The Platonic tradition in Anglo-Saxon philosophy, London, 
1931; T. Cassirer, Die Platonische Renaissance in England und die Schule 
von Cambridge, Leipzig, 1932; English translation: The Platonic Renais­
sance in England ,and the Cambridge School, New Haven, 1958. Selec­
tions of the philosophical writings of Henry More (namely from The 
antidote against atheism, The immortality of the soul, and the Enchiri­
dium metaphysicum in translation) were published in 1925 by Miss 
Flora J. Mackinnon with an interesting introduction, valuable notes, 
and an excellent bibliography: Philosophical writings of Henry More, 
New York, 1925. Cf. Marjorie Nicolson, Con,way letters, the' corre­
spondence of Anna, Viscountess Conway, Henry More and their friends, 
16413-1684, London, 1930; Markus Fierz, " Ueber den Ursprung und Be­
deutung der Lehre Newtons vom absolutem Raum," Gesnerus, vol. XI, 
fasc. 3/4, 1954; Max Jammer, Concept of space, Harvard Univ. Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1954. Both Markus Fierz and Max Jammer seem to 
me to exaggerate the real influence of cabalist space conceptions on 
Henry More (and his predecessors) . In my opinion, it was a typical 
ǿ91 

N O T E S  
case of reprojection into the past of modern conceptions in order to 
back them up · by sacred or venerable authorities; yet, as we know, mis­
understanding and misinterpretation play an important part in the 
history of thought. It seems to me, moreover, that Fierz and Jammer 
themselves are not quite innocent of the sin of retroprojection, for­
getting that space conceptions formed before the invention of geometry 
were not, and could not, be identical or even similar to the conceptions 
devised after this momentous event. 
2. Henry More, A n antidote against athewme, or an appeal to the natural 
faculties of the minde of man, whether there be not a God, London, 
1652; second ed. corrected and enlarged, London, 1655; third edition, 
corrected, and enlarged, " with 
an Appendix thereunto annexed," 
London, 1662. I am quoting this edition as given in Henry More's 
Collection of severall philosophical writings, London, 1662. 
3. Henry More, The immortality of the soul, so farre forth as it is 
demonstrable from the knowledge of nature and the light of reason, 
London, 1669; second edition in the Collection of severall philosophical 
writings of 1662. It is this edition that I am quoting. 
4. Henricus Morns, Enchiridium metaphysicum sive de rebus incorporeis 
succincta et luculenta disseriatio, Londini, 1671 .  
5 .  Henry More, A n  antidote against atheism, book I, cap. IV, §8, p .  15. 
6. Henry More, The immortality of the soul, b. I, c. II, axiom IX, p. 19. 
7. Cf. R. Zimmerman, " Henry More und die vierte Dimension des Raumes," 
Kaiserliche 
A kademie 
der 
Wissenschaften, 
Philosophisch-historische 
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, Bd. 98, pp. 403-sq., Wien, 1881 . 
8. Henry More, The immortality of the soul, b. I, c. II, §ll, p. 20. 
9. Ibid., 6, I, C. III, §§1 and 2, pp. 21 sq. 
10. Axiom IX (b. I, c. II, p. 19) tells us .that " There are some Properties, 
Powers and Operations, immediately appertaining to a thing, of which 
no reasons can be given, nor ought to be demanded, nor the Way or 
Manner of the cohesion of the Attribute with the subject can by any 
means be fancied or imagined." 
11. Cf. William Gilbert, De magnete, ch. XII, p. 808: " The magnetic force is 
animate, or imitates the soul; in many respects it surpasses · the human 
soul while that is united to an organic body." 
lla. Cf. also Markus Fierz, op. cit., pp. 91 sq. 
12. Henry More, The immortality of the soul, b. III, c. XII, §1, p. 198. 
13. Ibid., preface, §12, p. 12. 
14. An antidote against atheism, c. II, c. II, §1, p. 43. 
15. Ibid., Appendix (of 1655) , cap. VII, §1, p. 168. 
16. Ibidem. 
N O T E S  
17. Ibid., §§4, 5, 6, pp. 164 sq. 
18. Enchiridium metaphysicum, part I, cap. VI, v. 42. 
19. Ibidem. 
20. Ibidem. 
21. Ibid., cap. VI, 4, p. 44. 
22. Ibid., cap. VI, 11, p. 51. 
23. Ibid., cap. VII, 3, p. 53. 
24. This definition is given by Descartes in the Principia philosophiae, part 
II, §25. 
25. Enchiridium metaphysicu1n, cap. VII, 7, p. 56. 
26. Ibid., c. VII, 6, p .  55. 
27. Ibidem. 
28. Ibidem. 
29. Ibidem. 
30. Ibid., C. VIII, 6, p. 68. 
31. Ibid., C. VIII, 7, p. 69. 
32. Ibid., C. VIII, 8, pp. 69 sq. 
33. Ibid., C. VIII, 9, p. 70. 
34. Ibid., C. VIII, 10, p. 71. 
35. Ibid., C. VIII, 11, p. 72. 
36. Ibid., C. VIII, 12, p. 72. 
37. Ibidem. 
CHAPTER VII 
1 .  Cf. Nicolas Malebranche, Meditations chretiennes, med. IX, §9, p. 172, 
Paris, 1926. On Malebranche d. H. Gouhier, La philosophie de Male-
branche, Paris, 1925. 
2. Ibidem. 
3. Ibid., §10, p. 178. 
4. Ibid., §8, pp. 1 71 sq. 
· 5. Ibid., §ll, p. 174. 
6. Ibid., §12, pp. 1 74 sq. 
7. Cf. Malebranche, Correspondance avec J. J. Dortous de Mairan, ed. 
nouvelle, precedee d'une introduction par Joseph Moreau, Paris, 1947. 
8. Cr., e. g., the already quoted book of E. A. Burtt, The metaphysical 
foundations of modern physical science, New York, 1925; second ed., 
London, 1982. 
9. Cf. Sir Isaac Newton's mathematical principles of natural philosophy, 
293 

N O T E S  
translated into English by Andrew Motte in 1 7:9, the translation 
revised by Florian Cajori, p. 6, Berkeley, Calif., 1946. 
10. Ibid., p. 8. 
11. Ibidem. 
12. Ibid., p. 6. 
1 8 .  Ibidem. 
14. Ibidem. 
15. Ibidem. 
16. Ibidem. 
17. Ibidem. 
18. Ibid., p. 7. The example of the sailor is discussed by Descartes in the 
Principia philosophiae, II, 18, 8:. 
19. Ibid., p. 8. 
:O. His pupil, Dr. Clarke, will indeed do it; cf. infra, p. :75. 
:1. Ibid., p. 9. 
22. Ibid., p. 10. 
½8. Ibidem. 
:4. Ibid., p. 1 1 .  As against Descartes, Principia, II, 18. 
24a. Cf. Ernst Mach, The science of mechanics, Chicago, 1902, pp. 282 sq.; 
cr. also Max Jammer, op. cit., pp. 104 sq.; 121 sq.; 140 sq. 
:5. Ibid., p. 1:. 
½6. Ibid., book III, The system of the world, Lemma IV, cor. III, p. 497. 
27. Ibid., book III, The system of the world, prop. V, theorem VI, scholium, 
cor. III, p. 414. 
28. Ibid., cor. IV, p. 415. 
29. As a matter of fact, they have been listed also by Boyle and Gassendi 
who, in contradistinction to Descartes, insist on impenetrability as an 
irreducible property of body distinct from mere extension. 
80. Ibid., rule III, pp. 898 sq. The text I am referring to appeared in the 
second ' edition of the Principia; yet, as it represents the fundamental 
views of Newton which inspired his whole system, I feel it necessary 
to quote it here. On the difference between the first and the subsequent 
editions of the Principia, d. my papers " Pour une edition critique des 
oeuvres de Newton," Revue d'Histoire des Sciences, 1955, and " Experi­
ence et hypothese chez Newton," Bulletin de la Societe Franr;aise de 
Philosophie, 1956. 
81 . Ibid., book I, sect. XI, prop. LXIX, schol., p. 192. 
82. Cf. my Etudes Galileennes. II, La loi de la chute des corps, and III, 
Galilee et la loi d'inertie. 
88. Ibid., loco cit. 
84. Four Letters from Sir Isaac Newton to the Reverend Dr. Bentley, 
294 
N O T E S  
Letter II (Jan. 17, 1692-98) , p. 210, London, 1756; reprinted in Opera 
omnia, ed. by Samuel Horsley, 5 vols., London, 1779-85 (vol. IV, pp. 
429-442) , and also in the Works of R. Bentley, vol. III, London, 1888. 
I am quoting this edition. 
85. Letter III (Feb. 25, 1692-98) , ibid., p. 211 .  
M .  Eight sermons preach'd at the Honourable Robert Boyle lecture in the 
first year MDCXCII, By Richard Bentley, Master of Arts, London, 
1698. The first sermon proves The folly of atheism and .
.
.
 Deism 
even with respect to the present life, the second demonstrates that 
matter and motion cannot think, the third, fourth and fifth present 
A confutation of atheism from the structure of the human body, the 
sixth, seventh and eighth, forming the second part of the work, A con 
futation of atheism from the origin and frame of the world. I 
am 
quoting the last edition (Works, v. III) of this book that has seen nine of 
them in English, and one in Latin (Berolini, 1696) ; d. Part II, sermon 
VII (preached Nov. 7th, 1692) , pp. 152 sq. 
87. Ibid., p. 154. 
88. Ibid., p. 157. 
39. Ibid., pp. 162 sq. 
40. Ibid., p. 163. 
41. Letters from Sir Isaac Newton to the Reverend Dr. Bentley, Letter I, 
pp. 203 sq. 
42. A confutation of atheism from the origin and frame of the world, p. 165. 
48. Ibid., p. 170. 
44. Ibid., pp. 175 sq. 
45. On the cosmical optimism of the XVlIIth century, cf. Lovejoy, op. cit., 
pp. 133 sq.; E. Cassirer, Die Philosophie der AufkUirung, Tiibingen, 1932. 
CHAPTER VIII 
1. Joseph Raphson is chiefly known as the author of the violently pro­
Newtonian Historia Fluxionum, sive Tractatus Originem et Progressum 
Peregregiae Istius Methodis Brevissimo Compendio (Et quasi synoptice) 
Exhibens, Londini, 1 715. 
2. Analysis /Equationum Universalis seu ad A equationes Algebraicas Resol-
vendas Methodus Generalis e t  Expedita, Ex nova Infinitarum Serierum 
Methodo, Deducta et Demonstrata. Editio secunda cui accedit Appendix 
de Infinito Infinitarum Serierum progressu ad Equationum Algebrai­
carum Radices eliciendas. 
Cui etiam Annexum est De SPATIO REALI 
seu 
ENTE 
INFINITO conamen Mathematico Metaphysicum, Authore 
295 

N O T E S  
JO
.
SúPHO RAPHSON A. M. et Reg. Soc. Socio., Londini, 170:. The first 
edItIon of J. Raphson's work, wI'thout the 
b 
a ove-men tioned appendices, 
appeared in 1697. 
8. De ente infinito, cap. IV, p. 67. 
4. Cf. infra, pp. 198, 196. 
5. De ente infinito, cap. IV, pp. 57 sq. 
6. Ibid., pp. 70 sq. 
7. Ibid., cap. v, p. 7:. 
8. Ibid., Def. I. 
9. Ibid., Scholium, p. 78. 
10. Ibidem. 
11 .  Ibid., pp. 74 sq. 
1:. Ibid., Scholium, p. 76. On the space theories of the Cabala cf. Max 
Jammer, op. cit., pp. 30 sq. 
18. Ibid., corollarium. 
14. Ibidem. 
15. Ibid., p. 78. 
16. Ibid., p. 80 . . 
17. Ibid., cap. VI, p. 8:. 
18. Ibid., p. 88. 
19. Ibid., pp. 88 sq. 
:O. Ibid., p. 85. 
:1. Ibid., pp. 90 sq. 
::. Ibid., p. 91. 
:8. Ibid., p. 91. 
:4. Ibid., pp. 91 sq. 
:5. Ibid., p. 9:. 
:6. Ibid., p. 98. 
:7. Ibid., p. 95. 
CHAPTER IX 
1. Strange as it may se:m, the adjunction of these " queries," numbered 
17 to :8, to the Latm edition of the Opticks in 1706 seems t 
h 
escaped the 
tt 
r 
f N 
0 
ave 
. 
a en IOn 0 
ewton's historians who, usually, attribute 
5+se que:les to the second (English) edition of 1617 of his Opticks. 
us, for mstance, L. T. More, Isaak Newton, New York-London 1984 
p. 506, note: "A second edition (octavo) bears the advertisemen; 1717' 
It was published in 1718. . 
. The number of new Queries added 
:96 
N O T E S  
begins with the seventeenth." Leon Bloch's La philosophie de Newton, 
Paris, 1908, is an honorable exception to the afore-mentioned rule; and 
today, Mr. H. G. Alexander, editor of The Leibniz-Clarke correspond­
ence, Manchester University Press, 1956. 
:. Philosophical principles vf natural religion by George Cheyne,· M. D. and 
F. R. S., London, 1705. The second edition of Cheyne's book, published 
under the title Philosophical principles of religion, natural and revealed, 
London, 1615, " corrected and enlarged," contains two parts: Part I, 
" containing the Elements of Natural Philosophy and the Proofs of 
NATURAL RELIGION arising from them," and a Part II, " containing the 
Nature and Kinds of Infinities, the Arithmetick and Uses, and the Phil­
osophick Principles of Reveal'd Religion, now first published." Strangely 
enough the common title page, as well as that of the second part, bears 
the date 1715, whereas that of the first part, the date 1716. As a matter 
of fact, or at least according to David Gregory who held this information 
from Newton himself, it was the publication by Dr. Cheyne of his 
Fluxionum methodus inversa sive quantitatum fiuentium leges generales, 
London, 1 708 (rather sharply criticized by A. De Moivre in his Animad­
versiones in Dr. G. Cheyne's Fluxionum methodus . .
. London, 1704) , 
which prompted Newton to publish the Two treatises on the species and 
magnitudes of curvilinear figures, that is, The quadrature of curves and 
The enumeration of the lines of the third order; (d. David Gregory, Isaak 
Newton and their circle, Extracts from David Gregory's Memoranda, 
edited by W. G. Hiscock, pp. :: sq., Oxford, 1937) . 
In the selfsame 
Memoranda under the date of December n, 1705, we find also the 
following, very interesting passage (ibid., pp. :9-80) : " Sir Isaak Newton 
was with me and told me that he had put 7 pages of Addenda to his 
Book of Lights and Colours in this new latin edition of iL He has by 
way of quaere explained the explosion of Gun powder, all the chief 
Operations of Chymistry. He has shewed that Light is neither a com­
munication of motion nor of a Pressure. He inclines to believe it to be 
projected/minute bodys. He has explained in those Quaerys the double 
Refraction in Iseland CrystaU. His Doubt was whether he should put 
the last Quaere thus. 
What the space that is empty of bodies is filled 
with. The plain truth is that he believes God to be omnipresent in the 
literal sense. And that as we are sensible of Objects where their images 
are brought within the brain, so God must be sensible of every thing 
being intimately present with every thing: for he supposes that as God 
is present in space where there is no body, he is present in space where a 
body is also present. But if this way of proposing this his notion be too 
bold, he thinks of doing it thus. What cause did the Ancients assign of 
:97 

N O T E S  
Gravity. He believes that they reckoned God the Cause of it, nothing 
else, that is no body being the cause; since every body is heavy. 
" Sir Isaak believes that the Rays of Light enter into the composition 
of most Natural Bodies that is the small particles that are projected 
from a lucid body in form of Rays. As plain this may be the case with 
most combustible, inflammable bodies." On the relations of light and 
matter according to Newton d. Helene Metzger, Newton, Stahl, Boer­
haave et la doctrine chimique, Paris, 1930. 
3. Optice . . .  1. III, quo :O, pp. 31: sq.; London, 1706; quo :8 of the English 
edition; cf. 1. Bernard Cohen's edition of the Opticks, New York, 195:, 
p. 369. As the English edition certainly gives the original text of 
Newton himself, I will quote this latter giving first the page numbers 
of the Latin, and then those of the afore-mentioned edition. 
4. Ibid., pp. 32: sq.; pp. 375-76. The existence of various " impellent " and 
" repellent " forces acting between the " particles " of bodies is already 
asserted by Newton in the preface of the Principia. 
5. Ibid., p. 376. 
6. Ibid., p. 335; pp. 888 sq. 
7. Ibid., p. 885 sq.; pp. 889 sq. 
8. Ibid., p. 337; p. 394. 
9. Ibid., pp. 337 sq.; pp. 894 sq. 
1 0. Ibid., pp. 338 sq.; pp. 395-396. 
1 1 .  Ibid., pp. 340 sq.; pp. 897 sq. 
11a. The reasoning is, of course, utterly false and it is rather astonishing 
that Newton could have made it and that neither he himself nor his 
editors noticed this falsehood. 
1:. Ibid., p. 843; p. 399. 
13. Ibid., pp. 848 sq.; p. 400. 
14. Ibid., p. 845; p. 40:. 
15. Ibid., p. 346; p. 403. 
CHAPTER X 
1 .  George Berkeley, Principles of human knowledge, §1l0; p. 89 ( The works 
of George Berlt-eley Bishop of eloyne, ed. by A. A. Luce and T. E. 
Jessop, vol. I ,  Edinburgh, 1949) . 
:. Ibid., §111 ,  p. 90. 
3. Ibid., §1l7, p. 94. 
4. On the 18th of February 1673, Roger Cotes wrote to Newton (cf. 
:98 
N O T E S  
Correspondence of Sir Isaak Newton and Professor Cotes . .
. ed. J. 
Edleston, London, 1850, pp. 153 sq.) : " . . .  I think it will be proper 
[to] add something by which your book may be cleared from some prej­
udices which have been industriously laid against it. As that it deserts 
mechanical causes, is built upon miracles and recurrs to Occult qualities. 
That you may not think it unnecessary to answer such Objections you 
may be pleased to consult a Weekly Paper called M emoires of Literature 
and sold by Ann Baldwin in Warwick-Lane. In the 18th Number of ye 
second Volume of those Papers which was published May 5th, 1 71:, you 
will find a very extraordinary letter of Mr. Leibnitz to Mr. Hartsoeker 
which will confirm what I have said." Indeed, in this letter, dated 
Hanover, February 10, 1711, Leibniz who, as a matter of fact already 
had attacked Newton in his Theodicee (Essai de Theodicee, Discours de 
la Conformite de la Foi avec la Raison, §19, Amsterdam, 1710) assimi­
lated the Newtonian gravity to an " occult quality," so " occult " that 
it could never be cleared up even by God. It is well known that neither 
Leibniz nor Huygens had ever accepted the Newtonian conception of 
gravitation, or attraction. Cf. Rene Dugas, Histoire de la mecanique 
au XVIIe siecle, Neuchatel, 1954, cap. XII, Retour au Continent, pp. 
446 sq. and cap. XVI, Reaction des Newtoniens, pp. 556 sq. 
4a. In the first line, Henry More and Joseph Raphson. 
5. Cf. 
Mathematical principles 
of natural 
philosophy, translated into 
English by Andrew Motte in 1 729 . The translation revised 
. by 
Florian Cajori, General Scholium, pp. 543 sq., Berkeley, Cal., 1946. 
6. 
Ibid., pp. 544 sq. 
7. Ibid., p. 545. 
8. Ibidem. 
9. Ibidem. 
10. Ibid., p. 546. 
1 1 .  Ibid., pp. 546 sq. 
1:. Professor Cajori follows Andrew Motte in translating Newton's fingo by 
frame. It seems to be that the old term feign (used by Newton him­
self) is both more correct and more expressive. 
13. Principles, preface, p. xx. 
14. Ibid., p. xxix. 
15. Ibid., p. xxvii. 
16. Ibid., pp. xxxi sq. 
17. Principles, p. 547. On the XVIlth century conception of " spirit " d. 
E. A. Burtt, op. cit., and A. J. Snow, Matfer and gravity in Newton's 
philosophy, Oxford, 19:6. 
ǿ99 

N O T E S  
CHAPTER XI 
1 .  Wilhelmine Caroline, later Queen Caroline, was born Princess of Branden­
burg-Anspach and in 1705 became the wife of George Augustus, Electoral 
Prince of Hanover. It was as Princess of Hanover that she became 
intimate with Leibniz; as Leibniz put it himself, she " inherited " him 
from Sophie Charlotte of Prussia. 
2. Cf. "An extract of a letter written in November 1715," §§3 and 4, 
published in A Collection of papers, which passed between the late 
learned Mr. Leibnitz and Dr. Clarke. In the years 1715 and 171 6  Re­
lating to the Principles of Natural Philosophy and Religion. With an 
Appendix, pp. 3 and 5, London, 1717. Leibniz writes, of course, in French, 
and Clarke, in English. But he accompanies the publication of the 
originals by a translation of Leibniz's " papers " into English (probably 
made by himself) and of his own " replies " into French (probably made 
by the Abbe Conti) . Moreover, he adds to the text a series of footnotes 
with references to relevant passages in Newton's writings. This polemic 
is now available in the excellent edition of G. H. Alexander, The Leibniz­
Clarke correspondence, Manchester Univ. Press, 1956; d. also Rene 
Dugas, La mecanique au XVII siecle, cap. XVI, §3, pp. 561 sq. 
3. The choice of Dr. Samuel Clarke was rather obvious. 
Dr. Clarke, 
Rector of St. James', Westminster, was not only a philosoJ?hical the­
ologian - in 1704-5 he gave the Boyle Lectures - but also was former 
chaplain of Queen Anne, removed, to say the truth, from this charge for 
lack of orthodoxy (he was practically an Arian) . However, after Queen 
Anne's death he became an intimate of Princess Caroline with whom, at 
her request, he had weekly philosophical conversations in which other 
gentlemen interested in discussing philosophical problems participated. 
Thus it was only natural that, as Des Maizeaux tells us in the preface 
to his own French re-edition of the Collection of papers (Recueil de 
diverses pieces sur La philosophie, La religion naturelle, l'histoire, les 
mathematiques
etc., 2 vols., Amsterdam, 1720, p. II) : " Madame la 
Princesse de Galles, accoutumee aux Recherches Philosophiques les plus 
abstraites et les plus sublimes fit voir cette Lettre it M. Clarke et 
souhaita qu'il y repondit. . . . Elle envoyait it M. Leibniz les Reponses 
de M. Clarke et communiquait it M. Clarke les nouvelles difficultes, ou 
les Instances de .M. Leibniz." Indeed, Dr. Clarke as an intimate friend 
of Sir Isaac, and a Newtonian of long standing, could be relied upon to 
represent the philosophical views of his master. 
300 
N O T E S  
In my OpInIOn we must go even farther: it is utterly unconceivable 
that Clarke should accept the role of philosophical spokesman (and 
defender) of Newton without being entrusted by the latter to do it, 
nay, without having secured the collaboration of the great man, at least 
in the form of approval. 
I am, thus, morally certain that Clarke communicated to Newton both 
Leibniz's letters and his own replies to them. It is indeed unthinkable 
that in the midst of his bitter fight with Leibniz about the priority 
of the · invention of the calculus, Newton who " aided " both Keill 
and Raphson in their attacks against Leibniz, as he " aided " Des 
Maiseaux some years later in the preparation of his edition of the " Col­
lection of papers " (the second volume of his edition carries the history 
of the calculus controversy by publishing translations of selected pieces 
of the Commercium epistolicum) , should remain aloof and disinterested 
in the face of an assault upon his religious view and an accusation, prac­
tically, of atheism, by the selfsame Leibniz. As a matter of fact, the 
Princess of 'Wales informed Leibniz (Caroline to Leibniz, Jan. 1 0, 1716, in 
O .  Klopp, Die Werke von Leibniz, Hanover, 1864-84, vol. XI, p. 71, quoted 
in The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence, Manchester Univ. Press, 1956, p. 
193) that he was right in his supposition that these letters were not written 
without the advice of Newton. Strange as it may seem, the importance 
of Clarke's papers as representing literally the metaphysical views of 
Newton has never been recognized, with the result that their study was 
completely neglected by the historians both of Newton and of Leibniz. 
Thus, for instance, L. T. More, op. cit., p. 649: " It seems probable that 
Newton was even more exasperated by Leibniz's attack on the anti­
Christian influence of the Principia than by the controversy over the 
invention of the calculus. To justify himself he guided Des Maizeaux 
in preparing for publication the long debate between Leibniz and Samuel 
Clarke on the religious significance of the Newtonian Philosophy. For 
this purpose he gave to the author the documents relating to the contro­
versy, and assisted him in preparing an historical preface which reviewed 
the whole affair." 
4. Cf. supra, pp. 181-89. 
4a. As a matter of fact (d. supra, p. 209) Newton, at least once, identified 
space with God's sensorium. 
5. " Dr. Clarke's first reply," A collection of papers .
.
.
 , pp. 15 sq. 
5a. The Socinians did not believe in predestination, nor in the Trinity. 
6. " Mr. Leibniz's second paper," ibid., p. 25. 
7. Ibid., p. 33. 
8. Especially his allusion to Socinianism, because, as a matter of fact both 
301 

N O T E S  
Sir Isaac Newton and Dr. Samuel Clarke were much nearer to Socinian­
ism than to the teaching of the Established Church: neither of them, 
indeed, accepted the Trinitarian conception of God; they were both - as 
also John Locke - Unitarians; d. H. McLachlan, The religious opinions 
of Milton, Locke and Newton, Manchester, 1941 . On Newton's meta­
physical and religious views, d. Helene Metzger, A ttraction universeUe et 
religion naturelle, Paris, 1938, and E. W. Strong, " Newton and God," 
Journal of the History of Ideas, vol. XIII, 1952. 
9. Or, at least, proclaims. 
10. " Dr. Clarke's second reply," ibid., p. 41 . Intelligentia supramundana, 
or more exactly, extra mundana, is an expression of Leibniz; d. Theodicee, 
§217. 
11. Ibid., p. 45. 
12. " Mr. Leibniz's third paper," ibid., p. 57. 
13. Ibid., p. 59. 
. 
14. Ibid., p. 69. 
15. " Dr. Clarke's third reply," ibid., p. 77. Dr. Clarke uses the term 
" property " in his own " replies " as well as in the translation of 
Leibniz's " papers " - and one understands full well why he does not 
use the more correct one, " attribute ": just because Leibniz has men­
tioned Spinoza. But Leibniz himself uses the term " attribute "; moreover 
the French translation of Clarke's " replies," reviewed and acknowledged 
by Clarke himself, uses " attribute " for " property." 
16. Dr. Clarke's example is rather bad as, in this case, there would be a 
relative displacement of " our world " in respect to the fixed stars. 
17. The use of the principle of inertia in the discussion of the old problem 
whether God can move the world in a straight line (d. my paper 
quoted supra, cap. III, n. 43) is rather ingenious. 
18. " Dr. Clarke's third reply," ibid., p. 85. 
19. For Leibniz reality and individuality are inseparable. 
20. " Mr. Leibniz.'s fourth paper," ibid., p. 97. 
21 . Ibid., p. 103. 
22. Thus, practically, Leibniz and Descartes are in full agreement. 
23. " Mr. Leibniz's fourth paper," ibid., pp. 115 sq. 
24. Ibidem. 
25. Ibidem. Leibniz will mention Henry More in his fifth paper, n. 48: 
" To conclude. If the space (which the author fancies) void of bodies 
is not altogether empty: what is it then full of? Is it full of extended 
spirits perhaps, or immaterial susbtances, capable of extending and con­
tracting of themselves; which move therein and penetrate each other 
without any inconveniency, as the shadows of two bodies penetrate one 
302 
N O T E S 
another upon the surface of a wall? Methinks I see the revival of the 
odd imaginations of Dr. Henry More (otherwise a learned and well 
meaning man) and of some others who fancied that those spirits can 
make themselves impenetrable whenever they please." 
26. Ibidem. 
27. Ibidem. 
28. Ibid., p. 101 .  
29. Ibidem. 
30. " Dr. Clarke's fourth reply," ibid., p. 121 . 
31. We even have to suppose it if we want to link atomism with mathe-
matical philosophy. 
32. Ibid., p. 125. 
33. Ibidem. 
34. Ibidem. 
35. Ibid., p. 127. 
36. Ibid., p. 131. 
37. It is rather interesting to see Dr. Clarke use Henry More's famous 
concept and term. 
38. Ibid., p. 127. 
39. Ibid., p. 135 .  
40. Ibid., p. 139. 
41. Ibid., p. 139. 
42. Ibid., p. 141 . 
43. Ibid., p. 149 .  
44. Ibid., p. 151. 
45. This latter behaviour is, more often than not, branded as " arbitrari-
ness. " 
46. " Mr. Leibniz's fifth paper," ibid., p. 181. 
47. Ibidem. 
48. Ibid., p. 211 .  
49. Ibid., p. 183. 
50. Ibid., p. 207. 
51. Ibid., p. 231 .  
52. Ibid., p .  189. 
53. Ibid., p. 193. 
54. Ibid., p. 195. 
55. Ibidem. 
56. Ibid., p. 235. 
57. Ibid., p. 259. 
58. Ibid., pp. 269 sq. 
59. " Dr. Clarke's fifth reply," ibid., p .  295. 
303 

N O T E S  
60. Ibid., p. 313. 
61. Ibid., pp. 301 sq. 
62. Ibid., p. 349. 
63. Ibid., p. 367. 
64. Ibid., p. 335. 
304 
Index 
Acceleration: 169 
Ancients: concept of universe, 5, 14, 
16, 1 7, 24, 60, 112; explanation of 
gravity, 208, 297-98; theory of in­
comprehensibility of God, 198. See 
also Atomism 
Anselmian concept: 124 
Aristarchus of Samos: 28 
Aristotle: 28, 30, 35, 56, 59, 100, 101 ,  
126, 149, 261, 290; concept of God 
as First Cause, 225; concept 6f uni­
verse, 11, 34, 60, 72, 86-87, 97, 139, 
140; doctrines questioned, 24, 26, 
31-32, 46-47, 55, 139, 161, 230, 285; 
theory of relativity of motion, 56, 
279 
Arnauld, Antoine: 
attitude toward 
Malebranche, 158-59 
Atheism: causes, 138, 198, 234; re­
futed by Bentley, 179-80, 182-84, 
186-89 
Atomic structure of universe: 
113, 
115, 182, 211, 254, 274, 277. See 
also Hardness 
Atomism: 5, 141, 145, 154, 172, 173, 
208, 213, 278, 303 
Attraction, theory of Newton: 1 81, 
207, 220, 234, 298; discussed, 174-. 
79, 183-89, 209-16; inverse square 
law, 220, 228, 272; miraculous qual­
ities imputed to, by Leibniz, and 
defense by Newton and Clarke, 223, 
228, 229, 233, 234, 245-46, 248, 
258, 258, 267-68, 271-72; ultimate 
modification 
of, 
274, 
See 
also 
Gravity 
Attributes: 
substances 
implied by, 
145-47 
Attributes of God: 124, 148-5.3, 155-
56, 197 
Bacon, Francis: 1, 3, 243 
Bentley, Richard: 207, 223, 249, 295; 
accepts Bruno's concept of universe, 
180; follows Newton's teachings, 
179; misinterprets Newton's theory 
of gravity, 178-79; theory of in­
fluence of God in universe, 182-89 
Berkeley, George, Bishop of Cloyne: 
207; attack on Newton's philosophy 
and response by Newton, 221-28 
Bodies, attraction of. See Attraction 
Bodies, qualities of: 
discussed by 
Newton, 173-75 
Body: definition by More, 128-180 
Boyle, Robert: 8, 215, 220, 278, 294 
Boyle Lectures: delivered by Bentley, 
1 79; by Clarke, 300 
Brahe, Tycho: 3, 56, 92, 284, 286 
Bruce, Edward: 73, 287 
Bruno, Giordano: 58, 73, 75, 78, 96, 
99, 102, 105, 1 14, 118, 1 19, 1 71, 
241, 290; argument for change from 
sensual to intellectual perception, 
44-46; assertion of infinite space, 
46-49, 52, 53; attitude toward crea­
tive power of God, 42, 48-49, 52, 
53; attitude toward Lucretian cos-
805 

I N D E X  
mology, 6; attitude toward motion 
in universe, 39-40, 41, 44, 49-51; 
attitude toward Nicholas of Cusa, 
6, 14, 18; biographical sketch, 282-
83; burned at stake, 98, 283; con­
cept of infinity of universe, 35, 
39-54, 60-61, 180, 282; influence 
on contemporaries doubted, 54-55; 
principle of plenitude, 42, 44, 52; 
principle of sufficient reason, 44, 
46, 52, 283 
Brutus. See Bruce, Edward 
Cabala: 126 
Cabalists: 148 
Cartesian philosophy. See Descartes 
Center of universe: concept of Nicho-
las of Cusa, 1 1-21 passim; earth 
removed from, 3, 29-30, 32-33, 43; 
existence disputed, 40, 41-42, 63, 
64, 65, 67, 69, 96 
Centrifugal force: relation to circular 
motion, 167-71 
Centripetal force. See Attraction 
Chanut: 6 
Cheyne, Dr. George: 206, 274, 297 
Circumference of universe: concept 
of, 11, 12, 1 7, 18 
Clarke, Dr. Samuel: 207, 301; bio­
graphical sketch, 300; chosen by 
Newton to act as spokesman, 301; 
defense of Newton against attacks 
by Leibniz, 236-72, 273 
Copernicus, Nicholas: 3, 15, 56, 59, 
61, 92, 95, 96, 97, 99, 105, 281, 284, 
285, 286; concept of universe, 29-
34, 36; condemnation of, 98; dia­
gram of world replaced, 36-38; not 
influenced by Nicholas of Cusa, 8, 
1 8, 280; sources of inspiration, 28 
Cosmos: destruction of conception of, 
2, 24, 29, 43, 61 
Cotes, Roger: 230-32, 235-36, 274, 
298-99 
Creation of universe by God: concept 
of Leibniz, 266, 269; concept of 
Newton and Clarke, 256-57, 269; 
not necessary to infinite universe, 
275 
Cusa, Nicholas of. See Nicholas of 
Cusa 
Demetrius: 140 
Democritus: 3, 44, 73, 101, 1 12, 1 14, 
12Ԡ 14ԡ 141, 1 8Ԣ 23ԣ 239, 278 
Descartes, Rene: 1, 52, 139-77 passim, 
190-91, 197, 210-18 passim, 225, 
231, 237, 252, 254, 264, 267, 272, 
290, 294; concept of matter and 
space as identical, 99, 101-4; con­
cept of universe as indefinite and 
God as infinite, 100, 1 04-9, 124, 
15S-54; denial of void space, 136, 
141-43, 145, 232; exchange of letters 
with More, 110-24; explanation of 
gravity, 133; formulated principles 
of mathematical cosmology, 99; in­
fluence on philosophical develop­
ment of More, 125, 289; interpre­
tation of thought of Nicholas of 
Cusa, 6, 19; theory of extension, 
101-4, 138, 126-27, 132, 145-47, 
152, 162; use of hypotheses, 230; 
views of, disputed by More. See 
More, Henry, disputes views of 
Descartes 
Des Maiseaux: 301 
d'Etaples, Lefevre: 18 
" Dieu faineant ": 276 
Digges, Leonard: 35 
Digges, Thomas: contribution to con-
306 
I N D E X  
cept of infinity of universe, 35-39; 
diagram of infinite universe, 36-38; 
influence on Gilbert, 5.5 
Diogenes Laertius: 5, 6 
Donne, John: quoted, 29 
Dortous de Mairan, J. J.: 159 
Duhem, Pierre: 169 
Duns Scotus, John: 124 
Duration. See Time 
Earth: comparison with rest of uni­
verse, 25, 38, 105; displacement 
from center of universe, 3, 29-30, 
32-33, 43; low position assigned 
by traditional cosmology, denial of, 
19-23; motion of, 40, 41, 55-56 
Ecphantus: 28 
Einstein, Albert: 169 
Elasticity of bodies: theory of New­
ton, 215, 216-17 
Electricity. See Attraction 
Epicurus: 44, 112, 140, 1 78, 1 80, 238, 
239, 278 
Ether, properties of: 
132, 1 71-72, 
207-8 
Experimentation. 
See Newton, Sir 
Isaac 
Extension. See Space 
Extension, spiritual: denial by Des­
cartes, 138; distinction from space, 
132; identification with God, 191-
201; penetrates and is impenetrable, 
195, 200; theories of 1 7th century, 
130-31; theory of More, lll, 112, 
116-23 passim, 126-27, 132, 1 38 
Ficino, Marsilio: 125 
Finite world. See Universe 
First Cause. See God 
Fixed stars: 12-13, 19; comparison 
with rest of universe, 21-22; concep-
tion of Copernicus, 30-33; discov­
eries of Galileo through telescope, 
72-76, 89-95; existence of sphere 
denied, 35, 56-57, 95-96; infinite 
extent of, 36-39, 40, 41 , 48, 49, 51, 
53; infinity denied, 60-87; position 
and 
dimensions, 
30, 
32, 
62-85 
passim, 104, 281; world in relation 
to, diagram of Kepler, 79. See also 
Universe 
Freedom of choice. See God 
Galileo Galilei: 40, 54, 55, 83, 84, 1 75, 
176, 231, 277, 278; attitude toward 
gravity, 133; diagram of stars in 
Orion, 93; invention of telescope, 
influence of, 72-76, 81, 84, 88-95; 
lack of decision on infinity of 
universe, 95-99 
Gassendi, Pierre: 3, 1 14, 146, 9l78, 
290, 294 
General Scholittm: published by New­
ton, setting forth religious con­
ceptions' 223-30, 234 
Gilbert, 'Villiam: 
73, 284-85; con­
tribution to concept of infinity of 
universe, 55-57, 60-61; denial of 
existence of sphere of fixed stars, 
56-57; discussion of earth's rotation, 
55-56; influenced by Digges, 55; 
theory of magnetic forces, 131 
Glanvill, Joseph: 126 
God: absence from spacԤ, 275; attri­
butes of, 124, 148-53, 155-56, 197; 
conception of Descartes criticized 
by More, 1 11-24, 138, 147; con­
ception of Newton attacked by 
Leibniz and defended by Clarke, 
235-72; 
considered 
only infinite 
being, 52, 1 00, 106, 107, 108, 109, 
192-93; creator of universe, 42, 48-
307 

I N D E X  
49, 52, 53, 78, 100, 113, 119, 120, 
121, 124, 157, 208-9, 217-20, 239-
41, 256-57, 266, 269, 273, 275; 
decrease in position in universe, 
276; freedom of choice, concept of 
Newton, 239-46, 250, 253, 257, 259, 
260, 268-70, 272, 273; idea of, rela­
tion to idea of space, 135-36, 137-
39; identification with immaterial 
extension, 155-56, 191-201; identi­
fication with space, 137, 147, 155, 
222-23, 226; infinite extension of, 
distinguished from material exten­
sion, 156-58, 159; infinity of, 52, 
100, 106, 107, 108, 109, 113, 116-
24 passim, 140, 153-54, 192-93, 297; 
intervention needed to move uni­
verse, 183-89, 216, 224-25, 236-40 
passim, 245, 248-49, 252, 254, 272, 
276; participation in gravity, 134, 
1 79, 207-20, 234, 298; power re­
stricted by denial of void, 1 38, 232; 
relation of time and space to, by 
Newton, 161; religious conception 
of Newton, 223-28, 232-34; works 
of, 
discussed, 
208-9; 
world 
an 
ordered expression of, 58, 286 
Gravity: 131, 133-34. See also At-
traction, theory of Newton 
Gravity, specific: 1 72 
Greece. See Ancients; Atomism 
Gregory, David: 297-98 
Guericke, Otto von: 3 
Hardness: a property of all matter, 
theory of Newton, 207, 210-12, 217-
18, 254, 272, 274. See also Atomic 
structure of universe; Atomism 
Hea,rens. See Fixed · stars; Universe 
Hebrews: concept of infinite, 195 
Hell: position of, 281 
Heraclides: 28 
Hermes: 126 
Herschell, Sir William: 280 
Hiketas: 28 
Hobbes, Thomas: 3, 133, 145, 198, 
238 
Huygens, Christian: 3, 31, 169, 176, 
230, 299 
Hypotheses: danger to experimental 
philosophy, 204-5, 208, 228-34 
Indefinite universe. See Universe 
Inertia: principle of Newton, 169, 173, 
1 74, 175, 216, 218, 261, 302 
Infinite: definition of term, 72, 201 
Infinity. See God; Universe 
Isaiah: 201 
Johnson, Francis R.: 35 
Kant, Immanuel: 150, 180 
Keil!, John: 301 
Kepler, Johannes: 55, 95, 96, 97, 102, 
107, 171 ;  diagram " M "  of, 79; 
effect of telescopic discoveries on, 
72-76; influenced by Nicholas of 
Cusa, 6, 19; supporter of Aristotle, 
60, 72, 86-87; theories of, 58-87, 
277 
Laplace, Marquis Pierre Simon de: 
276 
Larkey, Sanford V.: 35 
" Learned ignorance ": 
doctrine of 
Nicholas of Cusa, 6, 8, 9, 10, 17 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von: 169, 
207, 211, 290; concept of universe, 
262-63, 266, 269, 273; death of, 273; 
distinction 
between 
motive and 
cause, 259; principle of observa­
bility of space, 261-62; principle 
308 
I N D E X  
of sufficient reason, 44, 46, 52, 61-
62, 78, 239-42, 243-45, 246, 250, 
253, 259, 262, 275, 283; theory of 
relativity of space, motion, and 
time, 245, 247-48, 249, 250-52, 254, 
256, 262-63 
-, attack on theories of Newton, 
and defense by Clarke: 
300-1 ; 
atomic structure of universe, 207, 
210-12, 254, 272, 274; concept of 
God, 232-72; concept of God's free­
dom of choice, 239-46, 250, 253, 
257, 259, 260, 268-70, 272, 273; 
concept of motion, 245, 269, 272; 
concept of space, 235, 237, 239, 
243-45, 247, 248, 251-52, 254-57, 
259, 260, 263-67; concept of time, 
256-57, 259, 263, 264-66, 
269; 
contrast between materialism and 
mathematical philosophy, 208, 238, 
241, 267, 271 ,  272; existence of 
void, 239, 241, 250-51, 254-.55, 260, 
264, 272; importance of matter in 
universe, 237, 239, 250; motion of 
universe, 
God's intervention re­
quired, 236, 237-38, 239-40, 245, 
248-49, 252, 254, 272, 276; " sen­
sorium " of God, 237, 239, 241 ,  
242. See also Attraction 
Leucippus: 73, 140 
Light: 
and matter, 13<Z, 207, 212, 
297-98; behavior of, 131, 207, 212, 
215; conception of Copernicus, 30, 
33; conception of Palingenius, 26-
27 
Locke, John: 235 
Locus. See Place 
Lovejoy, A. 0.: 25, 34, 39, 42, 44, 5 2  
Lucretius: 46, 54, JOl, 112, 114, 190, 
210, 278, 290; assertion of infinity 
of space, 35, 282; De rerum natura, 
5', 6, 283; influence on cosmological 
thinking, 6 
Mach, Ernst: 169 
Magnetism. See Attraction 
Malebranche, Father Nicolas: 
149, 
156-58, 159, 199 
Manilius, Marcus: 66, 287 
Manzoli, Pier Angelo. See Palingenius 
Mathematical philosophy: 19, 99, 205, 
208, 215, 228-34, 238, 241, 267, 
271, 272, 278 
Matter: atomic composition of, theory 
of Newton, 207, 209-13, 217-19, 
254, 27<Z, 274; conception of Des­
cartes, 111-19 passim, 124; impor­
tance in universe, 237, 239; nature 
of, 1 01-2, 130, 1 72-75, 193, 194; 
not attribute of God, 193, 201; 
question of compressibility, 
128; 
question of density, 207-8; relation 
to light, 1 32, 207, 212, 297-98. See 
also Attraction; Gravity; Space 
McColley, Grant: 31 
Mediaeval concept of space: 277 
Mediaeval concept of universe: 5, 6, 
16, 24, 34, 281 
Melissos: 73 
Mendelsohn, Moses: 201 
Metrodorus: 140 
Milky Way: 69-70, 83, 89 
Mon taigne, Michel de: 1 
More, Henry: 1 09, 156, 161 ,  163, 164, 
16.'5, 1 73, 176 ,  190, 195, 197, 201. 
220, <z48, 251, 252, 264, 274, 290, 
291, 302-3; concept of space, 126ǃ 
27, 132, 1 37-40, 145-47, 152, 1.55, 
159, 160; concept of spirit and 
matter, 12/), 127-32; concept of 
spiritual extension, Ill, 1 12, 1 17-
23 passim, 1 32, 138, 191-92; ex-
809 

I N D E X  
change of letters with Descartes, 
110-:4; philosophy of, 1:5-:6, :89; 
theories related to Newton's, 190 
-, disputes views of Descartes: con­
ception of God, III Ԟ:4; denial of 
existence of atoms, 11:-13; denial 
of void, 1l:, 116, 1:0, 138, 139-40, 
145, 191-9:; identification of matter, 
extension, and space, 110-1:, 115, 
117-18, 124, 126-:7, 13:; indefinite 
extension of universe, 114-15, 117-
::, 1:4, 1.5:-54; opposition of spirit 
and matter, 1l0-1:, 1:1, 125; rela­
tivity of motion, 142-45 
Motion: absolute, 163-71, 256, 27:; 
circular, 18, 167-71; indistinguish­
able from rest, 166; of earth, 15, 
20, 39-40, 55-56; of universe, 15, 
19, 30-33, 41, 44, 49-51, 56-57, 
)83ԟ89, 216, 2:4-25, 236-40 passim, 
:45, 248-49, :5:, 254, 269, 27:, 
:76; planetary, allied with force by 
,vhich bodies fall, 2:9; principle 
of observability, :61-62; proof of 
existence of God, 191-95, 202-3, 
216-17, 218; rectilinear, 166, 167-
69; relative, 10-17 passim, 14:-45, 
1 61-71, 256, 261, 262, 269, 279; 
use in measuring time, 161-62 
Napoleon Bonaparte: 276 
Neoplatonic revival: 24, 113, 161, 277. 
See also Plato 
Newton, Sir Isaac: 3, 109, 180, 189, 
:78, 290, 294, 298; correspondence 
with Bentley re gravity and plane­
tary motion, 1 78-89, 223; publica­
tion of General Scholium, setting 
forth religious conceptions, 223-30, 
ɂ34; publication of " queries " re 
metaphysical problems, :06-7, 296; 
success of philosophy of, :74; sup­
port of phenomena against hypo­
theses, :05, 208, 228-34; theories 
related to those of More, 159, 160, 
190; theory of finitude of universe, 
overcome, 274-75; world-view of, 
207. See also Attraction; Inertia; 
Leibniz, 
attack 
on 
theories 
of 
Newton; Mathematical philosophy 
-, concepts: God, 207-20, 223-:8, 
232-72, 274-76; light, 207, 212, 297-
98; matter, 1 72-75, 207-8, :09-13, 
217-19, 250, :54, 27:, 274, :97-98; 
motion, 160-71, 218, 215-18, :21, 
224, :36-40 passim, :45, :48-49, 
252, 254, 2.56, 269, 27:, 276; rare 
ether, 171-72, 207; space, 160-66, 
168, 169, 171-72, 207, 2:1-28, :35-
71 passim; time, :21-28, 256-57, 
259, 263, 264-66, 269; void, :39, 
241, 250-51 ,  254-5,5, 260, 264, 27: 
Nicholas of Cusa, 
Cardinal: 
6-24 
passim, 29, 35, 42, 43, 44, 47, 52, 
54, 96, 99, 106, 118, 282; belief in 
lack of precision in universe, 13, 
16-18; biographical sketch, 278; 
,comparison of inhabitants of parts 
of 
universe, 
22-:3; 
concept 
of 
motion, 15, 1 7, 18, 19; concept of 
universe, 
8-24; 
conceptions 
dis­
regarded by contemporaries, 18; 
denial of low position of earth, 
19-23; forerunner of Copernicus 
and Kepler, 19, :80; influence on 
Palingenius, 24; " Learned ignor­
ance," theory of, 6, 8, 9, 10, 1 7; 
rejects mediaeval concept of cos­
mos, 6; thought compared to that 
of Bruno, 41, 43 
Nullibists, nickname of Cartesians, 
138, 201 
310 
I N D E X  
Orion, constellation of: discussed by 
Kepler, 63-64, 6,5-66, 81; shield 
and sword, as seen through tele­
scope, 93 
Palingenius, Marcellus Stellatus: 28, 
39; attitude toward Greek cosmol­
ogists, 24; biographical sketch, :80; 
conception of universe, :4-27; in­
fluenced by Nicholas of Cusa, 24; 
suspected of heresy, :80 
Parallaxes: 
theory of, applied by 
Kepler, 66, 68, 287 
Pascal, Blaise: 3, 43, 277, :83, :91 
Pattrizzi, F.: 54 
Perspicillum. See Telescope 
Jlhilolaos: 28 
Phoenicia: 208 
Place: absolute, distinguished from 
relative, 
163-66; definition, 
140, 
163; relation to motion, 1 43-45. 
See also Space 
Planets: compared with fixed stars, 
92; discoveries enabled by inyen­
tion of telescope, 73-76, 89-90, 92; 
motion of, 31, 33, 49-51 , 
229; 
situation in universe, 73. See also 
Universe 
Plato: 3, 28, 54, 72, 123, 126, 140, 
141 .  See also Neoplatonic revival 
Plenitude, principle of: 25, 42, 44, 52, 
188, :75 
Plotinus: :90 
Plutarch: 141 
Poles of universe: 12, 14, 15, 1 6-17, 
20; 
Copernicus' . conception, 
30; 
denial of existence by Bruno, 41 
Pre-Copernican diagram of universe: 
7 
Princess of Wales: 235, 259, 263-64, 
300 
Ptolemy: 28, 32, 34, 56, 95, 96 
Pythagoras: 28, 30, 59, 147 
Raleigh, Sir \i\lalt.er: 34 
Raphson, Joseph: 206, 220, 221-23, 
249, 29,5, 301; concept of infinity, 
201-2; concept of space, 191-201; 
concept of universe, 202-4; influ­
ence of Spinoza on, 191; relations 
between theories of Newton and 
More pointed out by, 190-91 
Rectilinear motion. See Motion 
Helativity. See }\![otion; Space; Time 
Repulsion: theory of Newton, 213, 
214-15 
Rest: status of, 164, 166 
Rheticus: 28 
RiccioIi, Gianbattista: 31 
Rotational motion. See Motion 
St. Paul: 227, 270 
Scaliger, Julius: 119 
Scholastic tradition: 199, 230, 262, 
264, 266, 267, 268 
Scotus, John Duns. See Duns Scotus, 
John 
Sense-perception: question of value 
in interpreting universe, 44-46, 59, 
62, 85, 1 00, 111-12, 1 15, 160-62; 
scope increased by invention of 
telescope, 89 
Sensorium of God: concept of New­
ton, 237, 239, 241, 24:, 301 
Sidereus 
Nu,nciu,s of Galileo, an­
nouncing discoveries of telescope, 
importance of, 88, 90 
Socinianism: 239, 301-2 
Solar system. See Universe 
Space: absolute, 160-66, 1 68-69, 221-
28, 243-45, 247, 274; attribute of 
God, 1 49-50, 1 55, 193-201, 247; 
311 

I N D E X  
change in concept of, 275, 277; 
concept of More shared by New­
ton, 159, 160; concept of Newton 
attacked and defended, 285, 287, 
289, 248-45, 247, 248, 251-52, 254-
57, 259, 260, 268-67, 269, 270-71; 
distinction from extension, 182, 264, 
265; distinction from matter, 127, 
185-41 passim, 145-47, 152, 171-
72, 194; existence acknowledged by 
ancients, 140-41; existence of, a 
precondition to all existence, 187-
88; filled with ether, theory of 
Newton, 
171-72, 207; identified 
with God, 114, 148-58, 197, 244, 
247, 271; identified with matter, 
99, 101-6, 110-12, 117-18, 124, 
126-27, 155, 156, 191-92, 256-57, 
269; indefiniteness of 152; infinity 
of, 46-49, 52, 58, 126, 140-41, 155-
56, 
194-202; 
intelligible 
distin­
guished from material, 156-58, 159; 
measurabilitԧT of, 185-87, 189-40; 
nature of, 135-41, 145-54, 193-98; 
nonmeasurability of, 185-37; reality 
of, argued by More, 145-47; rela­
tive, 16, 162-68, 245, 247, 249, 
250-52, 254, 262-63. See also Ex­
tension, spiritual; Void 
,pecific gravity: 172 
,penser, Edmund: quoted, 280-81 
:;pheres. See Universe 
;pinoza, Benedict: 149, 159, 197, 201, 
289; concept of extension, 155-56; 
identifies God with universe, 191 , 
192-98; identifies space with matter, 
155, 156; influence on Raphson, 191 
,pirit: concept of More, 127-34 
;pissitude: theory of More, 129 
,tars. See Fixed stars; Universe 
;toa: 126 
3HZ 
Stoics: 140-41 
Substances: 
implied by attributes, 
145-47 
Sufficient reason, principle of. 
See 
Leibniz 
Sun. See Universe 
Syncretism: tendency of More to­
ward, 125-26 
Telescope: 
astronomy 
before 
dis­
covery of, 62, 
64; influence on 
thought of ' Kepler, 72-76, 81; in­
vention by Galileo, contribution of, 
88-95; use of, 84 
Thought, human: 
imperfection of, 
199-200 
Time: 
absolute, 16D-62, 221, 223, 
225-28; concept of Newton attacked 
and defended, 256-57, 259, 263, 
2(i4-66, 269; identified with dura­
tion, 161-62; relative, 160-62, 245, 
247-48, 252, 254, 256, 262-63 
Torricelli, Evangelista: 277 
Tycho Brahe. See Brahe, Tycho 
Universe: comparison of component 
parts, 20-28; concept of ancients, 5, 
14, 16, 1 7, 24, 60, 112; concept of 
Copernicus, importance to philos­
ophy, 29; concept of Nicholas of 
Cusa, 8-24; constituted from same 
matted' throughout, 105; corruption 
in, 23; finitude of: 24-27, 30-34, 
58-87, 140-41, 153, 157-58, 159, 
19!Z, 
202-4, 
249, 
256-57, 
260; 
hierarchical structure undermined, 
19-28, 29; importance of matter 
in, 237, 289; indefinite nature of, 
concept of Descartes, 8, 104-9, 
114-24 passim, 140; lack of pre­
cision, 18, 16-18, 19; mediaeval 
I N D  
concepԦ 5, ԥ 16, 24, 84, 281 ; popu­
lated throughout, 22-28, 25; pre­
Coperican, diagram of, 7; relation 
of God to, theory of More, 110-
24; solar systems in, 49-51. 
See 
also 
Center 
of 
universe; 
God: 
creator of universe; Motion 
-, infinity of: 2, 8, 5, 24, 84-35, 
188, 275, 276; concepts of: Bentley, 
180; Bruno, 89-54; Clarke, 256-57; 
Descartes, 104-9, 1 14-24 passim; 
Digges, 85-89; Galileo, 95-99; Gil­
bert, 55-57; Kepler, 58-87; Leibniz, 
260, 262-68; More, 1 14-15, 1 1 8-21, 
140, 158; Nicholas of Cusa, 6, 8, 
19; Pal in genius , 25-27 
Vacuum. See Void 
Void: 
57, 277, 288; conception of 
ancients, 141; considered center of 
universe, 78, 81, 82, 83; immensity, 
1 81-82; measurability, 1 39-40; posi-
tion, 65, 69, 75; question of eXIS­
tence, 40-41 , 46-48, 86, 87, 101-4, 
112, 116, 120, 137-38, 145, 1 71 ,  
180, 191-92, 207-8, 282, 289, 241, 
2.50-.51 , 254-55, 260, 264, 272, 283; 
success of Newton's concept, 274 
Voltaire, Fran<;ois Ma.rie Arouet de: 
!Z74 
von Leibniz, See Leibniz 
Vortices: theory of Descartes, 115, 
lIS, 119, 290 
\Vacherus. See vVackher von Wacken­
fels 
Wackher von 'Wackenfels, Mattheus: 
73, 287 
Wales, Princess of: 235, 259, 263-64, 
300 
World. See Universe 
Zodiac: 12 
813 

