FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
WHATEVER original work Plato himself did in mathematics
(and it may not have been much), there is no doubt that his
enthusiasm for the subject in all branches and the pre-eminent
place which he gave it in his system had enormous influence
upon its development in his lifetime and the period following.
In astronomy we are told that Plato set it as a problem to
all earnest students to find ' what are the uniform and ordered
movements by the assumption of which the apparent move-
ments of the planets can be accounted for'; our authority for
this is Sosigenes, who had it from Eudemus.1 One answer
to this, representing an advance second to none in the history
of astronomy, was given by Heraclides of Pontus, one of
Plato's pupils (circa 388-310 B.C.); the other, which was
by Eudoxus and on purely mathematical lines, constitutes
one of the most remarkable achievements in pure geometry
that the whole of the history of mathematics can show.
Both were philosophers of extraordinary range. Heraclides
wrote works of the highest class both in matter and style:
the catalogue of them covers subjects ethical, grammatical,
musical and poetical, rhetorical, historical; and there were
geometrical and dialectical treatises as well. 
Similarly
Eudoxus, celebrated as philosopher, geometer, astronomer,
geographer, physician and legislator, commanded and enriched
almost the whole field of learning.
Heraclides of Pontus: astronomical discoveries.
Heraclides held that the apparent daily revolution of the
heavenly bodies round the earth was accounted for, not by
1 Simpl. on De caelo, ii. 12 (292 b 10), p. 488. 20-34, Heib.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HERACLIDES. ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES 317
the circular motion of the stars round the earth, but by the
rotation of the earth about its own axis; several passages
attest this, e. g.
'Heraclides of Pontus supposed that the earth is in the
centre and rotates (lit. ' moves in a circle') while the heaven
is at rest, and he thought by this supposition to save the
phenomena/2
True, Heraclides may not have been alone in holding this
view, for we are told that Ecphantus of Syracuse, a Pytha-
gorean, also asserted that ' the earth, being in the centre
of the universe, moves about its own centre in an eastward
direction'2; when Cicero 3 says the same thing of Hicetas, also
of Syracuse, this is probably due to a confusion. 
But there
is no doubt of the originality of the other capital discovery
made by Heraclides, namely that Venus and Mercury revolve,
like satellites, round the sun as centre. If, as Schiaparelli
argued, Heraclides also came to the same conclusion about
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, he anticipated the hypothesis of
Tycho Brahe (or rather improved on it), but the evidence is
insufficient to establish this, and I think the probabilities are
against it; there is some reason for thinking that it was
Apollonius of Perga who thus completed what Heraclides had
begun and put forward the full Tychonic hypothesis.4 But
there is nothing to detract from the merit of Heraclides in
having pointed the way to it.
Eudoxus's theory of concentric spheres is even more re-
markable as a mathematical achievement; it is worthy of the
man who invented the great theory of proportion set out
in Euclid, Book V, and the powerful method of exhaustion
which not only enabled the areas of circles and the volumes
of pyramids, cones, spheres, &c, to be obtained, but is at the
root of all Archimedes's further developments in the mensura-
tion of plane and solid figures. But, before we come to
Eudoxus, there are certain other names to be mentioned.
1 Simpl. on Be caeM, p. 519. 9-11, Heib.; cf. pp. 441. 31-445. 5, pp. 541.
27-542. 2; Proclus in Tim. 281 E.
» Hippolytus, Refut. i. 15 (Vors. i3, p. 340. 31), ef. Aetius, iii. 13. 3
(Vors. i3, p. 341. 8-10).
? Cic. Acad. Pr. ii. 39, 123.
4 Aristarchus of Samos, the ancient Copernicus, ch. xviii.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

318 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
Theory of numbers (Speusippus, Xenocrates).
To begin with arithmetic or the theory of numbers. 
SPEU-
SIPPUS, nephew of Plato, who succeeded him as head of the
school, is said to have made a particular study of Pythagorean
doctrines, especially of the works of Philolaus, and to have
written a small treatise On the Pythagorean Numbers of
which a fragment, mentioned above (pp. 72, 75, 76) is pre-
served in the Theologumena Arithmetices.1 
To judge by the
fragment, the work was not one of importance. The arith-
metic in it was evidently of the geometrical type (polygonal
numbers, for example, being represented by dots making up
the particular figures). The portion of the book dealing with
' the five figures (the regular solids) which are assigned to the
cosmic elements, their particularity and their community
with one another', can hardly have gone beyond the putting
together of the figures by faces, as we find it in the Timaeus.
To Plato's distinction of the fundamental triangles, the equi-
lateral, the isosceles right-angled, and the half of an equilateral
triangle cut off by a perpendicular from a vertex on the
opposite side, he adds a distinction ('passablement futile',
as is the whole fragment in Tannery's opinion) of four
pyramids (1) the regular pyramid, with an equilateral triangle
for base and all the edges equal, (2) the pyramid on a square
base, and (evidently) having its four edges terminating at the
corners of the base equal, (3) the pyramid which is the half of
the preceding one obtained by drawing a plane through the
vertex so as to cut the base perpendicularly in a diagonal
of the base, (4) a pyramid constructed on the half of an
equilateral triangle as base; the object was, by calling these
pyramids a monad, a dyad, a triad and a tetrad respectively,
to make up the number 10, the special properties and virtues
of which as set forth by the Pythagoreans were the subject of
the second half of the work. Proclus quotes a few opinions
of Speusippus; e. g., in the matter of theorems and problems,
he differed from Menaechmus, since he regarded both alike
as being more properly theorems, while Menaechmus would
call both alike problems.2
1 Theol Ar., Ast, p. 61.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 77. 16; 78. 14,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEORY OF NUMBERS 
319
XENOCRATES of Chalcedon (396-314 B.C.), who succeeded
Speusippus as head of the school, having been elected by
a majority of only a few votes over Heraclides, is also said
to have written a book On Numbers and a Theory of Numbers,
besides books on geometry.1 These books have not survived,
but we learn that Xenocrates upheld the Platonic tradition in
requiring of those who would enter the school a knowledge of
music, geometry and astronomy; to one who was not pro-
ficient in these things he said ' Go thy way, for thou hast not
the means of getting a grip of philosophy3. Plutarch says
that he put at 1,002,000,000,000 the number of syllables which
could be formed out of the letters of the alphabet.2 If the
story is true, it represents the first attempt on record to solve
a difficult problem in permutations and combinations. Xeno-
crates was a supporter of ' indivisible lines '(and magnitudes)
by which he thought to get over the paradoxical arguments
of Zeno.3
The Elements. 
Proclus's summary (continued).
In geometry we have more names mentioned in the sum-
mary of Proclus.4
' Younger than Leodamas were Neoclides and his pupil Leon,
who added many things to what was known before their
time, so that Leon was actually able to make a collection
of the elements more carefully designed in respect both of
the number of propositions proved and of their utility, besides
which he invented diorismi (the object of which is to deter-
mine) when the problem under investigation is possible of
solution and when impossible/
Of Neoclides and Leon we know nothing more than what
is here stated; but the definite recognition of the Siopco-fios,
that is, of the necessity of finding, as a preliminary to the
solution of a problem, the conditions for the possibility of
a solution, represents an advance in the philosophy and
technology of mathematics. Not that the thing itself had
not been met with before: there is, as we have seen, a
1 Diog. L. iv. 13, 14.
2 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. viii. 9. 13, 733 A.
8 Siinpl. in Phys., p. 138. 3, &c.
4 Proclus onEucl. I, p. 66. 18-67. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

320 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
indicated in the famous geometrical passage of the
Meno1', no doubt, too, the geometrical solution by the Pytha-
goreans of the quadratic equation would incidentally make
clear to them the limits of possibility corresponding to the
8iopi<rfj.6$ in the solution of the most general form of quad-
ratic in Eucl. VI. 27-9, where, in the case of the ' deficient **
parallelogram (Prop. 28), the enunciation states that 'the
given rectilineal figure must not be greater than the parallelo-
gram described on half of the straight line and similar to the
defect \ Again, the condition of the possibility of constructing
a triangle out of three given straight lines (Eucl. I. 22),
namely that any two of them must be together greater than
the third, must have been perfectly familiar long before Leon
or Plato.
Proclus continues:2
' Eudoxus of Cnidos, a little younger than Leon, who had
been associated with the school of Plato, was the first to
increase the number of the so-called general theorems; he
also added three other proportions to the three already known,
and multiplied the theorems which originated with Plato
about the section, applying to them the method of analysis.
Amyclas [more correctly Amyntas] of Heraclea, one of the
friends of Plato, Menaechmus, a pupil of Eudoxus who had
also studied with Plato, and Dinostratus, his brother, made
the whole of geometry still more perfect. 
Theudius of
Magnesia had the reputation of excelling in mathematics as
well as in the other branches of philosophy; for he put
together the elements admirably and made many partial (or
limited) theorems more general. ' Again, Athenaeus of Cyzicus,
who lived about the same time, became famous in other
branches of mathematics and most of all in geometry. These
men consorted together in the Academy and conducted their
investigations in common. Hermotimus of Colophon carried
further the investigations already opened up by Eudoxus and
Theaetetus, discovered many propositions of the Elements
and compiled some portion of the theory of Loci. Philippus
of Medma, who was a pupil of Plato and took up mathematics
at his instance, not only carried out his investigations in
accordance with Plato's instructions but also set himself to
do whatever in his view contributed to the philosophy of
Plato.'
1 Plato, Meno, 87 A. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I,, p. 67. 2-68. 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS 
321
It will be well to dispose of the smaller names in this
list before taking up Eudoxus, the principal subject of
this chapter.- The name of Amyclas should apparently be
Amyntas,1 although Diogenes Laertius mentions Amyclos of
Heraclea in Pontus as a pupil of Plato 2 and has elsewhere an
improbable story of one Amyclas, a Pythagorean, who with
Clinias is supposed to have dissuaded Plato from burning the
works of Democritus in view of the fact that there were
many other copies in circulation.3 Nothing more is known
of Amyntas, Theudius, Athenaeus and Hermotimus than what
is stated in the above passage of Proclus. It is probable,
however, that the propositions, &c., in elementary geometry
which are quoted by Aristotle were taken from the Elements
of Theudius, which would no doubt be the text-book of the
time just preceding Euclid. Of Menaechmus and Dinostratus
we have already learnt that the former discovered conic
sections, and used them for finding two mean proportionals,
and that the latter applied the quadratrix to the squaring
of the circle. Philippus of Medma (vulg. Mende) is doubtless
the same person as Philippus of Opus, who is said to have
revised and published the Laws of Plato which had been left
unfinished, and to have been the author of the Epinomis.
He wrote upon astronomy chiefly; the astronomy in the
Epinomis follows that of the Laws and the Timaeus; but
Suidas records the titles of other works by him as follows:
On the distance vf the sun and moon, On the eclipse of the
moon, On the size of the sun, the moon and the earth, On
the planets. A passage of Aetius4 and another of Plutarch5
alluding to his proofs about the shape of the moon may
indicate that Philippus was the first to establish the complete
theory of the phases of the moon. In mathematics, accord-
ing to the same notice by Suidas, he wrote Arithmetical
Means, On polygonal numbers, Cyclica, Optic$y Enoptrica
(On mirrors); but nothing is known of the contents of these
works.
1 See Ind. Hercul., ed. B cheler, Ind. Schol. Gryphisw., 1869/70, col.
6 in.
8 Diog. L. iii. 46. 
s Ib. ix. 40.
4 Dox. Gr., p. 360.
5 Non posse suaviter vivi secundum Epicurum, c. 11, 1093 E.
1623 
Y
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

322 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
According to Apollodorus, EUDOXUS flourished in 01. 103 =
368-365 B. a, from which we infer that he was born about 408
B. c, and (since he lived 53 years) died about 355 B. 0. In his
23 rd year he went to Athens with the physiciian Theomedon,
and there for two months he attended lectures on philosophy
and oratory, and in particular the lectures of Plato; so poor
was he that he took up his abode at the Piraeus and trudged
to Athens and back on foot each day. It would appear that
his journey to Italy and Sicily to study geometry with
Archytas, and medicine with Philistion, must have been
earlier than the first visit to Athens, for from Athens he
returned to Cnidos, after which he went to Egypt with
a letter of introduction to King Neetanebus, given him by
Agesilaus; the date of this journey was probably 381-380 B.C.
or a little later, and he stayed in Egypt sixteen months.
After that he went to Cyzicus, where he collected round him
a large school which he took with him to Athens in 368 B.C.
or a little later. There is apparently no foundation for the
story mentioned by Diogenes Laertius that he took up a hostile
attitude to Plato,1 nor on the other side for the statements
that he went with Plato to Egypt and spent thirteen years
in the company of the Egyptian priests, or that he visited
Plato when Plato was with the younger Dionysius on his
third visit to Sicily in 361 B. c. Returning later to his native
place, Eudoxus was by a popular vote entrusted with legisla-
tive office.
When in Egypt Eudoxus assimilated the astronomical
knowledge of the priests of Heliopolis and himself made
observations. The observatory between Heliopolis and Cerce-
sura used by him was still pointed out in Augustus's time;
he also had one built at Cnidos, and from there he observed
the star Canopus which was not then visible in higher
latitudes. It was doubtless to record the observations thus
made that he wrote the two books attributed to him by
Hipparchus, the Mirror and the Phaenomena2; it seems, how-
ever, unlikely that there could have been two independent
works dealing with the same subject, and the latter, from which
1 Diog. L. viii. 87.
2 Hipparchus, in Arati et Eudoxi phaenomena commentarii, i. 2. 2, p. 8.
15-20 Manitiua.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUDOXUS 
323
the poem of Aratus was. drawn, so far as verses 19-732 are
concerned, may have been a revision of the former work and
even, perhaps, posthumous.
But it is the theoretical side of Eudoxus's astronomy rather
than the observational that has importance for us; and,
indeed, no more ingenious and attractive hypothesis than
that of Eudoxus's system of concentric spheres has ever been
put forward to account for the apparent motions of the sun,
moon and planets. It was the first attempt at a purely
mathematical theory of astronomy, and, with the great and
immortal contributions which he made to geometry, puts him
in the very first rank of mathematicians of all time. He
was a man of science if there ever was one. No occult or
superstitious lore appealed to him; Cicero says that Eudoxus,
' in astrologia iudicio doctissimorum hominum facile princeps',
expressed the opinion and left it on record that no sort of
credence should be given to the Chaldaeans in their predic-
tions and their foretelling of the life of individuals from the
day of their birth.1 Nor would he indulge in vain physical
speculations on things which werje inaccessible to observation
and experience in his time; thus, instead of guessing at
the nature of the sun, he said that he would gladly be
burnt up like Phaethon if at that price he could get to the
sun and so ascertain its form, size, and nature.2 Another
story (this time presumably apocryphal) is to the effect
that he grew old at the top of a very high mountain in
the attempt to discover the movements of the stars and the
heavens.3
In our account of his work we will begin with the sentence
about him in Proclus's summary. First, he is said to have
increased 'the number of the so-called general theorems'.
' So-called general theorems' is an odd phrase; it occurred to
me whether this could mean theorems which were true of
everything falling under the conception of magnitude, as are
the definitions and theorems forming part of Eudoxus's own
theory of proportion, which applies to numbers, geometrical
magnitudes of all sorts, times, &c. A number of propositions
1 Cic, Be div. ii. 42.
2 Plutarch, Non posse suavitervivi secundum Epicurum, c. 11, 1094 B.
3 Petronius Arbiter, Satyricon, 88.
Y 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

324 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
at the beginning of Euclid's Book X similarly refer to magni-
tudes in general, and the proposition X. 1 or its equivalent
was actually used by Eudoxus in his method of exhaustion,
as it is by Euclid in his application of the same method to the
theorem (among others) of XII. 2 that circles are to one
another as the squares on their diameters.
The three ; proportions' or means added to the three pre-
viously known (the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic) have
already been mentioned (p. 86), and, as they are alterna-
tively attributed to others, they need not detain us here.
Thirdly, we are told that Eudoxus ' extended' or ' increased
the number of the (propositions) about the section (TOL nepl
Tf]v TO/JLTJP) which originated with Plato, applying to them
the method of analysis \ 
What is the section ? The sugges-
tion which has been received with most favour is that of
Bretschneider^1 who pointed out that up to Plato's time there
was only one ' section' that had any real significance in
geometry, namely the section of a straight line in extreme
and mean ratio which is obtained in Eucl. II. 11 and is used
again in Eucl. IV. 10-14 for the construction of a pentagon.
These theorems were, as we have seen, pretty certainly Pytha-
gorean, like the whole of the substance of Euclid, Book II.
Plato may therefore, says Bretschneider, have directed atten-
tion afresh to this subject and investigated the metrical rela-
tions between the segments of a straight line so cut, while
Eudoxus may have continued the investigation where Plato
left off. Now the passage of Proclus says that, in extending
the theorems about' the section', Eudoxus applied the method
of analysis; and we actually find in Eucl. XIII. 1-5 five
propositions about straight lines cut in extreme and mean
ratio followed, in the MSS., by definitions of analysis and
synthesis, and alternative proofs of the same propositions
in the form of analysis followed by synthesis. Here, then,
Bretschneider thought he had found a fragment of some actual
work by Eudoxus corresponding to Proclus's description.
But it is certain that the definitions and the alternative proofs
were interpolated by some scholiast, and, judging by the
figures (which are merely straight lines) and by comparison
1 Bretschneider, Die Geometrie und die Geometer vor Eukleides, pp.
167-9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUDOXUS 
325
with the remarks on analysis and synthesis quoted from
Heron by An-Nairizi at the beginning of his commentary on
Eucl. Book II, it seems most likely that the interpolated defini-
tions and proofs were taken from Heron. Bretschneider's
argument based on Eucl. XIII. 1-5 accordingly breaks down,
and all that can be said further is that, if Eudoxus investi-
gated the relation between the segments of the straight line,
he would find in it a case of incommensurability which would
further enforce the necessity for a theory of proportion which
should be applicable to incommensurable as well as to com-
mensurable magnitudes. 
Proclus actually observes that
' theorems about sections like those in Euclid's Second Book
are common to both [arithmetic and geometry] except that in
which the straight line is cut in extreme and mean ratio'*
(cf. Eucl. XIII. 6 for the actual proof of the irrationality
in this case). Opinion, however, has not even in recent years
been unanimous in favour of Bretschneider's interpretation;
Tannery2 in particular preferred the old view, which pre-
vailed before Bretschneider, that 'section' meant section of
solids, e.g. by planes, a line of investigation which would
naturally precede the discovery of conies: he pointed out that
the use of the singular, rrjv TOjxrjv, which might no doubt
be taken as ' section ' in the abstract, is no real objection, that
there is no other passage which speaks of a certain section
par excellence, and that Proclus in the words just quoted
expresses himself quite differently, speaking of * sections' of
which the particular section in extreme and mean ratio is
only one. Presumably the question will never be more defi-
nitely settled unless by the discovery of new documents.
(a) Theory of proportion.
The anonymous author of a scholium to Euclid's Book V,
who is perhaps Proclus, tells us that ' some say' that this
Book, containing the general theory of proportion which is
equally applicable to geometry, arithmetic, music and all
mathematical science,' is the discovery of Eudoxus, the teacher
of Plato'.3 There is no reason to doubt the truth of this
1 Proclus on Eucl. l} p. 60. 16-19.
2 Tannery, ha gtomettie grecque, p. 76.
8 Euclid, ed. Heib.., vol. v, p. 280.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

326 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
statement. The new theory appears to have been already
familiar to Aristotle. Moreover, the fundamental principles
show clear points of contact with those used in the method
of exhaustion, also due to Eudoxus. I refer to the definition
(Eucl. V, Def. 4) of magnitudes having a ratio to one another,
which are said to be ' such as are capable, when (sufficiently)
multiplied, of exceeding one another'; compare with this
Archimedes's 'lemma' by means of which he says that the
theorems about the volume of a pyramid and about circles
being to one another as the squares on their diameters were
proved, namely that 'of unequal lines, unequal surfaces, or
unequal solids, the greater exceeds the less by such a
magnitude as is capable, if added (continually) to itself, of
exceeding any magnitude of those which are comparable to
one another', i.e. of magnitudes of the same kind as the
original magnitudes.
The essence of the new theory was that it was applicable
to incommensurable as well as commensurable quantities;
and its importance cannot be overrated, for it enabled
geometry to go forward again, after it had received the blow
which paralysed it for the time. This was the discovery of
the irrational, at a time when geometry still depended on the
Pythagorean theory of proportion, that is, the numerical
theory which was of course applicable only to commensurables.
The discovery of incommensurables must have caused what
Tannery described as 'un veritable scandale logique' in
geometry, inasmuch as it made inconclusive all the proofs
which had depended on the old theory of proportion. One
effect would naturally be to make geometers avoid the use
of proportions as much as possible; they would have to use
other methods wherever they could. Euclid's Books I-IV no
doubt largely represent the result of the consequent remodel-
ling of fundamental propositions; and the ingenuity of the
substitutes devised is nowhere better illustrated than in I. 44,
45, where the equality of the complements about the diagonal
of a parallelogram is used (instead of the construction, as
in Book VI, of a fourth proportional) for the purpose of
applying to a given straight line a parallelogram in a given
angle and equal to a given triangle or rectilineal area.
The greatness of the new theory itself needs no further
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUDOXUS'S THEORY OF PROPORTION 
327
argument when it is remembered that the definition of equal
ratios in Eucl. V, Def. 5 corresponds exactly to the modern
theory of irrationals due to Dedekind, and that it is word for
word the same as Weierstrass's definition of equal numbers.
(/?) The method of exhaustion.
In the preface to Book I of his treatise On the Sphere and
Cylinder Archimedes attributes to Eudoxus the proof of the
theorems that the volume of a pyramid is one-third of
the volume of the prism which has the same base and equal
height, and that the volume of a cone is one-third of the
cylinder with the same base and height. In the Method he
says that these facts were discovered, though not proved
(i.e. in Archimedes's sense of the word), by Democritus,
who accordingly deserved a great part of the credit for the
theorems, but that Eudoxus was the first to supply the
scientific proof. In the preface to the Quadrature of the Para-
bola Archimedes gives further details. He says that for the
proof of the theorem that the area of a segment of a parabola
cut off by a chord is f rds of the triangle on the same base and
of equal height with the segment he himself used the ' lemma'
quoted above (now known as the Axiom of Archimedes), and
he goes on:
6 The earlier geometers have also used this lemma; for it is
by the use of this lemma that they have proved the proposi-
tions (1) that circles are to one another in the duplicate ratio
of their diameters, (2) that spheres are to one another in the
triplicate ratio of their diameters, and further (3) that every
pyramid is one third part of the prism which has the same
base with the pyramid and equal height; also (4) that every
cone is one third part of the cylinder having the same base
with the cone and equal height they proved by assuming
a certain lemma similar to that aforesaid.'
As, according to the other passage, it was Eudoxus who
first proved the last two of these theorems, it is a safe
inference that he used for this purpose the ' lemma' in ques-
tion or its equivalent. But was he the first to use the lemma ?
This has been questioned on the ground that one of the
theorems mentioned as having been proved by ' the earlier
geometers' in this way is the theorem that circles are to one
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

328 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
another as the squares on their diameters, which proposition,
as we are told on the authority of Eudemus, was proved
(Seigai) by Hippocrates of Chios. This suggested to Hankpl
that the lemma in question must have been formulated by
Hippocrates and used in his proof.1 But seeing that, accord-
ing to Archimedes,' the earlier geometers' proved by means
of the same lemma both Hippocrates's proposition, (1) above,
and the theorem (3) about the volume of a pyramid, while
the first proof of the latter was certainly given by Eudoxus,
it is simplest to suppose that it was Eudoxus who first formu-
lated the ' lemma' and used it to prove both propositions, and
that Hippocrates's 'proof did not amount to a rigorous
demonstration such as would have satisfied Eudoxus or
Archimedes. Hippocrates may, for instance, have proceeded
on the lines of Antiphon's ' quadrature', gradually exhausting
the circles and taking the limit, without clinching the proof
by the formal reductio ad absurdum used in the method of
exhaustion as practised later. Without therefore detracting
from the merit of Hippocrates, whose argument may have
contained the germ of the method of exhaustion, we do not
seem to have any sufficient reason to doubt that it was
Eudoxus who established this method as part of the regular
machinery of geometry.
The ' lemma' itself, we may observe, is not found in Euclid
in precisely the form that Archimedes gives it, though it
is equivalent to Eucl. V, Def. 4 (Magnitudes are said to have
a ratio to one another which are capable, when multiplied,
of exceeding one another). When Euclid comes to prove the
propositions about the content of circles, pyramids and cones
(XII. 2, 4-7 Por., and 10), he does not use the actual lemma of
Archimedes, but another which forms Prop. 1 of Book X, to
the effect that, if there are two unequal magnitudes and from
the greater there be subtracted more than its half (or the
half itself), from the remainder more than its half (or the half),
and if this be done continually, there will be left some magni-
tude which will be less than the lesser of the given magnitudes.
This last lemma is frequently used by Archimedes himself
(notably in the second proof of the proposition about the area
1 Hankel, Zur GescMchte der Mathematih in Alterthum und Mittelalter,
p. 122.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUDOXUS. METHOD OF EXHAUSTION 329
of a parabolic segment), and it may be the < lemma similar
to the aforesaid' which he says was used in the case of the
cone. But the existence of the two lemmas constitutes no
real difficulty, because Archimedes's lemma (under the form
of Eucl. V, Def. 4) is in effect used by Euclid to prove X. 1.
We are not told whether Eudoxus proved the theorem that
spheres are to one another in the triplicate ratio of their
diameters. As the proof of this in Eucl. XII. 16-18 is likewise
based on X. 1 (which is used in XII. 16), it is probable enough
that this proposition, mentioned along with the others by
Archimedes, was also first proved by Eudoxus.
Eudoxus, as we have seen, is said to have solved the problem
of the two mean proportionals by means of 'curved lines'.
This solution has been dealt with above (pp. 249-51).
We pass on to the
(y) Theory of concentric spheres.
This was the first attempt to account by purely geometrical
hypotheses for the apparent irregularities of the motions of
the planets; it included similar explanations of the apparently
simpler movements of the sun and moon. 
The ancient
evidence of the details of the system of concentric spheres
(which Eudoxus set out in a book entitled On speeds, lie pi
Taxcov, now lost) is contained in two passages. The first is in
Aristotle's Metaphysics, where a short notice is given of the
numbers and relative positions of the spheres postulated by
Eudoxus for the sun, moon and planets respectively, the
additions which Callippus thought it necessary to make to
the numbers of those spheres, and lastly the modification
of the system which Aristotle himself considers necessary
'if the phenomena are to be produced by all the spheres
acting in combination \1 
A more elaborate and detailed
account of the system is contained in Simplicius's commentary
on the De caelo of Aristotle2; Simplicius quotes largely from
Sosigenes the Peripatetic (second century A. D.), observing that
Sosigenes drew from Eudemus, who dealt with the subject
in the second book of his History of Astronomy. 
Ideler was
1 Aristotle, Metaph. A. 8. 1073 b 17-1074 a 14.
2 Simpl. on De caelo, p. 488. 18-24, pp. 493. 4-506. 18 Heib.; p. 498
a 45-b 3, pp. 498 b 27-503 a 33.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

330 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
the first to appreciate the elegance of the theory and to
attempt to explain its working (1828, 1830); E. F. Apelt, too,
gave a fairly full exposition of it in a paper of 1849. But it
was reserved for Schiaparelli to work out a complete restora-
tion of the theory and to investigate in detail the extent
to which it could be made to account for the phenomena; his
paper has become a classic,1 and all accounts must necessarily
follow his.
I shall here only describe the system so far as to show its
mathematical interest. I have given fuller details elsewhere.2
Eudoxus adopted the view which prevailed from the earliest
times to the time of Kepler, that circular motion was sufficient
to account for the movements of all the heavenly bodies.
With Eudoxus this circular motion took the form of the
revolution of different spheres, each of which moves about
a diameter as axis. All the spheres were concentric, the
common centre being the centre of the earth; hence the name
of ' homocentric' spheres used in later times to describe the
system. The spheres were of different sizes, one inside the
other. Each planet was fixed at^ a point in the equator of
the sphere which carried it, the sphere revolving at uniform
speed about the diameter joining the corresponding poles;
that is, the planet revolved uniformly in a great circle of the
sphere perpendicular to the axis of rotation. But one such
circular motion was not enough; in order to explain the
changes in the apparent speed of the planets' motion, their
stations and retrogradations, Eudoxus had to assume a number
of such circular motions working on each planet and producing
by their combination that single apparently irregular motion
which observation shows us. He accordingly held that the
poles of the sphere carrying the planet are not fixed, but
themselves move on a greater sphere concentric with the
carrying sphere and moving about two different poles with
uniform speed. The poles of the second sphere were simi-
larly placed on a third sphere concentric with and larger
than the first and second, and moving about separate poles
1 Schiaparelli. Le sfere omocentriche di Eudosso, di Callippo e di Aristotele,
Milano 1875; Germ, trans, by W. Horn in Abh. zur Gesch. d. Math., i.
Heft, 1877, pp. 101-98.
2 Aristarchus of Samos, the ancient Copernicus, pp. 193-224.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEORY OF CONCENTRIC SPHERES 
331
of its own with a speed peculiar to itself. For the planets
yet a fourth sphere was required, similarly related to the
others; for the sun and moon Eudoxus found that, by a
suitable choice of the positions of the poles and of speeds
of rotation, he could make three spheres suffice. Aristotle
and Simplicius describe the spheres in the reverse order, the
sphere carrying the planet being the last; this makes the
description easier, because we begin with the sphere represent-
ing the daily rotaton of the heavens. The spheres which
move each planet Eudoxus made quite separate from those
which move the others; but one sphere sufficed to produce
the daily rotation of the heavens. The hypothesis was purely
mathematical; Eudoxus did not trouble himself about the
material of the spheres or their mechanical connexion.
The moon has a motion produced by three spheres; the
first or outermost moves in the same sense as the fixed stars
from east to west in 24 hours; the second moves about an
axis perpendicular to the plane of the zodiac circle or the
ecliptic, and in the sense of the daily rotation, i. e. from
east to west; the third again moves about an axis inclined
to the axis of the second at an angle equal to the highest
latitude attained by the moon, and from west to east;
the moon is fixed on the equator of this third sphere. The
speed of the revolution of the second sphere was very slow
(a revolution was completed in a period of 223 lunations);
the third sphere produced the revolution of the moon from
west to east in the draconitic or nodal month (of 27 days,
5 hours, 5 minutes, 36 seconds) round a circle inclined to
the ecliptic at an angle equal to the greatest latitude of the
moon.1 
The moon described the latter circle, while the
circle itself was carried round by the second sphere in
a retrograde sense along the ecliptic in a period of 223
lunations; and both the inner spheres were bodily carried
round by the first sphere in 24 hours in the sense of the daily
rotation. The three spheres thus produced the motion of the
moon in an orbit inclined to the ecliptic, and the retrogression
of the nodes, completed in a period of about 18^ years.
1 Simplicius (and presumably Aristotle also) confused the motions of
the second and third spheres. The above account represents what
Eudoxus evidently intended.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

332 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
The system of three spheres for the sun was similar, except
that the orbit was less inclined to the ecliptic than that of the
moon, and the second sphere moved from west to east instead
of from east to west, so that the nodes moved slowly forward
in the direct order of the signs instead of backward.
But the case to which the greatest mathematical interest
attaches is that of the planets, the motion of which is pro-
duced by sets of four spheres for each. Of each set the first
and outermost produced the daily rotation in 24 hours; the
second, the motion round the zodiac in periods which in the
case of superior planets are equal to the sidereal periods of
revolution, and for Mercury and Venus (on a geocentric
system) one year. The third sphere had its poles fixed at two
opposite points on the zodiac circle, the poles being carried
round in the motion of the second sphere; the revolution
of the third sphere about its poles was again uniform and
was completed in the synodic period of the planet or the time
which elapsed between two successive oppositions or conjunc-
tions with the sun. The poles of the third sphere were the
same for Mercury and Venus but different for all the other
planets. On the surface of the third sphere the poles of the
fourth sphere were fixed, the axis of the latter being inclined
to that of the former at an angle which was constant for each
planet but different for the different planets. The rotation of
the fourth sphere about its axis took place in the same time
as the rotation of the third about its axis but in the opposite
sense. On the equator of the fourth sphere the planet was
fixed. Consider now the actual path of a planet subject to
the rotations of the third and fourth spheres only, leaving out
of account for the moment the first two spheres the motion of
which produces the daily rotation and the motion along the
zodiac respectively. The problem is the following. A sphere
rotates uniformly about the fixed diameter AB. 
P, P' are
two opposite poles on this sphere, and a second sphere con-
centric with the first rotates uniformly about the diameter
PP' in the same time as the former sphere rotates about AB,
but in the opposite direction. M is a point on the second
sphere equidistant from P, P', i.e. a point on the equator
of the second sphere. Required to find the path of the
point M. This is not difficult nowadays for any one familiar
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEORY OF CONCENTRIC SPHERES 
333
with spherical trigonometry and analytical geometry; but
Sehiaparelli showed, by means of a series of seven propositions
or problems involving only elementary geometry, that it was
well within the powers of such a geometer as Eudoxus. The
path of M in space turns out in fact to be a curve like
a lemniscate or figure-of-eight described on the surface of a
sphere, namely the fixed sphere about A B as diameter. This
1 spherical lemniscate' is roughly shown in the second figure
above. The curve is actually the intersection of the sphere
with a certain cylinder touching it internally at- the double
point 0, namely a cylinder with diameter equal to AS the
sagitta (shown in the other figure) of the diameter of the
small circle on which P revolves. But the curve is also
the intersection of either the sphere or the cylinder with
a certain cone with vertex 0, axis parallel to the axis of the
cylinder (i. e. touching the circle AOB at 0) and vertical angle
equal to the ' inclination' (the angle AO'P in the first figure).
That this represents the actual result obtained by Eudoxus
himself is conclusively proved by the facts that Eudoxus
called the curve described by the planet about the zodiac
circle the hippopede or horse-fetter, and that the same term
hippopede is used by Proclus to describe the plane curve of
similar shape formed by a plane section of an anchor-ring or
tore touching the tore internally and parallel to its axis.1
So far account has only been taken of the motion due to
the combination of the rotations of the third and fourth
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 112. 5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

334 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
spheres. But A, B, the poles of the third sphere, are carried
round the zodiac or ecliptic by the motion of the second
sphere in a time equal to the ' zodiacal' period of the planet.
Now the axis of symmetry of the ' spherical lemniscate' (the
arc of the great circle bisecting it longitudinally) always lies
on the ecliptic. We may therefore substitute for the third
and fourth spheres the 'lemniscate' moving bodily round
the ecliptic. The combination of the two motions (that of the
1 lemniscate' and that of the planet on it) gives the motion of
the planet through the constellations. 
The motion of the
planet round the curve is an oscillatory motion, now forward in
acceleration of the motion round the ecliptic due to the motion
of the second sphere, now backward in retardation of the same
motion; the period of the oscillation is the period of the syno-
dic revolution, and the acceleration and retardation occupy
half the period respectively. When the retardation in the
sense of longitude due to the backward oscillation is greater
than the speed of the forward motion of the lemniscate itself,
the planet will for. a time have a retrograde motion, at the
beginning and end of which it will appear stationary for a little
while, when the two opposite motions balance each other.
It will be admitted that to produce the retrogradations
in this theoretical way by superimposed axial rotations of
spheres was a remarkable stroke of genius. It was no slight
geometrical achievement, for those days, to demonstrate the
effect of the hypotheses; but this is nothing in comparison
with the speculative power which enabled the man to invent
the hypothesis which would produce the effect. 
It was, of
course, a much greater achievement than that of Eudoxus's
teacher Archytas in finding the two mean proportionals by
means of the intersection of three surfaces in space, a tore
with internal diameter nil, a cylinder and a cone; the problem
solved by Eudoxus was much more difficult, and yet there
is the curious resemblance between the two solutions that
Eudoxus's hippopede is actually the section of a sphere with
a cylinder touching it internally and also with a certain
cone; the two cases together show the freedom with which
master and pupil were accustomed to work with figures in
three dimensions, and in particular with surfaces of revolution,
their intersections, &c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEORY OF CONCENTRIC SPHERES 
335
Callippus (about 370-300 B.C.) tried to make the system of
concentric spheres suit the phenomena more exactly by adding
other spheres; he left the number of the spheres at four in
the case of Jupiter and Saturn, but added one each to the
other planets and two each in the case of the sun and moon
(making five in all). This would substitute for the hippopede
a still more complicated elongated figure, and the matter is
not one to be followed out here. Aristotle modified the system
in a mechanical sense by introducing between each planet
and the one below it reacting spheres one less in number than
those acting on the former planet, and with motions equal
and opposite to each of them, except the outermost, respec-
tively ; by neutralizing the motions of all except the outermost
sphere acting on any planet he wished to enable that outer-
most to be the outermost acting on the planet below, so that
the spheres became one connected system, each being in actual
contact with the one below and acting on it, whereas with
Eudoxus and Callippus the spheres acting on each planet
formed a separate set independent of the others. Aristotle's
modification was not an improvement, and has no mathe-
matical interest.
The works of ARISTOTLE are of the, greatest importance to
the history of mathematics and particularly of the Elements.
His date (384-322/1) comes just before that of Euclid, so
that from the differences between his statement of things
corresponding to what we find in Euclid and Euclid's own we
can draw a fair inference as to the innovations which were
due to Euclid himself. Aristotle was no doubt a competent
mathematician, though he does not seem to have specialized
in mathematics, and fortunately for us he was fond of mathe-
matical illustrations. His allusions to particular definitions,
propositions, &c, in geometry are in* such a form as to suggest
that his pupils must have had at hand some text-book where
they could find the things he mentions. The particular text-
book then in use would presumably be that which was the
immediate predecessor of Euclid's, namely the Elements of
Theudius; for Theudius is the latest of pre-Euclidean
geometers whom the summary of Proclus mentions as a com-
piler of Elements.1
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 67. 12-16.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

336 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
The mathematics in Aristotle comes under the
following heads.
(a) First principles.
On no part of the subject does Aristotle throw more light
than on the first principles as then accepted. The most
important passages dealing with this subject are in the
Posterior Analytics.1 
While he speaks generally of ' demon-
strative sciences', his illustrations are mainly mathematical,
doubtless because they were readiest to his hand. He gives
the clearest distinctions between axioms (which are common
to all sciences), definitions, hypotheses and postulates (which
are different for different sciences since they relate to the
subject-matter of the particular science). If we exclude from
Euclid's axioms (1) the assumption that two straight lines
cannot enclose a space, which is interpolated, and (2) the
so-called * Parallel-Axiom' which is the 5th Postulate, Aris-
totle's explanation of these terms fits the classification of
Euclid quite well. 
Aristotle calls the axioms by various
terms, 'common (things)', 'common axioms', 'common opinions',
and this seems to be the origin of ' common notions' (KOIVOLL
evvoiai), the term by which they are described in the text
of Euclid; the particular axiom which Aristotle is most fond
of quoting is No. 3, stating that, if equals be subtracted from
equals, the remainders are equal. Aristotle does not give any
instance of a geometrical postulate. From this we may fairly
make the important inference that Euclid's Postulates are all
his own, the momentous Postulate 5 as well as Nos. 1, 2, 3
relating to constructions of lines and circles, and No. 4 that
all right angles are equal. These postulates as well as those
which Archimedes lajs down at the beginning of his book
On Plane Equilibriums (e.g. that 'equal weights balance at
equal lengths, but equal weights at unequal lengths do not
balance but incline in the direction of the weight which is
at the greater length') correspond exactly enough to Aristotle's
idea of a postulate. 
This is something which, e.g., the
geometer assumes (for reasons known to himself) without
demonstration (though properly a subject for demonstration)
1 Anal. Post. i. 6. 74 b 5, i. 10. 76 a 31-77 a 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTOTLE 
337
and without any assent on the part of the learner, or even
against his opinion rather than otherwise. As regards defini-
tions, Aristotle is clear that they do not assert existence or
non-existence; they only require to be understood. The only
exception he makes is in the case of the unit or monad and
magnitude, the existence of which has to be assumed, while
the existence of everything else has to be proved; the things
actually necessary to be assumed in geometry are points and
lines only; everything constructed out of them, e.g. triangles,
squares, tangents, and their properties, e.g. incommensura-
bility, has to be proved to exist. This again agrees sub-
stantially with Euclid's procedure. 
Actual construction is
with him the proof of existence. If triangles other than the
equilateral triangle constructed in I. 1 are assumed in I. 4-21,
it is only provisionally, pending the construction of a triangle
out of three straight lines in I. 22 ; the drawing and producing
of straight lines and thfc describing of circles is postulated
(Postulates 1-3). 
Another interesting statement on the
philosophical side of geometry has reference to the geometer's
hypotheses. It is untrue, says Aristotle, to assert that a
geometer's hypotheses are false because he assumes that a line
which he has drawn is a foot long when it is not, or straight
when it is not straight. The geometer bases no conclusion on
the particular line being that which he has assumed it to be;
he argues about what it represents, the figure itself being
a mere illustration.1
Coming now to the first definitions of Euclid, Book I, we
find that Aristotle has the equivalents of Defs. 1-3 and 5, 6.
But for a straight line he gives Plato's definition only:
whence we may fairly conclude that Euclid's definition
was his own, as also was his definition of a plane which
he adapted from that of a straight line. Some terms seem
to have been defined in Aristotle's time which Euclid leaves
undefined, e.g. K€K\d<r6cu, cto be inflected', vtvziv, to ' verge'.2
Aristotle seems to have known* Eudoxus's new theory of pro-
portion, and he uses to a considerable extent the usual
1 Arist. Anal. Post. i. 10. 76 b 39-77 a 2; cf. Anal. Prior, i. 41.49 b 34 sq.;
Metaph. N. 2. 1089 a 20-5.
2 Anal. Post. i. 10. 76 b 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

338 
FROM PLATO* TO EUCLID
terminology of proportions; he defines similar figures as
Euclid does.
(/?) Indications of proofs differing from Euclid's.
Coming to theorems, we find in Aristotle indications of
proofs differing entirely from those of Euclid. The most
remarkable case is that of the theorem of I. 5. For the
purpose of illustrating the statement that in any syllogism
one of the propositions must be affirmative and universal
he gives a proof of the proposition as follows.1
' For let A, B be drawn [i. e. joined] to the centre.
'If then we assumed (1) that the angle AC [i.e. 4 + C]
is equal to the angle BD [i.e. B + D] without assertitfg
generally that the angles of semicircles are equal, and again
(2) that the angle G is equal to the
angle D without making the further
assumption that the two angles of all
segments are equal, and if we then
inferred, lastly, that since the whole
angles are equal, and equal angles are
subtracted from them, the angles which
remain, namely E, F, are equal, without
assuming generally that, if equals be
subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal, we should
commit a petitio principii.9'
There are obvious peculiarities of notation in this extract;
the angles are indicated by single letters, and sums of two
angles by two letters in juxtaposition (cf. BE for D + E in
the proof cited from Archytas above, p. 215). The angles
A, B are the angles at A, B of the isosceles triangle OABf the
same angles as are afterwards spoken of as Ey F. But the
differences of substance between this and Euclid's proof are
much more striking. First, it is clear that ' mixed1 angles
(' angles' formed by straight lines with circular arcs) played
a much larger part in earlier text-books than they do in
Euclid, where indeed they only appear once or twice as a
survival. 
Secondly, it is remarkable that the equality of
the two ' angles' of a semicircle and of the two * angles' of any
segment is assumed as a means of proving a proposition so
1 Anal. Prior, i. 24. 41 b 13-22.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTOTLE 
339
elementary as I. 5, although one would say that the assump-
tions are no more obvious than the proposition to be proved;
indeed some kind of proof, e.g. by superposition, would
doubtless be considered necessary to justify the assumptions.
It is a natural inference that Euclid's proof of I. 5 was his
own, and it would appear that his innovations as regards
order of propositions and methods of proof began at the very
threshold of the subject.
There are two passages1 in Aristotle bearing on the theory
of parallels which seem to show that the theorems of Eucl.
I. 27, 28 are pre-Euclidean; but another passage2 appears to
indicate that there was some vicious circle in the theory of
parallels then-current, for Aristotle alludes to a petitio prin-
cipii committed by ' those who think that they draw parallels'
(or 'establish the theory of parallels', ra$ napaWfiXovs
ypd(f>€Lv), and, as I have tried to show elsewhere,3 a note of
Philoponus makes it possible that Aristotle is criticizing a
direction-theory of parallels such as has been adopted so
often in modern text-books. It would seem, therefore, to have
been Euclid who first got rid of the petitio princlpii in earlier
text-books by formulating the famous Postulate 5 and basing
I. 29 upon it.
A difference of method is again indicated in regard to the
theorem of Eucl. III. 31 that the angle in a semicircle is right.
Two passages of Aristotle taken together4 show that before
Euclid the proposition was proved by means of the radius
drawn to the middle point of the
arc of the semicircle. Joining the
extremity of this radius to the ex-
tremities of the diameter respec-
tively, we have two isosceles right-
angled triangles, and the two angles,
one in each triangle, which are at the middle point of the arc,
being both of them halves of right angles, make the angle in
the semicircle at that point a right angle. The proof of the
theorem must have been completed by means of the theorem
1 Anal Post i. 5. 74 a 13-16 ; Anal. Prior, ii. 17. 66 a 11-15.
2 Anal. PHor. ii. 16. 65 a 4.
3 See The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, vol. i, pp. 191-2 (cf.
pp. 308-9).
4 Anal. Post. ii. 11. 94 a 28; Metaph. e. 9. 1051 a 26.
z 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

340 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
of III. 21 that angles in the same segment are equal, a proposi-
tion which Euclid's more general proof does not need to use.
These instances are sufficient to show that Euclid was far
from taking four complete Books out of an earlier text-book
without change; his changes began at the very beginning,
and there are probably few, if any, groups of propositions in
which he did not introduce some improvements of arrange-
ment or method.
It is unnecessary to go into further detail regarding
Euclidean theorems1 found in Aristotle except to note the
interesting fact that Aristotle already has the principle of
the method of exhaustion used by Eudoxus: ' If I continually
add to a finite magnitude, I shall exceed every assigned
(' defined', wpur/jLivov) magnitude, and similarly, if I subtract,
I shall fall short (of any assigned magnitude)/x
(y) Propositions not found in Euclid.
Some propositions found in Aristotle but not in Euclid
should be mentioned. (1) The exterior angles of any polygon
are together equal to four right angles2; although omitted
in Euclid and supplied by Proclus, this is evidently a Pytha-
gorean proposition. (2) The locus of a point such that its
distances from two given points are in a given ratio (not
being a ratio of equality) is a circle 3; this is a proposition
quoted by Eutocius from Apollonius's Plane Loci, but the
proof given by Aristotle differs very little from that of
Apollonius as reproduced by Eutocius, which shows that the
proposition was fully known and a standard proof of it was in
existence before Euclid's time. (3) Of all closed lines starting
from a point, returning to it again, and including a given
area, the circumference of a circle is the shortest4; this shows
that the study of isoperimetry (comparison of the perimeters
of different figures having the same area) began long before
the date of Zenodorus's treatise quoted by Pappus and Theon
of Alexandria. (4) Only two solids can fill up space, namely
the pyramid and the cube 5; this is the complement of the
Pythagorean statement that the only three figures which can
1 Arist. Phys. viii. 10. 266 b 2.
2 Anal. Post i. 24. 85 b 38; ii. 17. 99 a 19.
3 Meteorologies iii. 5. 376 a 3 sq. 
4 De caelo, ii. 4. 287 a 27.
5 Ib. iii. 8. 306 b 7.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTOTLE 
341
by being put together fill up space in a plane are the equi-
lateral triangle, the square and the regular hexagon.
(S) Curves and solids known to Aristotle.
There is little beyond elementary plane geometry in Aris-
totle. He has the distinction between straight and ' curved3
lines (KafmvXcu ypa/jLjiai), but the only curve mentioned
specifically, besides circles, seems to be the spiral*; this
term may have no more than the vague sense which it has
in the expression 'the spirals of the heaven'2; if it really
means the cylindrical helix, Aristotle does not seem to have
realized its property, for he includes it among things which
are not such that 'any part will..coincide with any other
part', whereas Apollonius later proved that the cylindrical
helix has precisely this property.
In solid geometry he distinguishes clearly the three dimen-
sions belonging to ' body', and, in addition to parallelepipedal
solids, such as cubes, he is familiar with spheres, cones and
cylinders. A sphere he defines as the figure which has all its
radii (' lines from the centre') equal,3 from which we may infer
that Euclid's definition of it as the solid generated by the revo-
lution of a semicircle about its diameter is his own (Eucl. XI,
Def. 14). Referring to a cone, he says4 'the straight lines
thrown out from K in the form of a cone make GK as a sort
of axis (&(m£p a£ova)', showing that the use of the word
* axis ' was not yet quite technical; of conic sections he does
not seem to have had any knowledge, although he must have
been contemporary with Menaechmus. When he alludes to
' two cubes being a cube' he is not speaking, as one might
suppose, of the duplication of the cube, for he is saying that
no science is concerned to prove anything outside its own
subject-matter; thus geometry is not required to prove ' that
two cubes are a cube'5; hence the sense of this expression
must be not geometrical but arithmetical, meaning that the
product of two cube numbers is also a cube number. In the
Aristotelian Problems there is a question which, although not
mathematical in intention, is perhaps the first suggestion of
1 Phys. v. 4. 228 b 24. 
2 Metaph. B. 2. 998 a 5.
8 Phys. ii. 4. 287 a 19. 
4 Meteorologwa, iii. 5. 375 b 21.
5 Anal. Post. i. 7. 75 b 12.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

342 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
a certain class of investigation. 
If a book in the form of a
cylindrical roll is cut by a plane and then unrolled, why is it
that the cut edge appears as a straight line if the section
is parallel to the base (i. e. is a right section), but as a crooked
line if the section is obliquely inclined (to the axis).1 The
Problems are not by Aristotle; but, whether this one goes
back to Aristotle or not, it is unlikely that he would think of
investigating the form of the curve mathematically.
(e) The continuous and the infinite.
Much light was thrown by Aristotle on certain general
conceptions entering into mathematics such as the ' continuous'
and the 'infinite'. 
The continuous, he held, could not be
made up of indivisible parts; the continuous is that in which
the boundary or limit between two consecutive parts, where
they touch, is one and the same, and which, as the name
itself implies, is kept together, which is not possible if the
extremities are two and not one.2 The 'infinite' or 'un-
limited ' only exists potentially, not in actuality. The infinite
is so in virtue of its endlessly changing into something else,
like day or the Olympic games, and is manifested in different
forms, e.g. in time, in Man, and in the division of magnitudes.
For, in general, the infinite consists in something new being
continually taken, that something being itself always finite
but always different. 
There is this distinction between the
forms above mentioned that, whereas in the case of magnitudes
what is once taken remains, in the case of time and Man it
passes or is destroyed, but the succession is unbroken. The
case of addition is in a sense the same as that of division;
in the finite magnitude the former takes place in the converse
way to the latter; for, as we see the finite magnitude divided
ad infinitum, 
so we shall find that addition gives a sum
tending to a definite limit. Thus, in the case of a finite
magnitude, you may take a definite fraction of it and add to
it continually in the same ratio; if now the successive added
terms do not include one and the same magnitude, whatever
it is [i.e. it* the successive terms diminish in geometrical
progression], you will not come to the end of the finite
magnitude, but, if the ratio is increased so that each term
1 Probl. xvi. 6. 914 a 25. 
2 Phys. v. 3. 227 a 11; vii. 1. 231 a 24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTOTLE ON THE INFINITE 
343
does include one and the same magnitude, whatever it is, you
will come to the end of the finite magnitude, for every finite
magnitude is exhausted by continually taking from it any
definite fraction whatever. In no other sense does the infinite
exist but only in the sense just mentioned, that is, potentially
and by way of diminution.1 And in this sense you may have
potentially infinite addition, the process being, as we say, in
a manner the same as with division ad infinitum; 
for in the
case of addition you will always be able to find something
outside the total for the time being, but the total will never
exceed every definite (or assigned) magnitude in the way that,
in the direction of division, the result will pass every definite
magnitude, that is, by becoming smaller than it. The infinite
therefore cannot exist, even potentially, in the sense of exceed-
ing every finite magnitude as the result of successive addition.
It follows that the correct view of the infinite is the opposite
of that commonly held; it is not that which has nothing
outside it, but that which always has something outside it.2
Aristotle is aware that it is essentially of physical magnitudes
that he is speaking: it is, he says, perhaps a more general
inquiry that would be necessary to determine whether the
infinite is possible in mathematics and in the domain of
thought and of things which have no magnitude.3
'But', he says, 'my argument does not anyhow rob
mathematicians of their study, although it denies the existence
of the infinite in the sense of actual existence as something
increased to such an extent that it cannot be gone through
(dSiegiTrjTov); for, as it is, they do not even need the infinite
or use it, but only require that the finite (straight line) shall
be as long as they please. . . . Hence it will make no difference
to them for the purpose of demonstration/ 4
The above disquisition about the infinite should, I think,
be interesting to mathematicians for the distinct expression
of Aristotle's view that the existence of an infinite series the
terms of which are magnitudes is impossible unless it is
convergent and (with reference to Riemann's developments)
that it does not matter to geometry if the straight line is not
,'nfinite in length provided that it is as long as we please.
1 Phys. iii. 6. 206 a 15-b 13. 
2 Ib. iii. 6. 206 b 16-207 a 1.
3 Ib. iii. 5. 204 a 34. 
4 Ib. iii. 7. 207 b 27.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

344 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
Aristotle's denial of even the potential existence of a sum
of magnitudes which shall exceed every definite magnitude
was, as he himself implies, inconsistent with the lemma or
assumption used by Eudoxus in his method of exhaustion.
We can, therefore, well understand why, a century later,
Archimedes felt it necessary to justify his own use of the
lemma:
' the earlier geometers too have used this lemma: for it is by
its help that they have proved that circles have to one another
the duplicate ratio of their diameters, that spheres have to
one another the triplicate ratio of their diameters, and so on.
And, in the result, each of the said theorems has been accepted
no less than those proved without the aid of this lemma/x
(^) 
Mechanics,
An account of the mathematics in Aristotle would be incom-
plete without a reference to his ideas in mechanics, where he
laid down principles which, even though partly erroneous,
held their ground till the time of Benedetti (1530-90) and
Galilei (1564-1642). The Mechanica included in the Aris-
totelian writings is not indeed Aristotle's own work, but it is
very close in date, as we may conclude from its terminology;
this shows more general agreement with the terminology of
Euclid than is found in Aristotle's own writings, but certain
divergences from Euclid's terms are common to the latter and
to the Mechanica; the conclusion from which is that the
Mechanica was written before Euclid had made the termino-
logy of mathematics more uniform and convenient, or, in the
alternative, that it was composed after Euclid's time by persons
who, though they had partly assimilated Euclid's terminology?
were close enough to Aristotle's date to be still influenced
by his usage. 
But the Aristotelian origin of many of the
ideas in the Mechanica is proved by their occurrence in
Aristotle's genuine writings. Take, for example, the principle
of the lever. In the Mechanica we are told that,
'as the weight moved is to the moving weight, so is the
length (or distance) to the length inversely. In fact the mov-
ing weight will more easily move (the system) the farther it
is away from the fulcrum. 
The reason is that aforesaid,
1 Archimedes, Quadrature of a Parabola, Preface.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTOTELIAN MECHANICS 
345
namely that the line which is farther from the centre describes
the greater circle, so that, if the power applied is the same,
that which moves (the system) will change its position the
more, the farther it is away from the fulcrum/1
The idea then is that the greater power exerted by the
weight at the greater distance corresponds to its greater
velocity. Compare with this the passage in the De caelo
where Aristotle is speaking of the speeds of the circles of
the stars:
' it is not at all strange, nay it is inevitable, that the speeds of
circles should be in the proportion of their sizes.'2 . . . ' Since
in two concentric circles the segment (sector) of the outer cut
off between two radii common to both circles is greater than
that cut off' on the inner, it is reasonable that the greater circle
should be carried round in the same time/3
Compare again the passage of the Mechanica:
' what happens with the balance is reduced to (the case of the)
circle, the case of the lever to that of the balance, and
practically everything concerning mechanical movements to
the case of the lever. Further it is the fact that, given
a radius of a circle, no two points of it move at the same
speed (as the radius itself revolves), but the point more distant
from the centre always moves more quickly, and this is the
reason of many remarkable facts about the movements of
circles which will appear in the sequel/ 4
The axiom which is regarded as containing the germ of the
principle of virtual velocities is enunciated, in slightly different
forms, in the De caelo and the Physics:
1 A smaller and lighter weight will be given more movement
if the force acting on it is the same. . . . The speed of the
lesser body will be to that of the greater as the greater body
is to the lesser/ 5
'If A be the movent, B the thing moved, C the length
through which it is moved, D the time taken, then
A will move %B over the distance 2 C in the time D,
and A 
„ 
"£5 
,, 
„ 
C 
„ 
| D ;
thus proportion is maintained/6
1 Mechanica, 3. 850 b 1. 
2 De caelo, ii. 8. 289 b 15.
8 IK 290 a 2. 
4 Mechanica, 848 a 11.
5 De caelo, iii. 2. 301 b 4, 11, 
6 Phys. vii. 5. 249 b 30-250 a 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

346 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
Again, says Aristotle,
A will move B over the distance \G in the time JD,
and \A 
„ 
§5, 
a distance 
G 
., 
„ 
D;1
and so on.
Lastly, we have in the Mechanica the parallelogram of
velocities:
' When a body is moved in a certain ratio (i. e. has two linear
movements in a constant ratio to one another), the body must
move in a straight line, and this straight line is the diameter
of the figure (parallelogram) formed from the straight lines
which have the given ratio.'2
The author goes on to say 3 that, if the ratio of the two
movements does not remain the same from one instant to the
next, the motion will not be in a straight line but in a curve.
He instances a circle in a vertical plane with a point moving
along it downwards from the topmost point; the point has
two simultaneous movements; one is in a vertical line, the
other displaces this vertical line parallel to itself away from
the position in which it passes through the centre till it
reaches the position of a tangent to the circle; if during this
time the ratio of the two movements were constant, say one of
equality, the point would not move along the circumference
at all but along the diagonal of a rectangle.
The parallelogram of forces is easily deduced from the
parallelogram of velocities combined with Aristotle's axiom
that the force which moves a given weight is directed along
the line of the weight's motion and is proportional to the
distance described by the weight in a given time.
Nor should we omit to mention the Aristotelian tract On
indivisible lines. We have seen (p. 293) that, according to
Aristotle, Plato objected to the genus 'point* as a geometrical
fiction, calling a point the beginning of a line, and often
positing ' indivisible lines' in the same sense.4 The idea of
indivisible lines appears to have been only vaguely conceived
by Plato, but it took shape in his school, and with Xenocrates
1 Phys. vii. 5. 250 a 4-7. 
2 Mechanica, 2. 848 b 10.
3 Ib. 848 b 26 sq. 
4 Metaph. A. 9. 992 a 20.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TRACT ON INDIVISIBLE LINES 
347
became a definite doctrine. There is plenty of evidence for
thisx; Proclus, for instance, tells us of l a discourse or argu-
ment by Xenocrates introducing indivisible lines \2 The tract
On indivisible lines was no doubt intended as a counterblast
to Xenocrates. It can hardly have been written by Aristotle
himself; it contains, for instance, some expressions without
parallel in Aristotle. But it is certainly the work of some
one belonging to the school; and we can imagine that, having
on some occasion to mention ' indivisible lines', Aristotle may
well have set to some pupil, as an exercise, the task of refuting
Xenocrates. 
According to Simplicius and Philoponus, the
tract was attributed by some to Theophrastus3; and this
seems the most likely supposition, especially as Diogenes
Laertius mentions, in a list of works by Theophrastus, ' On
indivisible lines, one Book'. The text is in many places
corrupt, so that it is often difficult or impossible to restore the
argument. In reading the book we feel that the writer is
for the most part chopping logic rather than contributing
seriously to the philosophy of mathematics. 
The interest
of the work to the historian of mathematics is of the slightest.
It does indeed cite the equivalent of certain definitions and
propositions in Euclid, especially Book X (on irrationals), and
in particular it mentions the irrationals called ' binomial' or
* apotome', though, as far as irrationals are concerned, the
writer may have drawn on Theaetetus rather than Euclid.
The mathematical phraseology is in many places similar to
that of Euclid, but the writer shows a tendency to hark back
to older and less fixed terminology such as is usual in
Aristdtle. The tract begins with a section stating the argu-
ments for indivisible lines, which we may take to represent
Xenocrates's own arguments. The next section purports to
refute these arguments one by one, after which other con-
siderations are urged against indivisible lines. It is sought to
show that the hypothesis of indivisible lines is not reconcilable
with the principles assumed, or the conclusions proved, in
mathematics; next, it is argued that, if a line is made up
of indivisible lines (whether an odd or even number of such
lines), or if the indivisible line has any point in it, or points
1 Cf. Zeller, ii. I4, p. 1017. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 279. 5.
3 See Zeller, ii. 2s, p. 90, note.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

348 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
terminating it, the indivisible line must be divisible; and,
lastly, various arguments are put forward to show that a line
can no more be made up of points than of indivisible lines,
with more about the relation of points to lines, &C1
Sphaeric.
AUTOLYCUS of Pitane was the teacher of Arcesilaus (about
315-241/40 B.C.), also of Pitane, the founder of the so-called
Middle Academy. He may be taken to have flourished about
310 B.C. or a little earlier, so that he was an elder con-
temporary of Euclid. We hear of him in connexion with
Eudoxus's theory of concentric spheres, to which he adhered.
The great difficulty in the way of this theory was early seen,
namely the impossibility of reconciling the assumption of the
invariability of the distance of each planet with the observed
differences in the brightness, especially of Mars and Venus,
at different times, and the apparent differences in the relative
sizes of the sun and moon. We are told that no one before
Autolycus had even attempted to deal with this difficulty
' by means of hypotheses', i. e. (presumably) in a theoretical
manner, and even he was not successful, as clearly appeared
from his controversy with Aristotherus 2 (who was the teacher
of Aratus); this implies that Autolycus's argument was in
a written treatise.
Two works by Autolycus have come down to us. They
both deal with the geometry of the sphere in its application
to astronomy. The definite place which they held among
Greek astronomical text-books is attested by the fact that, as
we gather from Pappus, one of them, the treatise On the
moving Sphere, was included in the list of works forming
the ' Little Astronomy \ as it was called afterwards, to distin-
guish it from the 'Great Collection' (fxeydXrj <rvvTa£i$) of
Ptolemy; and we may doubtless assume that the other work
On Risings and Settings was similarly included.
1 A revised text of the work is included in Aristotle, De plantis, edited
by 0. Apelt, who also gave a German translation of it in Beitrdge zur
Geschichte der grieehiscJien Philosophie (1891), pp. 271-86. A translation
by H. H. Joachim has since appeared (1908) in the series of Oxford
Translations of Aristotle's works.
2 Simplicius on De caelo, p. 504. 22-5 Heib.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

AUTOLYCUS OF PITANE 
349
Both works have been well edited by Hultsch with Latin
translation.1 They are of great interest for several reasons.
First, Autolycus is the earliest Greek mathematician from
whom original treatises have come down to us entire, the next
being Euclid, Aristarchus and Archimedes. That he wrote
earlier than Euclid is clear from the fact that Euclid, in his
similar work, the Phaenomena, makes use of propositions
appearing in Autolycus, though, as usual in such cases, giving
no indication of their source. The form of Autolycus's proposi-
tions is exactly the same as that with which we are familiar
in Euclid; we have first the enunciation of the proposition in
general terms, then the particular enunciation with reference
to a figure with letters marking the various points in it, then
the demonstration, and lastly, in some cases but not in all, the
conclusion in terms similar to those of the enunciation. This
shows that Greek geometrical propositions had already taken
the form which we recognize as classical, and that Euclid did
not invent this form or introduce any material changes.
A lost text-book on Sphaeric.
More important still is the fact that Autolycus, as well as
Euclid, makes use of a number of propositions relating to the
sphere, without giving any proof of them or quoting any
authority. This indicates that there was already in existence
in his time a text-book of the elementary geometry of the
sphere, the propositions of which were generally known to
mathematicians. As many of these propositions are proved
in the Sphaerica of Theodosius, a work compiled two or three
centuries later, we may assume that the lost text-book proceeded
on much the same lines as that of Theodosius, with much the
same order of propositions. 
Like Theodosius's Sphaerica
it treated of the stationary sphere, its sections (great and
small circles) and their properties. The geometry of the
sphere at rest is of course prior to the consideration of the
sphere in motion, i. e. the sphere rotating about its axis, which
is the subject of Autolycus's works. Who was the author of
the lost pre-Euclidean text-book it is impossible to say;
1 Autolyci De sphaera quae movettir liber, De ortibus et occasibus libri duo
edidit F. Hultsch (Teubner 1885).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

350 
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
Tannery thought that we could hardly help attributing it to
Eudoxus. The suggestion is natural, seeing that Eudoxus
showed, in his theory of concentric spheres, an extraordinary
mastery of the geometry of the sphere; on the other hand,
as Loria observes, it is, speaking generally, dangerous to
assume that a work of an unknown author appearing in
a certain country at a certain time must have been written
by a particular man of science simply because he is the only
man of the time of whom we can certainly say that he was
capable of writing it.1 The works of Autolycus also serve to
confirm the pre-Euclidean origin of a number of propositions
in the Elements. Hultsch2 examined this question in detail
in a paper of 1886. There are (1) the propositions pre-
supposed in one or other of Autolycus's theorems. We have
also to take account of (2) the propositions which would be
required to establish the propositions in sphaeric assumed by
Autolycus as known. 
The best clue to the propositions under
(2) is the actual course of the proofs of the corresponding
propositions in the Sphaerica of Theodosius; for Theodosius
was only a compiler, and we may with great probability
assume that, where Theodosius uses propositions from Euclid's
Elements, propositions corresponding to them were used to
prove the analogous propositions in the fourth-century
Sphaeric. The propositions which, following this criterion,
we may suppose to have been directly used for this purpose
are, roughly, those represented by Eucl. I. 4, 8, 17, 19, 26, 29,
47; III. 1-3, 7, 10, 16 Cor., 26, 28, 29; IV. 6 ; XI. 3, 4, 10,11,
12, 14, 16, 19, and the interpolated 38. It is, naturally, the
subject-matter of Books I, III, and XI that is drawn upon,
but, of course, the propositions mentioned by no means
exhaust the number of pre-Euclidean propositions even in
those Books. When, however, Hultsch increased the list of
propositions by adding the whole chain of propositions (in-
cluding Postulate 5) leading up to them in Euclid's arrange-
ment, he took an unsafe course, because it is clear that many
of Euclid's proofs were on different lines from those used
by his predecessors.
1 Loria, Le scienze esatte nelV antica Grecia, 1914, p. 496-7.
2 Berichte der Kgl. Sachs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Phil.-hist. Classe, 1886, pp. 128-55.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

AUTOLYCUS AND EUCLID
351
The work On the moving Sphere assumes abstractly a
sphere moving about the axis stretching from pole to pole,
and different series of circular sections, the first series being
great circles passing through the poles, the second small
circles (as well as the equator) which are sections of the
sphere by planes at right angles to the axis and are called
the 'parallel circles', while the third kind are great circles
inclined obliquely to the axis of the sphere; the motion of
points on these circles is then considered in relation to the
section by a fixed plane through the centre of the sphere.
It is easy to recognize in the oblique great circle in the sphere
the ecliptic or zodiac circle, and in the section made by the
fixed plane the horizon, which is described as the circle
in the sphere 'which defines (oplfav) the visible and the
invisible portions of the sphere'. To give an idea of the
content of the work, I will quote a few enunciations from
Autolycus and along with two of them, for the sake of
comparison with Euclid, the corresponding enunciations from
the Phaenomena.
Autolycus.
1. If a sphere revolve uni-
formly about its own axis, all
the points on the surface of the
sphere which are not on the
axis will describe parallel
circles which have the same
poles as the sphere and are
also at right angles to the axis.
7. If the circle in the sphere
defining the visible and the
invisible portions of the sphere
be obliquely inclined to the
axis, the circles which are at
right angles to the axis and cut
the defining circle [horizon]
always make both their risings
and settings at the same points
of the defining circle [horizon]
and further will also be simi-
larly inclined to that circle.
Euclid.
3. The circles which are at
right angles to the axis and
cut the horizon make both
their risings and settings at
the same points of the horizon.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

352
FROM PLATO TO EUCLID
7. That the circle of the
zodiac rises and sets over the
whole extent of the horizon
between the tropics is mani-
fest, forasmuch as it touches
circles greater than
which the horizon touches.
Autolycus. 
Euclid.
9. If in a sphere a great
circle which is obliquely in-
clined to the axis define the
visible and the invisible por-
tions of the sphere, then, of
the points which rise at the
same time, those towards the
visible pole set later and, of
those which set at the same
time, those towards the visible
pole rise earlier.
11. If in a sphere a great
circle which is obliquely in-
clined to the axis define the
visible and the invisible por-
tions of the sphere, and any
other oblique great circle
touch greater (parallel) circles
than those which the defin-
ing circle (horizon) touches,
the said other oblique circle
makes its risings and settings
over the whole extent of the
circumference (arc) of the de-
fining circle included between
the parallel circles which it
touches.
It will be noticed that Autolycus's propositions are more
abstract in so far as the ' other oblique circle' in Autolycus
is any other oblique circle, whereas in Euclid it definitely
becomes the zodiac circle. In Euclid * the great circle defining
the visible and the invisible portions of the sphere' is already
shortened into the technical term ' horizon' (opifav), which is
defined as if for the first time: ' Let the name horizon be
given to the plane through us (as observers) passing through
the universe and separating off the hemisphere which is visible
above the earth.'
The book On Risings and Settings is of astronomical interest
only, and belongs to the region of Phaenomena as understood
by Eudoxus and Aratus, that is, observational astronomy.
It begins with definitions distinguishing between 'true' and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

AUTOLYCUS ON RISINGS AND SETTINGS 
353
' apparent' morning- and evening-risings and settings of fixed
stars. The 'true' morning-rising (setting) is when the star
rises (sets) at the moment of the sun's rising; the 'true'
morning-rising (setting) is, therefore invisible to us, and so is
the 'true' evening-rising (setting) which takes place at the
moment when the sun is setting. The 'apparent' morning-
rising (setting) takes place when the star is first seen rising
(setting) before the sun rises, and the 'apparent' evening-
rising (setting) when the star is last seen rising (setting) after
the sun has set. The following are the enunciations of a few
of the propositions in the treatise.
I. 1. In the case of each of the fixed stars the apparent
morning-risings and settings are later than the true, and
the apparent evening-risings and settings are earlier than
the true.
I. 2. Each of the fixed stars is seen rising each night from
the (time of its) apparent morning-rising to the time of its
apparent evening-rising but at no other period, and the time
during which the star is seen rising is less than half a year.
I. 5. In the case of those of the fixed stars which are on the
zodiac circle, the interval from the time of their apparent
evening-rising to the time of their apparent evening-setting is
half a year, in the case of those north of the zodiac circle
more than half a year, and in the case of those south of the
zodiac circle less than half a year.
II. 1. The twelfth part of the zodiac circle in which the
sun is, is neither seen rising nor setting, but is hidden; and
similarly the twelfth part which is opposite to it is neither
seen setting nor rising but is visible above the earth the whole
of the nights.
II. 4. Of the fixed stars those which are cut off by the
zodiac circle in the northerly or the southerly direction will
reach their evening-setting at an interval of five months from
their morning-rising.
II. 9. Of the stars which are carried on the same (parallel-)
circle those which are cut off by the zodiac circle in the
northerly direction will be hidden a shorter time than those
on the southern side of the zodiac.
A a
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

