Mathematics
From its pre-historic roots in simple counting to the algorithms powering 
modern desktop computers, from the genius of Archimedes to the genius of 
Einstein, advances in mathematical understanding and numerical techniques 
have been directly responsible for creating the modern world as we know 
it. This series will provide a library of the most influential publications and 
writers on mathematics in its broadest sense. As such, it will show not only 
the deep roots from which modern science and technology have grown, but 
also the astonishing breadth of application of mathematical techniques in the 
humanities and social sciences, and in everyday life.
A History of Greek Mathematics
‘If one would understand the Greek genius fully, it would be a good plan to 
begin with their geometry.’ As early as the sixth century BCE, Thales of Miletus 
used geometrical principles to calculate distance and height. Within a few 
hundred years, Euclid had produced his seminal Elements, which was still 
used as a textbook when this two-volume work was first published in 1921. A 
distinguished civil servant as well as an expert on ancient Greek mathematics, 
Sir Thomas Little Heath (1861–1940) includes here sufficient detail for a 
modern mathematician to grasp ancient methodology, alongside explanatory 
sections aimed at classicists. This remains a rigorous and essential exposition 
of a vast topic. Volume 2 focuses on post-Euclidian mathematics, beginning 
with the work of Aristarchus of Samos and extending to that of Diophantus 
of Alexandria. Heath had previously published separate studies on these two 
thinkers (also reissued in this series).
CAMBRIDGE LIBRARY COL L E C T I O N
Books of enduring scholarly value
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Cambridge University Press has long been a pioneer in the reissuing of 
out-of-print titles from its own backlist, producing digital reprints of books 
that are still sought after by scholars and students but could not be reprinted 
economically using traditional technology. The Cambridge Library Collection 
extends this activity to a wider range of books which are still of importance to 
researchers and professionals, either for the source material they contain, or as 
landmarks in the history of their academic discipline.
Drawing from the world-renowned collections in the Cambridge University 
Library and other partner libraries, and guided by the advice of experts 
in each subject area, Cambridge University Press is using state-of-the-art 
scanning machines in its own Printing House to capture the content of each 
book selected for inclusion. The files are processed to give a consistently clear, 
crisp image, and the books finished to the high quality standard for which the 
Press is recognised around the world. The latest print-on-demand technology 
ensures that the books will remain available indefinitely, and that orders for 
single or multiple copies can quickly be supplied.
The Cambridge Library Collection brings back to life books of enduring 
scholarly value (including out-of-copyright works originally issued by other 
publishers) across a wide range of disciplines in the humanities and social 
sciences and in science and technology. 
Published online by Cambridge University Press

A History of 
Greek Mathematics
Volume 2
T.L. Heath
Published online by Cambridge University Press

University Printing House, Cambridge, cb2 8bs, United Kingdom
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge. 
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108063074
© in this compilation Cambridge University Press 2014
This edition first published 1921
This digitally printed version 2014
isbn  978-1-108-06307-4  Paperback
This book reproduces the text of the original edition. The content and language reflect 
the beliefs, practices and terminology of their time, and have not been updated.
Cambridge University Press wishes to make clear that the book, unless originally published 
by Cambridge, is not being republished by, in association or collaboration with, or 
with the endorsement or approval of, the original publisher or its successors in title. 
Published online by Cambridge University Press

A HISTORY
OF
GREEK MATHEMATICS
VOLUME II
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Published online by Cambridge University Press

A HISTORY
OF
GREEK MATHEMATICS
BY
SIR THOMAS HEATH
K.C.B., K.C.V.O., F.R.S.
SC.D. CAM I*. ; HON. D.SC. OXFORD
HONORARY FELLOW (FORMERLY FELLOW) OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
. . . An independent world,
Created out of pure intelligence.'
WORDSWORTH.
VOLUME II
FROM ARISTARCHUS TO DIOPHANTUS
O X F O R D
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1921
Published online by Cambridge University Press

OXFORD UNIVERSITY 
PRESS
London 
Edinburgh 
Glasgow 
Copenhagen
New York Toronto Melbourne 
Cape Town
Bombay 
Calcutta Madras 
Shanghai
HUMPHREY M1LFORD
Publisher to the University
Published online by Cambridge University Press

