Classics
From the Renaissance to the nineteenth century, Latin and Greek were 
compulsory subjects in almost all European universities, and most early 
modern scholars published their research and conducted international 
correspondence in Latin. Latin had continued in use in Western Europe long 
after the fall of the Roman empire as the lingua franca of the educated classes 
and of law, diplomacy, religion and university teaching. The flight of Greek 
scholars to the West after the fall of Constantinople in 1453 gave impetus 
to the study of ancient Greek literature and the Greek New Testament. 
Eventually, just as nineteenth-century reforms of university curricula were 
beginning to erode this ascendancy, developments in textual criticism and 
linguistic analysis, and new ways of studying ancient societies, especially 
archaeology, led to renewed enthusiasm for the Classics. This collection 
offers works of criticism, interpretation and synthesis by the outstanding 
scholars of the nineteenth century.
A Short History of Greek Mathematics
James Gow’s Short History of Greek Mathematics (1884) provided the first 
full account of the subject available in English, and it today remains a clear 
and thorough guide to early arithmetic and geometry. Beginning with the 
origins of the numerical system and proceeding through the theorems of 
Pythagoras, Euclid, Archimedes and many others, the Short History offers 
in-depth analysis and useful translations of individual texts as well as a 
broad historical overview of the development of mathematics. Parts I and II 
concern Greek arithmetic, including the origin of alphabetic numerals and 
the nomenclature for operations; Part III constitutes a complete history of 
Greek geometry, from its earliest precursors in Egypt and Babylon through 
to the innovations of the Ionic, Sophistic, and Academic schools and their 
followers. Particular attention is given to Pythagorus, Euclid, Archimedes, 
and Ptolemy, but a host of lesser-known thinkers receive deserved attention 
as well.
Cambridge Library Co l le c ti o n
Books of enduring scholarly value
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Cambridge University Press has long been a pioneer in the reissuing of 
out-of-print titles from its own backlist, producing digital reprints of 
books that are still sought after by scholars and students but could not be 
reprinted economically using traditional technology. The Cambridge Library 
Collection extends this activity to a wider range of books which are still of 
importance to researchers and professionals, either for the source material 
they contain, or as landmarks in the history of their academic discipline.
Drawing from the world-renowned collections in the Cambridge 
University Library, and guided by the advice of experts in each subject area, 
Cambridge University Press is using state-of-the-art scanning machines 
in its own Printing House to capture the content of each book selected for 
inclusion. The files are processed to give a consistently clear, crisp image, 
and the books finished to the high quality standard for which the Press 
is recognised around the world. The latest print-on-demand technology 
ensures that the books will remain available indefinitely, and that orders for 
single or multiple copies can quickly be supplied.
The Cambridge Library Collection will bring back to life books of enduring 
scholarly value (including out-of-copyright works originally issued by other 
publishers) across a wide range of disciplines in the humanities and social 
sciences and in science and technology. 
Published online by Cambridge University Press

A Short History of 
Greek Mathematics
James Gow
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Cambridge University Press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore,                                     
São Paolo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108009034
© in this compilation Cambridge University Press 2010
This edition first published 1884
This digitally printed version 2010
ISBN 978-1-108-00903-4 Paperback
This book reproduces the text of the original edition. The content and language reflect 
the beliefs, practices and terminology of their time, and have not been updated.
Cambridge University Press wishes to make clear that the book, unless originally published 
by Cambridge, is not being republished by, in association or collaboration with, or 
with the endorsement or approval of, the original publisher or its successors in title. 
Published online by Cambridge University Press

A SHORT HISTORY
OF
GKEEK MATHEMATICS.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

C. J. CLAY AND SON,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE.
: DEIGHTON, BELL, AND CO.
ILcipjtg: F. A. BEOCKHATJS.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

A SHOET HISTOEY
OF
GREEK MATHEMATICS
BY
JAMES GOW, M.A.
FELLOW OP TBJNITY COLLEGE, 
CAMBRIDGE,
Tlap' EiKXeidjj' ns &pi-d/j.evos yew/ieTpelv, us rb TpQrov $eiipr;/xa tfia6ev,
rjpeTo rbv EfeXe/Sijc • rl Si /tot irKtov larai ravra 
ixavBAvovn; 
nal b
EUKXC£5?/S rbv ira?Sa tcaX^aas' 
56s, ^fjt 
atfrtp Tpi&fiokov, iireiSri 5e?
air!}, e£ uv fj.avda.pei, ttepSalvuv,
SXOBABUS, Flor. iv. p. 205.
EDITED FOR THE SYNDICS OF THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
CAMBRIDGE:
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
1884
Published online by Cambridge University Press

PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SON,
AT THE UNIVEBSITY PRESS.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

