EVOLUTIONARY TRADE-OFFS: EMERGENT CONSTRAINTS 
AND THEIR ADAPTIVE CONSEQUENCES 
 
 
by 
 
 
Bret S. Weinstein 
 
 
 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
(Biology) 
in The University of Michigan 
2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Doctoral Committee: 
 
 
Professor Emeritus Richard D. Alexander, Co-Chair 
 
Associate Professor Robyn J. Burnham, Co-Chair 
 
 
 
Professor Emeritus Gerald R. Smith 
 
Associate Professor Beverly I. Strassmann 
 
Assistant Professor Elizabeth A. Tibbetts 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©   Bret S. Weinstein 
________________________ 
 
2009

 ii 
DEDICATION 
 
 
When I was a little boy my grandparents, Harry and Sophie Rubin, took me on a hike in 
Griffith Park, in the hills above Los Angeles. As we sat eating our lunch of dry salami, 
crackers and gouda cheese my grandfather handed me a magnifying glass and pointed me 
to the center of a flower. As I looked at all the levels of intricate structure, the two of 
them told me about Darwin, and how all the complexity that I saw was a consequence of 
a simple thing called selection. When I looked up I was not the same. This dissertation is 
a status report on a project my grandparents set in motion. They dedicated themselves to 
my brother and me. And I dedicate the project, and this thesis, to them. 
   
 
Sophie Rubin  
 
 Harry Rubin 
 
1914-1978 
 
 
1913-2008 
 
 
 
 

 iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This thesis is the outgrowth of many people’s efforts and influences. My maternal 
grandparents, Harry and Sophie Rubin, had a great deal to do with cultivating the traits 
on which I have leaned most heavily. My brother, Eric, has been a strongly positive force 
in my life since childhood. His intellectual influence is evident throughout the work 
presented here, and much that is correct within it was built and refined with his 
invaluable insight and guidance.  
Larry Clark at the Monell Center in Philadelphia was the first teacher I had that 
understood the Darwinian landscape at a deep level. His willingness to take a young 
undergraduate seriously in his graduate Chemical Ecology seminar had lasting effects.  
Landing in Bob Trivers’ Social Evolution class at UCSC was an extraordinary bit 
of good fortune. Listening to hours of Bob’s insights, delivered at the chalkboard was a 
special pleasure, and has strongly affected my approach to selection, as well as to 
teaching. Bob also took me to Jamaica as his field assistant. That experience opened my 
eyes to dozens of important things about the evolutionary nature of humans, islands and 
the subtle dynamics at the frontier of evolutionary knowledge.  
Dick Alexander’s influence as my graduate mentor is not easily summarized. As 
recognized as he is for his achievements as a biologist, I believe that Dick has yet to get 
his full due. It has been rare in my experience to come up with a really good idea that 
Dick has not gotten to first in one way or another—an unusual situation given the huge 
number of topics subsumed under our mutual interest, ‘selection’. He has been 
everywhere, on the map and off, and his powers of observation and analytical capacity 
have made for invaluable surveys of that landscape. At the same time, he is singularly 
non-territorial about the puzzles he has encountered, and the work he has put into them—
Dick likes to hash out ideas with other people who are interested in the same questions.

 iv
That is the single most valuable trait an advisee could find in an advisor, to be sure. 
Dick’s insights are all the more important because he has understood, better than anyone 
else I know of, the unique way selection has shaped humans in the last 6 million years.  
Dick’s open-door and open-mind created a special zone of intellectual integrity 
and rigor around his office in the museum. It collected refugees from all over the Biology 
department, and was a great place to refine ideas and test out new heretical formulations. 
Among the many people in that sphere that helped shape my thinking about selection, a 
number stand out. Andrew Richards, David Marshall, John Cooley, Laura Howard, 
Deborah Ciszek and David Lahti have each been influential. David Lahti and Deborah 
Ciszek have also been excellent collaborators. Chapter 2 of this dissertation was co-
authored with Deborah Ciszek, and Chapter 4 with David Lahti, and the only reason their 
names are not on those chapters is that putting their names there violates an apparently 
inviolable University policy.  
Jerry Smith has played two crucial roles in my academic/intellectual life. First, he 
saved me from my detractors on several occasions. Second, he has encouraged me to 
think on much longer timescales than are typical in biology, even amongst evolutionists. 
That instinct—to look at selection on very long timescales—is, I believe, the key to many 
of the patterns that remain stubbornly paradoxical and enigmatic, and Jerry is the primary 
source. 
Arnold Kluge also played two important roles. First, he taught me the correct way 
to draw phylogenetic inferences, which is, in many ways, the most important tool in the 
adaptationist’s toolkit. The second thing he did was bring the philosophy of rigorous 
scientific thinking up to the explicit layer. All of the people I mention here are rigorous 
thinkers, but Arnold introduced me, and many others, to the inner workings of that 
machine.  
Heather Heying, to whom I am now married, has helped shape every facet of my 
work since we joined forces in 1989. We have talked in detail about every Darwinian 
concept in this thesis, and well beyond. Having her excellent evolutionary mind to 
generate, shape and refine ideas with has been immensely useful. Without our many 
thousands of hours of discussion about selection, I can’t say where any of this work 
would be. I can, however, say with confidence that the thesis never would have been 

 v 
completed, and I would not have gotten a professorship, absent her many talents and 
extraordinary patience.  
Elisabeth Kalko and the late Charles Handley both invested heavily in me and my 
work. The thesis contains none of the empirical product of that effort, but much of what 
is here was produced on BCI and was more than just catalyzed by the Smithsonian bat 
project which they created, and to which they welcomed me. 
Peter Howard has been extremely helpful in the final construction of this thesis. 
Others that have played an important and positive role include Jennifer Ast, Antonia 
Gorog, Gary Paoli, Pia Malaney, Nat Kurnick, Jae Choe, Arnold Marglin, Beverly 
Rathcke, George Estabrook, John Vandermeer, Jerry Urquhart, Chris Picone, Tom 
DiBenedetto, Dyan Haspel, Allen Herre, Randy Nesse, Cecile Bockholdt, Mike Hemann, 
Alec Lindsay, Paul Fine, Lissy Coley, Tom Kursar, Egbert Leigh, Steve Hubbell, Scott 
Peacor, Bill Rice, Austin Burt, Paula Schofield, Jack Longino, Nalini Nadkarni and many 
insightful undergraduates at The Evergreen State College.   
Finally, I wish to thank my committee, Robyn Burnham, Richard Alexander, 
Gerald Smith, Beverly Strassmann and Elizabeth Tibbetts for putting up with much that 
was non-standard. Their coordinated efforts and insight made this thesis considerably 
better than it otherwise have been.

 vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DEDICATION................................................................................................................ii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS............................................................................................iii 
LIST OF FIGURES.......................................................................................................vii 
ABSTRACT.................................................................................................................viii 
CHAPTER 
1. 
EVOLUTIONARY TRADE-OFFS AS A CENTRAL ORGANIZING 
PRINCIPLE IN BIOLOGY ...........................................................................1 
2. 
LIFE’S SLOW FUSE: TELOMERES, TUMOURS AND THE 
EVOLUTION OF VERTEBRATE SENESCENCE.....................................13 
3. 
PLATEAUS, RIDGES AND DUNES: DIVERSITY GRADIENTS 
AND ADAPTIVE TOPOGRAPHY.............................................................45 
4. 
THE BETTER ANGELS OF OUR NATURE: GROUP STABILITY 
AND THE EVOLUTION OF MORAL TENSION......................................65 
 

 vii
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
Figure 
1 
Three evolutionary phases: Innovation, optimizing selection, and 
diversifying selection.........................................................................................49 
2 
Imperfect trade-offs:  Extreme and trivial...........................................................50 
3 
Zone of equivalence...........................................................................................51 
4 
Robustness vs. efficiency in glacial and inter-glacial periods..............................55 
 

 
viii
ABSTRACT 
 
Trade-offs are widely recognized in biology, but the rules that govern them are 
not yet well understood. Increased predictive power can be gained by treating trade-offs 
as emergent phenomena governed by laws that are also emergent. The law-like nature of 
trade-offs becomes evident when we subdivide examples by type.  
Trade-offs can be A) probabilistic (e.g. the darkest individual in a population will 
rarely be the biggest), B) based on the mutually exclusive allocation of resources (e.g. 
roots vs. shoots), or C) based on extrinsic design limitations (e.g. high efficiency vs. 
extreme robustness). Only design trade-offs are law-like, although the other two types 
may be transformed into design limitations given strong selective pressures. 
Between every two fitness-enhancing characteristics of an organism or 
mechanism, a design trade-off must logically exist, preventing simultaneous 
optimization. Selection’s tendency toward optimization reveals that fraction of design 
trade-offs we come to empirically recognize. A particular trade-off can be evident both 
within and between species. Trade-offs may be obscured by insufficient selective time, 
noisy or fluctuating selective environments, and weak selection pressures.  
A natural parallel exists between trade-offs in space, and in time. The interrelation 
between these phenomena on the one hand, and niche-partitioning, competitive 
exclusion, character displacement and phenotypic plasticity on the other is also 
considered.  
Chapter One describes the proposed theoretical landscape. Chapter Two describes 
a senescence-causing trade-off between cancer prevention and tissue-repair capacity in 
vertebrates. Chapter Three relates the latitudinal diversity gradient to a gradient of design 
constraints that is a consequence of environmental fluctuation positively correlated with 
latitude on all relevant time scales. A natural reconciliation between niche assembly and  
community drift is proposed, and the effects of mate choice on diversity patterns is

 ix
considered. Chapter Four argues that facultative human moral self-restraint is an 
evolutionary response to an inescapable trade-off between the component of fitness that 
results from success in competition within one’s lineage, and the component that derives 
from the success of one’s group in competition with other lineages.  

 
1 
Chapter 1 
 
EVOLUTIONARY TRADE-OFFS AS A CENTRAL ORGANIZING 
PRINCIPLE IN BIOLOGY 
 
 
Trade-offs are negative relationships between desirable characteristics, and are 
widely recognized across biology, but there is much about them that remains unclear. The 
potential importance of trade-offs as an organizing principle has been discussed, and 
previous attempts have been made to sketch the landscape (e.g. Stearns, 1992, pp. 72-90), 
but much of the explanatory power of trade-offs remains unmapped and untapped. What 
follows is an attempt to increase the utility of the trade-off concept by subdividing the 
concept into natural types.  
One of the reasons that trade-offs are incompletely known within biology is that 
even the simplest biological organisms are unimaginably complex. Because we are 
always working with a crude and incomplete understanding of the adaptations that 
comprise a given organism, the natural tendency of evolution to modulate and balance 
competing concerns may be obscured.  
Additionally, as Stearns (1992) observes, trade-offs may be hidden by the way in 
which we study. One might easily get the wrong idea, for example, about the well known 
trade-off between a plant’s allocation of resources to above-ground and below-ground 
structures. Clearly an individual plant must allocate each unit of resource in one direction 
or the other, so there must logically be a trade-off. But you would not get that impression 
if you measured the masses of roots and shoots of individuals sampled as you moved 
from high altitude to low, because plants of a given species will tend to be larger in all 
regards at lower altitudes, so root mass and shoot mass will be positively, rather than 
negatively, correlated. In order to see the trade-off, we must control for variables that 
either encourage or tax the plant as a whole. 

 
2 
One solution to the problem of trade-offs obscured by complexity (including 
those masked by other variables) is to step out of the traditional boundaries of biology 
and into parallel realms in which trade-offs are better understood. Engineers, for 
example, work with trade-offs on a daily basis. And it is quite common to hear agreement 
among them regarding principles, even laws, that have equal reason to be expected in 
biology.  
It is commonly asserted in engineering, for example—from computer science to 
aviation—that two properties of a machine, program or mechanism can not be 
simultaneously optimized. There is, however no such consensus in biology, and that is 
striking because the corollary of that idea, Macarthur’s (1961) Jack-of-all-trades 
principle, is known and accepted, strongly implying the applicability of the stronger 
version from engineering within biology.  
It is possible that there is some threshold of complexity above which these 
engineering principles cease being applicable, but that constitutes special pleading unless 
evidence of such thresholds emerges between the level of the most complex machines, 
and the simplest organisms. Until then, we are justified in cautiously peering into fields 
where the complexity is simple relative to the noisy biotic systems we primarily wish to 
untangle (Csete and Doyle, 2002). 
The other advantage of learning from engineered machines about the constraints 
that shape the adaptive landscape (what engineers sometimes call ‘design space’) is that, 
unlike biological organisms, one can have a very complete understanding of exactly what 
each feature of a machine is intended to accomplish. That just isn’t the case in biology—
the dewlap of an Anolis lizard is a signal, but of what? That is unclear. And without 
complete knowledge of the advantage provided by a trait, it is difficult to do a 
cost/benefit analysis, which is at the core of understanding how any product of adaptation 
trades-off against any other. 
Trade-offs can usefully be divided into three types, probabilistic trade-offs, 
allocation trade-offs, and those trade-offs arising from inherent design-constraints. And 
dividing trade-offs in this way allows us to see that each has unique properties that must 
influence how they interact with adaptive evolutionary forces. 

 
3 
Probabilistic trade-offs are the weakest of the three, and many such trade-offs will 
be dismantled if sufficient selective advantage arises from doing so. Suppose, for 
example that a female frog prefers males that are unusually large, and at the same time, 
males that are unusually blue. And suppose further that size and color are largely 
independent polygenic traits. From that female’s perspective, preference for large size 
and blue color are likely to trade-off against each other. There will, for obvious reasons, 
be few individuals in the remote right tail of the distribution for size, and there will be 
few individuals in extreme blue tail of the color distribution. As a consequence, she is 
likely to have a very difficult time finding individuals in both tails and, as with any trade-
off, she will have to prioritize the two considerations. That being said, if size and color 
are not at odds for some functional reason, then selection by females could produce, over 
time, large, intensely blue, males, thus eliminating the initial trade-off. If on the other 
hand, there is a significant fictional relationship between size and color such that being 
extreme in one regard has costs with respect to the other, then the probabilistic trade-off 
will be converted into either an allocation trade-off, or a design constraint trade-off 
depending on the functional nature of the relationship. 
And the same can be seen in the world of machines. The likelihood that the 
camera with the best light-metering will be the camera with the sharpest lens will initially 
be low, unless there is demand for a camera with both an unusually sharp lens and an 
unusually powerful light-meter, in which case, there being no obstacle to the production 
of such a camera, one might well be built.  
The second kind of trade-off, the type arising from the allocation of a limited 
resource, is illustrated by the root/shoot example above. This is the type on which 
Stearns’ (1992) review of the topic is primarily concerned. Allocation trade-offs arise in 
any instance where a resource must be divided amongst competing concerns. The 
existence of such trade-offs does not therefore depend on the past action of selection—an 
allocation trade-off says nothing at all about the value of any particular division. A family 
could spend twenty percent of its budget on food, ten percent on housing, investing the 
remainder in lottery tickets and that would qualify as a three way trade-off, even though 
the budget makes no financial sense. Likewise, an individual songbird could spend all its 
time searching for mates out of season, thus failing to forage sufficiently to maintain 

 
4 
homeostasis and the trade-off would be just as real. Of course, in general, the division of 
resources exhibited by organisms will quickly honed by selection to reflect an adaptive 
division of the resource. The reproductively optimizing force of selection will tend to 
convert such trade-offs into something that behaves like a design-constraint trade-off 
(described below), with one important difference: allocation trade-offs can be eliminated, 
at least in the short term, with supplemental resources. This is why the root/shoot trade-
off is obscured by changes in altitude—lower altitudes act like a supplement of resources 
above that available at high altitudes.  One can see the same effect using fertilizers, 
supplemental light, water, etc. And the analogy holds into the realm of machines. 
Consider the plight of a photographer trying to capture a picture of a moving 
object while maintaining a large depth of field, such that things at various distances from 
the camera are in sharp focus. The amount of light needed to get the right exposure is a 
simple sum affected by two parameters, the time the shutter is open, and the size of the 
aperture in the lens. For a given level of incident light, a particular exposure is required. 
If the variables were continuous rather than discrete, then there would be an infinite set of 
combinations of lens openings and shutter-speeds that would yield the right exposure. 
But the particular combinations would yield different costs and benefits. Those 
combinations with large apertures and fast shutter-speeds would freeze motion, at the 
cost of a narrow depth of field (only a narrow band of objects at a given distance away 
would be in focus). While, slow shutter speeds with small aperture openings will give a 
large depth of field, at the cost of moving objects being blurred. But the trade-off 
between depth of field and the freezing of motion evaporates if we supply large quantities 
of extra photons (as with a flash), allowing us to produce the same exposure with the lens 
opening small and the shutter set to a brief period.  
The final trade-off type is the design-constraint trade-off. These trade-offs occur 
simply because the same form cannot be optimized for two different tasks 
simultaneously.  Unlike the other two types, trade-offs that derive from design constraints 
are emergent phenomena, unobservable until revealed by selection of sufficient strength 
and duration to bump species up against them. The most important aspect of design 
constraint trade-offs is that they are insensitive to resource supplementation, and thus 
produce hard limits on what selection can and can not do. There are two important sub-

 
5 
categories within design-constraint trade-offs: the degree of hardness is not universal. 
Some design-constraint trade-offs are local optima that can be exceeded once an 
‘innovation’ arises that allows circumvention. Others are global limits that can not be 
exceeded for non-biotic reasons. 
Design-constraints are likely to be the richest form of trade-off in terms of 
untapped explanatory power, because they exist inherently at the frontier where the biota 
meets its limitation. They are, in a sense, the primary geological force acting on the 
adaptive landscape—Dawkins’ metaphor of Mount Improbable may explain how simple 
processes can produce instances of mind boggling complexity, but design-constraints are 
the reason Mount Improbable takes the shape it does, why creatures don’t rise forever 
toward functional perfection.  
But design-constraint trade-offs are also the most easily misunderstood because, 
unlike allocation trade-offs that exist irrespective of selection, and unlike probabilistic 
trade-offs that are destroyed by selection, design constraints are invisible until the 
particular quadrant of the adaptive landscape in which they exist is explored by selection. 
And an invisible trade-off may be mistaken for non-existent in the absence of a good 
theoretical basis for imagining what must be there. If we mistake the revelation of a 
trade-off for its invention, then we miss their most powerful feature: we do not have to 
ask if there is a trade-off between capacity A and capacity B of an organism, nor should 
we be surprised when we find that there is. We are in an important sense justified in 
expecting these limits to exist between every two functional adaptations. And though 
many of these of these hidden relationships may be insignificant in their effect, a large 
number are, in one way or another, central to the way species divide time and space. 
Examples are the key to understanding design-constraint trade-offs, and there are 
many to choose from. Let’s start with the evolution of flight in bats from a gliding 
ancestor. True powered fight is superior to gliding in many important regards. A flyer is 
both more agile and more efficient than a glider, but between agility and efficiency, there 
is a well established trade-off: agile bats (e.g. flower visiting Glossophagine bats, which 
could properly be called ‘humming bats’) have short paddle like wings, while open space 
bats that travel long distances, have long narrow wings (e.g. Molossid bats that roost in 
very large colonies and must therefore fly farther to escape the intense local competition 

 
6 
for food). And no matter how well fed an animal is, there is no apparent way to evade this 
trade-off, wings are either optimized in the direction of efficiency or in the direction of 
agility, or they are a compromise between the two. 
Significantly, birds show the same pattern, hummingbirds and frigate birds 
representing their respective ends of the same trade-off. And the fact that organisms 
discover extrinsic limits that are the same has deep implications within evolutionary 
ecology. The fact of a high degree of lottery competition (Hubbell, 1997) existing in 
habitats that also apparently favor a high degree of specialization (Fine et al, 2006) is 
easily reconciled given the existence of extrinsic limits that constrain all taxa that reach 
them.   
But the diversity we find along a given design-constraint trade-off (different 
organisms having evolved to accept different points on the spectrum of possibilities), 
coupled with the paleontological evidence of the evolutionary trajectory taken by the 
lineage on the way to the trade-off, suggests another important pattern. Birds and bats are 
both thought to have evolved from gliding ancestors. And it stands to reason that the 
emergence of powered flight, a complex trait, would initially have been crude—both 
inefficient and clumsy. And as selection refined the trait, the intermediates would have 
been increasingly agile and efficient, on average, each generation slightly more so than 
the last. Creatures from this phase of evolution would appear not to be choosing between 
mutually exclusive advantages, but rather improving generally.  
And we have seen this same pattern in machines. The Wright Flyer (the first 
successful powered airplane) was both incredibly clumsy and inefficient, and also the 
first to take to the air because it was less so than any competing design. That initial 
innovation over successful gliding designs engendered almost unimaginably rapid 
refinement. At first there were not many types of planes, all planes carried one or two 
passengers exposed to the air, and little else. But, these designs allowed furious 
refinement, improving all the characteristics simultaneously. Ultimately, of course, trade-
offs did emerge and designs diversified, carrying a large load necessitating a substantially 
different design than avoiding enemy fire, to take one example. 
Another important pattern can be gleaned from the history of aviation. There have 
been numerous innovations that allow designs to evade some previously limiting barrier. 

 
7 
The ailerons supplanted the Wright brother’s wing-warping technology, increasing the 
maneuverability of planes. Tricycle landing gear replaced tail-dragging designs, 
improving control and safety. And similar claims can be made for jets over propellers, 
swept wings over perpendicular ones--the full list being extremely long. 
There is also something interesting in the fact of certain designs persisting within 
‘niches’ despite the existence of designs that are, in one sense or another, superior. Many 
propeller-driven planes persist and ‘outperform’ jets for tight maneuvering and low 
overall cost. And other types of niches also exist amongst machines. Helicopters are 
useful where no runway is available for takeoff and landing, but this comes at a cost in 
terms of the upper limits of the design. The upper limits for helicopter speed are quite 
low compared to the limits on planes because, as the speed of the aircraft approaches the 
speed of the tips of the rotor through the air, the retreating blade (the one moving in the 
opposite direction) is effectively standing still relative to the air, thus generating no lift, 
causing the aircraft to flop over. So, we can recognize a second trade-off in this machine 
example, between the fast flight and the ability to land in a confined space, and this one is 
the basis for a type of niche partitioning, much like the inversions of competitive 
dominance we see between congeners in some habitat pairs (Fine, 2006). 
Given the above arguments, design-constraint trade-offs become the most 
profitable focus for a biologist. What pattern should we expect of design trade-offs in 
complex entities? We have already touched on the fact that engineers expect the 
optimization of any particular parameter to have negative impacts on the upper limits 
possible for every other parameter, suggesting a universality to trade-offs—between 
every two desirable characteristics, there exists a trade-off that can not be exceeded. This 
claim strikes many biologists as a bridge too far, there being no intuitive currency to the 
idea that coat color should negatively impact speed, for example. But the reality is that 
there are feedbacks that force such a theoretical relationship to exist, even if it is not 
manifest in living examples. Coat color is, after all, related to the tendency of a creature 
to lose or retain heat. It also has a metabolic cost, and the apparatus that assembles 
pigments no doubt involves mass that must be carried. But the fact of pair wise trade-offs 
being ubiquitous is hidden by two facts within biology. First, organisms are never 
optimized for a single task, but instead must succeed in at least several ways to pass on 

 
8 
their genes at all. Second, some trade-offs involve inherent negative relationships, but 
with a bargain at one end such that evolution clumps all creatures at the same end. 
Consider the claim that there is a trade-off between the safety and the efficiency 
of a car. It is true that you can remove the seatbelts and airbags from a car, and improve 
kilometridge by so doing. But the gains are so small and the cost in terms of safety are so 
large that no reasonable person would do it. On other hand, reasonable compromises can 
be made between these same two parameters. All else being equal, smaller cars are more 
efficient and less safe because A) in a collision the smaller the object, the more violently 
it is accelerated in a new direction, and B) because it necessarily has less deforming 
material with which to dissipate the force of impact. The fact of a significant trade-off 
and a trivial trade-off surrounding the same two parameters, safety and efficiency, is 
instructive. It implies that trade-offs are not always straight lines as we typically 
conceptualize them. Instead, they are more likely to abide by the law of diminishing 
returns, whereby increasingly extreme measures produce accelerating costs as one moves 
farther to either end of a given trade-off—much as you can make an efficient car that is 
very unsafe, you can make an unbelievably safe car that is too expensive to drive. We, of 
course, do neither and diversity is only seen in that middle ground where reasonable 
people can disagree, or where different tasks demand different priorities.  
And that may be the most important thing to know about trade-offs. The reason 
we see so many implied by biotic diversity is likely related to the fact that a diminishing 
returns curve stretched between two desirable characteristics has a central section over 
which the tangent is close to 45 degrees (see chapter 3). We are likely to see diversity in 
and around that section, but not at the ends such that we don’t even intuit the existence of 
the ends—the ends are purely theoretical, selection driving species toward the center 
where reasonable species can differ over particular strategies, divvying up space and 
dime in ways that demand explanation. 
What follows are three chapters that tackle four significant questions with the 
same broad concept of trade-offs. Each involves a problem within evolutionary ecology 
(broadly defined) that has, at least in some regard, persisted for a long period without a 
consensus emerging about its evolutionary solution.   

 
9 
Chapter two involves a hypothesis that cancer, rather than being one of many 
effects of senescence, is actually the opposite of senescence. Building on George 
Williams’ theory of antagonistic pleiotropy, the chapter proposes that the risk of cancer in 
early life is far greater than recognized, and that complex and highly effective 
mechanisms have evolved that constitute a tumor failsafe, reining in runaway cell lines so 
that they rarely interfere with our ability to reproduce. The specific mechanism proposed 
involves the shortening of telomeres with each cell division in most somatic tissues of 
vertebrates. Selection adjusts the upper limit on cellular reproduction, the Hayflick limit, 
on a tissue by tissue basis such that each tissue exhibits an independent balance along the 
design-constraint trade-off between tissue repair, and tumor resistance. When this 
hypothesis was first published, it was a radical idea. In the years since Weinstein and 
Ciszek (2002), many aspects have been tested and the idea now enjoys wide acceptance, 
though there is still disagreement about whether this is the central mechanism underlying 
vertebrate senescence, or one of several.  
Chapter three seeks to explain the latitudinal diversity gradient using the logic of 
design-constraint trade-offs. It is based in two central ideas, the first being that wide 
climatic fluctuations on all relevant timescales in the temperate zones creates an temporal 
hazard which resist adaptive solutions. As species evolve toward competitive efficiency 
during mild periods (e.g. interglacial) they shed the robustness factors that got them 
through the last harsh bottleneck (e.g. glacial period) because those factors have a cost in 
competition and no present benefit. That renders such species vulnerable to extinction 
when the harsh conditions return. Creatures that resist this tendency become vulnerable to 
competitive exclusion during mild periods, and the oscillation between mild and harsh 
conditions sets up waves of extinction, there being no level of compromise between 
robustness and efficiency that resists both hazards indefinitely. The second set of 
arguments in this chapter surround the ‘jack of all trades’ principle and its consequences 
in relatively stable environments where competition exerts constant selective force in 
favor of specialization. It is argued that such selection is likely to break up widely 
distributed generalist species in tropical habitats into narrowly distributed specialist 
fragments through parapatric speciation (see Fine, 2006), likely facilitated by reinforcing 

 
10
selection exerted by females choosing males that exhibit evidence for adaptation to the 
local environment. 
Chapter 3 further addresses questions related to sexual selection. Females are 
thought by most models of sexual selection to favor males on the basis of honest 
indicators of good genes from which their offspring would benefit. But, if females 
disfavor males that carry ‘bad’ genes, generation after generation, then bad genes should 
become uncommon, rendering most of the efforts made by females in this direction a 
needless expense. That expense should favor females that are indifferent to indicators of 
quality because they get the benefits of past female choosiness without present cost. That 
should trigger a wave of female indifference, which should set the stage for bad genes to 
creep back in, drifting to increasing prevalence, at which point, female choosiness should 
become increasingly valuable and, therefore, common. Yet we don’t see evidence of 
waves of female indifference in species with choosy females. And there is a second 
problem with such models. If good genes are indicated by costly displays in males, then 
whatever advantage they provide to a female’s offspring must be diminished by the cost 
she inflicts on her sons by favoring costly male display. Unless the benefit to daughters 
outweighs the cost to sons, the displays and the preference for them should both be 
disfavored. In this chapter I propose two, compatible hypotheses to account for female 
vigilance in mate choice. The first involves the recognition that, especially in stable 
habitats (e.g. relatively aseasonal tropical habitats), ‘good genes’ are likely to be defined 
relative to local conditions that favor optimization in one direction in location A and, 
because of the trade-off principle, an divergent direction in location B (e.g. Fine, 2006; 
and see Hereford, 2009 for review of evidence of local-adaptation) Females in these 
locations are likely view a given male in opposite terms. If his genes are superior at A, 
they are likely to be inferior at B and visa versa. By imagining a local rather than global 
meaning to ‘good genes’ female vigilance becomes the expectation. Males from other 
locations are likely to be locally inferior, no matter how robust the may appear. And the 
fact that such males are always being created in adjacent habitats forces females to 
discriminate in every mating period.  
In widely fluctuating habitats, a different explanation is proposed. The tendency 
of temperate lineages to evolve towards decreased tolerances during mild periods creates 

 
11
the hazard discussed in chapter 3. But females are in a position to resist that tendency, 
thus retaining robustness factors in their lineage if, as a period of harshness recedes, they 
exhibit a preference for males with excess capacity demonstrated through costly display. 
In this way, females can function as a ‘tensioner’, compensating for the relaxation of 
selection that accompanies mild periods. A key prediction of this evolutionary tensioner 
idea is that such displays should be recoverable such that males can skimp when times 
are harsh (redirecting effort and materials toward survival), and display full strength 
when times are good. 
The final chapter describes a trade-off proposed to underlie moral self-sacrifice in 
humans. It derives from the fact that ancestral humans had little ability to leave their 
group and thus virtually all human fitness depended in the long run on the well being of 
that lineage. That linkage implies that human fitness is a vector comprised of two 
components, the two existing in a trade-off relationship. One component of a human’s 
fitness derives from the person’s level of competitive success within that individual’s 
group. The other derives from the success of one’s lineage against other lineages. 
Jockeying for position within the lineage necessarily comes at a cost to the lineage. Thus 
David Lahti and I (Lahti and Weinstein, 2005) propose a model in which humans monitor 
threats to their lineage and exhibit a facultative tendency toward infighting when the 
lineage is well positioned, and an inverse tendency to pull together and act familially 
when the lineage is weak or jeopardized. Lineages are kin groups projected in time. 
‘Lineage selection’ is a projection of kin selection deeply into the temporal dimension 
and, as chapter 4 demonstrates, has the ability to account for the evolution of extreme 
self-sacrifice, among other traits, without resorting to ‘group selection’.   
 

 
12
Literature Cited 
 
Csete, M. E. and Doyle, J. C. (2002) Reverse engineering of biological complexity. 
Science 295: 1664-1668. 
Fine, P.V.A., Miller, Z.J., Mesones, I., Irazuzta, S., Appel, H.M., et al. (2006). The growth-
defense trade-off and habitat specialization by plants in Amazonian forests. Ecology, 87, 
S150-S162. 
Hubbell, S.P. (1997). A unified theory of biogeography and relative species abundance and its 
application to tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Coral Reefs, 16, S9-S21. 
Lahti, D.C. and Weinstein, B.S. (2005). The better angels of our nature: group stability and the 
evolution of moral tension. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26, 47-63. 
Macarthur, R.H. (1961). Population Effects of Natural Selection. American Naturalist, 95, 195-9. 
Stearns, S.C. (1992). The Evolution of Life Histories. Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Weinstein, B.S. and Ciszek, D. (2002). The reserve-capacity hypothesis: evolutionary origins 
and modern implications of the trade-off between tumor-suppression and tissue-repair. 
Experimental Gerontology, 37, 615-27. 

 
 
 
13
Chapter 2 
 
LIFE’S SLOW FUSE:  
TELOMERES, TUMOURS AND THE EVOLUTION OF 
VERTEBRATE SENESCENCE 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper joins the evolutionary theory of senescence (antagonistic pleiotropy) with 
recent findings in experimental gerontology. We argue that, in vertebrates, a telomeric 
fail-safe mechanism prevents tumour formation by limiting cellular proliferation. The 
same system unavoidably results in the progressive degradation of tissue function with 
age. This senescent decline is caused by the combined effects of uncompensated cellular 
attrition and increasing histological entropy, both of which begin at sexual maturity. 
Extrinsic causes of mortality produce selection that pushes species toward an optimal 
balance between tumour suppression and tissue repair. With that trade-off as a 
fundamental constraint, selection adjusts telomere lengths—longer telomeres increasing 
the capacity for repair, shorter telomeres increasing resistance to tumour formation. In 
risky environments, where extrinsically induced mortality is frequent, selection against 
senescence is comparatively weak, generally favouring better tumour suppression and 
thereby a reduction in telomere lengths. In less dangerous environments selection more 
strongly opposes senescence, tending to lengthen telomeres. In iteroparous organisms 
selection further tends to co-ordinate rates of decline between tissues, so that no 
particular organ generally limits life-span. The implications of these hypotheses for 
experimental methods are significant and lead us to question the generality of a number 
of widely cited results. In particular we are concerned that captive-rodent breeding 
protocols, which are designed to increase reproductive output, simultaneously exert 
strong selection against senescence and virtually eliminate selection that would otherwise

 
 
 
14
favour tumour suppression. This unnatural selective regime appears to have had dramatic 
effects on laboratory mice, elongating their telomeres and, consequently, making them 
both unusually prone to tumour formation and unusually resistant to senescence. Use of 
these animals may have confounded the interpretation of numerous experiments. A strain 
of telomerase-negative mice, for example, required several generations to show signs of 
accelerated ageing. This generational delay has led some workers to discount the 
significance of telomere erosion and Hayflick limits in the normal senescence of 
individuals. The inadvertent elongation of mouse telomeres may also have serious public 
health implications, as it is likely that safety tests employing these models tend to 
overestimate cancer risks and underestimate the risk of tissue damage and its natural 
consequence, accelerated senescence. 
 
Introduction 
Why do we get tumours and Why do we grow old? These questions have become an 
obsession in the biomedical community. But we view them as pieces of a much larger 
puzzle: How is it possible for a highly differentiated, self-repairing organism composed 
of millions, billions or trillions of cells to live long enough, in a mutagenic environment, 
to reproduce, without a single cell escaping the normal developmental program and 
becoming a deadly tumour? We regard mechanisms that allow for extensive tissue repair, 
while inhibiting the frequent production of tumours, as major evolutionary innovations—
prerequisites to the evolution of life history strategies like those of most vertebrates. We 
describe one such mechanism by synthesising knowledge from two approaches to 
vertebrate senescence: evolutionary theory and experimental gerontology. 
Historically, these approaches have been practised almost independently. 
Evolutionists have remained largely unconcerned with the proximate mechanisms of 
ageing and gerontologists have been lax about the ultimate explanations which underlie 
their discipline. But comprehension of genetic and cellular machinery has now 
progressed to the point that evolutionary theory and empirical findings have begun to 
mirror each other. Not only can these two approaches now be profitably unified, but the 
resulting synthesis can accelerate progress in both disciplines. For that to occur, 
evolutionists and gerontologists need a common body of theory and knowledge as well as 

 
 
 
15
a language which allows for meaningful discourse. Below we develop a basic grammar 
and illustrate the breadth of potential insights that derive from its use. 
 
I. Synthesising two views of the ageing process 
Senescence: the evolutionary approach. All else being equal, longer lives provide more 
reproductive opportunities than shorter lives, therefore natural selection opposes 
senescence. Compared to the immense challenge of building a self-assembling, ten 
trillion cell organism (such as a human), the maintenance of such an organism should be 
relatively simple1. Yet selection has failed to eliminate senescence from any vertebrate. 
Elaborating on Medawar2, Williams1 explained the persistence of senescence as 
follows: Even in the absence of senescence, all lives would be finite because every 
organism would ultimately die from accident, starvation, predation or disease. Since an 
organism is always at risk of death, natural selection should favour early reproductive 
opportunities over the potential for later ones. Accordingly, the force of natural selection 
is never stronger than at the typical age of commencement of reproduction (when 
reproductive potential is greatest) and its strength must decline from that point forward. 
Therefore, traits that have beneficial effects early in life will tend to spread, even if they 
are inseparably coupled with deleterious effects that manifest later in life. Individuals are 
thus endowed with youthful vigour, at the cost of inevitable senescence. The power of 
“antagonistic pleiotropy” to account for the evolution of senescence was mathematically 
demonstrated by Hamilton3. 
According to the theory, selection modifies a species’ rate of senescence (in 
response to the distribution of mortality risks across the reproductive life-span) by 
adjusting pleiotropic balances between longevity and youthful vigour: The greater the 
risk of death between reproductive opportunities, the stronger the selective bias in favour 
of youth, the faster the rate of senescence becomes. Giant tortoises, housed in protective 
shells and living on remote islands, face few hazards during their reproductive lives, 
producing a rate of senescence that is almost imperceptible. Conversely, spawning 
salmon would face extreme hazards returning to sea and later attempting a second 
journey upstream. The very low probability of future reproductive opportunities has 

 
 
 
16
yielded a semelparous life-history strategy in which all resources that can be mobilised 
are invested in progeny rather than maintenance. These are the extreme cases. Most 
vertebrates fall on the continuum in-between, selection producing finer adjustments based 
on parameters that affect risk such as body size, defensive adaptations and the ability of 
some vertebrates to fly out of harm’s way.  
Extrinsic hazards can only produce such life-history refinements if selection 
retains substantial power during the process of senescence. Though the force of natural 
selection declines from the onset of reproduction, it remains strong throughout the 
reproductive life-span, even as the effects of senescence are becoming increasingly 
evident. Williams emphasised this point citing the example of the athletic decline that 
afflicts men in their thirties, observing that “Surely this part of the human life-cycle 
concerns natural selection.”1 
This point is persistently misunderstood outside of evolutionary biology. In 
gerontology it is commonly asserted that senescence results from “unselected” late 
effects of genes (e.g. refs. 4-6). Although the declining force of selection does eventually 
approach zero, that fact is insufficient to explain senescence early in the reproductive life-
span, when selection is still very strong1. 
Even in the extreme cases of senescent failures that occur so late that they may 
actually be inaccessible to selection (such as Alzheimer’s disease), the effects are only 
out of selective reach because senescence has already evolved. Extrapolating from the 
mortality rates of humans on the cusp of maturity, Ricklefs and Finch7 point out that 
“…if not for aging, 95% of us would celebrate our centenaries and 50% would reach the 
seemingly astonishing age of 1200 years” (see also ref. 8, p. 29). 
Selection continually minimises deleterious effects that manifest during the period 
of reproduction and offspring-rearing. If we mistakenly believe that senescence is the 
product of “unselected” effects, then we may harbour unwarranted hopes for therapeutic 
reduction of senescence. Conversely, if we view senescence as the unavoidable costs that 
remain after selection has acted to minimise harmful effects, then we will correctly view 
senescence as the same daunting challenge for medical science that it has apparently been 
for natural selection. 

 
 
 
17
 
A curious lack of antagonistic pleiotropies. In the four decades since antagonistic 
pleiotropy was first proposed, no clear case of a senescence-causing pleiotropy has come 
to light in vertebrates. This is odd in view of the fact that unique predictions of the theory 
have been clearly demonstrated9-11. We suspect that the failure to find relevant 
pleiotropies is the result of confusion over the term itself. 
Williams’ logic applies to traits with early benefits intrinsically tied to late costs. 
It is not necessary for the costs and benefits to derive from multiple traits (as a narrow 
definition of “pleiotropy” might seem to require), they may instead result from a single 
trait for which the cost/benefit ratio increases with age12. Furthermore, the trait need not 
result from an individual pleiotropic gene; the combined effects of multiple genes may 
produce emergent costs and benefits that cannot be separated by selection. To fall within 
the rubric of antagonistic pleiotropy, it is both necessary and sufficient that (1) the 
instantaneous cost/benefit ratio of a trait or system is initially less than one, becoming 
greater than one at some point after the onset of reproduction and (2) the cumulative 
cost/benefit ratio is less than one for the average individual. 
 
Telomeres and senescence: the experimental approach. In 1961, Hayflick and 
Moorhead13 made an important breakthrough in the experimental study of senescence. 
They disproved the notion that normal vertebrate cells could divide an indefinite number 
of times in vitro. They showed that normal somatic cell lines were limited in the number 
of population doublings they could undergo before growth slowed dramatically, then 
ceased. Later studies showed that the number of cell divisions occurring before the 
‘Hayflick limit’ co-varies (between taxa) with life-span14-16 and decreases in humans with 
cell-donor age17. For many years these findings lacked a mechanistic explanation, but a 
front-runner has now emerged18 (see also ref. 19). 
DNA polymerase is unable to duplicate the tips of chromosomes, so a small 
amount of DNA is lost with each successive cell division20,21. This progressive erosion 
would be catastrophic if important genes were located at the ends of chromosomes. But 
the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes consist of long, non-coding, repetitive sequences 

 
 
 
18
known as telomeres22,23. Telomere loss may explain the mortality of somatic cell lines as 
the erosion of telomeres below a critical length appears to trigger the shutdown of 
replicative machinery24. 
There must also be some means of adding telomeric DNA to chromosome ends, 
otherwise germlines would be mortal as well. The reverse transcriptase telomerase 
elongates telomeres22,25-27. Telomerase is active in gametogenesis and undetectable in the 
vast majority of adult somatic tissues28. 
 
Several lines of evidence support the telomere erosion hypothesis for Hayflick limits: 
• Telomere length diminishes with cell-line age in vitro and in vivo29-31. 
• A remarkably diverse array of immortal somatic cell lines (from tumours, which 
lack Hayflick limits ) express telomerase28,32. 
• Somatic tissues from patients with Hutchinson-Gilford (H-G) and Werner’s 
syndromes (diseases of dramatically accelerated ageing) have reduced 
proliferative capacities in vitro. H-G patients have short telomeres at birth17. 
Werner’s patients experience rapid erosion of initially normal telomeres33. 
The association of aberrant telomeres with apparently accelerated ageing suggests 
that Hayflick limits may explain more than just the mortality of individual cell lines. The 
limited proliferative capacity of somatic cells may underlie a general mechanism of body-
wide senescence. 
This possibility led to an experiment, which yielded equivocal34 results. A strain 
of laboratory mice with two disabled copies of a gene necessary for telomerase activity 
was produced35. This telomerase-negative strain did exhibit accelerated ageing, but only 
after six generations. Even then, the effect was not uniform. Mice in the sixth generation 
seemed to senesce prematurely in some tissues and not others. These results strengthened 
the argument that telomeric erosion is involved in somatic senescence, but suggested that 
the role of telomeres in the phenomenon of senescence might be limited to those few 
somatic tissues with high endogenous rates of turnover36. The six generation delay was 

 
 
 
19
taken to imply that normal senescence, of the type that occurs in a single generation, must 
involve important undiscovered factors34. We will reinterpret these results below. 
 
Telomeres and cancer. The connection among telomeres, Hayflick limits, and the 
phenomenon of senescence is important whether telomeres are the primary mechanism or 
just one of several. But, telomere regulation has significance beyond the issue of our 
gradual decline with age. Telomere regulation appears central to another great enemy of 
the old: cancer. 
Activation of telomerase appears to be a necessary step in most transformations of 
normal tissue into tumors26,28. The connection of cancer and senescence to the same 
mechanism is not serendipity, it is a window into a fundamental trade-off, the balance of 
which we may find difficult to improve. 
 
The reserve capacity hypothesis: A synthetic search for the missing pleiotropy. 
Juxtaposing an evolutionary perspective on senescence, with the gerontological and 
oncological view of telomeres, it appears that limits on the proliferative capacity of 
somatic cells (Hayflick limits) evolved as tumour suppressors that rein in runaway 
cellular proliferation, but that these same limits preclude indefinite somatic maintenance, 
causing gradual degradation of function. It seems the telomere/telomerase system is an 
antagonistic pleiotropy of the type Williams1 predicted. 
Kipling37 briefly proposed a similar interpretation (without reference to Williams’ 
theory), but there has been no apparent discussion of his idea or its implications. 
Others6,38 have used the term “antagonistic pleiotropy” in this context, but have evidently 
failed to appreciate the advances made by Williams1 over Medawar2: the declining force 
of natural selection with age is not sufficient to explain senescence during prime 
reproductive years. Only when senescence is recognised as an inherent consequence of 
design trade-offs can we fully understand the nature of ageing. 
A new term facilitates discussion of vertebrate telomeres. We will use reserve 
capacity to refer to the remaining quantity of population doublings that a differentiated 

 
 
 
20
cell can undergo (in vivo) before reaching its Hayflick limit. Reserve capacity decreases 
over time with cell division. 
The relationship of Hayflick limits to tumours is relatively straightforward. When 
a cell is damaged such that it begins to over-proliferate, it ultimately reaches its Hayflick 
limit and proliferation ceases. The greater the reserve capacity of the progenitor cell, the 
larger the resultant mass of growth-arrested daughter cells will be. We regard this mass of 
cells as a proto-tumour, each cell possessing the first of several mutations necessary for 
tumorigenesis and cancer. 
Because cells will tend to retain more proliferative potential early in an 
organism’s life, younger individuals should tend to produce larger proto-tumours than 
older individuals. Since each cell in a proto-tumour presents an equivalent opportunity 
for the acquisition of telomerase activating mutations, we predict that proto-tumours 
produced early in life carry a proportionally higher risk of becoming mature tumours than 
proto-tumours generated late in life. This effect will be exacerbated by the fact that proto-
tumours formed at an early age will tend to have more time in which to accumulate 
further genetic changes. The risk from any particular proto-tumour should diminish with 
time, as growth-arrested cells expire and are lost. Risk reduction may be accelerated if 
apoptosis is triggered by proto-tumour formation, but this would accelerate the 
exhaustion of the neighbouring lineages that ultimately replace the lost cells. 
 
Somatic senescence due to cellular attrition and increasing histological entropy. To our 
knowledge, no explicit mechanism linking Hayflick limits to the phenomenon of 
vertebrate ageing has been proposed. We offer the following first approximation. 
Development continually increases histological differentiation and specialisation, 
which are maximal when an organism becomes a reproductively capable adult. 
Throughout life, damage and programmed cellular turnover result in cells being lost from 
the soma and replaced. When cellular lineages exhaust their reserve capacity and are lost, 
they must be replaced by neighbouring lineages, if they are replaced at all. 
We propose that the uncompensated loss of some cellular lineages, coupled with 
the replacement of other lineages by neighbours (adapted to slightly different roles), 

 
 
 
21
diminishes the optimal arrangement of cell types. By our model, body-wide senescence 
results from the combined effect of (a) uncompensated cellular attrition and (b) increases 
in what might be called histological entropy, both of which will diminish an organism’s 
efficiency at accomplishing whatever tasks differentiation initially evolved to address. 
Senescence of this type should progress at a non-linear rate, accelerating with age as 
fewer cellular lineages maintain and repair an ever larger proportion of the body. 
The ageing of human skin appears to progress as our model predicts. Skin 
thickness decreases approximately 25% between the fourth and eighth decade of life39, 
and entropy increases: 
“The epidermis of older individuals exhibits a marked variation in thickness 
(often in the same histologic section) and a disparity in the size, shape and 
staining quality of the basal cell nuclei under light microscopy. There is also a 
loss of the orderly alignment of cells along the basement membrane and a 
disruption of the gradual upward uniform differentiation present in the 
epidermis of younger individuals… Electron microscopic studies show that the 
basal cells of the flattened epidermis of old individuals lack villi… Deletion and 
derangement of small blood vessels is found in aged skin, with sun-damaged 
skin being the most severely affected.”40 
Cardiovascular disease may provide an example of the negative consequences of 
uncompensated cellular attrition and increasing histological entropy. Cells in portions of 
the vascular system that sustain relatively high levels of wear and tear have short 
telomeres, implying a history of cellular replacement41 and likely attrition of cellular 
lineages. These areas fail to produce a protective layer of cells characteristic of younger 
tissue, and consequently have an increased propensity to develop atherosclerotic 
plaques41. 
 
One source, three sinks. Vertebrates use reserve capacity in growth, maintenance, and 
repair; each process erodes telomeres, reducing proliferative potential. Though 
antagonistic pleiotropy and accumulated damage hypotheses have traditionally been 

 
 
 
22
viewed as alternative explanations for senescence, the finite reserve capacity approach 
integrates them. Damage, even if it is functionally repaired, will accelerate the ageing of 
tissue by limiting the capacity for future maintenance and repair. The liver of a heavy 
drinker, for instance, may function essentially as well at 40 as it did at 25, but should fail 
more rapidly than the liver of a non-drinker, even if alcohol consumption ends before 
damage is evident. Any factor that damages tissue, including mutagens, pathogens, 
mechanical wear or trauma, oxidative stress and free radicals, will promote a local 
increase in that tissue’s rate of senescence. 
Selection should tend to optimise reserve capacities based on a species’ timing of 
reproduction and the typical rate of cellular repair and turnover as well as the extrinsic 
risk of mortality. Although telomere erosion begins at whatever point in ontogeny 
telomerase is inactivated in the soma, selection should adjust reserve capacities so the 
loss of cellular lineages does not begin before the usual age of first reproduction. In 
iteroparous species, selection should further act to co-ordinate reserve capacities among 
tissues so that senescence is synchronised throughout the body, thus minimising the 
fitness cost that would accompany early senescence in any particular organ (as per refs. 
1,3,42). 
But, because of the stochastic nature of environmental insults, past selection 
cannot predict the reserve capacity needs of individuals nor the organs on which they 
depend. An otherwise healthy individual may die from the premature senescence of a 
particular tissue (despite the synchronising force of selection) if the tissue has had an 
unusual history of damage. Because rates of damage differ between conspecific 
individuals, we should also expect dissynchrony of senescence rates between individual 
animals, even in populations that are genetically homogeneous. 
Selection can adjust telomere lengths based on species’ averages for parameters 
such as the number of cells in each tissue of the body and typical rates of damage and 
mortality. But selection based on averages will not produce ideal telomere lengths for 
individuals. The optimal telomere length on a chromosome passed from a 5’6” father to 
his 6’1” son will necessarily be a compromise (longer than optimal for the father and 
shorter than optimal for the son). This constraint may explain why the positive 
interspecific correlation between body size and longevity (addressed in ref. 1) is reversed 

 
 
 
23
within species. For example, even when the effects of obesity are controlled for, larger 
humans43,44 and dogs45,46 tend to be comparatively short lived. The extra cell divisions 
required to become larger, by diminishing reserve capacity at maturity, may shorten life-
span by reducing the capacity of larger individuals to maintain and repair their tissues. 
We expect smaller individuals to suffer a greater per cell risk of developing tumours due 
to longer-than-optimal telomeres at maturity. At the same time they should show an 
increased resistance to other senescent effects. Since smaller individuals are composed of 
fewer cells, we do not expect their increased per-cell tumour risk to fully counteract their 
decreased rate of senescence. Therefore, within a species, smaller individuals should tend 
to live longer. 
 
II. Reinterpreting experimental results: 
Senescent cellular phenotypes: misregulation or adaptive response? Upon reaching a 
Hayflick limit, many cell types begin expressing genes that were previously 
untranscribed, and cease expression of previously active genes47. Several workers have 
conjectured that somatic senescence of individuals results from the progressive 
accumulation of cells with “senescent phenotypes”48-50. To our knowledge no one has 
proposed a mechanistic connection between these phenotypes and organismal ageing. 
Instead, the phenotypic changes are asserted to result from “misregulation”. The implicit 
assumption is that expired cellular lineages accumulate late enough in life that selection 
lacks the power to regulate their function to the benefit of the organism. We propose a 
contrary interpretation. 
Williams1 argued that late negative effects would spread if pleiotropically 
associated with early benefits. He went on to argue that selection would then produce 
modifiers that would minimise the harm caused by these late effects. We suggest that 
“senescent cellular phenotypes” are actually adaptations that limit the harm caused by the 
expiration of cellular lineages. 
The hypothesis that changes in gene expression associated with ageing are the 
result of misregulation is apparently falsified by the very data used to support it. Ly et al. 
50 compared gene expression amongst people from three age classes and children with H-

 
 
 
24
G progeria. They found that 50% of the genes whose expression is altered in ageing (both 
accelerated and normal) belonged to two classes, mitosis initiation and progression genes 
(e.g. spindle formation) and extracellular matrix (ECM) modification genes. If 
transcriptional changes were the result of misregulation then we should expect a random 
pattern of changes reflecting a lack of stabilising selection on gene regulation. The fact 
that regulatory changes were observed in groups of functionally related genes, suggests 
that the shift in gene expression results from selection rather than a haphazard process. 
In addition to the functional relationship between affected genes, the seemingly 
co-ordinated direction of the regulatory changes was also suggestive of selection. 
Mitosis-related genes tended to be downregulated with age. This is unsurprising as 
“senescent” cells, which do not divide, are unlikely to need spindles or other mitotic 
machinery. 
In contrast to the down-regulation of mitosis-related genes, some of the genes 
which modify the ECM were upregulated and others downregulated. Downregulated 
genes were primarily associated with construction of the ECM while upregulated genes 
tended to be associated with its disassembly. This is consistent with earlier findings 
which suggest that “senescent” cells decrease the production of collagen and increase 
production of collagenase, an enzyme which breaks down collagen and thereby facilitates 
the remodelling of the ECM4. 
We propose that selection has produced a system that locally breaks down the 
ECM as cells are nearing their Hayflick limits, thereby facilitating cellular replacement. 
Early in life, the ECM maintains the developmentally optimal placement of cells. But in 
some circumstances this system may act as an impediment to cell motility. As cellular 
lineages become unable to replace themselves, adjacent lineages may not be able to fill 
vacated spaces with the ECM intact. Selection may have programmed senescent cells to 
locally dismantle the ECM, paving the way for their eventual replacement by adjacent 
lineages. 
 
Lab mice and cloned sheep: life on strange islands. If individuals disperse from a high 
risk environment to a low risk environment (e.g. a remote island) the resultant increase in 

 
 
 
25
longevity will enhance the potency of selection on late-life effects, eventually slowing the 
rate of senescence1. The evidence that selection does this in the wild is strong9-11. We 
expect that, in vertebrates, selection adjusts telomere lengths to postpone senescence 
under such circumstances. This adjustment must come at some cost, such as increased 
risk of tumours and/or an increased burden from larger proto-tumours. 
In the early part of this century, a small number of Mus musculus dispersed into a 
novel environment: the laboratory. In breeding colonies there is no predation, no resource 
limitation and the spread of pathogens and contaminants is controlled. Perhaps most 
importantly, breeders are retired at 8 months51 so the mice that contribute most to future 
generations are those that begin reproduction early, and sustain a high rate of 
reproduction until the cut-off age. Such conditions are dramatically different than those in 
the environment mice originally evolved to exploit, likely favouring a different pattern of 
senescence. 
The telomere systems of laboratory mice are hard to reconcile with the notion of 
Hayflick limits as tumour suppressors or as the cause of senescence. Compared to 
humans, lab mice have “ultra-long” telomeres, exceeding human telomeres by an order of 
magnitude52. Further, somatic tissues of lab mice produce telomerase, and can 
“spontaneously immortalise” in culture.  
We predicted that the long telomeres observed in laboratory mice would be 
atypical for mice in general. Greider’s lab tested this with a survey of telomere lengths in 
six species of laboratory mice with short histories of captivity. All six had telomere 
lengths approximately one tenth of those in common lab mice (C. Greider, pers. com.). 
The unusual telomere system of lab mice may be an unintended consequence of 
captive breeding. Retirement of breeders after 8 months eliminates selection on late-life 
effects. Tumour-forming mutations take time to occur, and the likelihood of tumour 
initiation is presumably a function of the number of cells in the body, so in small bodied 
animals like mice, tumours may be rare in the first eight months of life, even without the 
telomeric fail-safe. Further, selection for sustained high reproductive output before 8 
months should tend to eliminate any senescent effects occurring before that deadline. 
Selection acting to simultaneously increase early reproductive output and eliminate 
senescent effects may elongate telomeres. Because of the inextricable connection 

 
 
 
26
between tumour suppression and somatic maintenance, telomere elongation should 
dramatically increase the risk of tumour formation, but any effects occurring after the 
breeding cut-off will be selectively irrelevant. Selection for early high rates of 
reproduction in the absence of selection for longevity should result in a strong propensity 
for these mice to eventually die from tumours. At all ages, lab mice should be more likely 
to die of tumours than wild mice raised in similar environments. Lab mice should also be 
unusually resilient to somatic damage and show few signs of ageing other than tumour 
formation. Alexander53 presents evidence consistent with this pattern: 
“The most striking fact is that even very old [lab] mice (e.g., more than 2.5 
years) when killed while still fit have remarkably few pathologies and are 
almost indistinguishable from young animals.” 
The hypothesis that an 8 month breeding cut-off should select for non-senescent, 
tumour prone mice seems, at first, paradoxical. Based on traditional evolutionary 
thinking, one might expect the elimination of selection on late life effects to accelerate 
senescence, not retard it. But in the case of mice, selection for high, sustained rates of 
breeding appears to be the dominant factor. This would likely not be the case in much 
larger vertebrates (which are necessarily composed of much larger populations of cells). 
Each cell that retains the ability to divide has the potential to become a tumour. Thus, in 
the absence of a scaleable tumour suppressor, the chance that a tumour will form and kill 
an organism is a function of the number of cells in that organism. In lab mice, the tumour 
suppressor has effectively been turned off, condemning them to form tumours but leaving 
an early-life window of reproduction within which there is minimal senescent decline. In 
a much larger organism, turning off the tumour suppressor would likely create such an 
onerous tumour-burden that reproductive age would never be attained. This is especially 
likely since larger animals tend to reach reproductive maturity later, increasing the 
chance that a tumour will arise before reproduction begins. 
Unfortunately, it has been widely assumed and asserted that “ultra-long” 
telomeres are characteristic of “mice” or even “rodents” in general. The stark differences 
between lab mice and humans led de Lange 19 to argue: 

 
 
 
27
“…it seems very unlikely that mice use telomeres as a tumor suppressor system 
and perhaps with good reason. Since the telomere barrier to proliferation does 
not manifest itself until many cell divisions have passed, this mechanism may 
not be useful for a small animal in which a 2cm mass of misplaced cells could 
be life-threatening.” 
 
We agree that the telomere system of small animals would need to arrest very 
small growths to serve as a useful tumour suppressor, but the conjecture that “mice” do 
not use this system is premature. The tissues of wild mice might have very limited 
reserve capacities, thus protecting them from lethal growths and limiting their life-spans. 
It is unfortunate that mouse strains with long telomeres were used to create the 
telomerase-negative mice. If the experiment were conducted using mice recently derived 
from the wild we predict that accelerated senescence would be observed in the first 
generation. But even in such an experiment we expect that the acceleration of gross 
senescent effects would be limited to high-turnover tissues because other tissues, which 
typically use reserve capacity to repair damage, will tend to senesce minimally in a 
protected environment. 
The unique state of lab mice may lead to erroneous conclusions about 
tumorigenesis. For example, based on evidence from mice with ultra-long telomeres, 
Kipling54 speculates that “...telomerase expression in mouse tumorigenesis is an innocent 
bystander rather than a necessary event.” Clearly, telomerase activity, telomere length 
regulation and spontaneous immortalization must be investigated in newly domesticated 
mice to separate experimental artefacts from natural phenomena. 
Care must also be taken in interpreting the pattern of ageing in animals produced 
through nuclear transfer cloning, such as the sheep Dolly. The nucleus that was used to 
produce Dolly was taken from an adult sheep55, and thus had shorter telomeres than a 
normal sheep zygote, though as yet Dolly does not appear to be senescing abnormally56. 
Like lab mice, Dolly lives in a controlled environment, protected from the traumas, 
illnesses and impurities of a wild or even a typical farm habitat. We expect Dolly to 
senesce earliest in tissues with high endogenous turnover rates (because her need for 

 
 
 
28
damage repair is likely to be minimal), and to display early senescence compared to 
sexually produced controls reared in the same protected environment. But compared to 
normal sheep, her senescence may not appear accelerated, as it is likely being slowed by 
her isolation from environmental insults. 
 
Retarding senescence with caloric restriction: natural phenomenon or laboratory 
artefact? Caloric restriction (CR) is the only experimental treatment shown to 
dramatically increase longevity in vertebrates. Laboratory mice and rats placed on a 
restricted diet live significantly longer than controls57. This has been interpreted as 
evidence that resource limitation slows the process of senescence. But if, as we suggest, 
these animals have been selected to senesce minimally, then slowing senescence should 
have little effect on their longevity. 
We have argued that laboratory mice should overwhelmingly die of tumours. CR 
may increase longevity in these animals by reducing the risk of tumour formation. CR 
animals are approximately 1/3 smaller58 and exhibit slower cell replication59 than 
controls. By stunting growth (reducing the number of cells in the organism), and by 
reducing the rate of cell division, CR may simply reduce the likelihood of tumorigenesis. 
Such positive effects might also occur in CR vertebrates with wild-type telomeres. 
Further, by reducing body size, delaying maturation, inhibiting reproductive mechanisms 
and slowing cellular turnover, CR should postpone the exhaustion of reserve capacity. 
But CR, like famine, will likely interfere with normal homeostasis and repair, increasing 
vulnerability to environmental insults. The opposing nature of these effects will likely 
prevent CR from dramatically increasing longevity in vertebrates with normal telomeric 
tumour suppressors. 
 
III. Selective inactivation of the telomeric tumour suppressor 
The counterintuitive nature of early development. If finite reserve capacity is an 
evolved fail-safe against runaway cellular lineages, we must give special consideration to 
those times and places where selection has disabled this mechanism. Telomerase is 
present in the somatic tissues of embryonic placental mammals, but activity ceases before 

 
 
 
29
birth38,60,61. To illustrate why selection responds differently to telomere erosion in early 
versus late development, we will compare the distinct developmental profiles of two 
processes: cellular population doubling and resource investment. 
In the absence of telomerase, telomere loss is a function of the number of cell 
population doublings, therefore division of a zygote into two cells would reduce the 
mature body’s reserve capacity as much as the growth of a 5 trillion cell child into a 10 
trillion cell adult (if all cells made an equivalent contribution to growth). The vast 
majority of cellular doublings occur in early development when the absolute number of 
cells is very small and the embryo is tiny compared to the adult it will become. In 
contrast, parental investment of resources is lowest in early development and grows with 
the embryo’s size. Because of this asymmetry, the resources placed at risk by early foetal 
telomerase activity are minimal. 
Spontaneous abortions are common in early foetal development, ending 
approximately 50% of human pregnancies62. Early spontaneous abortions are not without 
cost. In many species breeding periods are narrowly timed and an aborted pregnancy may 
eliminate a female’s reproductive output for the year. The cost of early spontaneous 
abortions has apparently resulted in mechanisms that reduce such risks. For example, 
maternal aversion to complex foods during early stages of pregnancy is thought to protect 
the embryo/foetus from mutagens during an especially vulnerable period (reviewed in ref. 
63). We propose that isolating the foetus from mutagens is particularly important while 
telomerase is active, when runaway cellular proliferation would necessarily result in 
abortion. 
In humans the majority of prenatal cell divisions occur before the end of the fifth 
month of gestation, while telomerase is maintaining telomere lengths. The period of 
telomere maintenance ends, on a tissue-by-tissue basis, beginning in the fourth month and 
continuing through the fifth month38,60,61. After this point the foetus begins to accrue 
resources in the form of body fat. In contrast to the rate of cell addition, which peaks in 
the fifth month, then drops precipitously64, the great majority of prenatal weight gain 
occurs in the later, telomerase-negative period. We interpret this developmental pattern as 
a mechanism by which selection has minimised the resources placed at risk by 
developmental telomerase activity. 

 
 
 
30
Though early telomerase activity carries risks, a lack of telomerase during the 
period of rapid cellular doublings would result in a substantial erosion of the telomeres, 
accelerating the onset and rate of senescence later in life. It seems selection could solve 
this problem by lengthening germline telomeres, thus adding reserve capacity to the 
organism as a whole. Because selection has favoured telomerase activity (and its 
associated risks) over a simple lengthening of telomeres, we expect foetal telomerase 
activity also provides a significant benefit. 
The nature of that benefit may relate to Williams’ argument that selection should 
tend to synchronise senescence across the soma1. If finite proliferative capacities 
determine the senescence rates of different tissues, and if those rates are to be 
synchronised by selection, telomere lengths must be adjusted according to the typical 
rates of cellular turnover of different parts of the soma. Simply lengthening germline 
telomeres could not produce this synchronisation. If telomerase were never active in the 
soma, the reserve capacity of a particular tissue would simply be an inverse function of 
the total number of cell divisions that produced it from the zygote. In contrast, tissue-
specific telomerase activity can establish inter-tissue synchronisation. This could be 
accomplished at any point in the lifecycle, but it is least costly in early development when 
(1) the investment placed at risk is minimal, (2) the foetus is insulated from most 
environmental mutagens, and (3) the number of potential runaway cells is relatively 
small. 
The reserve capacity of mature tissues can be set by adjusting the number of cells 
in each tissue before telomere maintenance ceases. If it is demonstrated that organ 
senescence is prenatally synchronised in such a manner, it will firmly establish that 
patterns of senescence are products of natural selection, not incidental effects that occur 
in the absence of selection. 
After somatic telomerase is shut down, growth via cell division will reduce tissue 
reserve capacity. Wistar rats that were growth-retarded prenatally (i.e. during telomere 
maintenance), but grew to normal size after birth, had shorter telomeres in their kidneys 
and shorter life-spans than control rats65. Among humans, women that were short at birth 
but grew to average or above average height had an increased risk of death from coronary 

 
 
 
31
heart disease66. A similar pattern appears to exist in men67, though it is confounded by 
mortality risks associated with obesity rather than “catch-up growth”. 
 
Cellular over-proliferation in early and late life: tumours of two natures. If the 
shortening of telomeres is part of an adaptive tumour suppressor mechanism, why are 
tumours most common late in life, when telomeres are shortest? Tumours may be divided 
into two classes: (1) tumours which arise when telomere lengths are exceedingly long or 
are being maintained by telomerase (these can occur at any point in the life-span, 
including childhood); and (2) tumours arising when telomeres have become critically 
short (primarily late in life). Reserve capacity limitation appears to counter early-life 
tumours so successfully that we may fail to realise that a serious threat would otherwise 
exist. The few systems in which telomere lengths are maintained provide a window into 
life without the telomeric fail-safe. 
 
Childhood leukaemia and lymphoma. Most of the tumours common in the elderly are 
essentially unknown in children and young adults. The most common childhood tumours, 
leukaemias and lymphomas, involve hyper-proliferative leukocytes (B- and T-cells) or 
their progenitors. Leukocytes are responsible for our specific immune response which 
“learns” to recognise pathogens. When a leukocyte is activated by a matching antigen, 
the cell proliferates, creating a population of cells with variations of the progenitor cell’s 
receptor formula. Iterated clonal selection allows the system to hone in on unfamiliar 
pathogens and to track antigenic changes in an ongoing infection68. 
Although most leukocytes will never be stimulated, the subset that become 
activated must retain an extensive capacity to proliferate. Otherwise pathogens for which 
immune cells have initially weak affinities would remain elusive, and rapidly changing 
pathogens could exhaust the proliferative potential of the immune system. Instead, 
leukocytes produce telomerase upon antigenic activation, allowing for extensive 
proliferation69,70. We suspect that telomerase activity, which is necessary to the 
functioning of the immune response, but greatly diminishing the effectiveness of the 

 
 
 
32
telomeric failsafe, results in a disproportionate childhood risk of developing leukaemias 
and lymphomas. 
 
Germline tumours. Testicular cancer is essentially absent in boys, but beginning at 
puberty (when gametogenesis begins) the incidence of testicular germ cell tumours 
jumps, peaking between the ages of 20 and 3471. Germline tissue does not senesce, so 
spermatogenic cells must maintain their telomeres throughout life, despite undergoing 
very high rates of cellular proliferation. Spermatogenic cells lack a telomeric failsafe, 
since they produce telomerase during gametogenesis28, which likely explains the 
disproportionate occurrence of testicular cancer in young men. In female mammals 
gametogenesis occurs before birth, so there is no increase in risk of germ cell tumours 
with puberty. Indeed, minimisation of the fitness costs associated with germline tumours 
may account for the evolutionary shift of female gametogenesis to the prenatal period. 
 
Tumours late in life. Late-life tumours can arise by at least two pathways. A proto-
tumour cell which earlier became developmentally insensitive to signals halting growth, 
may later gain a mutation that activates telomerase. This is statistically unlikely in any 
individual cell, but since the many cells in a proto-tumour will all carry the initial growth-
stimulating mutation(s), the risk that one will gain an additional mutation increases with 
the proto-tumour’s size. 
The second pathway does not depend on telomerase or a population of cells at 
increased risk. Typically cells cease proliferation when telomeres become critically short. 
But a cell carrying a mutation that prevents such arrest may continue to divide and erode 
the telomere below the threshold necessary to stabilise the chromosome ends. When that 
occurs, chromosomes become unstable and fuse into closed structures72. Such 
chromosome instability has dramatic, unpredictable effects and may lead to excessive 
growth even in the absence of telomerase. For example, the erratic telomere shortening 
and resultant chromosomal aberrations characteristic of Werner’s syndrome results in 
both tumorigenesis and accelerated senescence. 
 

 
 
 
33
A senescence ‘rescue’ mechanism: reactivation of telomerase in failing tissues. 
Telomerase is believed to be inactive in nearly all healthy somatic tissues of adults, but 
we suspect this is a significant oversimplification. Selection should balance the risk posed 
by the early senescence of disproportionately damaged tissues against the risk of 
tumorigenesis. If relatively early senescence of a tissue threatens the survival of the 
individual, local activation of telomerase may be a worthy risk. If the exhaustion of 
cellular reserve capacities was not due to hyper-proliferation, then telomerase can extend 
the life of a failing tissue. We predict the existence of such a ‘rescue’ mechanism. 
However, if the rescued section includes a proto-tumour, telomerase activation will likely 
result in tumorigenesis. We expect localised activation of telomerase to increase with age 
(as the proportion of the body threatened by imminent senescence becomes increasingly 
large), and only a subset of such activation to be associated with tumours. 
 
Reinventing the veal: Novel effects in the cloning of calves. Lanza et al.73 found that 
calves cloned from “senescent” fibroblasts were born with unusually long telomeres. This 
counterintuitive result suggests the possibility that the use of senescent cells may have 
inadvertently triggered the rescue mechanism during cloning or development. In any 
case, we predict that these cloned calves with long telomeres will have increased cancer 
rates compared to sexually produced calves raised in a similar environment, and will 
otherwise exhibit relatively delayed senescence. 
 
Explaining rapid decline in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. The failure of telomerase 
reactivation may be relevant to Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome. H-G progeria is a 
homozygous recessive condition74,75 which we predict results from two inactive copies of 
a gene necessary for telomerase functionality. Without telomerase, the erosion of 
telomeres during early development would be substantial, and could account for the 
abnormal ontogeny and early onset of senescence in H-G patients. The inability to rescue 
senescent tissues by selectively reactivating telomerase may account for the rapid decline 
of H-G patients compared to normal elderly people. Consistent with our theory, H-G 
patients are not known to get cancer76. 

 
 
 
34
 
Telomerase activity in epithelial tissues. Several types of basal epithelial cells (which 
must proliferate extensively for normal functioning) express telomerase (reviewed in ref. 
77). Yet basal layers are not a common source of tumours in young people. There are at 
least two reasons: first, the basal layer is protected from superficial contact with 
environmental mutagens. Second, progeny of the basal cells are sloughed from the body 
regularly, likely purging hyper-proliferative cells from these tissues before they become a 
danger78.  
 
IV. Conclusions 
An optimal window of reproductive opportunity. Decreasing the rate of human 
senescence and the threat posed by tumours are desirable medical goals. Shay and 
Wright79 (also see ref. 80) have outlined a research plan to accomplish both: 
“The key issue is to find out how to make our cancer cells mortal and our 
healthy cells immortal, or at least longer lasting. Inhibition of telomerase in 
cancer cells may be a viable target for anti-cancer therapeutics while expression 
of telomerase in normal cells may extend lifespan.” 
This illustrates the danger of isolating medical research from evolutionary 
biology. If one believes that senescence results from a lack of selection, then it may seem 
reasonable to pursue a technological solution to fill in where selection left off. But 
evolutionary theory indicates that senescence results primarily from trade-offs, not from 
incidental effects or a failure of selection. Once we recognise that longevity and tumour 
suppression are antagonistic goals, the first question we should seek to answer is: How 
well has selection optimised the balance between these traits? 
It is not clear that selection has left much room for improvement. We suggest that 
a staggering majority of our proto-tumour cells are already mortal, allowing only a 
miniscule risk of tumorigenesis in the first four decades of life. And it is likely that 
selection has already extended our life-spans by modifying telomere lengths and co-
ordinating the reserve capacities among our various tissues. It is a reasonable guess that 

 
 
 
35
maximum longevity cannot be greatly extended without a dramatic increase in the rate of 
tumour formation, and that increasing the effectiveness of telomeric tumour suppression 
would accelerate the ageing process. 
 
Medical applications. If a simple modification of telomere-system parameters would 
extend life without significant costs, selection would surely have made it. We are 
therefore skeptical of attempts to favourably modify telomere regulation in healthy 
people. But this does not imply that medical benefits cannot be derived from telomere 
regulation. In fact, such knowledge holds great medical promise. Telomerase treatment, 
in vitro, may rejuvenate tissues or organs before transplant, extending telomeres in 
accordance with the amount of cell division expected to occur in the recipient (but see 
ref. 81). This has been suggested for bone marrow transplants82 and may be particularly 
useful for liver transplants in which fractions of a divided liver grow to normal size in 
multiple recipients. 
Further, replacement tissues could be grown from a person’s own cells, in the 
presence of telomerase, to provide a patient threatened by the premature senescence of a 
tissue with an MHC-matched replacement. This technique might be useful in treating 
early-stage HIV patients. HIV-reactive T-cells could be removed early in the course of 
infection, maintained in vitro, and treated with telomerase. When the in vivo T-cell count 
begins to crash, the invigorated cells could be reintroduced into the patient where they 
might greatly extend the latent phase of HIV. 
Finally, given our increasing ability to detect and surgically or chemically 
eliminate tumours, we might one day be willing to accept an increase in our tumour risk 
in order to extend youth. The in vitro lengthening of zygote telomeres would likely 
produce that heritable effect. 
Avenues of research likely to lead to viable therapies are those to which natural 
selection has not had access (e.g. surgery and in vitro methodologies). The idea that 
medical science will improve the cell-by-cell regulation of telomerase in healthy people, 
thereby extending youth while at the same time reducing cancer risks, is wishful thinking 
of the highest order. 

 
 
 
36
 
Antagonistic pleiotropy: a theory in retrospect. The belief that senescence evolves 
because the harmful effects of genes are invisible to selection late in life, and thus 
accumulate by drift, is inadequate to account for the senescence of iteroparous organisms. 
Despite Williams’1 elucidation of this point, a chronic confusion on this issue persists. 
This oversight has important implications for present and future work, implications which 
are brought into stark relief by errors in telomere research. A focus on drift as a causal 
agent has produced misinterpretations of empirical patterns (e.g. senescent cellular 
phenotypes) and may have obscured others (e.g. developmental co-ordination of reserve 
capacities between tissues). 
Most importantly, a failure to understand the active way that environmental 
hazards selectively adjust patterns of senescence has resulted in a haphazard breeding 
strategy for model organisms such as mice. Inadvertent selection has altered our model 
systems in ways that obscure the very patterns we most wish to understand. 
Not only are our model organisms unfit for studies of ageing, but because they 
have extraordinary reserve capacities, their use in the safety testing of drugs, pesticides 
and other chemical agents is likely to drastically underestimate somatic damage. Toxins 
which damage tissues, hastening the attrition of cellular lineages and thereby accelerating 
organ degeneration, may appear harmless when administered (even in high doses) to 
mice with telomeres long enough to last six generations. The same substance may 
produce irreversible effects in humans, which we may fail to recognise if they manifest 
after a delay of many years and appear similar to normal effects of ageing. We should 
therefore reconsider the use of substances deemed safe primarily because they proved 
harmless to “mice”. At the same time, safety testing with lab mice may tend to 
overestimate cancer risks. 
Based on the above analysis, we regard the theory of senescence developed by 
Medawar2, Williams1 and Hamilton3 as remarkably foresighted and accurate. But as one 
might expect, there are a number of ways in which the nature of the reserve capacity 
mechanism is unexpected. Perhaps most significant, evolutionary theory predicted that 
senescence would be the result of a large collection of distinct pleiotropic effects acting 
across the soma. It was hypothesised that selection would come to synchronise these 

 
 
 
37
many effects such that they would degrade somatic function across the body at an even 
rate, so no effect would itself be disproportionately costly.  
We cannot rule out the possibility that there are a large number of senescence 
causing pleiotropies yet to be discovered. In fact, the unitary nature of development 
virtually ensures that there are. But it seems that the tissue by tissue adjustment of reserve 
capacity may have effects across the soma that match the expectations of Williams and 
Hamilton, without the need to invoke many independent genes. Are tumours such a 
potent selective force in vertebrates that tumour suppression alone could account for 
senescence by the logic of antagonistic pleiotropy? We suspect so.  
We also suspect that selection’s ability to regulate gene expression differentially 
with age allows the late-life silencing of many pleiotropic genes that may have originally 
contributed to senescence. It is therefore conceivable that only a few antagonistic 
pleiotropies continue to produce large enough senescent effects to be easily measured. 
Williams1 foreshadowed this argument in his discussion of the evolution of senescence-
reducing modifiers, but may have underestimated its significance. 
In addition, we now question a potentially falsifying prediction offered Williams1. 
He hypothesised that no individual can have both an unusually vigorous youth and an 
unusually long life. We agree that no individual should be genetically predisposed to 
both, but an individual with long telomeres may exhibit slow senescence accompanied by 
an increased risk of tumour formation yet, by chance, not acquire mutations leading to 
cancer. We suggest that this particular prediction did not allow for the prominent role that 
environmental stochasticity plays in the senescence equation. 
It is interesting that the hypothesised trade-off between youthful vigour and 
longevity does not map directly onto the reserve capacity hypothesis. Though tissue 
repair likely controls longevity in vertebrates, tumour suppression is not the same as 
“youthful vigour”. It is possible that we have overlooked some feature of this system that 
does affect vigour. The accumulation of proto-tumours, for example, may have 
significant negative effects on organismal efficiency. If so, decreases in initial reserve 
capacities would result in smaller proto-tumours thus increasing vigour at a cost to 
longevity. More likely, “youthful vigour” is an unnecessarily restrictive concept and any 
fitness enhancing benefit in youth should be included on the vigour side of the trade-off. 

 
 
 
38
Finally, we are intrigued by the implications of the reserve capacity hypothesis for 
the correlation between body size and longevity. We must stress that Williams1 provides 
an elegant explanation for the widespread tendency of larger animals to live longer lives 
than smaller animals. Williams’ argued that smaller organisms are subject to being eaten 
by a larger variety of predators, thus in small-bodied animals selection for longevity tends 
to be weaker, increasing rates of senescence. The exceptions to the general body-size 
trend clearly demonstrate the power of Williams’ explanation. Birds and bats, for 
example, tend to be extremely long lived for their given sizes. This is presumably due to 
the anti-predator benefits associated with the ability to fly. But our analysis of reserve 
capacity suggests that, in vertebrates, a more fundamental selective effect may have acted 
in concert with predation to favour the evolution of the general body-size/longevity trend. 
As de Lange 19 implies, the smaller an organism is, the more threatened it will tend to be 
by a misplaced growth of some size. Because cell size does not increase with body size, 
effective tumour protection requires small vertebrates to arrest runaway growths at a 
smaller absolute number of cells. Therefore reserve capacity must be kept low, limiting 
the number of replacement cells available for each primary cell in the adult organism. 
This issue of allometry may underlie the tendency of body-size to correlate with 
longevity, and leads us to predict that birds, bats and other vertebrates disproportionately 
long-lived for their size will also be disproportionately burdened by larger proto-tumours 
and more frequent tumours. 
 
Perspective. In the popular imagination, humanity is in a race to “reverse” human ageing 
and to “cure” cancer. Recent discoveries about the connection of telomeres to senescence 
and tumour suppression have fuelled speculation that we may be on the brink of 
accomplishing one or both tasks. We are not. Tumorigenesis is an ever-present threat to 
any large, highly differentiated, self-repairing organism. Proliferative limits provide a 
tumour failsafe, the inevitable cost of which is the gradual failure of our ability to repair 
damage. Though it may seem we are a species plagued by senescence and tumours, we 
are in fact the beneficiaries of selection’s remarkable efficiency at simultaneously 
minimising the harm of these two opposing hazards. 
 

 
 
 
39
Acknowledgements 
 
This paper was submitted to Nature on August 1st, 2000, co-authored with Debbie 
Ciszek (submission number W08077). After it was declined review at Nature, a revised 
version was invited for publication at Experimental Gerontology. The resulting paper was 
published as follows: 
Weinstein, B. and Ciszek, D. (2002). The reserve-capacity hypothesis: 
evolutionary origins and modern implications of the trade-off between tumor-
suppression and tissue-repair. Experimental Gerontology, 37, 615-27. 
 
The acknowledgements that appeared in the original submission are as follows: The 
authors are grateful for the guidance of R. Alexander, S. Austad, P. Coley, R. Dawkins, 
C. Greider, M. Hemann, H. Heying, L. Howard, N. Kurnick, T. Kursar, D. Lahti, D. 
Marshall, D. Molbo, C. Murren, R. Nesse, W. Potts, A. Richards, N. Shefferly, G. Smith, 
F. Solomon, E. Weinstein, K. Weinstein, and G. Williams.

 
 
 
40
Literature Cited 
 
1. 
Williams, G. C. Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. 
Evolution 11, 398-411 (1957). 
2. 
Medawar, P. B. An Unsolved Problem in Biology (H. K. Lewis, London, 1952). 
3. 
Hamilton, W. D. The moulding of senescence by natural selection. Journal of 
Theoretical Biology 12, 12-45 (1966). 
4. 
Campisi, J. The biology of replicative senescence. European Journal of Cancer 
33, 703-709 (1997). 
5. 
Campisi, J. Aging and cancer: The double-edged sword of replicative senescence. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 45, 482-488 (1997). 
6. 
Harley, C. B. in Telomeres and Telomerase (eds. Chadwick, D. J. & Cardew, G.) 
129-144 (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1997). 
7. 
Ricklefs, R. E. & Finch, C. E. Aging: A Natural History (Scientific American 
Library, New York, 1995). 
8. 
Finch, C. E. Longevity, Senescence, and the Genome (University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 1990). 
9. 
Austad, S. N. Retarded senescence in an insular population of Virginia opossums 
(Didelphis virginiana). Journal of Zoology 229, 695-708 (1993). 
10. 
Reznick, D. N. Life history evolution in guppies (Poecilia reticulata): Guppies as 
a model for studying the evolutionary biology of aging. Experimental 
Gerontology 32, 245-258 (1997). 
11. 
Ricklefs, R. E. Evolutionary theories of aging: Confirmation of a fundamental 
prediction, with implications for the genetic basis and evolution of life span. 
American Naturalist 152, 24-44 (1998). 
12. 
Alexander, R. D. The Biology of Moral Systems (A. de Gruyter, Hawthorne, N. 
Y., 1987). 
13. 
Hayflick, L. & Moorhead, P. S. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell 
strains. Exp. Cell Res. 25, 585-621 (1961). 
14. 
Hayflick, L. Biology of human aging. American Journal of the Medical Sciences 
265, 432-445 (1973). 
15. 
Hayflick, L. Aging under glass. Mutation Research 256, 69-80 (1991). 
16. 
Rohme, D. Evidence for a relationship between longevity of mammalian species 
and life spans of normal fibroblasts in vitro and erythrocytes in vivo. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America-Biological 
Sciences 78, 5009-5013 (1981). 

 
 
 
41
17. 
Allsopp, R. C. et al. Telomere length predicts replicative capacity of human 
fibroblasts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 89, 10114-10118 (1992). 
18. 
Chiu, C.-P. & Harley Calvin, B. Replicative senescence and cell immortality: The 
role of telomeres and telomerase. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental 
Biology & Medicine 214, 99-106 (1997). 
19. 
de Lange, T. Telomeres and senescence: Ending the debate. Science 279, 334-335 
(1998). 
20. 
Olovnikov, A. M. A theory of marginotomy: The incomplete copying of template 
margin in enzymic synthesis of polynucleotides and biological significance of the 
phenomenon. Journal of Theoretical Biology 41, 181-190 (1973). 
21. 
Watson, J. Origin of concatameric T7 DNA. Nat. N. Biol. 239, 197-201 (1972). 
22. 
Blackburn, E. H. Telomeres. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 16, 378-381 (1991). 
23. 
Moyzis, R. K. et al. A highly conserved repetitive DNA-sequence, (TTAGGG), 
present at the telomeres of human chromosomes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 85, 6622-6626 (1988). 
24. 
Griffith, J. K. et al. Reduced telomere DNA content is correlated with genomic 
instability and metastasis in invasive human breast carcinoma. Breast Cancer 
Research & Treatment 54, 59-64 (1999). 
25. 
Blackburn, E. H. Telomerases. Annual Review of Biochemistry 61, 113-129 
(1992). 
26. 
Feng, J. et al. The RNA component of human telomerase. Science 269, 1236-1241 
(1995). 
27. 
Weinrich, S., L. et al. Reconstitution of human telomerase with the template RNA 
component hTR and the catalytic protein subunit hTRT. Nature Genetics 17, 498-
502 (1997). 
28. 
Kim, N. W. et al. Specific association of human telomerase activity with immortal 
cells and cancer. Science 266, 2011-2015 (1994). 
29. 
Harley, C. B., Futcher, A. B. & Greider, C. W. Telomeres shorten during aging of 
human fibroblasts. Nature 345, 458-460 (1990). 
30. 
Hastie, N. D. et al. Telomere reduction in human colorectal-carcinoma and with 
aging. Nature 346, 866-868 (1990). 
31. 
Lindsey, J., McGill, N. I., Lindsey, L. A., Green, D. K. & Cooke, H. J. In-vivo 
loss of telomeric repeats with age in humans. Mutation Research 256, 45-48 
(1991). 
32. 
Counter, C. M., Hirte, H. W., Bacchetti, S. & Harley, C. B. Telomerase activity in 
human ovarian carcinoma. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America 91, 2900-2904 (1994). 

 
 
 
42
33. 
Faragher, R. G. A. et al. The gene responsible for Werner syndrome may be a cell 
division "counting" gene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 90, 12030-12034 (1993). 
34. 
Rudolph, K. L. et al. Longevity, stress response, and cancer in aging telomerase-
deficient mice. Cell 96, 701-712 (1999). 
35. 
Blasco, M. A. et al. Telomere shortening and tumor formation by mouse cells 
lacking telomerase RNA. Cell 91, 25-34 (1997). 
36. 
Lee, H. W. et al. Essential role of mouse telomerase in highly proliferative organs. 
Nature 392, 569-574 (1998). 
37. 
Kipling, D. The Telomere (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995). 
38. 
Wright, W. E., Piatyszek, M. A., Rainey, W. E., Byrd, W. & Shay, J. W. 
Telomerase activity in human germline and embryonic tissues and cells. 
Developmental Genetics 18, 173-179 (1996). 
39. 
Black, M. A modified radiographic method for measuring skin thickness. Br. J. 
Dermatol. 81, 661 (1969). 
40. 
Balin, A. K. in Human Biologic Age Determination (ed. Balin, A. K.) 343-373 
(CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1994). 
41. 
Chang, E. & Harley Calvin, B. Telomere length and replicative aging in human 
vascular tissues. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 92, 11190-11194 (1995). 
42. 
Maynard Smith, J. The causes of ageing. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London, Series B 157, 115-127 (1963). 
43. 
Samaras, T. T. & Elrick, H. Height, body size and longevity. Acta Medica 
Okayama 53, 149-169 (1999). 
44. 
Samaras, T. T. & Storms, L. H. Impact of height and weight on life-span. Bulletin 
of the World Health Organization 70, 259-267 (1992). 
45. 
Li, Y., Deeb, B., Pendergrass, W. & Wolf, N. Cellular proliferative capacity and 
life span in small and large dogs. Journal of Gerontology 51A, B403-B408 
(1996). 
46. 
Michell, A. R. Longevity of British breeds of dog and its relationships with sex, 
size, cardiovascular variables and disease. Veterinary Record 145, 625-629 
(1999). 
47. 
Smith, J. R. & Pereira-Smith, O. M. Replicative senescence: Implications for in 
vivo aging and tumor suppression. Science 273, 63-67 (1996). 
48. 
Campisi, J., Dimri, G. & Hara, E. in Handbook of the Biology of Aging (eds. 
Schneider, E. L. & Rowe, J. W.) 121-149 (Academic Press, San Diego, 1996). 
49. 
Johnson, F. B., Sinclair, D. A. & Guarente, L. Molecular biology of aging. Cell 
96, 291-302 (1999). 

 
 
 
43
50. 
Ly, D. H., Lockhart, D. J., Lerner, R. A. & Schultz, P. G. Mitotic misregulation 
and human aging. Science 287, 2486-2492 (2000). 
51. 
National Research Council. Mammalian Models for Research on Aging (National 
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1981). 
52. 
Kipling, D. & Cooke, H. J. Hypervariable ultra-long telomeres in mice. Nature 
347, 400-402 (1990). 
53. 
Alexander, P. in Perspectives in experimental gerontology (ed. Shock, N. W.) 
266-279 (Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois, 1966). 
54. 
Kipling, D. Mammalian telomerase: Catalytic subunit and knockout mice. Human 
Molecular Genetics 6, 1999-2004 (1997). 
55. 
Campbell, K. H. S., McWhir, J., Ritchie, W. A. & Wilmut, I. Sheep cloned by 
nuclear transfer from a cultured cell line. Nature 380, 64-66 (1996). 
56. 
Shiels, P. G. et al. Analysis of telomere lengths in cloned sheep. Nature 399, 316-
317 (1999). 
57. 
Ross, M. H. in Nutrition and aging (ed. Winick, M.) (John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 1976). 
58. 
Sprott, R. L. & Austad, S. N. in Handbook of the biology of aging (eds. 
Schneider, E. L. & Rowe, J. W.) 3-23 (Academic Press, San Diego, 1996). 
59. 
Wolf, N. S., Penn, P. E., Jiang, D. Z., Fei, R. G. & Pendergrass, W. R. Caloric 
restriction: Conservation of in vivo cellular replicative capacity accompanies life-
span extension in mice. Experimental Cell Research 217, 317-323 (1995). 
60. 
Ulaner, G. A. & Giudice, L. C. Developmental regulation of telomerase activity in 
human fetal tissues during gestation. Molecular Human Reproduction 3, 769-773 
(1997). 
61. 
Yashima, K. et al. Expression of the RNA component of telomerase during 
human development and differentiation. Cell Growth & Differentiation 9, 805-
813 (1998). 
62. 
Stabile, I., Grudzinskas, G. & Chard, T. (eds.) Spontaneous Abortion (Springer-
Verlag, London, 1992). 
63. 
Flaxman, S. M. & Sherman, P. W. Morning sickness: A mechanism for protecting 
mother and embryo. The Quarterly Review of Biology 75, 113-148 (2000). 
64. 
Thompson, D. a. W. On Growth and Form (Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1943). 
65. 
Jennings, B. J., Ozanne, S. E., Dorling, M. W. & Hales, C. N. Early growth 
determines longevity in male rats and may be related to telomere shortening in the 
kidney. Febs Letters 448, 4-8 (1999). 
66. 
Forsen, T., Eriksson, J. G., Tuomilehto, J., Osmond, C. & Barker, D. J. P. Growth 
in utero and during childhood among women who develop coronary heart disease: 
Longitudinal study. British Medical Journal 319, 1403-1407 (1999). 

 
 
 
44
67. 
Eriksson, J. G. et al. Catch-up growth in childhood and death from coronary heart 
disease: Longitudinal study. British Medical Journal 318, 427-431 (1999). 
68. 
Burnet, F. M. A modification of Jerne's theory of antibody production using the 
concept of clonal selection. Austral. J. Sci. 20, 67 (1957). 
69. 
Buchkovich, K. J. & Greider, C. W. Telomerase regulation during entry into the 
cell cycle in normal human T cells. Molecular Biology of the Cell 7, 1443-1454 
(1996). 
70. 
Weng, N. P., Granger, L. & Hodes, R. J. Telomere lengthening and telomerase 
activation during human B cell differentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 
10827-10832 (1997). 
71. 
Horwich, A. in Testicular cancer: Investigation and management (ed. Horwich, 
A.) 1-17 (Chapman & Hall Medical, London, 1996). 
72. 
Greider, C. W. Telomeres do d-loop-t-loop. Cell 97, 419-422 (1999). 
73. 
Lanza, R. P. et al. Extension of cell life-span and telomere length in animals 
cloned from senescent cells. Science 288, 665-668 (2000). 
74. 
Khalifa, M. M. Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome Report of a Libyan 
Family and Evidence of Autosomal Recessive Inheritance. Clinical Genetics 35, 
125-132 (1989). 
75. 
Maciel, A. T. Evidence For Autosomal Recessive Inheritance of Progeria 
Hutchinson Gilford. American Journal of Medical Genetics 31, 483-488 (1988). 
76. 
Martin, G. M. in Genetic effects on aging (eds. Bergsma, D. & Harrison, D. E.) 5-
39 (Alen R. Liss, New York, 1978). 
77. 
Greider, C. W. Telomerase activity, cell proliferation, and cancer. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95, 90-92 
(1998). 
78. 
Cairns, J. Mutation selection and the natural history of cancer. Nature 255, 197-
200 (1975). 
79. 
Shay, J. W. & Wright, W. E. in Molecular Biology of Aging. Alfred Benzon 
symposium 44 (eds. Bohr, V. A., Clark, B. F. C. & Stevnsner, T.) 148-158 
(Munksgaard, Copenhagen, 1999). 
80. 
Shay, J. W. Toward identifying a cellular determinant of telomerase repression. 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 91, 4-6 (1999). 
81. 
Wang, J., Hannon, G. J. & Beach, D. H. Risky immortalization with telomerase. 
Nature 405, 754-755 (2000). 
82. 
Holt, S. E. & Shay, J. W. Role of telomerase in cellular proliferation and cancer. 
Journal of Cellular Physiology 180, 10-18 (1999). 
 
 

 
45
Chapter 3 
 
PLATEAUS, RIDGES AND DUNES:  
DIVERSITY GRADIENTS AND ADAPTIVE TOPOGRAPHY 
 
 
The latitudinal gradient of species diversity has been recognized since 1799 
(Humboldt, 1850) and is a strong contender for the most general ecological pattern on 
Earth, yet there remains no consensus on its root cause (Pianka, 1966; Willig et al, 2003; 
Hillebrand, 2004). The pattern exists in the great majority of extant taxa, on all the 
world’s continents and, in every ocean (Hillerbrand, 2004), both at the surface and on the 
sea floor (Rex et al, 1993, 2000; but see Lambshead et al, 2002 for caveat regarding 
marine benthos). 
The generality of the pattern suggests the action of a strong ecological force, 
acting pervasively over evolutionary time, a force that presumably continues into the 
present. For there to be no consensus on what strong, continuing ecological force is 
responsible indicates that something about our approach and/or our fundamental 
assumptions is incorrect and is blinding us to a process so general that it should, by all 
rights, be apparent. 
Ecology, in the narrow sense, makes the implicit assumption that the causes of 
species distributions and the long-term interaction dynamics that explain them can be 
inferred from observations made on short ‘ecological’ timescales. Clearly some patterns, 
like forest succession (Connell and Slayter, 1977; Connell et al, 1987) can be. But the 
presumption that one can extrapolate from observations on short timescales is suspect for 
many other patterns of ecological interest, including the latitudinal diversity gradient. The 
latitudinal diversity gradient must, by its very nature, be explained in terms of species 
creation (speciation), species loss (extinction) and changes in species range (migration), 
all three being rare events that tend to elude observation. Searching for the causes of the

 
46
diversity gradient using the short time-scale tools of classical ecology may simply place 
the answer outside the scope of inquiry. 
The rare event problem is exacerbated in ecology whenever the rare event in 
question is an inversion--a force that typically pulls in one direction, but occasionally 
pulls strongly in the other. In other words, we have reason to suspect that whenever 
selection favors distinct, antagonistic phenotypes on different timescales, that ecological 
investigations are likely to over-rate the significance of the common selective regime, 
and undervalue or miss the significance of the rare one.  
That is particularly hazardous to our analytical framework given the power of 
rare, harsh conditions to bottleneck populations down to their most robust members. To 
the extent that something like drought tolerance is hereditary within a species, a thousand 
year drought will tend to produce a population in its wake that is highly resistant to dry 
conditions. When we study that population ecologically, we are therefore likely to 
observe a mismatch between the tolerances of the individuals in that population, and the 
range of conditions faced in an average lifespan, under average conditions. Further, when 
those tolerances are ‘purchased’ by selection at a cost relative to other desirable traits 
(e.g. competitive efficiency or dispersal ability) we may misunderstand the creature as 
simply inferior unless we see it in the rare circumstances that account for the phenotype 
(for a cautionary tale of this sort see Kenyon et al, 1993; then see Walker et al, 2000). 
This might seem like a minor consideration were it not for the commonality with 
which we observe phenotypic trade-offs both within and between species (e.g. Walters 
and Reich, 1996; Weinstein and Ciszek, 2002). As important as trade-offs have become 
to modern ecological thinking, they are still vastly underrated with respect to their 
significance. We need a general theory of trade-offs with explanatory power. I will 
present a framework for incorporating trade-offs into our ecological and evolutionary 
theory in a manner that unlocks otherwise intractable puzzles like the latitudinal diversity 
gradient.  
The trade-off framework presented here suggests a number of conceptual 
alterations to the way we address issues within ecology. First, it suggests several features 
in adaptive landscape space (the plateaus, ridges and dunes of this chapter’s title) that are 
useful, logically necessary, but absent from the standard toolkit. Second, it suggests that 

 
47
we should be very cautious about assuming the generality of ecological phenomena (e.g. 
the competitive exclusion principle; Hardin, 1960), that may correctly characterize 
dynamics in one biome or zone, and be absent from another. And third, for reasons 
already discussed, we should be extremely cautious about imagining that ecological 
timescales are sufficiently representative of long-term dynamics to allow ecological 
questions to be answered directly through observation and measurement under average 
conditions.  
In the past when I have presented papers outlining the argument described in this 
chapter (first on Barro Colorado Island in 1996, at the University of Michigan in 2003, 
and again at the Perimeter Institute in 2009), I have argued that the discipline of ecology 
generally, and the question of latitudinal diversity gradients in particular, have suffered 
from the historical accident of ecology having been born in the temperate zone, leaving 
ecologists the impossible task of explaining the immense diversity of low latitudes 
according to the ecological rules that seemingly characterize the much lower diversity at 
high latitudes. I argued that Gause (1934) would not have thought to propose the 
competitive exclusion principle, and Hardin (1960) would not have thought to embrace it 
had they been working in highly diverse tropical forests or coral reefs.    
The origins of ecological thinking are, it turns out, a bit more complex than I 
realized. A compelling argument can be made that ecology was in fact founded by a 
young Dane named Warming in the Brazilian tropics beginning in 1863 (Goodland, 
1975). But the remains true that when the modern discipline of ecology emerged in the 
latter half of the 20th century, it was for some time almost entirely temperate. The result 
was that when interest in tropical ecology received serious ecological consideration 
beginning in the late 60s, the race was on to understand tropical diversity in the familiar 
terms of character displacement (Brown and Wilson, 1956), niche partitioning 
(Hutchinson, 1959) and competitive exclusion (Hardin, 1960) that had, to that point in the 
history of ecology, been so useful. 
The result of attempting to shoehorn tropical systems into models built from 
temperate patterns has been less than impressive. In fact, the most accurate model we 
currently have to explain relative species abundances in tropical forests and coral reefs 
requires that we treat the species in question as if they are not interacting at all (see 

 
48
Volkov et al, 2007 and the references therein) despite the fact that intense, ongoing 
competition for limiting resources is readily apparent in these systems (e.g. the trees are 
tall in lowland tropical forests). 
The largest obstacle to credibly explaining the latitudinal diversity gradient in 
rigorous, predictive terms is knowing what features of the pattern are really in need of an 
explanation. Had the modern study of ecology begun where the majority of extant species 
are found, we would likely intuit that limiting similarity (MacArthur and Levins, 1967) 
can be zero (May and MacArthur, 1972; May, 1973), and that competitive exclusion is an 
important process, but not one we have an analytical basis to automatically expect for any 
given pair of ecologically similar species in sympatry. Starting from a tropical vantage 
point we would see that the central question demanding a mechanistic answer is not “how 
do so many similar species coexist in tropical habitats?” but rather “why are the 
temperate zones species-poor and dominated by generalists that differ widely with 
respect to competitive ability?” 
 
A framework for understanding trade-offs 
 
Trade-offs are inherently negative relationships between desirable characteristics. 
They are emergent phenomena in the sense that innovations (inherently crude structures) 
may be simultaneously refined in several respects at once, giving the impression that the 
characteristics in question are independent of each other. But optimization ultimately 
reaches a point—what economists call an ‘efficient frontier’—beyond which 
simultaneous improvement is no longer possible. Along that trade-off function, further 
improvements to one trait negatively impact the other, and visa versa.  
This emergent nature becomes apparent through a technological example. The 
Wright Flyer, the first airplane, was crude by any standard except comparison with its 
contemporaries. It was neither agile, nor efficient. But it ushered in an era of rapid 
refinement in which planes, including the Wright Flyer, were quickly improved in every 
regard simultaneously. During that era of refinement, the trade-offs that would eventually 
emerge would not have been apparent. Speed, safety, cargo and passenger carrying 
capacity, agility, efficiency all went up together. That pattern quickly reached an end, 

 
49
though, and we now live in an era in which some planes are fantastically agile while 
other planes have ability to carry huge loads. But they are necessarily different planes, 
and there has been a powerful trend toward diversification. Many pair-wise trade-offs are 
simultaneously apparent, and functional diversity is found along many, but not all of 
these trade-offs functions.  
This time series suggests three evolutionary phases, equally relevant to all realms 
with emergent design trade-offs, including biology, technology and economics. The three 
phases are innovation, optimizing selection (i.e. refinement) and diversifying selection 
(i.e. adaptive radiation). (See Figure 1.) 
 
 
Figure 1:  
Three evolutionary phases: Innovation, optimizing selection, and 
diversifying selection 
 
 
This trade-off is sometimes referred to as a ‘perfect’ trade-off, meaning 
that along the frontier, the fitness benefit arising from increases in 
capacity A come at a cost in B that exactly balances.  

 
50
If you juggle real world trade-offs in your mind you will discover that there exist 
many imperfect trade-offs in which costs and benefits clearly do not balance (the slope is 
not 45 degrees) . No diversity is expected along such trade-offs because competitors that 
move in the direction that provides net benefits will out compete competitors that do not 
move. All competitors should therefore pile up at the bargain end of such a trade-off, and 
we observers may therefore not realize that a trade-off exists at all. Take for example the 
question of car safety vs. fuel efficiency. Eliminating seatbelts will improve the fuel 
efficiency of any car. But the fuel savings would be tiny, and the reduction in safety 
would be spectacular. So we don’t expect to see diversity in strategies in spite of the fact 
that a genuine trade-off lurks there. The trade-off is too extreme (or trivial, depending on 
which characteristic you focus on) for rational competitors to disagree over it (Fig 2). 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  
Imperfect trade-offs: Extreme and trivial  

 
51
But if we follow the example of safety and fuel efficiency through to its logical 
conclusion we find something important, that has a deep relevance to biological trade-
offs. There exist foolish strategies and bargains on both sides of the safety vs. fuel 
efficiency trade-off. A fool could remove the seatbelts from his car to improve mileage, 
but his equally foolish neighbor could drive a military tank, thereby attaining a great deal 
of safety at an unacceptable cost in terms of fuel. We don’t expect to see either strategy  
commonly employed. Instead we expect a range of vehicles with an inverse correlation 
between safety and efficiency (a pattern made noisy by the fact that there are many other 
trade-offs playing out simultaneously). The range within which we see actual, realized 
diversity should be bounded by the limits of where reasonable competitors could disagree 
labeled ‘Zone of Equivalence’ in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3:  
Zone of equivalence  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this, as any other, diminishing returns curve, the greater the capacity in A, the 
larger the costs in B per unit of improvement in A. If we imagine selection acting 
on species with respect to characteristics that are functionally closely tied, we 
can begin to see why ‘perfect’ physiological, morphological, behavioral and 
ecological trade-offs are so commonly observed, and why they support the 
evolution and maintenance of diversity. 

 
52
Species are pushed towards the diminishing returns frontier (the line that limits 
further improvement without compromise) by optimizing selection (Fig. 1). Species are 
pushed away from the ends of that curve by the relative bargains in the middle. Within 
the zone of equivalence, they are favored by resource competition to spread out. The zone 
of equivalence, if mapped in adaptive landscape space would look like a ridge, a set of 
contiguous peaks of equal altitude owing to their similarity with respect to fitness. 
Multiple trade-offs of this type interacting in adaptive landscape space (e.g. growth rate 
vs. resource defense vs. dispersal capacity) describe a plateau, a set of contiguous points 
over which strategic variation occurs without providing absolute competitive advantages. 
If a species reaches a given frontier in design-space first, with no interspecies 
competition, it is likely to spread out (generalize) over the zone of equivalence. If there 
are other species in the zone of equivalence already, all species present will be 
competitively pushed toward any open spots, where competition is low. Once the line is 
saturated, there is no reason to expect limiting similarity, because within that zone, costs 
balance benefits as species move along the frontier. On the competitively saturated line, 
character displacement is no longer favored, and the number of species in a given niche 
can rise with time.  
This model matches the initially bizarre observations that led Hubbell (2001) to 
propose the unified neutral theory of biodiversity, but also has the power to account for 
the relative species poverty of the temperate zones, as well as the tendency for 
competitors in the temperate zones to exclude each other. It also matches an important 
theorem in economics which states that ‘efficient markets’ fluctuate randomly 
(Samuelson,1965). 
Tropical forests and coral reefs are fantastically diverse and fiercely competitive, 
yet the effects of competition can, to first approximation, be ignored in predicting relative 
species abundances and changes in population size (Volkov et al, 2007; Hubbell, 2001). 
The reason for that seeming paradox now comes into focus. Design trade-offs are not 
particular to a species. They are extrinsic constraints, arising directly, in a fundamental 
way, out of physics and chemistry, limiting what is possible within a given segment of 
design space. Hubbell (2001) has separately reached similar conclusions. Species that 
reach these limits will naturally tend to evolve toward the zone of equivalence, and once 

 
53
there, they lack the ability to competitively exclude other species—They can’t exceed the 
frontier without a new innovation. Falling below the line would render them 
competitively inferior, so selection holds them to the line. Leaving the zone of 
equivalence in either direction produces net losses. And within the zone, competitors are 
equal.    
 
What does this model predict about tropical ecosystems? 
1. 
Fierce, active competition with no net trend in population sizes of the 
species present—population sizes should drift as individuals fight to the 
death with a sea of equal rivals. 
2. 
Every limiting resource falls to exceedingly low levels. 
3. 
Recognizable niches, with no limit on species number within a given 
niche. 
4. 
Specialization rates should be high. 
5. 
Species ranges should be narrow. 
6. 
Ecological tolerances should also be narrow. 
7. 
It should be almost impossible to invade a mature mainland tropical 
habitat because invaders can, at best, come in as equal competitors (since 
they are bound by the same extrinsic design limits) and they inevitably 
come in at very low population numbers—an equal competitor, starting 
with a population size near zero, fluctuating randomly, is almost certain to 
go extinct before it becomes common enough to call it a successful 
invader. And if the competitor comes from slightly different habitat, it will 
tend to be an inferior competitor in the novel environment.  
 
And what does this framework predict about the temperate zones? Why should 
they look any different? 
The temperate zones fluctuate over a much larger range of climatic conditions on 
every time scale of biological relevance. And on timescales greater than an individual 
lifespan, this irregular fluctuation creates an inherent evolutionary hazard. The trade-off 

 
54
lines that describe the design limits will oscillate, preventing species from converging on 
a strategy that would render them equal competitors.  
Consider, for example, glaciations, driven by long-periodicity Milankovitch 
cycles. Following a glaciation, all individuals persisting in temperate locations that 
exhibit severe climate alteration will tend to be robust, having descended from 
populations of individuals that weathered the severe event in one way or another. They 
will repopulate the landscape as the glaciers recede, creating broadly distributed 
populations of climatologically robust individuals.  
But the tolerances that offer protection from harsh climate come at some cost, as 
argued above. Those costs would tend to be a bargain while the temperate zones are 
glaciated, but those costs would be a competitive disadvantage during the mild conditions 
that characterize the interglacial (Fig 4) . Competition in mild conditions will favor the 
elimination of the very robustness factors that allowed persistence through glaciation, as 
competitive efficiency becomes a bargain relative to climatological tolerance. And the 
populations that shed those robustness factors fastest will enjoy a comparative advantage 
over populations that retain them longer.  
That flip-flop in dominance between biotic and abiotic hostile forces creates no 
safe refuge. Species that retain robustness and are slow to become competitively efficient 
will be vulnerable to competitive exclusion by species that are quick to adapt to the mild 
conditions. When the glaciers descend again, the dominant competitors in the mild period 
will be fragile with respect to the harsh climate. Each oscillation will tend to wipe species 
out on both ends: glaciation will drive many good competitors to extinction, and 
competition will eliminate many robust creatures. It is an adaptive dune, where peaks and 
valleys undulate, and species can’t help but bounce around in response. 

 
55
Figure 4: Robustness vs. efficiency in glacial and inter-glacial periods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
56
What does this model predict about the temperate zones?  
The first thing to realize is that, unlike the tropics, it matters when, in a 
paleontological sense, you ask the question.  
1. 
In all periods the temperate zones should be species-poor, climbing slowly 
due to migration and speciation after glaciers recede.  
2. 
During an interglacial, species should exist over broad geographic ranges,  
3. 
During an interglacial, species should exist with high levels of 
intraspecific variation. 
4. 
Species in similar niches (but in different locations) should vary widely in 
competitive ability, being constantly in motion from a past optimum to a 
new one. 
5. 
When similar species encounter each other, one should always be 
competitively superior and should exclude the other. 
6. 
When humans transport creatures between temperate locations with 
similar average (interglacial) conditions, those organisms should tend to 
invade if their native habitat has lower climatic variance than their new 
location. 
7. 
As a consequence, invasions from temperate habitat A to temperate habitat 
B should imply immunity of habitat A to invasion by creatures from B 
(rather than reciprocal invisibility). 
8. 
Resources over which temperate species compete should be captured with 
much lower efficiency than in similar tropical habitats, leaving more in 
excess. 
9. 
The level of within habitat excess resource should drop slightly as the 
interglacial period progresses and selection favors efficient competitors.  
 
How species come to divide up space, and resist the hazards in time 
 
The model above raises two interesting questions, the answers to which may 
resolve another longstanding puzzle: (1) In habitats where competition remains the 
dominant selective force (because fluctuations are narrow and/or highly predictable), how 

 
57
do generalists diversify into specialists without physical barriers to interbreeding? And 
(2), is there any conceivable adaptive response that might diminish the tendency for 
competitors in widely fluctuating environments to drive each other to surrender their 
heritable robustness factors during mild times? 
It is perhaps best to approach both questions from the other side by confronting a 
seemingly disjunct mystery. Costly sexual displays are traditionally explained in two 
ways. First, “sexy son models” (Weatherhead and Robertson, 1979) suggest that arbitrary 
sensory preferences (typically in females) favor corresponding elaborations in males. 
Females with such preferences therefore tend toward the production of sons that are 
attractive to other females with such preferences, leading to a positive feedback for the 
elaborations and the preferences. These models have a hollow ring, though, because the 
large cost typical of most displays ought to put the brakes on the positive feedback 
mechanism: the more elaborate the displays and the stronger the preferences, the greater 
the comparative ecological advantage drab males and display-indifferent females should 
enjoy. That same criticism can be leveled at the runaway portion of Fisherian models 
(Fisher, 1930).  
The alternative to sexy-son and runaway models has traditionally been good-
genes models in which male display functions as an honest advertisement of male genetic 
quality (for review see Zahavi and Zahavi, 1997). These models avoid the pitfall 
mentioned above, but they raise another question. If females chose genetically superior 
males by using displays as a proxy, inferior genes ought to be strongly disfavored. The 
result over time should be a drop in the value of the displays and the preferences for them 
as heritability is reduced by the fixation of good genes. When ‘bad’ genes become rare, 
indifferent females and drab males ought to have an ecological advantage due to their 
lesser investment in vigilance and display. That should produce an oscillating temporal 
pattern, where display and choosiness are amplified when ‘bad’ genes are common, and 
fall as ‘bad’ genes become rare, reduction in female vigilance allowing new ‘bad’ genes 
produced by mutation to creep up in frequency.  But no such fluctuating pattern is 
known.  
The Zahavi handicap model (Zahavi and Zahavi, 1997) provides a potential 
solution in that costliness itself is an integrative measure of male well-being. But it 

 
58
requires the ecological benefits to a female’s daughters to more than outweigh the display 
costs to her sons. And, although there may be situations in which that would be the case, 
it is unlikely to be stable because the costs to displaying sons remain high even when 
‘bad’ genes are rare and the benefits to daughters are consequently small.  
My contention is that sexual selection is misunderstood for two reasons. First, it is 
actually two distinct phenomena that have been studied as if they were one; Second, 
many sexual adaptations are responses to selection on lineages, rather than on 
individuals, which most models assume. 
The first type of sexual selection is likely to be characteristic of habitats that are 
temporally stable over long periods. In such habitats, special variation in ecological 
conditions cants the generalism/specialization trade-off heavily in the direction of 
specialization. That is because in a widely distributed population, individuals that have 
broad capacities pay a cost for them that is likely not to be recovered in the narrower 
range of conditions under which individuals compete. Conspecifics that function more 
efficiently, under a narrower range of conditions, will tend to become competitively 
dominant under those conditions at the cost of being inferior under other conditions.  
Therefore, as Darwin (see Stauffer, 1975), Fisher (1930), Endler (1977) and 
others have recognized, there should be a tension on broadly distributed species to 
fragment parapatricaly (for review see Coyne and Orr, 2004). The traditional problem for 
models of parapatric speciation is the need for sufficient ‘reinforcement’ to produce 
multiple species absent a physical barrier to interbreeding. Sexual selection has been 
proposed as a mechanism that can produce that effect. What has been less well 
understood is that local adaptation in stable environments provides a definition of ‘good’ 
genes and ‘bad’ genes that does not predict fluctuation. If two adjacent locations differ in 
their parameters such that competitively dominant individuals in one location are inferior 
at the other, then each environment is likely to be a perpetual source of ‘bad’ genes for 
the other, favoring female vigilance and therefore male display (see Hereford, 2009 for 
review of evidence for local adaptation and fitness trade-offs). 
It is also true that a local adaptation model of sexual selection explains the 
otherwise enigmatic richness of sexual signals. Take for example the lekking behavior of 
the Satin Bowerbird, Ptilonorhynchus violaceus (Patricelli et al, 2003). Males build a 

 
59
structure of purely esthetic value, adorn it with rare items that must be collected and 
defended against rivals, and they dance intricately around the structure. Now imagine a 
robust, healthy male adapted to ecological conditions in some other part of the species 
range—conditions dissimilar to the ones the female’s offspring will face. That male 
might fly in, evict a resident male and attempt to mate. Were the female to simply assess 
his current condition, she might think him a good choice and in so doing select for her 
offspring genes that are well suited to some other environment (genes that are locally 
bad). On the other hand, if she assesses his ability to dance around the bower gracefully, 
she may well recognize him as an interloper, as it takes practice to dance smoothly over 
an idiosyncratic surface. If he dances well, he has been there long enough to become 
proficient dancing around the particular structure. 
Now imagine the male flies in from afar, evicts a resident male from an attractive 
bower and practices the dance to perfection, all while defending and procuring rare (blue) 
objects and feeding himself. In such a case, the female would not be making a mistake 
mating with him because, wherever his genes may be from, they are well enough suited 
to her environment that he is able to forage, defend and practice the dance—all under 
local conditions—for a long enough period that he can dance with grace. If a male is 
healthy, well fed, has a nice bower and dances well around it, he necessarily well adapted 
to the local environment, whether he built the structure and collected the rare items or 
not. Similar arguments can be made for many sex displays and preferences in many 
comparatively stable environments, the key being that they provide an indicator of 
success coupled with an indicator that the wellbeing is being maintained locally.    
But what about displays in fluctuating environments where the landscape favors 
broadly distributed generalists and local adaptation is not prevalent? Here a distinct 
possibility emerges. As discussed above, periodic harsh conditions will tend to bottleneck 
populations down to the most robust subset of individuals. As mild conditions return, 
intraspecific competition will tend to erode the heritable robustness factors that are 
required to get through harsh times, as instantaneous natural selection (i.e. selection to 
conditions in the immediate circumstance) favors competitive efficiency over robustness. 
Lineages that respond to that instantaneous selection become vulnerable to 
fluctuation in the long term. But females are in a position to exert a countervailing force 

 
60
that is capable of preventing their own lineages from going down that dangerous path. By 
favoring males that show an ability to acquire resources above and beyond ecological 
requirements, males are effectively advertising the presence of genes that are likely to be 
robust in harsh times.  
It may at first seem like elaborate male displays would have the opposite effect, 
burdening creatures that invest in them such that they would be more vulnerable to harsh 
conditions. And that supposed tendency of costly displays to reduce the mean fitness of 
the population has been proposed and widely discussed elsewhere (Haldane, 1932; 
Lande, 1980; Kondrashov and Yampolsky 1996). But that discussion misses an important 
characteristic of many, if not all, such displays: costs can be reduced in response to 
environmental changes.  
Peacocks (Pavo cristatus), for example, re-grow their tails every year, and the 
size varies with the animal’s current condition (Loyau, 2005). In other words, instead of 
making large ratty looking structures, males respond to harsh conditions by producing 
smaller tails. Presumably, therefore, during an extremely harsh event, males that would in 
favorable times have had the most excess resource, and consequently the most elaborate 
displays, would have much smaller displays. Males who would have had smaller displays 
under mild conditions would presumably be absent under harsh conditions, because their 
reserves would be inadequate for survival. Females would still favor the males with the 
relatively biggest displays, small as those displays might become.  
According to this model, female choice in fluctuating environments functions as 
an evolutionary tensioner, counteracting the tendency of mild conditions to favor 
competitively efficient—and therefore climatically vulnerable—lineages. In order for this 
model to function, displays must be expensive, must track current condition of the 
creature in question, and be recoverable when conditions are not favorable. Displays 
being expensive and tracking current condition has been well documented (for Eastern 
Bluebirds [Sialia sialis] see Siefferman, 1998; for Brown Headed Cowbirds [Molothrus 
ater] see McGraw, 2002; for Blue Grosbeaks [Passerina caerulea] see Keyser and Hill, 
2000; for Blue-Black Grassquit [Volatinia jacarina] see Doucet, 2002). And the 
recoverability of expense is evident in any system where calls or dances can be reduced 
in duration or intensity, or structures can be reduced under harsh conditions. It is also the 

 
61
case that male-male competition (e.g. rutting behavior in bovids) can serve the same 
function relative to climatic fluctuation—robust males effectively demonstrating excess 
capacity that could be redirected in climatically unfavorable circumstances. The 
migratory behavior of anadromous salmonids may even be a manifestation of tensioning 
selection exerted by females, as it is clearly a demonstration of recoverable excess 
capacity on the part of males, demanded by females.  
This model is closely related to the handicap model, but it has two important 
advantages. First, it does not require the benefits to daughters to exceed the cost to sons, 
because the cost to sons is reduced or recovered, potentially in its entirety, when natural 
selection is strongest in harsh times. It therefore predicts that sexual selection in such 
systems enhances lineage fitness rather than detracting from it. Second, it resolves the 
question of why bad genes persist in the face of strong female choice against them—the 
‘bad’ genes are genes well suited to mild conditions and ill suited to recurrent harsh 
conditions.  
 
 

 
62
Literature Cited 
 
Brown, W.L. and Wilson, E.O. (1956). Character displacement. Systematic Zoology, 5(2), 49-64. 
Connell, J.H., Noble, I.R., Slatyer, R.O. (1987). On the mechanisms producing successional 
change. Oikos, 50(1), 136-7. 
Connell, J.H. and Slatyer, R.O. (1977). Mechanisms of succession in natural communities and 
their role in community stability and organization. American Naturalist, 111(982), 1119-44. 
Coyne, J.A. and Orr, H.A. (2004). Speciation. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates. 
Doucet, S.M. (2002). Structural plumage coloration, male body size, and condition in the Blue-
Black Grassquit. Condor, 104(1), 30-8. 
Endler, J.A. (1977). Geographic variation, speciation, and clines. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
 Fisher, R.A. (1930). The genetical theory of natural selection. London: Oxford (original 
publisher: The Clarendon Press). 
Gause, G.F. (1934). The struggle for existence. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins 
Goodland, R.J. (1975). The tropical origin of ecology: Eugen Warming’s jubilee. Oikos, 26(2), 
240-5. 
Haldane, J.B.S. (1932). The causes of evolution. London: Harper. 
Hardin, G. (1960). Competitive exclusion principle. Science, 131(3409), 1292-7. 
Hereford, J. (2009). A quantitative survey of local adaptation and fitness trade-offs. American 
Naturalist, 173(5), 579-88. 
Hillebrand, H. (2004). On the generality of the latitudinal diversity gradient. American 
Naturalist, 163(2), 192-211. 
Hubbell, S.P. (2001). The unified neutral theory of biodiversity and biogeography. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Humboldt, A.V. (1850). Views of nature: or, Contemplations on the sublime phenomena of 
creation, with scientific illustrations. London: Henry George Bohn. 
Hutchinson, G.E. (1959). Homage to Santa-Rosalia or Why are there so many kinds of animals. 
American Naturalist, 93(870), 145-59. 
Keyser, A.J. and Hill, G.E. (2000). Structurally based plumage coloration is an honest signal of 
quality in male blue grosbeaks. Behavioral Ecology, 11(2), 202-9. 
Kenyon, C., Chang, J., Gensch, E., Rudner, A., Tabtiang, R. (1993). A C-Elegans Mutant That 
Lives Twice as Long as Wild-Type. Nature, 366(6454), 461-4. 
Kondrashov, A.S. and Yampolsky, L.Y. (1996). Evolution of amphimixis and recombination 
under fluctuating selection in one and many traits. Genetical Research, 68(2), 165-73. 
Lambshead, P.J.D., Brown, C.J., Ferrero, T.J., Mitchell, N.J., Smith, C.R., et al. (2002). 
Latitudinal diversity patterns of deep-sea marine nematodes and organic fluxes: a test from 

 
63
the central equatorial Pacific. Marine Ecology-Progress Series, 236(129-35. 
Lande, R. (1980). Sexual dimorphism, sexual selection, and adaptation in polygenic characters. 
Evolution, 34(2), 292-305. 
Loyau, A., Saint Jalme, M., Cagniant, C., Sorci, G. (2005). Multiple sexual advertisements 
honestly reflect health status in peacocks (Pavo cristatus). Behavioral Ecology and 
Sociobiology, 58(6), 552-7. 
Macarthur, R. and Levins, R. (1967). The limiting similarity, convergence, and divergence of 
coexisting species. American Naturalist, 101(921), 377-86. 
May, R.M. (1973). Stability and complexity in model ecosystems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
May, R.M., and Macarthur, R. H. (1972). Niche overlap as a function of environmental 
variability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 69(5), 1109-13. 
McGraw, K.J., Mackillop, E.A., Dale, J., Hauber, M.E. (2002). Different colors reveal different 
information: how nutritional stress affects the expression of melanin- and structurally based 
ornamental plumage. Journal of Experimental Biology, 205(23), 3747-55. 
Patricelli, G.L., Uy, J.A.C., Borgia, G. (2003). Multiple male traits interact: attractive bower 
decorations facilitate attractive behavioural displays in satin bowerbirds. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences, 270(1531), 2389-95. 
Pianka, E.R. (1966). Latitudinal Gradients in Species Diversity - a Review of Concepts. 
American Naturalist, 100(910), 33-46. 
Rex, M.A., Stuart, C.T., Coyne, G. (2000). Latitudinal gradients of species richness in the deep-
sea benthos of the North Atlantic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 97(8), 4082-5. 
Rex, M.A., Stuart, C.T., Hessler, R.R., Allen, J.A., Sanders, H.L., Wilson, G.D.F. (1993). 
Global-Scale Latitudinal Patterns of Species-Diversity in the Deep-Sea Benthos. Nature, 
365(6447), 636-9. 
Samuelson, P.A. (1965). Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate randomly. Industrial 
Management Review, 6(2), 41-9. 
Siefferman, L., Hill, G.E. (2003). Structural and melanin coloration indicate parental effort and 
reproductive success in male eastern bluebirds. Behavioral Ecology, 14(6), 855-61. 
Stauffer, R.C., ed. (1975). Charles Darwin's Natural Selection: Being The Second Part Of His 
Big Species Book Written From 1856 To 1858. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
 Volkov, I., Banavar, J.R., Hubbell, S.P., Maritan, A. (2007). Patterns of relative species 
abundance in rainforests and coral reefs. Nature, 450(7166), 45-9. 
Walker, D.W., McColl, G., Jenkins, N.L., Harris, J., Lithgow, G.J. (2000). Natural selection - 
Evolution of lifespan in C-elegans. Nature, 405(6784), 296-7. 
Walters, M.B., Reich, P.B. (1996). Are shade tolerance, survival, and growth linked? Low light 
and nitrogen effects on hardwood seedlings. Ecology, 77(3), 841-53. 

 
64
Weatherhead, P.J., Robertson, R.J. (1979). Offspring quality and the polygyny threshold: the 
sexy son hypothesis. American Naturalist, 113(2), 201-8. 
Weinstein, B.S., Ciszek, D. (2002). The reserve-capacity hypothesis: evolutionary origins and 
modern implications of the trade-off between tumor-suppression and tissue-repair. 
Experimental Gerontology, 37(5), 615-27. 
Willig, M.R., Kaufman, D.M., Stevens, R.D. (2003). Latitudinal gradients of biodiversity: 
Pattern, process, scale, and synthesis. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics, 
34, 273-309. 
Zahavi, A., Zahavi, A. (1997). The handicap principle: a missing piece of Darwin's puzzle. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
65
Chapter 4 
 
THE BETTER ANGELS OF OUR NATURE:   
GROUP STABILITY AND THE EVOLUTION OF MORAL 
TENSION 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Moral systems require individuals to act in service to their social groups.  Despite the 
human tendency to view moral norms as invariant and constantly deserving of adherence, 
we vary not only in the moral norms we espouse but also in the degree to which our 
behavior reflects those norms.  Nevertheless, moral systems exhibit patterns and 
complexity that suggest the action of natural selection.  We propose that much observed 
variation in commitment to the group can be explained by a rule of stability-dependent 
cooperation, where the adaptive level of individual commitment varies inversely with the 
stability of the social group.  This hypothesis is rooted in the understanding that humans 
are caught in an evolutionary trade-off between two methods of increasing reproductive 
success: competing with fellow group members, and increasing the stability of the group 
relative to other groups.  If cooperation is stability-dependent, however, human groups in 
times of high stability and low cooperation may be susceptible to fast-acting extrinsic 
threats as well as self-destructive competitive races to the bottom.  In light of this, we 
hypothesize that the absolutism and unchangeableness commonly attributed to moral 
norms serves a group stability insurance function, and present predictions from this 
hypothesis. 
 
Key words:  morality, evolution, inter-group competition, cooperation, altruism

 
66
”We are not enemies, but friends.  We must not be enemies.  Though passion may 
have strained it must not break our bonds of affection.  The mystic chords of 
memory, stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart 
and hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, 
when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.” 
-Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address (1861). 
 
1.  Introduction  
The history of evolutionary approaches to morality has been characterized by 
debate between those who claim that “evolution has, as a matter of fact, constructed 
human beings to act for the community good” (Richards, 1987: 623-624;  see also Ruse, 
1986; Sober & Wilson, 1998), and a diverse opposition maintaining either that morality is 
selectively neutral, or that it requires us to combat the evolutionary process and “rebel 
against the tyranny of the selfish replicators” (Dawkins, 1976; see also Huxley, 1894; 
Williams, 1988).  Despite the productivity of this discussion (Maienschein & Ruse, 
1999), this paper argues that neither general perspective is sufficiently explanatory; moral 
action is not always adaptive, but neither is it neutral or maladaptive.  We argue instead 
that the propensity for moral deliberation is the fitness enhancing characteristic, any 
given moral action shifting between adaptive and maladaptive depending on context.  
This paper draws attention to the significant variation humans exhibit in individual 
commitment to moral norms, and proposes that the variation represents generally 
adaptive responses to dynamic social environments.  
Although psychologists are intensely aware of the importance of social influences 
on morality, they are less aware of whether and how individual commitment to moral 
responsibility varies with societal variables (Hartup & van Lieshout, 1995).  This gap 
provides an opening for hypotheses that predict empirical trends based on an evolutionary 
consideration of the nature of morality.  This paper presents two principles that predict 
variability in individual commitment to moral norms as a function of one’s perceived 
social context. 
A background assumption for this discussion is that a moral rule tends to be 
manifest in consciousness as absolute, in two senses.  First, when people promote one 
alternative as morally correct, they imply that it is superior to all others in some general 
way.  Regardless of our actions or desires, we tend to treat moral rules as deserving of 

 
67
absolute adherence.  Second, humans tend to consider moral rules absolute in the sense 
that they carry an implication of permanence across time and space.  Despite moral 
variation within and between individuals, humans tend to operate under the assumption 
of an underlying truth to moral rules that does not change (Mackie, 1981).  This idea that 
moral absolutism is widespread and general is a refutable psychological and sociological 
hypothesis.  If morals are deemed absolute in the first sense (deserving of absolute 
adherence), people should consistently endorse alternatives they deem morally right, even 
if their behavior or desires conflict with these moral precepts; and if morals are deemed 
absolute in the second sense (invariable in time and space), people should tend to 
evaluate the attitudes and behaviors of others according to their own moral belief 
systems, without regard for cultural or historical differences.   
 
2.  Commitment to moral rules varies 
The central problem to be addressed in this paper is that despite moral absolutism, 
people’s lives exhibit variation in commitment and adherence to the moral rules they 
recognize.  Humans deliberate, calculate, and often struggle-- sometimes adhering to the 
rules, sometimes not.  Perhaps the central paradox of morality is the fact that behavior 
does not always match the moral rules espoused by the agent.  Moral rules are considered 
absolute, but adherence is facultative.   
When social and natural scientists have asked why this apparent incongruity 
exists, their answers often fall into two broad categories.  One general solution is to view 
moral rules as contrary to self-interest, such that the two are continually in opposition.  
The other, perhaps more common, solution is to see morality as always consistent with 
globally calculated self-interest, and our moral struggles and deliberation as internal 
conflict between short-term and long-term self-interest.  Both these alternatives interpret 
variation in commitment to moral norms as a maladaptive byproduct of a weakness or 
inconsistency in human psyche.  Either the difficulty of self-sacrifice or the difficulty of 
foregoing short-term benefits for long-term ones is proposed as the psychological 
constraint that limits compliance with moral rules.   
An evolutionary perspective raises doubts about the explanatory power of both 
these solutions.  If moral behavior were simply a hindrance to the competitive 

 
68
ascendancy of the individual, one would expect it to dwindle, and if it were simply 
adaptive, then absolute compliance would evolve and presumably sweep to ‘fixation’.  
Given this situation, Peters (2003) recently drew attention to the fact that evolutionary 
studies of morality have still failed to produce an effective explanation of the fact that 
humans appear to be disposed both toward and against prosocial or group-serving 
behavior.   
What, therefore, needs to be explained?  What is the hypothesized locus of 
adaptation?  An attempt to explain the adaptive significance of perfectly moral behavior, 
although a common goal, is misguided since such behavior is never observed.  We 
contend that a successful theory must address the adaptive significance of the facultative 
adherence to moral absolutes.  From this perspective, the traits that appear to be 
adaptations are the capacity for moral behavior and the tendency toward moral 
deliberation, as distinct from the execution of any particular behaviors all the time.  This 
is similar to Nesse’s (2001) suggestion that natural selection may have shaped 
“commitment strategies” for effective use in society.  If this is correct, the key to 
understanding morality from an evolutionary perspective lies in discovering the extrinsic 
factors that govern moral deliberation and moral commitment.  The merit of an 
evolutionary explanation for moral behavior can be judged on its ability to predict what 
conditions will produce compliance versus defection.  Can variability in human 
environments explain our plasticity in following the rules?  
 
3.  Morality and intergroup competition 
Richard Alexander has shown that two related facts are key elements in an 
evolutionary understanding of morality.  First, humans "evolved to live in groups, within 
which they both cooperate and compete and outside of which they presumably failed 
consistently"; secondly, "some acts of costly beneficence enable the survival of the entire 
group, when that outcome is essential for our own survival" (Alexander, 2004; see also 
1992; 1987).  Social grouping evolved in humans in an unprecedented way, with low 
within-group relatedness (relative to eusocial animals) and multiple breeding males 
within groups.  Alexander built on earlier writers such as Darwin (1871) and Keith 
(1949) in explaining the evolution of this phenomenon.  At first our grouping was 

 
69
probably maintained by selection for predator avoidance, and later for cooperative group-
hunting (Alexander, 1989), but eventually, as humans reduced their susceptibility to 
"hostile forces of nature", the main threat to an individual's reproductive success became 
other people, and competition among human groups became the primary function of 
group living.  Human cooperation within groups, then, probably evolved as a way to 
compete between groups, as individual reproductive success was served increasingly by 
maintaining solidarity with one's fellows (Alexander, 1990).  The most important 
mechanisms for this cooperation appear to have been (a) extensive and differential 
nepotism, and, arising in this context, (b) social reciprocity of two different sorts.  The 
direct sort is the process of "indefinitely continuing interactions between intelligent 
beings in which each can benefit from cooperating with the other, and… defection… will 
in the long run represent net losses to the defector." (Alexander, 1992; see also Trivers, 
1971).  The indirect sort of reciprocity arises when multiple parties interact in the same 
way that two do in direct reciprocity.  In a species with powers of observation, memory, 
and communication of individual reputations within a social group, rewards for 
cooperating (and punishments for defecting) can be administered by "society at large, or 
from other than the actual recipient of beneficence" (Alexander, 1979). 
If humans have tended throughout their history to fail outside social groups, and if 
threats from other groups have rendered the suppression of competition within a group 
necessary for individual reproductive success, it is not surprising that individuals should 
often subjugate their own interests to those of their groups.  Insofar as morality requires 
attention to group causes such as the welfare of others, morality functions as social 
cement and thus tends to contribute to long-term individual interests, i.e. fitness.  
Moreover, as indirect reciprocity became important for insuring service to the group, 
individuals perceived as morally upstanding would gain additional benefits through the 
approbation of others.  These two interactive processes are broadly similar to the two 
kinds of games (“public goods” and “image scoring”) that recent experimental studies 
have employed to illustrate the dynamics of human cooperation (e.g., Milinski et al., 
2002). 
Indirect reciprocity may be able to account for part of the facultative or inconstant 
nature of human commitment to moral norms.  Indirect reciprocity is a system in which 

 
70
one's reputation, built on others' observations of one's behavior in the past, affects one's 
prospects.  It is not that a particular moral or immoral action inherently enhances or 
degrades the actor’s fitness.  The net effect is dependent on (a) the direct costs and 
benefits of the action, (b) the likelihood of being observed or of reports being believed, 
(c) the reputational shift that will result, and (d) the expected return on that shift in future 
interactions.  Sensitivity to cues of these parameters and their net effect on fitness would 
account for a degree of nonrandom variation in adherence to moral norms. 
Such, perhaps, is the adaptive value of the refined moral systems characteristic of 
extant human groups, where the proceeds from indirect reciprocity arguably have grown 
to be more relevant to decision-making than the proceeds from continued group 
persistence.  For an average member of a modern group, the likelihood of suffering a 
significant fitness cost from the damage to reputation that an immoral choice can 
produce, is much higher than the likelihood of suffering a significant fitness cost from the 
loss of group unity that might arise from that choice.  This is so even if Darwin and 
Alexander are correct in arguing that the need for solidarity against threats from other 
groups is precisely what drove the evolution of human cooperation, including those 
actions maintained by indirect reciprocity, in the first place.  Thus, the system of moral 
reputation may have greater and more immediate fitness effects today than do the 
selective pressures that favored that system’s origin. 
To elaborate more fully the relationship between indirect reciprocity and human 
social structure, one can demonstrate that indirect reciprocity today depends on a concept 
of group service, but the existence of group service does not depend on indirect 
reciprocity.  Indirect reciprocity is a means that needs an end; it requires a criterion for a 
'good reputation'.  If indirect reciprocity functioned independently of its evolutionary 
origin in intergroup competition, one's reputation would merely reflect shrewdness rather 
than group service, but service to others is a cardinal value fostered by indirect 
reciprocity.  Humans expend significant effort debating the validity of claims of 
selflessness and bestowing praise for actions deemed selfless.  Shrewdness does persist, 
because it can sometimes be an effective way to exploit the system, but it is discouraged 
by moral norms and thus suppressed by indirect reciprocity.  The centrality of the concept 
of service or selflessness in moral norms (Roes & Raymond, 2002; Ridley, 1996) 

 
71
suggests that within-group cooperation in the face of intergroup competition still 
underlies indirect reciprocity today.  Otherwise, entertaining the idea that the actions of 
others can have group-serving motivations would be maladaptive.  Moreover, in order for 
the earliest form of indirect reciprocity to produce fitness benefits, a belief in group 
service must already have existed, implying an independent evolutionary origin.  The 
human social situation of within-group cooperation as a form of between-group 
competition explains why the concept of selflessness, rather than shrewdness, is the value 
encouraged by indirect reciprocity.   
Following this reasoning, we propose that there was a period in the evolution of 
morality when group service was adaptive due to rising intergroup competition, but 
before indirect reciprocity became dominant.  We are not aware of any previous proposal 
of such a period.  Furthermore, the dynamics that drove cooperation at this intermediate 
stage in the evolution of morality may still be important today.  Since moral norms are 
still pervaded by a strong group-service element, something about human social group 
dynamics are probably still today providing the values for indirect reciprocity, i.e., 
determining what behaviors will be productive of what kinds of reputation.   
 
4.  Group stability 
Competition between groups implies that groups, like individuals, vary in how 
well they are doing.  In the absence of a governing structure, such that groups are 
autonomous or nearly so, competition between groups for limited resources will function 
like competition between individuals, with variation in groups’ likelihood of persistence 
analogous to the concept of fitness that evolutionary biologists use to compare 
individuals.  (Since “fitness” in a biological sense generally refers to contribution to 
succeeding generations via reproduction, and since human groups do not reproduce as a 
whole or have discernable generations, we avoid the term “fitness” and use the term 
group stability to reflect this relative likelihood of group persistence.) 
 
4.1. Principle of stability-dependent cooperation    
If humans are facultative in adherence to moral norms (section 2), and moral 
norms arose and are probably still maintained in the context of intergroup competition 

 
72
(section 3), then variation in individual commitment to moral norms over time and space 
may reflect variation in the degree to which groups require service.  Thus, the first of two 
principles we introduce to describe the dynamical function of morality in human history 
is stability-dependent cooperation.  We propose that people vary in the relative 
importance they place on the individual versus the group in their working value systems 
or decision rules, because individual sacrifice in service to the group at a given time and 
place is adaptive in inverse proportion to the stability of the group relative to its 
competitors. 
The general idea of adaptive variation in moral psychology has some precedent.  
Even proponents of a relatively strict developmental structure to morality have allowed 
for, and found indirect evidence of, apparently adaptive differences among cultures in the 
way morality is used to guide individual decisions (Nisan & Kohlberg, 1982; Edwards, 
1975).  Also, evolutionary psychologists and anthropologists have shown that rules of 
social exchange can vary in ways that are predictable from environmental conditions 
(review in Cohen & Vandello, 2001; Cosmides & Tooby, 1992).  The principle of 
stability-dependent cooperation offered here predicts adaptive variation specifically in 
commitment to moral rules, as distinct from in the rules themselves or the development of 
their recognition.  The foundation for this principle is the dynamic of natural selection in 
situations where individuals with divergent interests exist in collectives on which their 
persistence depends.  A parallel dynamic best explains the overarching cooperation of 
genetic elements temporarily united in a genome.  The genome works together, and 
subsets only rarely seek their own interests at the expense of other elements (Buss, 1987), 
because the persistence of a gene or chromosome depends on the survival and 
reproduction of the individual housing it.  Cooperation to increase individual fitness is 
therefore usually the best strategy for a genomic element.  When genetic elements behave 
competitively within a genome, as in T-haplotype mice (Lyon, 2003) this tends to 
produce negative fitness consequences for the individual, and thus for all other elements 
within it.   
Likewise, individual humans depend on their social groups.  Service to group 
causes fosters unity, and can decrease the effects of resource limitation (e.g., restrict 
hoarding and squandering, mitigate distribution of wealth effects, and otherwise increase 

 
73
efficiency of resource use), thereby decreasing within-group competition and increasing 
the group’s stability and competitive prowess (Frank, 2003; Alexander, 1979).  
Conversely, within-group competition arising from individual self-interest can be self-
defeating: resource utilization becomes less efficient, and group unity erodes, increasing 
susceptibility to intergroup competition.   
Some writers, often extrapolating from economic models, have hypothesized a 
general tendency of cooperation either to decay, or to fluctuate in regular boom and bust 
cycles (Nowak & Sigmund, 1998).  Some have gone on to suggest that, given these 
proposed tendencies, in order for cooperation to be maintained and group persistence to 
be assured over time, a certain specialized trait must have evolved and persist at some 
threshold level in the population, such as “strong reciprocity” involving costly 
punishment of the selfish (Gintis, 2000) or “phenotypic defection” involving 
unintentional lack of service (Lotem et al., 1999).  Although punishment of various sorts 
of non-cooperators are certainly features of human culture (Axelrod, 1984), our 
hypothesis of stability-dependent cooperation is an alternative explanation for the 
persistence of groups.  We propose that the reason why cooperation does not 
automatically collapse or cycle in the way suggested by economic models is because such 
models have not yet taken into consideration the general human tendency towards 
facultative adherence to moral norms, and the resulting negative feedback on booms and 
busts of cooperation. 
One’s reproductive success can be advanced either by serving one’s group 
(thereby slightly increasing the reproductive success of all group members relative to 
others) or by more immediately serving oneself (thereby increasing one’s reproductive 
success relative to that of other group members).  In many situations, these two options 
imply a continuum of behavioral options, or even two mutually exclusive options.  This is 
the point at which many evolutionary studies of human behavior apply the terms 
“altruism” and “selfishness”, a misleading dichotomy that begs the question of which 
course of action is in fact adaptive for an individual in a given situation.  A more precise 
set of terms would reflect the fact that certain behaviors are adaptive because they 
increase the between-group component of reproductive success (enhance group stability), 
whereas others are adaptive because they increase the within-group component (increase 

 
74
individual fitness relative to other group members).  Most behavioral options probably 
affect both components of fitness, which necessitates a continuum rather than a 
dichotomy.  For convenience, we will use the terms “group-service” and “self-service” to 
refer to the two possible directions of movement on such a continuum. 
The principle of stability-dependent cooperation implies that an individual’s 
assessment of group stability is a major determinant of behavior in situations where 
group-service and self-service prescribe different courses of action.  The more group 
stability is threatened, the more group-service is likely to be adaptive for an individual, 
while the more successful or stable the group, the more adaptive is a relaxation of 
individual commitment to the group and an increase in self-serving behavior, because the 
detriment to group stability of such relaxation is small.  Security in the persistence of the 
group renders restraint from self-serving strategies less critical.  If this hypothesis is 
correct, no single level of cooperation is adaptive all the time.  Thus, we propose that the 
adaptation is not cooperation per se, but the propensity to evaluate the optimal level of 
cooperation in a given situation.   
One prediction from this hypothesis is that studies of moral judgments in social 
context (e.g., Carpendale and Krebs, 1992; 1995) will find perception of group stability 
(a variable hitherto untested) to be a significant determinant of the outcome of moral 
deliberation.  Also, the large proportion of unexplained variation in cross-cultural studies 
of moral intuitions (e.g., 39-44% in O'Neill and Petrinovich, 1998) may be reduced by 
taking a measure of perceived group stability into account.  First, behavior should more 
closely approach the ideal of golden rules of general beneficence in times and places 
where group stability is threatened, whereas when group stability is more assured, “Do 
unto others...” may still be a mantra, but the evidence should indicate a more competitive 
edge to intra-group interactions, and a tolerance of such competition in the community.  
Second, patriotism is a value that should be most emphasized and displayed when the 
nation is threatened, and actions that undermine national unity should be better tolerated 
in a time of peace than in time of war.  Third, generosity and magnanimity should be 
higher within less stable groups, and lower within more stable groups, since when one’s 
group is doing poorly, group members are “all in it together”, and should be more 
disposed to share and affiliate, and self-service should be viewed dimly.  A sense of 

 
75
communal struggle will lose impact in times and places of group success, however, and 
individuals may get away with, and tolerate in others, more “materialistic” and 
competitive behavior such as hoarding and extravagance.  Indirect evidence for such 
trends already exists.  For example, adversity tends to increase individual commitment to 
causes that are central to a person’s values (Lydon, 1990; Brickman, 1987).  
 
4.2. Group stability and indirect reciprocity 
Indirect reciprocity provides the means for individuals to gain information about 
the dedication of others to the group, act to minimize parasitism by freeloaders or cheats, 
and allocate benefits to individuals in proportion to their level of commitment 
(Alexander, 1987).  If, as proposed in section 3, the dynamic of within-group cooperation 
in the context of intergroup competition maintains indirect reciprocity, determining the 
bases upon which reputations are made and broken, then the workings of indirect 
reciprocity may be expected to covary with group stability by a two-part mechanism. 
First, one’s assessment of group stability will affect the attitude that one has 
towards the behaviors of others.  When group stability is under threat, people will be 
especially assiduous in assuring that others serve the group, both because that service can 
aid group stability which is a high priority, and because one’s own restraint from self-
serving action raises one’s vulnerability to competitive exploitation by any group 
members who fail to exhibit similar restraint.  Thus, unilateral group-service is unlikely 
to be adaptive for individuals with the means to behave self-servingly; rather, group-
service will tend to be adaptive only when other members are also practicing it, and each 
individual has a stake in ensuring the cooperation of others.   
When group stability is relatively assured, the principle of stability-dependent 
cooperation implies that people will be more permissive of intra-group competition, the 
balance thus shifting away from group-service.  Of course, one would prefer that 
everyone except oneself maintain a high level of group service regardless of group 
stability; but because apparent hypocrisy is disproportionately damaging to one’s 
reputation, one cannot pursue self-interest alone except by deception (which is risky) or 
despotism (which requires rare power).  Absent these options, the best way for one’s 
competition to be tolerated by the group is to foster tolerance of competition in general.  

 
76
On the group level this dynamic pattern of individual attitudes means that community 
enforcement of group-service will be variably strict depending on how members of the 
community perceive its stability.   
The second reason to expect covariation between indirect reciprocity and group 
stability is that the assessment of the actions and attitudes of others involved in indirect 
reciprocity will be important in determining the optimal range of individual commitment 
to the group.  People look to others not only to enforce their commitment, but also to 
determine what level of commitment is required.  As group stability changes, the 
tendency of the community to enforce service to the group will also change, producing 
positive feedback, as each assessor is also a participant; individuals must track all such 
changes, behaving differently as the community shifts in moral emphasis.  Erring on the 
side of self-service will incur a reputational cost; erring on the side of group-service will 
incur a sucker’s cost.   
In short, the dynamics of indirect reciprocity are expected to covary with 
dynamics of group stability because (1) individuals benefit by assessing others in 
different ways depending on group stability, and (2) as these assessments change, 
individuals will benefit by accommodating their own behavior to those changes. 
  
4.3. Dynamic moral tension: an illustrative model  
The dynamic moral tension hypothesized here can be illustrated as follows.  
Consider a boat race in which a number of multi-rower craft race against each other over 
a predetermined course.  Prize money is divided such that the first boat receives 50% of 
the total, the second boat receives 50% of the remainder, and so on down the standings.  
Within each boat, the position of each rower dictates what fraction of the boat’s total 
winnings are his, such that the person in the first seat gets 50% of the boat’s total, the 
person in the second seat gets 50% of what remains, and so on down the boat.  (Astute 
readers will recognize that the prize allotment scheme leaves a small sum un-awarded, 
which we would argue is best spent on imaginary beer for all participants).  The rules 
permit individuals, alone or in collaboration, to dislodge boatmates from superior seats, 
but, as a practical matter, this cannot be accomplished while rowing. 

 
77
 
In such a race, one can easily imagine that as boats fall behind they will be 
overcome by a sense of shared fate and the need to cooperate intensely so that they will 
have something substantial to divide.  As any boat pulls ahead, individuals in the back of 
that boat (who stand to gain little from the win) will reasonably conclude that bettering 
their own standing within the boat is the best use of their efforts.  Cooperation between 
competitors in the back of the boat is likely to arise, and breakdown of such alliances is 
increasingly probable as they move closer to the front of the boat and more prize money 
is at stake.   
 
4.4. When groups collapse 
One exception to the trend of stability-dependent cooperation follows from the 
fact that humans, although highly dependent on their groups, are not absolutely so.  When 
stability is so low that the group might be doomed to dissolution, group members may 
consider the benefits of leaving the group to be greater than the benefits of serving it.  
Moreover, as individuals cease striving for the group when they believe the cause is lost, 
they will be accelerating the collapse of the group both by their withdrawal of aid, and by 
the effects of that withdrawal on the assessments of others.  This consideration indicates a 
threshold effect, with a sharp decline in cooperation and thus self-fulfilling group 
dissolution, once hopelessness of group persistence begins to spread.  The existence of 
this tendency, however, depends on a perceived probability of successfully integrating 
into new groups following past group failures.  Where there is no such hope, individuals 
would be expected to go down with the ship, continuing to employ the only strategy with 
any apparent chance of success. 
 
4.5. Zero-sum vs. nonzero-sum dynamics 
We propose that this model generates behavior readily recognizable to observers 
of human behavior.  However, it only represents that portion of human endeavor that is 
characterized by conditions that are zero-sum or nearly so.  Zero-sum conditions are 
those in which resource utilization is complete, so one individual can only benefit at a 
cost to others.  Because humans, like all organisms, tend toward carrying capacity, near 
zero-sum dynamics as the typical state may be a plausible hypothesis.  Nevertheless, the 

 
78
dynamics of moments in human history are worth considering when resource limitation 
temporarily decreases, to the point where a rapidly growing population can nevertheless 
become dominated by strategies that ramp up the extraction of resources from the 
environment.  In such situations (e.g., dispersal onto a newly discovered landmass), intra-
group competition, though still a functional strategy for individuals, may bear 
disproportionate opportunity cost because effort spent on infighting could be spent 
instead on resource extraction (thereby increasing the overall size of the pie), a strategy 
that in these situations is more profitable, and likely to increase the future size of the 
group, thereby reducing future susceptibility of the group to intergroup threats.  Despite 
the potential importance of nonzero-sum dynamics to human morality (Wright, 2000), the 
remainder of this paper will continue to focus on the more conventional zero-sum 
situation.  
 
5.  Morality as group stability insurance 
5.1. Variation in commitment can endanger group stability 
The principle of stability-dependent cooperation predicts an inverse correlation 
between the stability of groups and the tendency of their members to adhere to moral 
rules.  However, if the dynamic of human cooperation were this simple, there are at least 
two potential problems which, when significant, could cause group stability to deteriorate 
too quickly for individual behavior in service to the group to increase to counteract it.   
First, factors influencing group stability can be extrinsic, and therefore not under 
the control of the group.  When factors like resource limitation and intergroup 
competition act quickly, group destabilization may be difficult to anticipate and prevent.  
If this is true, high group stability and its concomitant low levels of service to the group, 
will lead to an increased vulnerability of the group to fast-acting extrinsic sources of 
group instability. 
Second, positive and negative effects on group stability are asymmetrical.  As 
with many organized structures, an individual has more power to affect group stability 
negatively than positively.  Under circumstances favoring group stability, each 
cooperator restrains self-service for the sake of the group, but generally contributes to 
group stability only in a small way.  However, if individuals jockey for position within 

 
79
the group, they can initiate a rapid decline in group stability, as the prospect of 
exploitation shifts everyone’s adaptive strategy away from group-service towards self-
service.  If moral rules are less important to people in times of group stability, and the 
usual restraints on within-group competition are relaxed, the opportunity would be 
created for individuals to compete to slightly exceed their neighbors' moral decay.  An 
individual would attempt to gain the greatest possible benefits from the group's moral 
relaxation.  The result would be a “race to the bottom”, where the bottom is the 
breakdown of group-serving cooperation and the outright neglect of group stability. 
Of course, the dependence of individuals on their group means that when the 
disastrous race began to threaten group stability, the interests of everyone would be 
served by reversing the trend and maintaining the group.  However, in cases where 
everyone's interests are served by community action that is costly to each individual if 
unilaterally pursued, a tragedy of the commons results (Hardin, 1968).  Everyone may 
continue to pursue actions that are beneficial to no one in the end, resulting in group 
destabilization.  Indirect reciprocity is unlikely to be able to rescue a community from 
this situation.  (Milinski et al. (2002) concluded otherwise, but the situation being 
described here is different from their experimental milieux.  In actual societies, 
reputational costs and benefits may return too slowly to counteract the immediate benefits 
accruing to competitors in a race to the bottom.)   
Thus, in both classes of hazard—extrinsic threats as well as races to the bottom—
the  fast-acting nature of the changes is what is expected to jeopardize stability in human 
groups.  
 
5.2. Morality buffers variation in commitment 
Functional systems are often buffered against perturbations that threaten their 
integrity.  For instance, in contrast to some proteins such as MHC that experience rapid 
evolution, histone proteins, which are critical to the stability of all eukaryotic genomes, 
have evolved an extremely low mutation rate (Kornberg & Lorch, 1999).  If fast-acting or 
unpredictable forces can threaten the stability of human groups, and if susceptibility to 
these forces is affected by group members’ adherence to moral rules, then a buffering 
system may be in place in moral systems that lowers the risk from such threats to group 

 
80
stability.  Therefore, the second principle we propose is the group stability insurance 
function of morality, whereby certain features of human morality are adaptive primarily 
because they buffer group stability against fast-acting threats.  The two major features of 
morality that may be serving this buffering function are absolutism and viscosity. 
 
 
5.3. The function of moral absolutism 
Individuals in groups where moral rules appear to be constant and always 
deserving of adherence should be less likely to discard or neglect those rules than 
individuals in groups where rules have no such absolutist qualities.  We hypothesize, 
then, that the air of absolutism surrounding moral rules has been maintained in human 
culture because it buffers the changes in attitude and behavior that would be engendered 
by stability-dependent cooperation.  In particular, absolutism works against the natural 
slippage of adherence to moral rules that occurs during times of group stability, 
decreasing the susceptibility of the group to sudden extrinsic threats and heading off the 
tendency for a rapid competitive race to the bottom.  Moral groups, on this hypothesis, 
insure their stability by "consecrating" their rules in the minds of their members, just as 
political theorist Edmund Burke suggested political groups do (Burke, 17XX: §159-164).  
Hence, the adaptive dynamics of social groups provide the basis for an explanation of 
how humans benefit by associating their moral rules with the most sacred and 
authoritative aspects of their culture, despite facultative adherence to these rules.  We are 
not aware that any other hypothesis addresses this apparent paradox.   
    
5.4.  The function of moral viscosity 
 
The second feature of the adaptive buffering system that we propose to be in place 
in human moral systems is a viscosity with regard to moral rules.  Viscosity in this sense 
is suggested by the old notion of moral character, the quality of individuals that is 
significantly influenced by habit, and slow to change attitudes and behavior patterns once 
developed (Kohlberg, 1964).  If humans are resistant to change and susceptible to 
entrainment or habit formation in morality, they will be less likely to engage in rapid 
changes of commitment level that can compromise the efficacy of indirect reciprocity and 
ultimately threaten group stability.  They will also be less likely to track drastic 

 
81
fluctuations in perceived group stability, decreasing susceptibility to sudden extrinsic 
threats. 
Available psychological evidence does suggest that moral attitudes are viscous in 
this sense (Eisenberg et al., 2002; Kagan, 1989; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1963).  In fact, this 
appears to be a relatively old feature of the human psyche that functions in a variety of 
other contexts, and so is not unique to the moral sphere.  Nevertheless, if the above 
considerations are correct, moral character or viscosity together with moral absolutism 
can be explained biologically as a system providing insurance of group stability.  The 
system buffers the impact of threats to group stability at the level of individual adherence 
to moral norms. 
 
 
6. Status and power inequality as a modifier of within-group moral variation 
Discussion to this point, while not assuming egalitarianism within groups, has not 
dealt with the variation in moral commitment that results from inequalities of power and 
status.  At an authoritarian extreme, the effect of power disparity will swamp the effects 
of group stability, for the ability of most individuals to modify their level of service to the 
group will be very limited.  In general, predictions like those at the end of section 4.1 are 
more applicable the more freedom individuals have to make behavioral decisions, and are 
best tested on behaviors that are not legislated or coerced except by community 
expectations.  Even when individuals do have such freedom, status inequalities still 
probably modify the expected dynamics. 
One set of examples of such complexity relates to the adaptive strategies of 
people in positions of power.  Like other people, the powerful benefit when group 
stability is high, but they also have a special stake in promoting group service, both 
because they get disproportionate shares of the profits of collaboration, and because 
competition is much more likely to move them down the intra-group hierarchy than it is 
to move them up.  Two tactics that are therefore likely to be employed by powerful 
members of stable groups are misinforming the group by understating group stability 
(perhaps by manufacturing or exaggerating threats), and enforcing group service through 
penalties.  In the terms of the boat race model presented in section 4.3, those seated in the 
fronts of boats, and perhaps especially in the front of leading boats, will tend to 

 
82
exaggerate the threat from competing boats since they have little to gain and everything 
to lose from intra-boat competition.  Moreover, in certain cases such as in democratic 
groups where the continued tenure of leaders depends on perceptions of their having done 
a good job, leaders may gain from preaching the high stability of the group, at least 
relative to when they were not leaders.  These considerations illustrate the importance of 
distinguishing between actual and perceived group stability in predicting the optimal 
degree of group service.  Such status-by-stability interactions also become important 
when stability is dangerously low.  At some low threshold of group stability, group 
members may do better by leaving, but leaders will benefit by keeping others in the 
group, providing an incentive to misinform group members that the group is more stable 
than it is. 
 
7.  The multiplicity of social groups 
This discussion has portrayed moral deliberation as unidimensional, from self-
service to group-service.  In fact the moral landscape is more complicated, since 
individuals belong simultaneously to different groups.  Some may overlap, such as an 
ethnic group and a workers’ union, and some are concentric, such as a neighborhood 
within a city within a state within a nation, but still others may be quite distinct in their 
domains of relevance.  The rule of stability-dependent cooperation can certainly be dealt 
with on the simple continuum of self-service to group-service, but the actual decisions 
faced by individuals may often be a matter of how large a group to align with in a 
particular situation (the self being one end of that continuum), or which of two group 
memberships to prioritize (Mason, 1996).  Analysis focused on one group identity may 
misinterpret prioritization of another as defection towards self-service. 
 
8.  Relation to two other perspectives on the evolution of morality 
8.1.  Cultural evolution of memes 
The hypotheses introduced above treat facultative adherence to morality as a trait 
that is adaptive.  This contrasts with the view that the persistence of cultural elements, or 
“memes” (Dawkins, 1976), is unrelated to individual reproductive success.  In the view 
of Dawkins and others, memes need not increase the bearer’s inclusive fitness to persist; 

 
83
rather, they evolve and adapt to each other in an autonomous system.  This viewpoint 
surely has some utility in the short term, and individual cultural elements may subvert the 
interests of others and of the genes.  However, the perspective that has led to the 
principles of stability-dependent cooperation and the group stability insurance function of 
morality is based on the assumption that radical separation of culture from individual 
fitness cannot commonly be the case in the long run.   
Since the capacity for culture is genetic in evolutionary (and developmental) 
origin, in order to have become fixed in our species the system must have returned 
benefits to the genomes of its bearers throughout the period of its elaboration.  The net 
average fitness effect of all memes, genetically speaking, must therefore have been 
positive.  At whatever point the net effect of all memes on genes becomes negative, 
natural selection should disassemble the genetic capacity for memes.  Recognizing this, 
most will acknowledge that memes must have been fitness enhancers early in their 
evolution, but some will claim that the system has more recently become autonomous, 
and memes need only be neutral in fitness impact (on average) in order to persist 
independent of genetic interests.  But because all behaviors take time and effort and 
therefore have an opportunity cost, memes that are not beneficial are expected to be 
short-lived.  When cultural elements are widespread and persistent, they are likely to 
have become so because they tended to benefit their bearers. 
 
8.2.  Group selection 
The hypotheses developed here clearly depend on the interests of groups of 
individuals.  Nevertheless, we have not relied on the group selection perspective (where 
natural selection is discussed at various levels including the social group, as if selection at 
multiple levels reflects multiple evolutionary mechanisms).  In fact, even proponents of 
multi-level selection admit that selection at various levels can be reduced to a single 
mechanism (Sober & Wilson, 1998).  An individual-level perspective in evolutionary 
discussions of human groups therefore has the advantage of discussing the complexity of 
natural selection without an apparent proliferation of evolutionary mechanisms.  
Moreover, as mentioned in section 7, humans are members of various social groups that 
are not always concentric as the notion of a “level” of selection would imply.  Finally, 

 
84
our individual-level perspective also refrains from making assumptions about the degree 
to which groups replicate or otherwise resemble genomes (Williams, 1966).  
Nevertheless, the hierarchical relationship between the competitive success of the group 
and that of the individual remains explicit in these hypotheses and the perspective 
underlying them.  Individual fitness is considered overwhelmingly dependent on group 
persistence, and groups are assumed to vary in their capacity to persist.  From this 
perspective, selection on the individual results in the individual's capacity to prioritize 
among several avenues of potential fitness return.   
 
9. Conclusion 
 
We have drawn implications from the understanding that humans, as 
social animals who are nevertheless genetically individualistic, must strike a balance 
between strategies for competition within a group, and strategies for increasing group 
stability.  This assessment of the human situation follows from the evolutionary theory of 
human culture and morality developed by Alexander (1987, 1990, 1992, 2004).  
In particular, we have proposed that much observed variation in commitment to 
moral norms is explained by a rule of stability-dependent cooperation, where the adaptive 
level of individual commitment is a function of the stability of the social group.  If this is 
true (and the predictions from this hypothesis are numerous), variability in human moral 
commitment reflects our ability to track variation in the expected benefits of competition 
versus cooperation.  However, groups in this situation would still be susceptible to fast-
acting extrinsic threats as well as self-destructive competitive races to the bottom.  In 
light of this, we have proposed that the absolutism and unchangeableness that people 
attribute to moral norms, features that have bewildered moral philosophers for centuries 
(Williams, 1985), might function as group stability insurance against fast-acting threats.   
These hypotheses deserve testing for at least three reasons.  First, they explain 
why morality has an air of absolutism despite the facultative nature of human 
commitment to moral rules.  Second, they resolve the longstanding debate about the 
adaptive status of moral rules, by placing the locus of adaptation not in particular kinds of 
acts, but in the moral agent’s ability to weigh options and choose a commitment strategy 
based on the current social environment.  Third, they connect moral attitudes to 

 
85
environmental variables, and thus have the potential to explain hitherto perplexing moral 
variation within and between individuals and cultures.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This paper was co-authored with David Lahti, and published in the proceedings 
following the festschrift for Dick Alexander, as follows: Lahti DC, Weinstein BS. 2005. 
The better angels of our nature: group stability and the evolution of moral tension. 
Evolution and Human Behavior 26:47-63. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
86
Literature Cited  
 
Alexander, R.D. (1979). Darwinism and Human Affairs. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 
Alexander, R.D. (1987). The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de 
Gruyter. 
Alexander, R.D. (1989). Evolution of the human psyche. In The Human Revolution. 
(Eds.) Mellars, P., and Stringer, C. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press, pp. 455-
513. 
Alexander, R.D. (1990). How did humans evolve? Reflections on the uniquely unique 
species. University of Michigan Museum of Zoology Special Publication, 1, 1-38. 
Alexander, R.D. (1992). Biological considerations in the analysis of morality. In 
Evolutionary Ethics. (Eds.) Nitecki, M.H., and Nitecki, D.V. Albany, NY: SUNY 
Press, pp. 163-196. 
Alexander, R.D. (2004).  Evolutionary selection and the nature of humanity.  In 
Darwinism and Philosophy. (Eds.) Hosle, V., and Illies, C.  Notre Dame, IN: University 
of Notre Dame Press. 
Axelrod, R. (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books. 
Brickman, P. (1987). Commitment, Conflict, and Caring. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall. 
Burke, E. (1790). Reflections on the Revolution in France. 
Buss, L.W. (1987). The Evolution of Individuality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Carpendale, J.I.M. and Krebs, D.L. (1992). Situational variation in moral judgment: in a 
stage or on a stage? Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 21, 203-224. 
Carpendale, J.I.M. and Krebs, D.L. (1995). Variations in level of moral judgment as a 
function of type of dilemma and moral choice. Journal of Personality,63, 289-313. 
Cohen, D. and Vandello, J.A. (2001). Honor and 'faking' honorability. In Evolution and 
the Capacity for Commitment. (Ed.) Nesse, R. New York: Russell Sage Press, pp. 163-
185. 

 
87
Cosmides, L. and Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In The 
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. (Eds.) 
Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 
163-228. 
Darwin, C. (1871). The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Race. London: John 
Murray. 
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Edwards, C.P. (1975). Societal complexity and moral development: a Kenyan study. 
Ethos, 3-4, 505-527. 
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I.K., Cumberland, A., Murphy, B.C., Shepard, S.A., Zhou, Q. and 
Carlo, G. (2002). Prosocial development in early adulthood: a longitudinal study. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 993-1006. 
Eysenck, S.B.G. and Eysenck, H.J. (1963). The validity of questionnaire and rating 
assessments of extraversion and neuroticism, and their factorial stability. British 
Journal of Psychology, 54, 51-62. 
Frank, S.A. (2003). Perspective: repression of competition and the evolution of 
cooperation. Evolution, 57, 693-705. 
Gintis, H. (2000). Strong reciprocity and human sociality. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
206, 169-179. 
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162, 1243-1248. 
Hartup, W.W. and van Lieshout, F.M. (1995). Personality development in social context. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 46, 655-688. 
Huxley, T.H. (1894). Evolution and Ethics. In Evolution and Ethics London: Macmillan 
and Co., pp. 46-86. 
Kagan, J. (1989). Unstable Ideas: Temperament, Cognition, and Self. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Keith, A. (1949). A New Theory of Human Evolution. New York: Philosophy Library. 
Kohlberg, L. (1964). Development of moral character and moral ideology. In Review of 
Child Development Research, Vol. 1. (Eds.) Hoffman, M.L., and Hoffman, L.W. New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 383-432. 

 
88
Kornberg, R.D. and Lorch, Y. (1999). Twenty-five years of the nucleosome, fundamental 
particle of the eukaryote chromosome. Cell, 98, 285-294. 
Lotem, A., Fishman, M.A. and Stone, L. (1999). Evolution of cooperation between 
individuals. Nature, 400, 226-227. 
Lydon, J.E. (1990). Commitment in the face of adversity: a value affirmation approach. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1040-1047. 
Lyon, M.F. (2003). Transmission ratio distortion in mice. Annual Review of Genetics, 37, 
393-408. 
Mackie, J.L. (1981). Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, ch.1. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Maienschein, J. and Ruse, M. (eds.) (1999) Biology and the Foundations of Ethics. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Mason, H.E. (1996). Moral Dilemmas and Moral Theory. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Milinski, M., Semmann, D. and Krambeck, H.-J. (2002). Reputation helps solve the 
‘tragedy of the commons’. Nature, 415, 424-426. 
Nesse, R. (2001). Natural selection and the capacity for subjective commitment. In 
Evolution and the Capacity for Commitment. (Ed.) Nesse, R. New York: Russell Sage 
Press, pp. 1-47. 
Nisan, M. and Kohlberg, L. (1982). Universality and variation in moral judgment: a 
longitudinal and cross-sectional study in Turkey. Child Development, 53, 865-876. 
Nowak, M.A. and Sigmund, K. (1998). Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image 
scoring. Nature, 393, 573-577. 
O'Neill, P. and Petrinovich, L. (1998). A preliminary cross-cultural study of moral 
intuitions. Evolution and Human Behavior, 19, 349-367. 
Peters, K.E. (2003). Pluralism and ambivalence in the evolution of morality. Zygon, 38, 
333-354. 
Richards, R.J. (1987). Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and 
Behavior. Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
Ridley, M. (1996). The Origins of Virtue. London: Penguin. 
Roes, F.L. and Raymond, M. (2002). Belief in moralizing gods. In Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. 

 
89
Ruse, M. (1986). Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to Philosophy. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Sober, E. and Wilson, D.S. (1998). Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of 
Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 
35-57. 
Williams, B. (1985). Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy, ch.1-5. London: Fontana. 
Williams, G.C. (1966). Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
Williams, G.C. (1988). Huxley's Evolution and Ethics in sociobiological perspective. In 
Issues in Evolutionary Ethics. (Ed.) Thompson, P. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, pp. 317-
349. 
Wright, R. (2000). Nonzero:  The Logic of Human Destiny.  New York: Vintage Books. 
 

