 
 
My Life at Purdue 
 
William R. Fuller 
 
Selected chapters from my Autobiography 
 
 
 
Contents 
• M.S. to Ph.D. via NOPI 
• Professional Life Starts 
• From Here To . . . 
• My Life on the Road 

MS to Ph.D. via NOPI
September, 1949 – August, 1957
As I mentioned earlier, I received an oﬀer of
an assistantship from Ralph Hull, Head of the Pur-
due Mathematics Department in March, 1949. I
came to Purdue University as a Teaching Assis-
tant (TA) in Mathematics in September, 1949.
Such people were normally hired to teach half-
time.
At that time this meant eight classroom
hours per week plus preparation, grading papers,
oﬃce hours, etc. I had some GI Bill eligibility re-
maining, so I was able to reduce my load to only
one ﬁve hour course.
TAs usually taught Algebra, Trigonometry or
Analytic Geometry. After getting a Masters de-
gree TAs could teach Calculus.
In those early
days, I mainly taught Algebra.
The Purdue Mathematics Department had
several specialized algebra courses. One was for
“Home Ec” students. Typically, these classes were
composed of only females. Except that the sub-
ject tended to be low level: conversion of units of
measurement, etc., it wasn’t a bad class to teach.
Mathematics for Agricultural students involved
stuﬀabout mixing concrete, number of board-feet
in a log and the volume of hay stacks.
Through the Purdue housing oﬃce, we se-
cured an apartment at FPHA 213-3. The rent was
$40 per month plus an additional $8.50 for utili-
ties. A space heater was furnished. The FPHA
housing consisted of one story, tar-paper covered
buildings which had been Army barracks some-
where.
Typical FPHA unit
Hundreds of these units
had been brought to
Purdue to accommodate
the
housing
crunch
brought on by the re-
turning veterans. Ours
was an end apartment
in a three apartment
unit. This was nice in at least two ways. It had
end windows for more light and air and it only
received the noise from one adjacent apartment.
The walls were rather thin, so this location was a
real advantage. The windows ﬁt poorly. When it
rained it was necessary to place rolled up towels on
the sills to prevent water from streaming into the
rooms. The only heat was the gas space heater
in the living room.
All rhese units were about
24 inches above the ground, mounted on concrete
blocks. So they were a lot like Ravenswood, but
without ﬂoods. There was a “crawl space” under
the building. The wind whipped through this and
frequently blew out the ﬂame in the heater. When
this happened at night, it got pretty cold in the
apartment. Except for cross ventilation there was
no relief from the heat in the summer. While life
in these apartments was a lot like living at 1608
Haynes Avenue in Ravenswood, we did have in-
door plumbing!
There were ﬁve such areas comprising perhaps
1000 apartments. FPHA 213 was for families who
had two or more children.
We, therefore, occu-
pied a two bedroom apartment. There was large
play space about ﬁfty feet wide between buildings
which was nice for kids.
There was little traf-
ﬁc except for residents. No telephone service was
available to individual apartments. There was one
phone, placed high on a pole (so kids couldn’t get
to it) between apartments that could be used for
emergency outgoing calls. Notice of incoming calls
was brought by the police as in the case of Aunt
Josephine’s death (see below).
Lou, Dick, Ted and I shared our building with
Don and Virginia Burroughs and their children
Donald Lee, Virginia and John, and with Garnet
and Carolyn Welch and their two children.
One of the things that made FPHA 213 mem-
orable was both Dick and Ted contracting Chicken
Pox. Not a terribly dangerous disease, it nonethe-
less causes a great deal of discomfort. Both kids
required a lot of bathing with Calomine Lotion to
allay the itching.
The money from the GI Bill and the assis-
tantship let us live, but without many luxuries.
Occasionally we would get “Spud Nuts,” dough-
nuts made with potato ﬂour, from a little diner at
the corner of Third and University Streets. This
building was razed for a parking lot in 1999. In
2006 the new Computer Sciences building opened
on that corner.
Typical entertainment for Dick and Ted in-
cluded driving down the stadium “roller coaster,”
a hill along west side the Purdue stadium that de-
scended sharply, leveled oﬀ, descended again, etc.
This road was eliminated in a stadium remodel-
ing in 2002.
Another diversion was parking on
a Lafayette street to watch the trains go through
downtown on Fifth Street. These trains were elim-
inated in about 2000. Sometimes there was some
activity to be seen at the Purdue airport.
Dick was ﬁve years old when we ﬁrst came
to Purdue.
He attended a cooperative Kinder-
garten on the Purdue campus.
The site is now
marked by the University water tank. Cooperative
meant we all paid a bit toward the teacher’s salary,
contributed juice and cookies and helped with in-
struction. It was the non-student adult, usually
63

the mother, who handled these chores. The sec-
ond year Dick went to Klondike school. “Purdue
kids” were not exactly welcomed with open arms
because they lived in non-taxed homes.
In the summer of 1950 Aunt Josephine died
in Chicago. I don’t think I had seen her since that
day in 1941 when she brought me the watch. I
don’t know why she lived in Chicago or what she
did for sure. It is thought that she was a secre-
tary. The Indiana State Police brought word of her
death. They had been contacted by the Illinois po-
lice who got our name from a letter Lou had writ-
ten to her. Apparently that was the only clue they
found in her apartment. I had to take a day oﬀ
from study and teaching to go to Chicago. None
of us knew anything of her aﬀairs. I met a lawyer
who agreed to have her remains cremated and sent
to me in exchange for signing whatever she had
over to him. We had no resources to do anything
else. It was one of the most stressful days of my
life. I’ve been a little resentful that she kept her-
self so completely aloof from us. The lawyer kept
his word. Her ashes did arrive and were interred
in Crown Hill Cemetery in Indianapolis. Later a
few pictures from her apartment arrived.
Because we were so busy with studies, there
wasn’t much social life. We occasionally got to-
gether late at night with Don and Virginia Bur-
roughs. That’s when the Spud Nuts came in. Oc-
casionally fellow students Nick Vaughn or Walt
Wood came to study and socialize.
Our church at that time was called the Uni-
versity Baptist Church. This church was really a
mission to Purdue students. I think it was origi-
nally supported by an oﬀ-campus group as a mis-
sion activity.
Reverend Stacy F. Shaw was the
minister and put a great deal of himself and his
business into keeping it going. Since I was mainly
a student, I didn’t take an active part in this
church although we were faithful in attendance.
I shared an oﬃce with ﬁve other people in an
old creaky building called Stanley Coulter Annex.
Three of them were graduate students like me and
two were non-student Instructors. Other graduate
students were next to us with only a seven foot
wall separating us.
Generally, it was quiet, but
on Friday, when the Nation weekly came things
livened up a bit. This was not so much for the
erudite articles in that intellectual paper, but be-
cause of the Crossword Puzzle. Many of the clues
turned on puns: Nationality of Passengers on a
bus at a stop perhaps? Lapplanders. Why did the
brothers call their cattle ranch “Focus?” (Because
that’s where the sons (sun’s) raise (rays) meet.)
Studying and teaching took up most of my time.
Occasionally, a fellow student would have a party.
“Charades” was a popular way to spend time at
these parties. There was not much, if any, alcohol
at these parties.
Because of a reduced teaching load (G.I. Bill
help), I could enroll in more courses.
As a re-
sult I completed the work for the Master’s degree
by January, 1951. (See Page 251) My examining
committee was composed of Professors Howard K.
Hughes, E. A. Trabant, Vivian A Johnson, Physics
(I had a minor in Physics); and Ralph Hull, the
Head of the Department.
I suppose Hull was a good mathematician; I
didn’t have a way to judge that. As a teacher, he
left something to be desired. I had several good
teachers; the best was Professor Michael Golomb,
but that probably belongs in a later Chapter.
Along the way, I completed the requirement
in reading in German (July 14, 1950) and French
(August 18, 1950) which were required for my
subsequent Ph.D. studies. Although I had come
home from Europe with a fairly good, street level,
speaking knowledge of German, I knew nothing of
grammar. My teacher, and later colleague, Mer-
rill Shanks, and I often joked about translating
the opening phrase of Landau’s Grundlagen der
Analysis and having a word, “an,” left over.
The next major event that inﬂuenced my life
was the Korean War or Police Action, as it was
euphemistically called.
Korea had been divided
into North and South Korea after W.W.II, the
North being communistic and adhering to China.
On June 25, 1950, the North invaded the South
to force re-uniﬁcation. The United Nations orga-
nized a police force to resist. The U.S. was a major
player in this conﬂict. Men were being conscripted
to ﬁght there and reservists were being called back
to service. I was still a Reserve First Lieutenant
of Artillery. Having already enjoyed travel to one
foreign country, I decided that I did not want an-
other such tour. I looked for some way to ensure
that I would not be called up.
While at Butler,
I had interviewed the
U.S. Naval Ordnance Plant, Indianapolis (NOPI)
about a job. They wanted me, but I decided to
go to graduate school. Now at the completion of
my Master’s degree, I contacted Kaj Nielsen of
the Mathematics Division on January 11, 1951.
Kaj responded in letters dated January 16 and
17 that pending completion of paper work neces-
sary to qualify for a Civil Service appointment, he
would be able to oﬀer me a position as GS-9 with
a starting salary of $4,600 per year. I accepted
64

this position and started work as Mathematician
in February of 1951.
I was never called by the
Army, but NOPI was a good experience.
I felt that I had taken a wise step since, under
date of 1 December, 1950, I was appointed as a 1st
Lieutenant in the Artillery. I had thought all along
that I already had this by virtue of what I had been
told at Separation in November, 1945. The on the
31st of that month, I was oﬀered the opportunity
to decline an appointment as a Reserve commis-
sioned oﬃcer. I received an Honorable Discharge
dated 1 April, 1953.
While I started work a NOPI, Lou and the
boys stayed at Purdue during the Spring semester
of 1951 so that Dick could complete the year at
Klondike School. It was a tough winter. On one
occasion the pipes in the apartment froze due to
the space heater going oﬀ. Lou had to deal with
that on her own.
I came up to Lafayette each
weekend.
I took a room near the plant, but I didn’t
like that kind of living. Bob and Rhoda were kind
enough to oﬀer me to live with them and share a
room with my nephew, Robert John, Jr. When
the school year ended, Lou and the boys moved
to Indianapolis and we rented a house, which we
ultimately bought, at 1536 East 73rd Street.
1536 East 73rd Street
The Picket fence was
added later.
So, again, we were back in Ravenswood.
This house was also in the ﬂood plain of White
River, but was elevated a full room level above
the ground. There was
a basement and garage
under the house. It was
like any small house one
might ﬁnd except for
the elevation of the liv-
ing quarters. We rented
the house from Rose-
mary Delatore whose fa-
ther, Frank Delatore, an
Indianapolis policeman,
had built it for her.
When she wanted to sell
it, we decided to buy it as we thought we were
in Indianapolis to stay.
We were able to bor-
row the money from a good friend Herbert Reeder
(Herb) Bailey, whom I had met at NOPI. At this
time Herb was a graduate student at Purdue and
a student of a man I was to meet later, Lam-
berto Cesari.
Without lawyers and by a simple
hand-written note we completed the deal.
The
whole thing was handled very informally. Every
time we made a payment, I calculated the interest
due, added it to the principal and subtracted the
amount of the payment.
July 24, 1952
I promise to pay the sum of $6000.00
plus interest at 5.5% per annum to Herbert
R. Bailey. The above amount due by July
24, 1967. Amount subject to reduction by
monthly payments.
We made payments regularly until I returned
to Purdue to complete my Ph.D. degree.
We put the house up for rent, as we fully in-
tended to return there after the degree was com-
pleted.
The renters often defaulted and when
they did, Herb got no check. He never questioned
what was going on. Mrs. Gambill, Bob Gambill’s
mother, sold the house for us when we decide to
stay at Purdue, and we paid Herb oﬀin full in
1964.
Herb in 1952
Herb later conﬁded in me that his mother
thought he was crazy to make
such an unsecured loan.
How-
ever, this gave us a start on eq-
uity development which stood us
in good stead later on. Herb got
a little higher rate of return on
his money and we paid less than
we would have paid to a bank.
This act of friendship has always
been warmly remembered!
While living at 1536 73rd Street, Lou had the
misfortune to miscarry what would have been our
third son.
Also while at 1536 East 73rd Street, Bob and
I, along with Dad, spent a lot of evenings putting
a solid foundation under 1608 Haynes. We mixed
our own concrete for the footings and laid three
courses of concrete blocks on these. In the pro-
cess, we leveled the ﬂoors.
This was good and
bad as it developed that the ﬂoors had never been
level. After this job we had to patch some corners
where the wall board had come apart as part of
the levelling process.
While living at 1536 E. 73rd Street I won a
Sealy mattress from a radio show. A radio station
called early one Sunday to see if someone would
be home to take their call.
They didn’t want
to waste time calling a number which wouldn’t
be answered.
I assured them I would be home.
However, we didn’t have a radio! I borrowed one
from Mom for the afternoon and listened care-
fully to a 15 minute detective drama. I decided
that what they asked would have to do with num-
bers. I wrote down every number that occurred.
The question was: “What were the odds on race
horse?” I knew, and won the mattress.
When we came to 1536, the lot on which it
65

was built was a forest. The sun never shone on the
house. It was still a forest after we had 11 trees
cut down, but at least we could dry out somewhat
due to increased sunlight. The cut trees provided
a stack of ﬁrewood of ﬁreplace length which was
about four feet high and ﬁfty feet long. The house
had a nice ﬁreplace and we used this wood in it to
warm the house on chili days.
Diﬀerent from Haynes Avenue, this house on
73rd Street had indoor plumbing. However, there
were no sewers in Ravenswood. We had our own
septic tank which drained into a “ﬁnger system” of
clay pipes to diﬀuse the water into the subsurface
gravel layer. One of our early jobs was to have
repairs and extensions made to this system.
Another nice feature of 1536 E. 73rd Street
was that Bob and Rhoda lived in Ravenswood
also. That gave our sons, especially Dick who was
older, a chance to get to know his ﬁrst cousins,
Robert John Fuller, Jr., and Deborah Sue Fuller.
I carpooled to work at NOPI with several oth-
ers in the area. My memory problems showed up
even in those days when I drove on a day when
I also took the car to a repair shop.
I forgot
that I had passengers to take home. We were all
stranded for a while. This car was a Maroon 1949
Hudson. It was a pretty car and had good riding
qualities, but a long drive shaft with two universal
joints was prone to failure. When we tired of the
repair bills, we bought a Blue 1952 Chevrolet with
an automatic transmission. Once Lou drove this
kind of car, nothing else would do.
My immediate boss at NOPI was Kaj Neilsen,
a good applied mathematician and avid Bridge
player. He gave me one simple sounding assign-
ment when I reported for work there. Kaj handed
me a book entitled The Mathematical Theory of
Toss Bombing.
His words were: “Go away and
become an expert on this.” Almost every thing I
did at NOPI ﬂowed from that assignment. By the
way, “toss-bombing” is an approach to bomb de-
livery where the aircraft comes toward the target
at a low altitude, pulls up into a climb, releases
its bomb, rolls over and ﬂies away in the opposite
direction. An eﬀective approach if the pilot wants
to be out of the impact zone as rapidly as possible.
My principal work was monitoring and an-
alyzing the eﬀorts of several Navy of Bureau of
Ordnance contractors. This work took me to var-
ious sites in and around New York City includ-
ing Pleasantville and Syossett, Long Island. One
Bureau of Ordnance contractor was located on
Skunks Misery Road. It was always work; I never
allowed extra time for seeing much of the city.
I also made a few trips to the Naval Ordnance
Test Station (NOTS) at Inyokern, California on
the edge of Death valley. This was where some
of the ordnance was actually tested. They had an
interesting view about humans and “black boxes,”
as computers were called. “Humans are not as eﬃ-
cient as black boxes for certain speciﬁc operations,
however, they are more easily maintained and may
be produced by relatively unskilled labor.”
The ﬂight from Burbank to NOTS was by a
DC-3 commuter. Completing his work as ticket
agent, the attendant became the luggage handler.
Then he appeared on the plane as cabin attendant.
No he didn’t ﬂy the plane.
Most of the work I did at NOPI/NAFI was
classiﬁed: CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET, etc., so I
couldn’t take away copies of my papers when I left.
My work required that I apply for “Q” clearance
which was the level required whenever discussion
of “special weapons” came up. This was a Civil
Service job and I believe my rating was GS-12 at a
salary of about $7,000 per year when I left NOPI.
At NOPI I applied some of the mathematics
I had learned. This included inﬁnite series to ap-
proximate functions, diﬀerentials to estimate er-
rors and sensitivity in mechanization of functions,
and matrix theory. The elementary theory of mo-
tion from physics was also involved.
In 1951, calculations were done using electro-
mechanical calculating machines.
(Frieden and
Marchant were manufacturers.) Around 1952 ma-
chines like this which could extract square roots
became available.
This was a major advance.
Before they became available, we used Newton’s
Method or subtraction of odd integers to ﬁnd these
roots. These calculators were desk top units which
displayed the results of computation in a dial. Al-
though these had to be copied down manually,
they were a big step up from the slide rule.
Then came the Card Programmed Calculator.
(above)
The CPC was basically a printing device
know as a tabulator.
Electrically attached to
it were one or more storage devices (ours at
66

NOPI had two). These devices were also electro-
mechanical.
Each device held, as I recall, eight banks of ten
wheels on axles. The numbers in decimal notation
were printed on the perimeters so one could read
directly what was stored there. A control panel,
wired by the computer programmers of those days,
directed the ﬂow of impulses and provided com-
putation of functions such as the trigonometric
functions and logarithms.
We, the users, wrote
our instructions on the famous “IBM Cards.” One
operation between two numbers was allowed per
card.
These numbers could be punched on the
card directly or the punch could call for a number
in storage.
Sorting cards
for the CPC
The “program” delivered to the machine
operator was a collection of cards appropri-
ately punched with numbers
and/or sources.
Instruc-
tions to the operator were
like: “Run the deck with the
pink stripe until the num-
ber output is less than (some
speciﬁed value).” This was
an early form of what be-
came FORTRAN’s LOGI-
CAL IF. “Run the blue deck
51 times” pre-shadowed the
“DO.” and so forth. These
cards, with one operation
connecting two numbers, ran
through the machine at the
rate of 150 cards per minute if there were no jams.
Very primitive, but in 1952 and 1953 this was as
much of an advance as if we had been transported
aboard the Starship Enterprise!
The ﬁrst electronic computer came to NOPI
about the time I returned to Purdue to work on my
Ph.D. On this new computer, which I hadn’t used,
the program on cards was read into the computer
which then performed the computations without
supervision. This was known as a Stored Program
Calculator. Both of these terminologies have van-
ished from the computing vocabulary.
All of this was before the development of tran-
sistors and the miniaturization which they have
made possible.
During the Spring Semester of 1954, I taught
a course at night for Butler. The course was Alge-
bra for Business and I was paid $500 for teaching
it.
In March of that year a friend, Bob Gambill,
whom I had met while studying at Butler wrote to
express his interest coming to work at NOPI. He
did so and worked there several years, Our paths
continued to cross as Bob came back to Purdue
several years later as I will relate in another Chap-
ter.
Also during the late Spring of 1954, I went
on a trip for NOPI to vist the Navy Bureau of
Ordnance in Washington, DC, and to visit some
researchers at the University of Virginia at Char-
lottesville, Virginia, on NOPI business. This was
Cherry Blossom time in Washington, so we de-
cided to make a family trip of it, combining busi-
ness with vacation time. The blossoms were a little
past their prime, but still quite lovely.
Enroute to Washington, we experienced a bit
of history by stopping brieﬂy at the Gettysburg
Memorial.
In Washington, we camped in a camp ground
on an island in the Potomac River. This was a
very crowded site. We had two tents; one for Lou
and me and one for Dick and Ted. We just had
room for our tents and no more. We couldn’t tell
if the kids arguing were ours or some in another
tent.
This did give is a chance to see some of
DC. We went to the Smithsonian, Lincoln Memo-
rial and the Capitol Building among the sights of
Washington.
Leaving Washington, we drove down the Sky-
line Drive to Charlottesville. While I visited the
university, Lou and the boys toured Montecello,
Thomas Jeﬀerson’s home. I didn’t get to see that
until a much later trip. Of course, this was the
days before the Interstate Highway System had
been built. Therefore, coming back to Indianapo-
lis was an arduous trip with many miles of narrow
roads through the mountains.
Toward the end of my tour at NOPI (which
may have become NAFI, Naval Avionics Facility,
Indianapolis, by that time) in the Summer of 1954,
I was working on analyzing the motion of a gy-
roscope for controlling the direction of an aircraft
ﬁring machine guns toward a moving target. With
use of rotation matrices to represent the gimbal-
ing system of the instrument I was able to explain
anomalies in the motion which the physicists had
observed. For this simple work I received the Navy
Meritorious Civilian Service Award.
The award
was dated December 6, 1955 and was signed by R.
F. Scott, Capt. USN. (See Pages 255, 256)
My path recrossed with Roger Scott when he
completed the RASTP (see next Professional Life
Starts) and became a Science Counselor and In-
structor in the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at Purdue.
During this period I received a bonus from the
State of Indiana for my WWII service. (See Pages
67

197, 198) Records indicate that the amount was
$453.34. The length of service on which this was
based does not exactly agree with my count, but
I don’t remember contesting their ﬁgure. Some of
that money went for a new nylon dress for Lou.
Having been used for parachutes during the war,
nylon had not been available for clothing for sev-
eral years. Nylon provided one of the ﬁrst “wrinkle
free” fabrics for clothing.
Lou in her nylon dress with Dick, Ted and me.
A truce agreement in the Korean War was
signed and ﬁghting stopped in July, 1953. I sup-
pose the troops were not sent home immediately,
because of the fragile nature of the peace.
But
by 1954 they were coming home in large numbers.
Again this produced a ﬂood of veterans return-
ing to college campuses. The assistant department
head at Purdue, Dr. Harold S.F. Jonah, remem-
bered me as a good teacher and cooperative person
who had wanted to pursue the Ph.D. He contacted
me to see if I wanted to come back to Purdue as
an Instructor (the lowest faculty rank.).
My reserve commission had also expired (See
Pages 199, 200), so I could resume my graduate
studies without concern for being called to active
duty.
After a lot of soul searching Lou and I decided
that returning to Purdue was the right thing to do.
The decision to return to Purdue having been
made, I sought the support of Kaj Nielsen, and
was granted a one year leave of absence from
NAFI. I did not expect to return after one year,
expecting extensions of my leave, but did expect
to return eventually. I did work at NAFI during
the summers of 1955 and 1956.
I accepted the oﬀer from Ralph Hull on June
3, 1954 and returned to Purdue that Fall.
This meant that we had to ﬁnd a renter for
our house at 1536 E. 73rd Street and ﬁnd hous-
ing in West Lafayette.
It also meant leaving a
church that had ben important to us for the pre-
vious three years. That was the Victory Mission-
ary Baptist Church in Indianapolis. We attended
this church during our stay in Indianapolis from
1951 to 1954. We were very active in this church
and I taught the adult men’s bible class on Sunday
morning during part of that time.
The mid 1950s was an era of extreme para-
noia with regard to Communism and the Soviet
Union.
Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin
chaired some investigative committees of which
the House Committee on Un-American Activities
was the best known. History books will have a lot
to say about that organization, so I’ll omit further
discussion. But the atmosphere created was one
in which Loyalty Oaths were required of all sorts
of people. Before returning to Purdue, I had to
complete President’s Oﬃce Form 15 as were all
“professors, instructors, and teachers in colleges
and universities in the State of Indiana supported
in whole or in part by public funds . .” We had to
sign, in the presence of a Notary Public, an oath
which read:
I solemnly swear (or aﬃrm) that I
will support the Constitution of the United
States of America, the Constitution of the
State of Indiana, and the laws of the United
States and the State of Indiana, and will, by
precept and example, promote respect for
the ﬂag and the institutions of the United
States and the state of Indiana, reverence
for law and order and undivided allegiance
to the government of the United States of
America.”
This oath taking caused me no problem at
all, but some objected to it on several grounds.
One colleague wrote that he was not sure he could
think of “examples” and if he were able to, how
could he compel others to listen to them. While
my own memory is not clear on this, the local
newspaper reported that he was ﬁred for not sign-
ing.
In 1954, as in 1948, housing was in short sup-
ply. I applied to housing director, Irving Wilson,
to live in the FPHA area again. He responded that
nothing was available at that time, but would
“keep my request on ﬁle.” When I checked
later, they could not ﬁnd my application.
Fi-
nally, it turned up in a “completed” ﬁle.
I
asked why it had not been kept in a more ac-
tive status.
The answer was:
“I guess we
thought our letter settled the matter.” A glimpse
of the administrative mind.
68

We found housing in West Lafayette at 120
Sylvia Street. This was a double, converted into
four apartments.
We had one of the ﬁrst ﬂoor
units.
The landlord, Francis Cobb also worked
in the Chemistry Department. He was a decent
landlord. One entered the apartment through our
bedroom (which served as my study area as well);
this was followed by the living room and, ﬁnally,
side by side, a bedroom for Dick and Ted and the
kitchen/dining room.
The Family in 1954
Dick had had a most unfortunate year at John
Strange School on the near north side of Indi-
anapolis. This was the
same school my broth-
ers and I had attended
in the 1930s.
Dick’s
fourth grade teacher led
them to participate in
a sort of rhythm band
based of clapping wooden
blocks.
This activity
was such an obsession
with the teacher that
the kids progressed only
a few months in aca-
demic subjects.
Since
we were now moving to
a new city, we thought it would be a good time
for Dick to repeat the fourth grade.
The West
Lafayette school oﬃcials agreed and that was what
happened.
The schools in West Lafayette were
more academically oriented, so he would had a
diﬃcult time with the inadequate preparation he
had been given.
Ted also started Kindergarten at this time.
Both boys attended Morton Elementary School.
My salary as an Instructor in 1954 was $4000
for the academic year. It wasn’t much and the GI
Bill beneﬁts were exhausted.
Lou was always a
good cook and manager, but I remember eating
a lot of tuna during that period.
Lou prepared
it as creamed tuna, served on toast; as a noodle
casserole; a rice casserole and as tuna salad.
At 120 Sylvia we learned about Ted’s ability
to read into something only what it actually said.
One evening, while Dick and Ted were in their
room studying, we heard a loud argument. Dick
ﬁnally came out and expressed dismay over Ted’s
inability to determine how many right angles there
were in rectangle and in a square. I asked to see
the text. There I found a ﬁgure consisting of a
vertical segment and at right angles to it a hori-
zontal segment of twice the length of the vertical
one. Beneath this ﬁgure were the words “Right
Angle.” I asked Dick if Ted had claimed there was
one right angle in the rectangle and none in the
square. Dick said; “Yes, but how did you know
that?” I pointed out on the basis of the deﬁnition
Ted was absolutely correct. The engineer, which
Dick became, instinctively knew that translations
and rotations didn’t change the “right angle” but,
logically, he had no basis for that. Ted’s instinct
was the more logical if not the more useful.
At another time Lou and I both contracted a
very debilitating case of inﬂuenza. A neighbor and
fellow graduate student, Alfred Schmidt, helped us
by bringing prepared meals. Al was also a student
of Lamberto Cesari.
There may have been as many as a dozen new
Instructors at Purdue that Fall. I was the only
non-Ph.D. in the group. I don’t remember many
who were in the group except for long time col-
league Christoph J. Nuegebauer. Bob Baer and
Nick Kazarinoﬀwere two more.
Instructor was
the normal starting rank at that time. The Fac-
ulty Handbook stated something like: “The rank
of Associate professor is the terminal rank for most
members of the faculty.”
Professor Hull met with us before classes be-
gan to emphasize the importance of good teaching.
He explained that he or other senior faculty mem-
bers would visit our classrooms in order to be able
to make helpful suggestions. He related 12 points
upon which the “senior observer” would be rating
us. I have forgotten most of them. Three were:
Is the Instructor wearing a neck tie?
Does the
Instructor have the students working at the chalk-
board? Does the Instructor appear to be on the
student’s side in the struggle against the diﬃcult
material? I always thought the last one was worth
while. I didn’t think much of wearing a tie as a
criterion for judging a teacher, but I always wore
one! As for having students work on the chalk-
board: that was already a practice I had started
during my year of teaching at Butler. I’m not sure
how eﬀective it is, but it does give the students a
moment to move around; sitting for an hour can
be very tiresome.
A few days later, Professor Hull climbed to
the fourth ﬂoor of Purdue Hall to visit my class-
room. As soon as I saw him, I sent all my students
to the chalkboard. Finally, out of boredom I sup-
pose, he went to the board to work with some of
the students. Later I asked him how he liked my
class? He said that he had not expected to ﬁnd
anything wrong in my class. I then remarked that
I had been embarrassed by an approach that some
of the students had been following to one of the
69

problems.
Professor Hull said: “Oh, that’s the
way I was showing them to do the problem.”
Cause
Eﬀect
Fourth Floor Purdue Hall - 1954
The University administration in 1954 consid-
ered the Mathematics Department to be a service
department.
Most departments were like that.
That is, their primary function was teaching gen-
eral education courses for students in the tradi-
tional “land grant” disciplines: Agriculture and
Engineering.
In mathematics, there were about
a half dozen professors who had done research:
the Head, Ralph Hull; Arthur Rosenthal, for-
mer Dean of the Faculty at Heidleburg Univer-
sity and a refugee from Hitler; Michael Golomb,
from Berlin with a similar reason for being in the
U.S.; Howard Hughes, Aubery H. Smith, Merritt
Webster, Arthur Trabant, Cleota Fry and a few
others who didn’t stay long after I came in 1954.
The star of that period was Lamberto Cesari from
the University of Pisa.
I took courses from all
of these except Smith and Fry. Golomb was the
best teacher I had and his course “Mathematical
Physics” brought all that I studied together into
one homogeneous whole. Hughes was solid, but
stodgy; Webster pretty much the same. Trabant
was inscrutable until I found the book he copied
his notes from. Hull was the worst. I always said
he spent “six inches” in preparing his lectures.
That is, he started thinking what to teach when
he reached the door to the classroom and ﬁnished
when he was through it. This frequently led to
an hour fumbling for the proof of a “well-known”
theorem, which he thought we should all know.
Later, of course, I came to call all these people
by their ﬁrst names except Ralph Hull, who had
departed by the time I ﬁnished the Ph.D. degree.
A humorous incident involving Hull and fel-
low graduate student Jack Forbes occurred at a
time when Hull was on leave and Jack was sending
him material from his dissertation for approval.
In one large batch, Hull noted near the beginning
that he didn’t like a certain terminology.
From
time to time, in this batch of writing, the same ter-
minology came up, prompting similar comments.
Finally, Hull wrote: “I wish you would stop us-
ing this terminology.” Of course, Jack had had no
chance to modify it as all occurrences were in the
same writing.
A. Rosenthal
Arthur Rosenthal was an interesting person.
He had been a student of C.L.F. Lindemann,
who proved the transcendence of
π.
According to contemporary
press, he had been Dean of the
Faculty at Heidelberg University
before coming to the States. Hav-
ing gotten his degree in 1909, he
was a contemporary of many of
the great names in the founda-
tions of modern analysis. He of-
ten told amusing anecdotes about some of these
persons. My great regret is not having recorded
any of them. Rosenthal and Golomb were brought
to Purdue by William Leake Ayres.
Ayres was
head of the department in 1941 and later Dean of
the School of Science, Education and Humanities.
In 1955 I was one of those who complained
about a calculus text we were using. It contained
several errors of importance in understanding limit
concepts among others.
As a result.
I was ap-
pointed to a committee to select a new book. I
was also preparing to take the Qualifying Exams,
a preliminary to starting thesis research. Because
of my textbook committee work, Arthur Rosen-
thal, Acting Head (1955-56), thought I should put
oﬀthese exams until the next semester. Although
I felt that I was ready, I acceded to his sugges-
tion. The book we selected was the ﬁrst of the
new approach to calculus instruction, combining
the elementary functions and coordinate geometry
with calculus. Previously, the freshman year had
been Algebra, Trigonometry and Analytic Geom-
etry, with Calculus in the Sophomore year. The
new text was by Johnson and Kiokemeister.
I was a little unusual as a graduate student. I
was older, a war veteran and returning from a suc-
cessful, though short, career in applied research.
This got me some respect that I probably didn’t
merit.
Harold Jonah, in his wisdom, saw to it
that I was put in an oﬃce with Lamberto Cesari.
It was then natural that I should choose him to
be my major professor and he accepted me. At
70

that time our oﬃce was on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of Pur-
due Hall. In 1964 Purdue Hall was razed to make
way for the new Mathematics Building.
There was a great shortage of space for the
Mathematics Department.
Most people were in
the Recitation Building, but others were scat-
tered around the campus. The fourth ﬂoor of the
Recitation Building had, in an earlier era, pro-
vided hand ball courts and showers for the faculty.
By the 1950s these were no longer used and the
space was converted to windowless oﬃces. Cesari
and I were moved to an oﬃce thus created which
we shared with Lincoln Turner, another of Cesari’s
students.
One night, during and electrical storm while
Cesari and were working, the lights failed and Ce-
sari and I had to feel our way to the steps to leave
the building. There were no emergency lights at
that time.
My fellow graduate students told me Lam-
berto considered me “the big man from Industry.”
He wanted me to call him Lamberto from the start.
I couldn’t do that. With his guidance I did ﬁnish
my course work and the research for and writing of
my Ph.D. dissertation. After the ﬁnal exam over
my dissertation, he asked: “Now will you call me
Lamberto?” I did.
Lamberto was very enthusiastic about our
work. He always exhibited great tenacity about
everything, if not ﬁnesse. He often thumped the
desk and said: “Bill, if we don’t prove these theo-
rems, nobody will!” He referred to our background
in the ﬁeld, but it could have meant something
else.
I completed the work for the Ph.D. in Au-
gust, 1957.
(See Page 252) My thesis topic
was “Existence theorems for periodic solutions of
systems of diﬀerential and diﬀerential-diﬀerence
equations,” The ﬁnal examining committee con-
sisted of Professors Lamberto Cesari, Michael
Golomb, Howard K. Hughes, E. Arthur Trabant,
and Calvin R. Putnam. This committee was ap-
pointed by Professor Carl F. Kossack on July 14,
1957.
As a humorous note on the defense of mydis-
sertation there is this. After I had talked about
my thesis for abour a hour and three quarters of
a two hour period, the thought occured to me:
“The time is almost up. what can they do to me
now?”. One member of my committee did note
that I misspelled “Lebesgue” as “Lesbeque.”
I had taken a leave of absence from NAFI,
when I returned to graduate study, in the fall of
1954. I returned to NAFI to work during the in-
tervening summers until I completed the Ph.D. de-
gree in 1957. It was during one of those summers
that I did the work for which I received the Meri-
torious Civilian Service Award. In 1957 I resigned
from NAFI to accept a position as Assistant to
the Head of the renamed Department Mathemat-
ics and Statistics at Purdue University.
We had rented 1536 East 73rd Street to a cou-
ple. They had trouble keeping up the rent pay-
ments. This made me pretty sure I didn’t want
to be a landlord. The husband of this couple was
killed in an automobile accident. His wife collected
the insurance, paid the back rent and moved out.
We continued to rent the house until 1964 when
we engaged Mrs. Gambill, Bob’s mother, to sell it
for us. We then liquidated the rest of our indebt-
edness to Herb Bailey.
Others who studied for the Ph.D. while I was
there include:
Bob Gambill, Jack Hale, Ralph
Niemann, Jack Forbes and Walt Wood. All had
successful careers. Jacl’s was great academically;
Walt did well as a techical entreprenuer.
Bob later returned to Purdue where, in addi-
tion to mentoring several Ph.D. students, he was
a valuable member of the department administra-
tion.
Jack Forbes ended up at one of Purdue’s Re-
gional Campuses and wrote several successful high
school text books.
Ralph Niemann and his wife Lois became and
remain close friends. Ralph was ahead of me in
graduate studies, but was delayed by being called
up for duty during the Korean War. Ralph com-
bined teaching with a successful venture at raising
Black Angus cattle near Fort Collins, Colorado.
I was fortunate to be asked on several summers,
to lecture to Ralph’s Institutes for teavhers. We
enjoyed Colorado very.
Walt asked me on a couple of occasions to join
him in his consulting business. I declined. I guess
I didn’t have the nerve; the university provided a
more secure environment.
While living in FPHA 213-3, Lou typed an
Algebra book for Professor M. Wiles Keller. This
had to be typed, error free, on camera ready forms.
She typed it on her old portable typewriter with-
out a tab key. She recalls that she was paid 25
cents per page for this job.
At 120 Sylvia, Lou worked for two biology
professors. Charles Porter worked on preventing
molds and fungi on plants. Richard Armacost di-
rected biology students preparing for teaching ca-
reers.
During these years, we again attended the
71

Baptist Bible Union. In all these experiences with
Baptists, and especially at the BBU, I became
more and more put oﬀby the attitude that if one
didn’t completely agree with theology of that local
church, one was a heretic. After the BBU closed
it’s doors a few years later, I no longer partici-
pated actively in any church although attendance
continued to be part of our life.
This phase of life concluded with a trip to
Pennsyvania State University to deliver a paper on
my thesis at the Summer Meeting of the Ameri-
can Mathematical Society.
We, along with sev-
eral other math families, camped in nearby Black
Moshanon State Park. We took Lou’s mother with
us and dropped her oﬀnear Butler Pennsylvania
to visit some of her relatives. On the return trip,
we drove non-stop from Butler to Moline, dropped
of Lou’s mother and drove to West Lafayette.
I was about to enter a new phase of my life -
which I describe in the Chapter Professional Life
Starts. Because I was to have a higher salary, we
rented a slightly larger apartment at 118 Sylvia
Street. This was in the same converted house. We
alsao bought our ﬁrst TV, Black and White, of
course.
72

Professional Life Starts
August, 1957 – August, 1964
I think of the Fall of 1957, when I received the
Ph.D. degree, as the time when my professional
life started. I have been able to supply much more
detail about my life for this period. It isn’t that
my memory suddenly improved that enabled me
to write so much detail; rather, I kept an enormous
ﬁle of correspondence from the period.
Professor Meyer Jerison (Jerry) and I often
talked of writing a history of the department. Un-
fortunately, Jerry was taken from us before we had
the opportunity to carry out our dream. I am sure
he would have added a valuable component to the
following account.
From the Fall of 1957 through the Summer of
1964, at least, my professional history and that of
the department are deeply intertwined.
The reason for this claim is the following
chronology of my assignments from September,
1957 until June, 1964.
September, 1957
Assistant Professor and As-
sistant to the Head of the Department of
Mathematics and Statistics
May, 1958
Associate Professor and Executive
Assistant to the Head of the Department
of Mathematics and Statistics
September, 1959
Acting Head of the Depart-
ment of Mathematics and Statistics
March 2, 1960
Professor and Head of the De-
partment of Mathematics and Statistics.
Resigned eﬀective January 31, 1961
March 9, 1961
Paul Chenea Acting Head of
the Division of Mathematical Sciences; I
assisted with daily routine without title
September 25, 1961
George Hawkins acting
Head of Division of Mathematical Sci-
ences: W.R. Fuller, M. Golomb assisting.
Mail to Math in care of W.R. Fuller
February 1, 1962
Assistant Head of Division
of Mathematical Sciences
September 1962
Chairman of the Department
of Mathematics within Division of Math-
ematical Sciences
Spring, 1963
Assistant Dean of the new School
of Science.
June, 1963
Acting Head of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences. This terminated
with the arrival of Gerald MacLane in
July, 1964
Carl F. Kossack came to Purdue Univer-
sity in 1947 as Professor of Mathematics al-
though he was a Statistician.
He was instrumental in bring-
ing digital computing to Pur-
due.
He became Head of the
newly combined Department of
Mathematics and Statistics in
the Fall of 1957. A brief history
of this period at Purdue can be
found in his Memoirs in the De-
partment of Statistics at Purdue.
Because of my applied research experience
with the Navy, Kossack asked me to stay on at
Purdue as an Assistant Professor of Mathematics,
with the additional title: Assistant to the Head. I
suppose I had a formal oﬀer of this position, but
the only paper I can ﬁnd was Carl’s memo of Au-
gust 24, 1957, to President Frederick L. Hovde no-
tifying him that I had completed the requirements
for the Ph.D. and that I would be an Assistant
Professor with a salary of $7,200 per year as per
the 1957-58 budget. (See Page 202)
In May, 1958, Kossack wrote to President
Hovde promoting me to “Executive Assistant to
the Head of the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics. This memo was endorsed by Dean W.L.
Ayres. (See Page 203)
C.F. Kossack
My job was to help develop a Sponsored Re-
search program in the Department.
I encour-
aged faculty members to write research proposals
and conveyed these to research supporting agen-
cies in Washington, DC. Purdue Mathematics was
largely unknown in research at that time although
Purdue had a student body of about 15,000. Pur-
due was thought to be a small private school. My
job was to change that image so far as ﬁnancial
Washington was concerned. It was rather inter-
esting work. Aside from a couple of memos about
speciﬁc cases, I didn’t keep a record of proposals
submitted or the results. I made regular visits to
the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Oﬃce
of Naval Research (ONR), and the Air Force Oﬃce
of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR). NSF was a new
organization with a budget of about $3,000,000.
A few years later the University formed an
Oﬃce Of Sponsored Research within the Purdue
Research Foundation to handle such matters for
the entire university.
Each grant brings to the university certain
added costs. If the researcher is relieved of teach-
ing duties, for example, then a new person must
be added to take up that duty. Moreover, both
individuals require space, heat, light, etc. The ac-
73

cumulation of these costs is called “overhead.” The
NSF, in 1957, granted 20% of direct costs as over-
head. Other agencies gave various amounts.
These years were a battle ground on the
subject of overhead.
Principal Investigators did
not understand why the university deducted from
their grants for doing what they were hired to do
– original research.
Business Oﬃcers faced the
problem of providing physical resources for both
the research and the teaching functions. Endless
dialogue between these disparate groups did not
bring understanding to either; but the business
oﬃcers won in the end! An important reason was
an organization – The National Association of Col-
lege and University Business Oﬃcers – came into
being in this period and won the day.
Dr. William Leake Ayres was Dean of the
School of Science Education and Humanities
(SEH) of which the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics was one Department. He had been
a mathematician at the University of Michigan be-
fore coming to Purdue. It seems that he was well
respected as a mathematician.
As an adminis-
trator, however, he was a “micro-manager.” My
appointment as Carl’s assistant gave me my ﬁrst
view of this attribute of his. Oﬃce space was in
very short supply. I used 2 foot by 4 foot by 7
foot supply cabinets to separate oﬀa cubicle for
my work in a corner of a large room on the sec-
ond ﬂoor of the Recitation Building, the principal
home of the Department. Carl ordered a telephone
for my use. Ayres came, personally, to see where
the telephone would be placed.
I suspect that Carl didn’t fully understand
the European psyche. He issued an organization
chart which showed me, as Coordinator of Spon-
sored Research, at the head of the research profes-
sors. My major professor, Lamberto Cesari, joked
about me moving from being his student to being
his “boss” overnight.
I wasn’t his boss, or that
of anybody else, but the chart suggested other-
wise. Lamberto shortly thereafter accepted a vis-
iting appointment at the University of Michigan
and ended up staying there.
I continued in this job for two years. Several
faculty members applied for and received grants.
In the process of developing guides for developing
the budgets for these applications, I found that
I had some organizational skills. I don’t remem-
ber having been called upon for them before. At
NOPI, I did write proposals, but they were more
for use by the NOPI Commanding Oﬃcer in re-
questing funds, as part of an organizational pro-
posal, from the Naval Bureau of Ordnance.
In the Mathematics Department in 1957, we
were not “hi tech.” I found an ancient dictating
machine called an EdiPhone. It was strictly me-
chanical.
By speaking into what looked like an
old fashioned Ear Horn, one’s voice activated a di-
aphragm to which a stylus was attached thereby
inscribing appropriate grooves on Bakelite cylin-
ders. My secretary found the scratchy quality of
this medium intolerable, so I started dictating di-
rectly to her. I preferred the other approach be-
cause I could stop to think out what I wanted to
say before committing to audible sound. Learning
to cope with face to face dictating at that time
stood me in good stead later.
During this period as Assistant to the Head,
I taught two mathematics courses each semester.
The typical load was four courses involving 12 to
18 hours in the classroom per week plus the usual
other associated duties of a teacher. Typically, I
taught Calculus or Diﬀerential Equations.
As I
mentioned before, having obtained the Ph.D. de-
gree at age 37, I did not aspire to a research career
so did not request graduate level courses in which
I would have generated graduate students.
I didn’t discuss in the previous chapter how
student registration was accomplished.
The de-
partmental part of this was handled by Profes-
sor H.F.S. (Harold) Jonah.
Working with user
disciplines, Harold decided what courses and how
many sections of each course to oﬀer and the num-
ber of spaces required at each time period. The
Registrar prepared an appropriate number of class
cards on standard “IBM punched” cards. At reg-
istration time, boxes containing all these cards
were delivered to the Armory where they would
be handed out by departmental representatives.
There students, who had consulted with their ad-
visors, came to try to ﬁt together a schedule which
gave them the courses they wanted at times which
worked best for them.
Only so many students
were allowed in the Armory at one time, so there
were frequently lines of up to a block long out-
side. Inside the students went from department
to department, picking up at each a class card
for the class and hour desired.
Since some sec-
tions had ﬁlled before a student arrived at his/her
department’s table, this necessitated returning a
card which caused a time conﬂict for one that
wouldn’t.
When a student completed a “deck”
containing all desired courses and free of time con-
ﬂicts, these were delivered to a representative of
the Registrar’s Oﬃce.
From these decks, each
student’s class schedule was printed.
The night
before classes began, boxes of the cards selected
74

by students, and sorted by course and time, were
delivered to the departments. During that night,
Harold Jonah assisted, as I recall, by Cleota G. Fry
(and probably Wiles Keller and Aubry H. Smith)
divided the cards into class size packets for each
course. These class size packets were then assem-
bled into teaching assignments for the faculty and
TAs.
With few exceptions, only those teaching
graduate level courses knew before the morning
classes began what, when and where they would
be teaching. Of course, an eﬀort was made to ac-
commodate requested times and courses.
On October 14, 1957, the Russians launched
Sputnik I. This was the ﬁrst artiﬁcial earth satel-
lite. That the Russians beat the U.S. to it caused
profound examinations of U.S. policies and espe-
cially the role of education.
The failure of in-
struction in mathematics and physics became the
“whipping boy” for our national failure.
Vast
sums of money poured from the federal coﬀers to
“ﬁx” this. The “New Math” was one of the con-
sequences. The basis of this activity was that a
deeper understanding of the foundations of math-
ematics would lead us to regain our rightful place
as the world’s technological leader.
The new math caused great consternation be-
cause the teachers were not prepared to under-
stand the concepts they were now called upon to
teach. Parents were upset by their inability to help
their children with home work. This was brought
home to me one day when I was met at the door
by Lou and Jim with the question: “Why do they
need the empty set, anyway?”
It was clear that massive re-education of
teachers was necessary. The NSF, under a con-
gressional mandate,
established a program of
Summer Institutes for school teachers to bring
them up to the required level.
We applied for
and received several grants for teacher prepara-
tion. Carl and I also visited several corporate and
foundation headquarters seeking more funds for
this purpose. The NSF was our primary success.
Summer Institutes for high school teachers spon-
sored by the General Electric Company had been
going on for some time under the direction of M.
Wiles Keller and these continued into the “Space
Age.”
Sometime that Fall of 1957, the university
Television unit approached the department about
presenting a program on mathematics for a gen-
eral audience. The program was to be developed
at Purdue and broadcast over WFBM Television,
Channel 6, Indianapolis. Jack Forbes and I agreed
to work on this. We worked with John Glade from
the TV unit and developed a “pilot” program.
The pilot had to do with M¨obius Bands. These
bands are formed by gluing the ends of a strip of
paper together after giving one end a half twist.
This forms a surface that is one-sided in the sense
that a pencil mark traversing the strip the long
way returns to the starting point with the mark
on both “sides” of the loop.
Cutting a M¨obius
Band along its length at varying distances from
the sides also produces interesting results. Try it.
The pilot was, of course, presented live. There
was no tape in those days. We had to go down to
Indianapolis to the station to present it. After-
wards, we went with John and Bill Fall, WFBM
Program Manager, to the executive oﬃces. There
we found the senior management, like so many
school kids, busily exploring the various proper-
ties of these strange surfaces using tape pirated
from the oﬃce adding machines.
Evidently, our pilot was a success. We were
invited to present 13 programs on succeeding Sun-
day evenings in the Spring Semester of 1958.
These involved aspects of mathematics not ordi-
narily covered in the standard classroom.
The
program was titled Its All In Your Mind, an Ad-
venture in Reason.
Bill Fuller and Jack Forbes on the set
During the week, working with the Purdue
TV Unit, we developed the theme, graphics, etc.,
for the next program, in West Lafayette and then
drove to Indy to air the show. In spite of being on
at the same time that “Lassie” was being shown
on another channel, we did have some following.
The experience of sitting in the Lobby of the
station waiting for our time to go on and being
recognized by a young boy, who was there with his
parents for some reason, was fun. We occasionally
had High School classes and teachers in the studio
75

and that was interesting also.
With producer John Glade from Purdue TV Unit
Director of Admissions, Harlan White, wrote
a laudatory letter to Dean Ayres, complimenting
us on a good representation of Purdue. The sta-
tion wanted us to continue for another 13 weeks.
However, the university wasn’t willing to reduce
our other duties and the station wasn’t willing to
pay. If you are willing to give your time away, it
is probably worth what you get for it.
Jack and/or I reported to the Indiana Section
of the Mathematical Association of America at the
May 3, 1958 meeting at Ball State University. An
abstract appeared in the October, 1958 issue of
the Mathematical Association of America (MAA)
Monthly.
In another brush with television in 1958, I
taught some sections of calculus via closed circuit
TV while other colleagues taught similar sections
conventionally.
Testing revealed that there was
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance between
the student taught in the two diﬀerent ways. The
televised instruction did not rate highly with the
students. Along with testing “large lecture” meth-
ods of instruction, this was an eﬀort to approach
the problem of many students to teach, while at-
tempting to bring the teaching load into line with
major universities.
Merrill Shanks wrote a report on this which
appeared in the June-July issue of the Monthly.
He generously listed John Dyer-Bennett, who
taught the convention sections, Warren Seibert,
who did the statistical evaluation and me as co-
authors.
On May 13, 1958, Carl wrote to President
Hovde that he was promoting me to Executive
Assistant to the Head of the Department eﬀective
July 1, 1958. I don’t remember what additional
duties were involved.
In retrospect, it is symptomatic of Carl’s
problems with Dean Ayres and problems which
I later inherited, that these promotions were ar-
ranged directly with President Hovde and by-
passed Dean Ayres.
Carl had a sort of advisory committee.
I
don’t recall who all was on it. I believe Merrill
Shanks, Michael Golomb, Bob Oesterle (math ed-
ucation), and Virgil Anderson were on it. There
really wasn’t anyone in computing on the faculty.
Duane Pyle, a graduate student, was director of
what called the Statistical Computing Laboratory;
perhaps he was part of this group. I met with the
group also. Around the department it was referred
to as the “Kitchen Cabinet.”
As a minor activity, I chaired the department
Christmas party in 1958. To accommodate a va-
riety of religious beliefs, I secularized the party by
calling it a “Holiday Party.” The party was held
at The Trails. This was also a ﬁrst as the Purdue
Memorial Union had been the usual venue.
Carl Kossack’s tenure as head was rather
brief. He had wanted to make changes in the op-
erations of the department to bring it into line
with research departments in major universities.
He also wanted to develop a strong department
including pure and applied mathematics, statis-
tics, computing and teacher education (He used
the term Mathematical Sciences to describe his
goal). He thought he had President Frederick L.
Hovde’s blessings to do this and perhaps he did.
Dean Ayres did not seem to be in agreement with
these goals. It is hard for a president to work di-
rectly with a department head, bypassing a dean.
At the end of my second year, 1958-1959, Carl gave
up and left Purdue.
Later on President Hovde
found a way to “get around” Dean Ayres in deling
with the mathematics department.
W.L. Ayres
During those two years, I had apparently
demonstrated some administrative ability. How-
ever, I was extremely surprised when Dean Ayres
asked me to become Acting
Head of the department while
he carried on the search for a
replacement for Carl.
I was
not prepared to supervise fac-
ulty members. They, armed as
they are with tenure, can be
quite independent.
I, on the
other hand, with 15 years of
successes (starting with my ad-
mission to Oﬃcer Candidate School) behind me,
had great conﬁdence in my ability. So I accepted
this position. At about the same time I received
a promotion to Associate Professor.
A letter
from President Hovde related that the Board of
76

Trustees had approved it on March 18, 1959. The
promotion and new salary became eﬀective July
1, 1959. (See Page 204)
At that time at Purdue, this was the way
many promotions occurred.
Along with my new status came a very inter-
esting opportunity. With a group of eight other
Purdue faculty members, I was invited to spend
the month of August, 1959, at Cape Canaveral
working as a consultant for the RCA Service Com-
pany in advance of the ﬁrst manned space ﬂight.
This phase, a sub-orbital ﬂight, was known as
Project Mercury.
This was concurrent with my
becoming Acting Head of the Mathematics De-
partment.
This project originated with a letter to
Dr. Thomas Jones from Dr. B.(Blair) W. Sparks.
Jones was the Head of Purdue’s School of Elec-
trical Engineering and Sparks signed the letter as
Manager, Data Processing Planning at the RCA
Service Company, Patrick Air Force Base, Florida.
The date was 24 March, 1959. Sparks was a Pur-
due graduate but I don’t recall the circumstances
of our original association.
The original proposal was to establish an
AMR (Atlantic Missile Range) Advanced Prob-
lems Laboratory. The embryonic concept seemed
to be an eﬀort to establish a graduate program
for AMR staﬀto work for the Ph.D. in Electri-
cal Engineering, but also to provide for consult-
ing arrangements with individual Purdue faculty
members. It appears that no formal arrangement
was deemed necessary as degree candidates were
to meet eligibility requirements of the University.
Requirements about returning to AMR work at
the end of the degree programs were involved, but
these were private arrangements between AMR
and personnel involved.
In the next few weeks this project focused on
a proposed visit by a number of Purdue faculty to
Patrick Air Force Base near Cocoa Beach, Florida.
A group of nine individuals, myself included, was
decided upon. We were to be called the Purdue
Advanced Problems Team. I received my invita-
tion to participate in a letter from J.M. Hyndman
dated May 7, 1959. We were to advise on AMR
problems and determine the relevancy of Purdue
programs for graduate study as outlined in the
original draft.
We were to be at Patrick Air Force Base dur-
ing the month of August. I requested to use my
vacation time for this project. Approval was not
automatic. Dean Ayres felt that vacation should
be vacation; not just work in another site. I con-
vinced him that the project would provide a re-
fresher for me and an opportunity for a connec-
tion that could produce graduate students.
It
also would provide needed income as we had just
bought what would be our home for the next 40+
years. He approved the idea.
I had thought that we were contracted with as
a group of individuals. When it developed that we
were being called the Purdue Advanced Problems
team, I was embarrassed.
I apologized to Pres-
ident Hovde, who assured me that there was no
way we would not be identiﬁed with Purdue and
all we could do was to do our best to represent the
school.
I did not preserve copies of my reports at the
conclusion of the month. My drafts indicate that
I reviewed many of their in-house reports for con-
sistency and omissions. I also proposed an Educa-
tional Plan for RCA/MTP (MTP = Missile Test
Project). The purpose of this was to avoid stag-
nation and ensure that relevant ideas from pure
researchers found their way into the thinking of
management and staﬀ. In particular, I observed
that there was no Mathematical Section in the
Canaveral Complex.
I proposed the establishment of an in-house
education program under the auspices of a Pro-
fessional Development Committee. Some compo-
nents were: Basics of Physics and Mathematics for
technicians, updates for engineering staﬀ, gradu-
ate degree programs (as a recruiting tool and for
competence), establishing a “center” near a major
university for RCA/MTP work but also for grad-
uate study for selected personnel. I don’t know
if anything came of this. The whole activity may
have been a big “boondoggle,” but a pleasurable
one.
I also talked with them about management
matters. The management was always complain-
ing that no one was around in the afternoon. I
pointed out to them that their recruiting oﬀered
“work in a vacation land.” What did they expect,
I asked?
There was great concern about what would
happen if the ﬁrst “man in space” perished. Not
entirely “tongue in cheek,” I suggested rerunning
ﬁlms about the early days of aviation when a
crashed pilot crawled away from the wreckage of
his plane, exclaiming “Be careful of left turns” or
some such. These were the kinds of ﬁlms I watched
in the twentys at the Hamilton Theater in Indi-
anapolis.
Others on the team included:
T.F Jones,
Head of EE; V.L. Anderson, Director of the Sta-
77

tistical Laboratory; L.D. Pyle, Head of the Com-
puting Laboratory; P.H. Randolph, Professor of
Mathematics and Industrial Engineering; J.H. Ab-
bott and D. Greenspan, Professors of Mathemat-
ics; J.R. Lewis and R. Harrison (with whom I pre-
viously worked at NOPI), Instructors in EE.
Our visit got a big write-up in both the Cocoa
Tribune and in the Orlando Sentinel.
This activity took place almost two years
before Alan Shepard’s historic ﬁrst man-in-space
sub-orbital ﬂight on May 5, 1961.
Our interesting interlude ended and I was
back in West Lafayette early in September in time
for the opening of the Fall semester. I was soon
to learn of the diﬃculties in being head of a large
department like ours.
I continued correspondence on the Canaveral
educational venture after returning in letters to
Blair Sparks and Hal Morris, outlining how some
portions of the program might be organized and
indicating on-scene facilities available through the
Purdue Research Foundation. I have no recollec-
tion and no records of what ensued. Actually, one
of the problems with administration is the amount
of time one spends on projects which never come
to fruition. I don’t know of anyone on the team
having further contact with the project.
Late in 1960 Tom Jones and I were invited
to visit the General Electric Company facility in
Syracuse, New York, to discuss consulting oppor-
tunities. We made one visit. Perhaps Tom contin-
ued, but I felt that I was too busy with department
problems to stat a new activity. Blair Sparks, no
longer with the space project, was responsible for
initiating this activity.
My naivet´e or lack of “political correctness”
was, in retrospect, quite astonishing. When Mer-
ritt Webster, who supervised the graduate pro-
gram, told me that the department was “uneasy”
about their duties, I sent out a memo saying
something like “When I was in the army and a
new Commanding Oﬃcer took over, he sent out
a memo saying ‘all standing orders remain in ef-
fect until changed’.” This military reference was
not wise. In November, 1959, I sent the faculty a
memo saying it was a “dereliction of duty” to dis-
miss classes early for Thanksgiving. I had a lot to
learn and no teacher except the knocks that come
from criticism.
I had moved into the head’s oﬃce, sitting be-
hind a huge blonde oak desk that Carl Kossack had
used. That the department ran smoothly in spite
of my inexperience was probably due to Harold
Jonah handling the class schedules, Annabelle
Smith (virtually an administrative assistant) han-
dling the oﬃce routine, and my not trying to
change things too abruptly.
Kossack’s goal and my work to improve the
level of sponsored research aside, the department
had a large “service teaching” load. In addition
to courses for engineering students, a variety of
elementary algebra courses, tailored to particular
needs was oﬀered. Among these were courses for
“Home Ec” and for Agricultural students.
Early on in my tenure as Department Head,
Assistant Dean David Pfendler of the School of
Agriculture came to me about the high failure rate
of his students in elementary chemistry. Over a
period of years, he had discovered that if an Agri-
culture student could solve a certain series of arith-
metic problems he or she could succeed in the ele-
mentary chemistry course. His test included such
exercises as 1/2+1/3 and .02/.01. I claimed we
were just talking about arithmetic literacy. OK,
Dave said, but this is what some of our students
can’t do. Feeling that it was part of our function
to help students who had been admitted succeed,
I hired a graduate student, oﬀschedule, to come
in at 6:00 AM to teach Pfendler’s special students
about fractions, ratios, etc. I called this “The cal-
culus of rational numbers taught with obdurate
sympathy.”
On March 2, 1960, Dean Ayres informed the
departmental faculty that he was recommending
to the President that I be made Head, but he
did not write this to the president until March
31, 1960. (See Pages 205, 206).
Dean Ayres reported that most faculty mem-
bers had expressed a preference for ﬁnding some-
one from the outside to be Head.
He said that
he had followed up on many suggestions given for
ﬁlling the headship of the department from out-
side the university. These had been fruitless, he
reported, and hence he had recommended to Pres-
ident Hovde that I be made Head. I believe he also
sought a volunteer from among the senior profes-
sors in the department. None were willing. Dean
Ayres did not include this aspect of the search in
his report to the faculty, so my memory may be
faulty. (See Page 205)
At that time, he recommended to the Pres-
ident that I be promoted to Professor. I believe
he was inﬂuenced in this by Associate Dean R. M.
Whaley, who felt that a department head should
be a full professor. On May 19, 1960, President
Hovde wrote me that “The Committee on Fac-
ulty Promotions, following a recent meeting, has
recommended to me that your academic rank be
78

changed from Associate Professor of Mathemat-
ics to Professor of Mathematics, eﬀective 1 July,
1960. I am very pleased to approve this recom-
mendation.” He also set my salary for 1960-61 at
$13,500 per year. (See Pages 211 and 226)
My appointment to the post of Department
Head was a bad move on Dean Ayres part.
A
senior colleague told me in later years that ‘outra-
geous’ would be a better term. However, in view
of the outcome of the “search” described above,
what were his other options?
It probably was
outrageous of me to accept. I had no inkling of
how diﬀerent university administration was from
industrial (i.e., my Naval Ordnance Plant experi-
ence). I was also unaware of past departmental
problems.
I suppose Ayres thought that as very young
person (I wasn’t, of course) he would be able to
control me. It could also have been disastrous for
me, but it actually turned well for me and, I think,
for all who survived the ensuing months.
Part of this “control” surfaced when Dean
Ayres, arguing my inexperience, oﬀered to (and
did) help me construct the salary budget for the
faculty for the academic year 1960-61. This “help”
came in the form of shaving $100 or $200 oﬀsev-
eral salaries that I had set for the next year. Later
I learned that this was standard procedure for
Ayres.
The department had long been a “revolving
door.” That is, a large number of mathematicians
had come and gone. At least 65 faculty members
had come and gone between 1944 and 1960. (See
Pages 229-232) Some of these became notable in
our profession. In the spring of 1960, nine faculty
members had stated their intention to leave Pur-
due. More were on the verge of doing so. I faced
real diﬃculties in having enough “warm bodies”
to teach our courses in the coming year. It was
one of the most tense periods of my life. As late
as May 23, 1960 we were facing a shortage of staﬀ
which I estimated to be 8 to 10 faculty members
in a memo to Associate Dean R.M. Whaley. (See
Page 208)
The situation was exacerbated by an arti-
cle in a recently formed “underground” campus
newspaper, SPECTRUM, which in its second is-
sue on May 20, 1960, ran a story under the head-
line: Math Department in Flux; 7 profs re-
sign, 11 leaving. In the article Ayres claimed
that “not enough Ph.D.s were being turned out
and many vacancies exist in math departments.”
The article referred to a “growing discontent with
the lack of autonomy of the department.” Mel
Henriksen referred to a “lack of feeling of dig-
nity and John Dyer-Bennett, one of those leav-
ing, commented that it would be a mistake “to
think there were nothing more than the results of
an acute shortage of mathematicians.” The article
concluded by stating that a number of professors
agreed with Michael Golomb who said: “I am con-
vinced that the situation is recovering. Those who
stay are making a positive eﬀort. Dr. Fuller’s ap-
pointment is in line with this improvement.”
I should comment that this was a time when
many universities were attempting to expand. Of-
fers were easy to come by and often used as lever-
age for better salaries at the home institution. In
fact I used the term “grand national permutation”
to describe the eﬀect nation-wide.
Having not been happy with Ayres “help”
with the budget, I proposed immediate addi-
tional salary increases for several faculty mem-
bers for 1960-61 and promotions for three of them.
Through conversations with top advisors to the
President, I had prepared the way for these pro-
posals.
Hence, Dean Ayres concurred and en-
dorsed my letter to the President. The president
agreed and instructed Vice President and Trea-
surer Lytle Freehafer to make the changes eﬀective
July 1, 1960. This action averted more losses, but
did not improve my relations with Dean Ayres.
(See Pages 207,208)
A major appointment for the 1960-1961
school year was Harley Flanders, a mathematician
of some stature. Meyer Jerison was instrumental
in getting him to come. To enhance our oﬀer I
agreed to put him on the payroll a month before he
came, in lieu of moving expenses, which we didn’t
pay then. In return, he was to recruit graduate
students for us from Berkeley.
This turned out to be a “no-no” and I was
called to Mr. R.B. Stewart’s (he was known cam-
pus wide as R.B.) oﬃce for a lecture on how one
could and could not commit State money. Funds
from the Purdue Research Foundation covered this
expenditure; I did not suﬀer; and Purdue got a
young “name” mathematician.
Had I asked for
permission, it wouldn’t have happened. Stewart
was Vice President and Treasurer of the Univer-
sity. His inﬂuence probably exceeded that of Pres-
ident Hovde.
I was so proud of the Flanders acquisition that
I wrote the President praising the cooperation I
had gotten from other administrators in the uni-
versity which, among other things, had included a
position for June Flanders in the School of Man-
agement. (See Page 213)
79

Also, with the help of several faculty mem-
bers, I managed to recruit 11 new faculty mem-
bers for the fall of 1960. In addition to Flanders
there was Robert A. Gambill, Louis J. Cote (prob-
ably arranged by Karl Kossack), Robert Kane and
James Lillo who continued at Purdue for many
years and made signiﬁcant contributions to the
department and university.
Others added that
Fall included:
R.L. Blair, M.W. Carter, G.J.
Rieger, A.R. Amir-Moez, and R.M. Stemmler.
J.H. Michael was brought in as a visiting professor
from Australia.
The principal oﬃces of the Department of
Mathematics and Statistics were in the Recitation
Building, but faculty members had oﬃces in many
buildings scattered around the campus.
In the
Recitation Building 600 square foot class rooms
had been divided into three 200 square foot of-
ﬁces. Most of these housed at least three faculty
members.
In around 1955 or 1956, the attic of
the building, which had once held handball courts
and showers, was converted into oﬃces. Naturally
these were windowless. Each pair of oﬃces shared
a telephone which was placed in a small box open-
ing to each oﬃce.
Lincoln Turner and I had moved into one of
these oﬃces with our major professor Lamberto
Cesari.
In thinking about our oﬃce problems in 1960,
I conceived of adding two wings extending out to
the West from the Recitation Building’s stairwells
and presented this idea to Treasurer R.B. Stewart.
While discussing this idea with a faculty member
outside the building, Dean Ayres came by. When I
explained what I was proposing, he observed that
I was wasting my time for when the University
thought we needed more space, they would pro-
vide it.
R.B., on the other hand, wrote me a
nice report on September 23, 1960 about possi-
ble problems from a physical plant viewpoint, but
indicated that further study would be conducted.
While nothing came of the idea, R.B. at least ap-
peared to consider it. (See Page 212)
Unfortunately, for my relationship with Ayres,
I shared the views Carl Kossack had had for the
development of the department.
In the Fall of
1960, I started a series of meetings with the Profes-
sors to map a strategy for the development of the
department. In a memo dated October 18, 1960, I
wrote Professors Anderson, Burr, Dwinger, Flan-
ders, Goﬀman, Hughes, Jerison, Keller, Putnam,
Reiter and Shanks: (See Page 213)
“This is to invite you to a coﬀee for the
Full Professors in my oﬃce this Wednesday,
October 19, at four o’clock. I hope this will be
the ﬁrst of a series of, say, biweekly meetings.
The purpose will be to provide a forum for
the discussion of departmental problems and
aspirations.”
On one occasion I invited Dean Ayres to meet
with us at one of our regular meetings.
He de-
clined. Later Saunders MacLane indicated that it
was impolitic to invite the dean at a time I set.
Again my naivet´e showed. There may have been
another reason for declining the invitation to meet.
A colleague whose time at Purdue predates mine,
told me that it was Ayres practice to meet with
Professors one by one, even if several were sum-
moned for the same time, and then make his de-
cision. Consensus did not seem to be important.
To help reduce the teaching load for the pro-
fessorial staﬀ, I proposed adopting a “lecture-
recitation” method of instruction.
I appointed
a committee headed by Merrill Shanks to work
out the details.
This was one of the ideas that
Carl Kossack had considered to reduce teaching
loads and make more money available to hire staﬀ
and improve salaries.
I once proposed that I
could teach the entire Freshman class in the ﬁrst
semester of Calculus in Loeb Theater.
Shanks’ committee proposed using lectures of
200 students with recitations sections of 15 stu-
dents taught by TAs. One lecture was to be a full
load for a faculty member, with four recitation sec-
tions each meeting two hours weekly the teaching
load of a half-time TA. The proposal estimated a
doubling of Teaching Assistants from about 40 to
79; and approximately 25-30 new professorships.
These proposed staﬀincreases were accompanied
by requests for additional oﬃce space.
After working with the Professors in the de-
partment to develop a plan, I submitted a memo
to Dean Ayres for this development. The essence
was for development in Applied Mathematics (pro-
posed earlier by Michael Golomb and Alan Perlis);
statistics, probability and game theory; to develop
a program in computer and information science
(There were as yet no such departments anywhere.
Purdue had a background in this area as Alan
Perlis and others had been involved in developing
programming languages such as ALGOL); mathe-
matics education; and rebuilding in analysis, alge-
bra and topology. In the area of teaching loads, we
recommended competing with leading universities
by reducing contact hours to 6 for those involved
in research.
These proposals are in Memoranda I sent to
Dean Ayres on November 9, and November 21,
80

1960. (See Pages 214 and 215-221)
When Dean Ayres read the proposal, he asked
me, kindly, if I would like to have it back. It was
“silly,” he said and thought I wouldn’t want to
have it in the ﬁles. He claimed that the increased
funding requested would take all the money the
university was likely to get. I declined to take it
back and, due to circumstances completely unan-
ticipated at the time, within a few months, we
were actually close to what had been proposed.
Of course, by this time my personal relation-
ship with Dean Ayres was deteriorating. I learned
much later that my style of meeting with the group
of Full Professors was antithetical to his technique.
I learned that he rarely talked to any group as a
whole; rather, even if many persons were present,
he talked to them individually. He then reported
his conclusion. I don’t know if it was my style or
the content of the messages I was sending him, but
we were deﬁnitely at odds.
Early in December or late November, 1960,
Michael Golomb called me to relate a conversa-
tion he had been involved in. President Hovde and
Dean Ayres had asked him to meet with them.
They told him that Bill Fuller wasn’t “working
out” and they thought they would have to replace
him They asked Michael if he would accept the
headship. When he asked them if they had talked
to me about the situation they replied that they
hadn’t. Michael considered this most unfair and
hence contacted me. Michael declined this oﬀer.
I don’t know whether or not Dean Ayres had a
backup plan other than that which ensued in Jan-
uary, 1961. I didn’t wait to see.
I decided to resign the headship of the de-
partment (by virtue of my Professorship, I had
“tenure.”). On December 5, 1960, I wrote to Pres-
ident Hovde to express my desire to resign the
headship of the Department. This was to be eﬀec-
tive January 30, 1961. (See Page 224)
Our conﬂicts with the Dean had, of course,
reached the president’s ears because of my fre-
quent conversations with Presidential Assistant
John Hicks and other members of the president’s
staﬀ. President Hovde told me that my resigna-
tion would enable him to “deal” with the situation.
I should mention that John’s practical, down
to earth approach and his dedication to Purdue
was always helpful to me.
After resigning, but before my tenure as head
expired, I assigned myself a small oﬃce on the
ground ﬂoor of the Recitation Building, and or-
dered a new desk, desk chair and several side
chairs.
When the purchase order reached Dean
Ayres, he called me to say that the oﬃce I had
chosen wouldn’t hold that many chairs. We agreed
that he would delete some from the order. When
I moved into the oﬃce, I appropriated the chairs I
wanted from the hallway. It really didn’t matter,
because I occupied that oﬃce for only a few weeks!
Of course, the President accepted my resig-
nation, but his nice letter doing so did not arrive
until January 24, 1961. (See Page 227)
Shortly after I became head of the depart-
ment, I had attended some alumni aﬀair at Butler
University. I asked M.O. Ross, Butler’s President,
what a president wanted to hear from his depart-
ment heads. His response: “As little as possible!”
I’m afraid that I didn’t measure up to that man-
date so far as President Hovde was concerned. Still
in later years, he wrote in my copy of The Hovde
Years: “To Bill Fuller: With thanks for your help
& friendship during our years together at P.U.;
yours, Frederick L. Hovde.”
A few days after submitting my letter of res-
ignation I was pleased to receive a letter dated
December 12, 1960, signed by 51 members of the
department stating:
“We, the undersigned, sincerely regret
your recent decision to resign as head of our
department.
Moreover, we are dismayed at
the rumor that your resignation was caused in
part by dissatisfaction within the department
with your leadership. We want, therefore, to
tell you that, whatever feelings we may have
had when you took over, we now support you
whole heartedly and that we appreciate your
honesty, integrity, energy, and your selﬂess de-
votion to the welfare of our department.”
The signers of this letter are listed at the end
of this Chapter. (See also Page 223)
Dean Ayres convened a meeting of the math-
ematics faculty early in January, 1961, at which
time he read a statement which referred to my res-
ignation and told the department that, after con-
ferring with the president, he had asked Michael
Golomb to become the Head. Ayres informed the
group that Michael had declined this oﬀer.
He
then said that, on the basis of additional discus-
sions, it had been decided that he should assume
the headship on a part time basis. In a multi-page
statement, he outlined what the immediate future
would hold and ended with:
“I have attempted to set forth here the
most important policies which the Depart-
ment must follow. I hope that my colleagues
in the Department can subscribe to them in
principal and support them in practice. Much
81

remains to be done and the goodwill of all
of us is necessary to accomplish it. If, how-
ever, there are those who cannot honestly sub-
scribe to the policies here stated, those per-
sons should seek posts in other universities. I
urge all of you to cooperate with me in the de-
velopment of our Department, but I will not
beg you to stay if the policies upon which it
must be built are distasteful to you.”
I considered this closing statement to be both
unnecessary and inﬂammatory. I asked the Dean
for permission to reproduce his statement for dis-
tribution to the faculty and requested that he sign
it. He did both. It was distributed to the faculty
in “ditto” form. The full text is quoted near the
end of this chapter.
In the Spring of 1961, the staﬀconsisted of 26
persons with the rank of Assistant Professor (in-
cluding 9 non-Ph.D members) 25 Associate Profes-
sors, and 15 Professors, There were 17 Instructors
and 50 Teaching Assistants. (See Page228)
As one can imagine, the turmoil surround-
ing the events described here led to many rumors.
One was that the graduate program was going to
be phased out. Without changes in staﬃng the
program could not have been robust, but I know
of no proposal to suspend it. Ayres dealt with this
in a Memo to graduate students on February 13,
1961, assuring them that, as he had come to Pur-
due to create such a program, it was unthinkable
that he would destroy it. (See Page 229)
This entire time period was one of great ten-
sion for me and, I’m afraid, also for my wife, Lou.
It was not possible to leave it at the oﬃce so great
were the problems. Department members were re-
signing, or going on leave to wait out the storm.
I often had serious questions about our ability to
meet our teaching responsibilities.
In addition, Lou was pregnant and expected
to deliver our third child about the ﬁrst of Febru-
ary. In spite of this, and Ayres telling me that I
“should stay home,” I felt that I must attend the
January, 1961, Joint Mathematical meetings. Per-
haps this was an example of the foolish: “A man’s
gotta do what a man’s gotta do!”
I made plans on January 23 (Lou remembers
this date) to ﬂy to Washington to attend the meet-
ings for a day or two. Nature had somewhat dif-
ferent plans for about midnight Lou said we really
should go to the hospital. James Holbrook Fuller
was born early on January 24, 1961. Looking back,
it is diﬃcult to believe that I left Lou and our new
son in the hospital, and our other sons in the care
of my father, and went to the meetings. I don’t
recall that I accomplished anything there except
to fulﬁll my need to be in on the action!
Harley Flanders went to the January Joint
Mathematical Meetings in Washington, DC, wear-
ing a name tag which read “AVAILABLE.” He was
vocal in spreading the word of our situation.
M. E. Shanks
At the meeting Merrill E. Shanks,
who
was a Governor of the Mathe-
matical Association of Amer-
ica (MAA), conveyed to the
Board the extent of our dis-
tress, including reference to
Dean Ayres Policy statement.
(See Page 230)
The minutes of the Board
of Governors state that if the
Council of the American Math-
ematical Society concurred, both presidents should
write President Hovde expressing concern and of-
fering to appoint a committee to assist Purdue
in resolving the issues. A motion to do this was
passed unanimously.
While I was there a minor snow fell, Wash-
ington almost shut down, planes didn’t ﬂy and I
and several colleagues came home by train.
In
those days, newly delivered mothers could essen-
tially stay in the hospital as long as they wanted,
so Lou waited there for my return. I relate this
part of the story to illustrate the type of tension
we lived under.
Shortly after the Joint Mathematics Meet-
ings, President Hovde invited a group of senior
mathematicians to visit Purdue, to talk to the
principals and make a report to him. The three
were: Saunders MacLane, University of Chicago;
J Barkley Rosser, of Cornell University; and G.T.
Whyburn, of the University of North Carolina.
My most memorable recollection of their visit
to the campus was meeting with them for dinner
at Sarge Oaks on Main Street.
The restaurant
had a small private room that seated about ten
persons.
Hanging from the ceiling was a single
naked light bulb with a green shade above it. The
whole atmosphere was conspiratorial and took me
back to those clandestine meetings I had with the
French Underground in 1944.
In attendance, in
addition to MacLane, Rosser and Whyburn, were
several senior professors and me.
I don’t know the exact nature of these visi-
tor’s report. However, shortly thereafter, by EX-
ECUTIVE MEMORANDUM No.
A-203, dated
9 March, 1961, President Hovde renamed the de-
partment as the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and transferred it to the Schools of Engineering,
82

under Dean George Hawkins. Paul Chenea, Vice
President for Academic Aﬀairs and former head of
the Division of Engineering Sciences, was named
Acting Head. (See Page 236)
Michael Golomb and I served as advisors.
The President had found the ideal way to circum-
vent Dean Ayres. I was back at Carl Kossack’s
oversize desk, handling the daily routine of the
department.
I thought this title was to make mathematics
parallel with Engineering Science, since that was
also the concept Carl Kossack had been pushing
and the term may have been known in the Exec-
utive Building.
The problems that Paul Chenea faced were
epitomized by a letter he received from Profes-
sor A.W. Tucker, of Princeton University.
Paul
had apparently written seeking candidates for po-
sitions which needed ﬁlling. Tucker wrote that all
their graduates had been placed and added “...let
me say quite frankly that the opinion of Purdue
has fallen so low in mathematical circles that it
would be diﬃcult to persuade one of our good
young men to go to Purdue.” (See Page 237)
Despite this gloomy forecast, Chenea was able
to entice some people to Purdue. One of them was
a well known mathematician then at a prestigious
eastern university. This was not an unmixed bless-
ing. The candidate told us, up front, that he was a
“recovered” alcoholic. Lou warned me that there
was no such thing, but we were very eager to make
a major appointment and I ignored her warning.
He did contribute to Purdue, but he also presented
a few problems as he proved Lou right.
One such incident occured at Thanksgiving
time one year. My family was at dinner when I
received a call from another colleague that this in-
dividual was intoxicated and paying an unwelcome
visit to the colleague’s home where his own family
was at dinner. Naturally, I had to leave my family
dinner to go to pursuade the oﬀender to return to
his own home and family.
Also during the late Spring and Summer of
1961, other senior mathematicians accepted po-
sitions starting in the Fall of 1961.
They were:
Samuel Kaplan, John S. Maybee, Manibhai Pa-
tel, Daniel Pedoe, Eugene Schenkman and Otto F.
Schilling. These, with some younger appointees,
brought the faculty up to 13 Assistant Profes-
sors, 21 Associate Professors and 22 Professors.
This count does not include 9 non-Ph.D. Assistant
Professors or any Instructors. While the choices
were made by a personnel committee, I carried
out much of the personal negotiating.
I was the one who conducted the daily aﬀairs
of the department, still sitting behind the oversize,
blonde oak desk I inherited from Carl Kossack.
This was 1961 and that desk is still very popular
with the faculty having been used by Harry Pol-
lard and (in 2001) by Richard Penny.
Following a nation-wide search which ended
in August, 1961, Felix (Phil) Haas was invited to
become head of the Division. He accepted the of-
fer and moved to Purdue in February of 1962. I
believe the suggestion to look at Haas came from
Mel Henriksen who had spent a Sabbatical period
at Wayne State University while Haas was head
there.
Felix Haas
Haas was an MIT Ph.D.
and Chairman of the Mathe-
matics Department at Wayne
State University in Detroit.
His background provided him
with contacts with many of
the leading mathematicians in
the country. His vision for the
new Division of Mathemati-
cal Sciences included most of
what we had proposed to Dean Ayres. Carl Kos-
sack had started a digital computing program in
the Department of Mathematics and Statistics. In
the proposals that we had made prior to Haas’
coming, the need for more professional help in
this area had been noted, but I don’t think we
envisioned the Department of Computer Science
which Haas brought into being. He proved to be
an ideal person to lead the new Division in this
and other new developments and opportunities.
I was still not out of the loop as on September
13, Dean Hawkins wrote to Vice President Paul
Chenea asking, with the concurrence of Phil Haas,
that I be made Assistant Head of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences eﬀective February 1, 1962.
(See Pages 238, 239)
There was also another interim activity cov-
ered in a memo from Dean George Hawkins
to President Hovde announcing that to relieve
Paul Chenea of his duties in the new Division,
he, George Hawkins, would become Acting Head
of the Division, sharing administrative activities
with W.R. Fuller and M. Golomb, and stating that
all questions concerning the Division should be ad-
dressed in care of W.R. Fuller. (See Page 240)
Phil Haas started his tenure in February,
1962. He launched a vigorous faculty recruiting
campaign, resulting in the appointment of 22 new
faculty members for the Fall of 1962.
As one
newspaper put it: “Purdue Hires Two Football
83

Teams.” Much of our “silly” proposal to Dean
Ayres had come to pass!
Haas wanted to be sure to hire all the quali-
ﬁed candidates he could and to help accomplish
this, he assigned a probabilty of acceptance to
each. This probability was altered weekly. Based
on the delay of acceptance by a particular person,
the probablity was lowered. “Probability” times
“value of salary oﬀer” was never allowed to exceed
the money available.
In September, 1962, Dean Hawkins issued
Administrative Circular No.
31, the purpose of
which was to establish the internal structure of
the Division of Mathematical Sciences. Starting in
October, 1962, the Division was to consist of three
instructional units and two service and research
organizations. Brieﬂy, there was to be a Depart-
ment of Mathematics, Department of Statistics
and a Department of Computer Sciences (the ﬁrst
in the country). No one was sure if computer sci-
ence would become a “discipline” in the academic
sense of the word. All of the early appointment
in the department wanted to have the title “Pro-
fessor of Mathematics and Computer Science.” Of
course, they were all trained as mathematicians.
There would also be a Computer Sciences
Center and a Statistical Laboratory. Sam Conte
chaired both computer operations; Irving Burr
chaired Statistics; William Fuller chaired Math-
ematics (for the academic year 1962-63); Virgil
Anderson was the Director of the Statistical Lab-
oratory. (See Page 245)
A Center for Applied Mathematics was formed
later and mathematics education was shared with
the School of Education, another break-oﬀfrom
the old SEH.
Phil Haas’ tenure was even shorter than mine,
as it was decided to create a new School of Science
in the Spring of 1963. Phil was appointed Dean
of the new School. He immediately found it nec-
essary to give up his duties in the Division and, in
Administrative Circular No. 1, dated June, 1963,
appointed William R. Fuller to be Acting Head of
the Division with Otto Schilling and Meyer Jeri-
son as Assistant Heads responsible for graduate
and undergraduate matters, respectively in math-
ematics; Sam Conte continued in charge of the
Computing Center and the new Department of
Computer Science; Irving Burr in charge of Statis-
tics; and Virgil Anderson in charge of the Statistics
Laboratory. While remaining within the Division
of Mathematical Sciences, the Computer Sciences
Center was to operate under a policy group con-
sisting of Hawkins, Haas and Conte. (See Pages
245, 246)
Gerald R. MacLane, of Rice University, was
selected to be the Head of the Division of Math-
ematical Sciences as well as Head of the De-
partment of Mathematics.
The search ended in
January, 1964 and during the Spring Semester
MacLane made many weekend visits to Purdue
to familiarize himself with our rather large and
diverse operation. He and I became quite well ac-
quainted during that interval as we met frequently
to discuss details.
These arrangements continued until July,
1964, when MacLane arrived in West Lafayette
and took up the position as the Head of the Divi-
sion. I then took up full time duties as Assistant
Dean of the new School of Science. My main du-
ties had to do with student welfare and counseling.
Another part of my job was to chair a com-
mittee to determine the needs for a building to
house the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
to write a proposal for submission to the National
Science Foundation requesting funding.
In one of my capacities I had been invited to
attend the opening of the new Mathematics Build-
ing at the University of Wisconsin – Van Fleck
Hall. The Walter Scholer architectural ﬁrm had
designed virtually all campus buildings for many
years and would design our building.
When it
came to the design phase for our building, I took
Lloyd Moser, a design architect for the Walter Sc-
holer ﬁrm, to see the Wisconsin building. I wanted
him to see the open columnar eﬀect of the ground
level and especially the elegant “coﬀee room” on
the top ﬂoor overlooking Lake Mendota. Looking
at our building, you can see that this had some ef-
fect, but Vice President and Treasurer Lytle Free-
hafer insisted that there be no top ﬂoor “coﬀee
room.” We were lucky to get our third ﬂoor room
under the guise of “Staﬀand Graduate Student
Reading Room.”
An interesting and revealing vignette about
Walter Scholer’s tastes arose when I complained
that oﬃces on the north and south ends of the
proposed building had no windows. I argued that
putting in windows would not only beneﬁt the of-
ﬁce dwellers but would break up the “solid red
brick” walls. Mr. Scholer responded: “You know,
Bill, that’s just the problem; a solid red brick
wall is a mighty pretty thing.” Subsequently, most
of these oﬃces did get windows and there were
matching ones on the end with elevators which
could not be seen from inside the building!
As
I recall the NSF grant was for $1,400,000 of a
$3,400,000 building.
84

These things in place, I applied for and re-
ceived a Sabbatical leave for 1964-65 although
Presidential Assistant John Hicks said he couldn’t
see why an administrator needed a sabbatical! I
spent it at the University of California at Berkeley,
and left Purdue in peace for a year.
I shouldn’t leave this without a bit more of the
back ground of our diﬀerences with Bill Ayres. I
recognize that he isn’t here to give his side; nor
are any of his contemporaries in the Dean’s Of-
ﬁce. However, some “old-timers” say that I have
been too kind to Dean Ayres in the above account.
They refer to many instances of shabby treatment
of colleagues which resulted in signiﬁcant eﬄuxes
of persons who became leaders in our profession.
Their names are on the list referred to earlier. (See
Page 233)
Although it was never explicitly stated to me,
it appeared to me that Dean Ayres desired to keep
the Mathematics Department a “Service Depart-
ment” primarily providing mathematical instruc-
tion to the students in the traditional Land Grant
College mandate: Agriculture and the Mechanic
Arts. In his resignation from Purdue in 1962, he
seemed to state otherwise. Quoted in the Purdue
Exponent on April 4, 1962, Ayres said, in his res-
ignation letter:
“...you are aware, Mr. President, of deep
diﬀerences that exist between us with regard
to the proper role of the Purdue University
in the years ahead. Purdue’s past history has
emphasized engineering and agriculture with
other areas in supporting and service roles, of
whatever strength or mediocrity necessary to
support the two primary areas. This has been
the pattern of Purdue in the past, but it is
not even the Purdue of today and certainly
must not be the Purdue of tomorrow” The
Exponent continued: “It has been my belief
that Purdue needs a broader base for its fu-
ture greatness and that I have been unable to
convince you of this.” (See Page 243)
The mystery to me is that his actions never
indicated his desire for excellence. A reading of
Bob Topping’s The Hovde Years or A Century and
Beyond suggests that Ayres’ did desire to extend
Purdue’s involvement in the Humanities.
In spite of burgeoning enrollments, it was al-
ways diﬃcult to get Dean Ayres approvals for staﬀ
appointments in a timely way. Those who were
still in the national pool of mathematicians by
August were obviously not the hottest prospects
for building a strong department.
One of the
most egregious of these delays was his frequent
postponement of appointments to meet Casper
Goﬀman, who Lamberto Cesari was interested in
bringing to Purdue.
This did ﬁnally take place
and “Cas” had a long career in the Purdue Math-
ematics Department.
Another complicating factor of those days
was the Retired Armed Services Training Program
(RASTP). The complication, for me, was from
continuing protests from younger faculty mem-
bers about the lack of mathematical soundness
of the curriculum oﬀered the retired oﬃcers to
earn a Master of Science degree.
The adoption
of the program had sharply divided the faculty
into camps composed of younger Ph. D. faculty
and older mathematically active faculty and an
ongoing set of older members. The latter were se-
rious about teaching and dedicated to Purdue but,
I think, took a position based more on loyalty to
Dean Ayres than on dedication to the profession.
So intense was the division that some friendships
were threatened by positions taken on the issue.
The program was conceived by Dean Ayres
in late 1955 or early 1956. I believe the genesis
of the idea was a conversation Ayres had with a
seat mate on a ﬂight. His companion was a retired
military oﬃcer.
The idea was based on the fact that most
military academy graduates had studied mathe-
matics at least through Diﬀerential Equations and
hence with a few more courses could be available
to teach elementary mathematics courses in the
nation’s colleges and universities. In view of the
dramatic shortages to be faced in the next several
years, this seemed to be an idea worth exploring.
The idea was attractively described in the
March, 1956 issue of Shipmate, the U.S. Naval
Academy Alumni Monthly under the heading: Do
You Want a Digniﬁed Position? The journal
asked those with interest to signify that by submit-
ting a form with certain information. (See Page
241)
As an Instructor of Mathematics, I was con-
sidered a faculty member even though I was a
graduate student.
So I was present in faculty
meetings leading up to the establishment of the
RASTP. For details I rely on a report prepared
by Melvin Henriksen for the Graduate Committee.
According to this report, Dean Ayres discussed the
idea with Cleota Fry, Harold Jonah, Wiles Keller,
Carl Kossack, Arthur Rosenthal and Merritt Web-
ster. It was brought to the faculty on April 17,
1956. At the meeting, the above group was joined
by Merrill Shanks in recommending the program
for adoption. Some thought it too weak and the
85

committee was augmented by Arthur Copeland,
John Dyer-Bennett and Michael Golomb.
With
some strengthening, the program was adopted by
a vote of 22 for and 18 against at an evening meet-
ing on May 2, 1956. Dean Ayres was a participant
in the debate and vote.
The program began in the Fall of 1956. The
Masters degree was awarded to those completing
the program. The courses in the program were tai-
lored to the group and to the objective to prepare
the graduates to teach elementary college mathe-
matics.
Ten former oﬃcers in this ﬁrst group com-
pleted the MS and graduated during the summer
of 1957. Nine of these went into teaching positions
(although one did not teach matematics). A study
concerning these nine was conducted by Assistant
Professor Robert A. Oesterle.
These taechers and their department heads
were asked to complete an “opinionaire.” All did.
Based on a number of attributes related to teach-
ing, Oesterle found that the dpartment heads
ranked the teachers bwteen 3.43 and 4.56 on a ﬁve-
point scale. All but one was invited back for a sec-
ond year. Oesterle concluded that, in general, the
teachers were considered to be “above average.”
The teachers, while indicating some areas
that would have been helpful to them, reported
their ﬁrst year experiences to have been enjoyable.
In 1960, after four years and ﬁfty-four Mas-
ters’s Degrees, M.W. Keller and A.H. Smith con-
ducted another survey. They found that 69% of
departments responding to a questionaire viewed
the RASTP in a favorable light. Keller and Smith
concluded that the program was fulﬂling a need.
The program was never popular with the fac-
ulty. The department included several non-Ph.D.
persons and others who genuinely sided with the
Dean. I do not wish to denigrate these colleagues.
They were mostly good teachers and interested in
the welfare of the department and of the univer-
sity. Leaving these out, the RASTP would never
have come into existence.
I felt that there was
much good about the idea, but had no real con-
tact with it until the Fall semester of 1960.
In order to form an opinion based on experi-
ence, I assigned myself to teach in the Program.
I taught MA 541 (Called Advanced Calculus, but
half was a review of beginning Calculus) and MA
533 Diﬀerential Equations. In a letter of July 24,
1961 to Mel Henriksen, Chairman of the Gradu-
ate Committee, I remarked about the poor show-
ing of the class and their antagonism to me as a
teacher. One told me that I was “not a gentle-
man.” I had never experienced anything like that
before or since.
I interpreted the complaints of
some as due to my inability to write examinations
they could pass. I concluded with:
“It is my opinion that the major diﬃ-
culties I experienced in my contacts with the
RASTP are due to the mathematical immatu-
rity of the students. I feel that they were sim-
ply not yet prepared to cope with abstractions
of notation and argument. It is my opinion
that if they were given suﬃcient time to ma-
ture, before being asked to cope with courses
which the instructor at least feels are gradu-
ate courses, they might put on a better show.
I feel that an additional year might give them
this maturity.”
There was strong suspicion that Ayres in-
tended to hire a number of the 1961 RASTP class.
There is cause to believe this would have hap-
pened had the department not been moved admin-
istratively to the Schools of Engineering. When
Ayres assumed the headship in February, 1961,
he used the desk calendar I had left behind for
his appointment schedule.
When I returned to
that oﬃce as Paul Chenea’s assistant, the calen-
dar was still there showing, in Ayres handwriting,
appointments for several members of this class. I
preserved the pages from this calendar for several
years. Unfortunately, they seem to have been lost.
During the early days (July, 1961) of the new
Division of Mathematical Sciences, Paul Chenea
asked the Graduate Committee to make a study of
the program. A survey of the faculty showed con-
siderable disapproval of the program, but not all in
favor of suspending it. Sixteen felt modiﬁcations
were needed; 18 felt it should be discontinued; 4
oﬀered no opinion. In an undated report, L. Cote,
C. Goﬀman, M. Henriksen (chair), M. Jerison and
M. Shanks voted to discontinue the program. M.
Webster dissented.
In July, 1961, Dean George Hawkins, at
V.P. Paul Chenea’s request, asked Dr. Saunders
MacLane for an opinion.
MacLane responded
by telephone after which Dean Hawkins sent him
a copy of his transcribed remarks to which he
agreed. In summary, MacLane recommended not
awarding a Master’s degree and oﬀering a certiﬁ-
cate instead, and putting more mathematics into
the program. If a certiﬁcate would not attract stu-
dents then the program should be discontinued.
Paul Chenea reviewed the copious material
on the issue, including a report by Aubry Smith,
the Graduate Committee’s report, and Saunders
MacLane’s report.
On October 9, 1961, Dean
86

Hawkins issued a memorandum discontinuing the
program at the close of Summer, 1962. Paul Ch-
enea indicated his concurrence by cosigning this
memorandum.
Hawkins reported that he based
his decision on: “consultation with Drs.
M.W.
Keller, A.H. Smith, M. Golomb, W.R. Fuller, M.
Henriksen and other staﬀmembers of the Division
and after receiving Dr. Chenea’s written recom-
mendation.” Of course, nothing prevented such re-
tirees from coming to the university for make up
work and then pursuing a minimal Masters degree
program. I know of none who did.
Several internal studies were made of the
RASTP. I have not reviewed them extensively
here.
My overall impression is that, whatever
shortcomings the program and its participants
may have had, most of the graduates had reward-
ing and useful careers in smaller colleges. Some
stayed and taught at Purdue for a few years. One
of especial interest to me was Roger F. Scott (R
Adm, Ret, U.S.N.). Roger, in addition to teach-
ing, was a School of Science Counselor for several
years.
This was the second time our paths had
crossed, as Roger was the one who signed the cer-
tiﬁcate for the Meritorious Civilian Service award
I received from the Navy in 1954 for my work at
the Naval Ordnance Plant, Indianapolis.
The Saga of the RASTP ended with the close
of the Summer Session of 1962. My ﬁle contained
several other rather voluminous documents which
may be found in the Purdue University Library
Archives.
The announcement about closing the
program came from Dean of Engineering George
Hawkins in his role as Acting Head of the Division
of Mathematical Sciences. (See Page 242)
As can be surmised by much of the above tale,
Faculty participation in Governance was minimal
at Purdue and hardly existed at all in mathematics
until 1961.
Dean Ayres Memorandum to the Faculty,
dated March 2, 1960, indicates that he received
suggestions from them as to a possible head and
that he compiled a list of more than 30 candidates
all of whom were eliminated for one reason or an-
other. There is no indication that any of them was
brought to the campus to meet with the faculty.
It also states that after further consultation “with
several faculty members, Dean Young and Dean
Hawkins,” he had recommended me to President
Hovde who concurred.
I don’t know what went on before my time,
but at this time, tenure, according to AAUP rules,
was usually achieved by default.
Probably this
was because it was so diﬃcult to obtain approval
for new hires. Once we became a Division in the
Schools of Engineering, tenure was taken seriously.
I may have been the ﬁrst in Purdue mathematics
to tell an assistant professor that Purdue would
not be his/her home for life. The ﬁrst two were
Don Lick and Rosemary Stemmler.
I have not commented on the role of speciﬁc
faculty colleagues unless I had notes to support my
poor memory. Mel Henriksen is one I do remember
most from this time. Mel often came to my oﬃce
for “ten minutes of hate” in a take-oﬀon George
Orwell’s novel 1984. I asked him to think positive
thoughts while he countered asking me to think
negatively. We had many discussions, which I wish
I could remember and report in detail. Mel and
I remain good friends and share a mutual respect
for each other.
Although I was obviously deeply involved in
what we old-timers called our “Revolution,” I
don’t consider myself a major player.
However,
I do wonder what would have happened had I
been content to be the head of a mediocre or
lower level department. I can easily imagine that,
while we would have continued to lose the better
people, we would have hired “warm bodies” and
met our teaching requirements. So I do credit my
work with the professors to build a well-rounded,
modern department as part of the catalyst that
brought about the changes reported above.
In writing some recollections for Lou’s and
my 50th wedding anniversary, my colleague Meyer
Jerison wrote:
“My most dramatic memory is of your role
in our “revolution.” Many people contributed
to the success of that diﬃcult and, in retro-
spect, glorious eﬀort. If any single one of them
other than you had not been involved, it is safe
to say that the outcome would have been the
same. But as I have often said, though perhaps
not to you directly, if you had not been there
and done what you did then I fear we would
have had a diﬀerent history.”
The importance of the sequence of events ini-
tiated by Merrill Shanks at the January, 1961, So-
ciety meetings cannot be over-emphasized.
In spite of the intense period I have described,
these events did not ﬁll all my time. In no par-
ticular order here are some of my other activities.
Some are described in more detail in other chap-
ters.
• During 1958-59 school year I taught in Pur-
due’s oﬀ-campus program in engineering educa-
tion.
• With a group of eight other Purdue faculty
87

members, I spent the month of August, 1959, at
Cape Canaveral working as a consultant for the
RCA Service Company in advance of the ﬁrst Mer-
cury ﬂight.
• Late in 1960 Tom Jones and I were invited
to visit the General Electric Company facility in
Syracuse, New York, to discuss consulting oppor-
tunities. We made one visit.
• I lectured in several Summer Teacher In-
stitutes at Colorado State run by my friend from
student days, Ralph Niemann.
• Early in 1966 (February or March), I inter-
viewed for the Deanship of the College of Liberal
Arts and Sciences at the University of Connecti-
cut at Storrs, Connecticut. I wasn’t oﬀered the
position.
• In April,1966, I interviewed for the Dean-
ship of Arts and Sciences at Colorado State Uni-
versity. I was oﬀered the position but rejected it.
• I interviewed for chairmanship of the Math-
ematics Department at Buﬀalo. I wasn’t oﬀered
the job.
• I was oﬀered the position of Assistant Exec-
utive Director of the American Mathematical So-
ciety by Gordon Walker. In-ﬁghting I observed on
a visit to Providence cooled this for me.
• Some time in the early 60s I reviewed tapes
of mathematic lectures for MPATI. MPATI was
the Midwest program for Air Borne Televised In-
struction.
Funded by the Ford foundation and
others, the program based at Purdue used a DC
6 ﬂying over northwest Indiana to beam televised
instruction to a ﬁve state area. The format called
for two University of Chicago teachers (as I re-
call it) to make a conventional presentations, the
camera going from one to the other. The material
was competently presented, but I objected when
the dialogue degenerated to a combative mode be-
tween the presenters.
I may have been brought
into this activity by Bill Fall, former program di-
rector for WFBM, who now had a signiﬁcant role
in the MPATI program. As I recall, I got $50 per
lesson for these reviews.
I describe these activities in more depth in
the chapter Life With ....
Before recording Dean Ayres Policy State-
ment, I oﬀer a few anecdotes on life in the Depart-
ment of Mathematics and Statistics in 1959-1961.
To open this section, I repeat some background on
the department.
In the mid 1950s the Department of Mathe-
matics was mostly housed in the Recitation Build-
ing. Originally a classroom only building, several
600 square foot classrooms had been divided into
three 200 square foot oﬃces. Each such oﬃce was
home to at least three faculty members. At that
time the fourth ﬂoor of the building was remodeled
to provide several windowless oﬃces. Each pair of
adjacent oﬃces was connected by a small box in
the wall holding a telephone shared by the occu-
pants. In 1956-57 (maybe earlier), I shared one of
these oﬃces with Professor Lamberto Cesari and
another graduate student, Lincoln Turner.
We
were working under Cesari’s direction.
There was a lounge of about 200 square feet
in area in this fourth ﬂoor complex. There were
many requests to have a “coke” machine in this
lounge.
I don’t recall exactly how it happened,
but when I became Acting Head, I managed to
get such a machine installed. Not only that, but
the department received a share of the proceeds
from the sale of Coca Cola. The machine was hu-
morously dubbed the “William R. Fuller Memo-
rial Coke Machine.” Needless to say, it wasn’t long
before the ﬁscal powers discovered this source of
income and started licensing Coca Cola to install
machines and gathered the proceeds for the uni-
versity.
There was a chalk board in the fourth ﬂoor
lounge, but the oﬃces on that level did not have
them. It is hard to imagine a mathematician’s of-
ﬁce without a chalkboard. When I inquired about
having the Physical Plant Department install such
boards, it was obvious that our budget would pay
for only one or two. However, a colleague showed
me an oﬃce supply catalog in which chalk boards
of an appropriate size could be bought for about
a tenth of the university estimate.
I shot oﬀa
purchase order for the requisite number of boards.
The money probably came from our “coke” fund.
When the boards arrived I contacted the carpen-
ter shop about installing them. Then I discovered
the value of not asking ﬁrst. “How did you man-
age to get these boards?” “How do you know they
will be strong enough to be installed?” And other
questions. However they installed them; they were
satisfactory; and so far as I know may still be serv-
ing their purpose. I also may have been respon-
sible for some additional checks being mandated
on how requisitions ﬂow through the purchasing
department.
On the subject of the Purchasing Depart-
ment, I am reminded of an incident which came
later, but shows the administrative mind set. One
of the head guys in purchasing explained to me
one of the travails of his job.
He related that
when a new building is to be erected, a space is
found where a layout of projected oﬃces can be
88

constructed. He continued: “We bring in a fur-
niture manufacturer who designs furniture that is
‘just right’ for the space. We install the furniture,
and what happens? The professor moves in and
rearranges it to suit himself!”
Every large group must have a “character.”
I’ll call ours “X”, for obvious reasons. The ﬁrst
anecdote concerns a wastebasket. The janitor told
Assistant Department Head, Harold Jonah, that a
wastebasket was missing from a classroom in the
Recitation Building. Harold remembered having
seen X walking across the campus with a waste-
basket on his shoulder. When asked about it, X
observed that he always found that wastebasket
empty and hence it was unneeded in that class-
room whereas he needed one at home. The item
was returned to the classroom.
On one occasion X told me, plaintively, that
he was having trouble attracting graduate stu-
dents to work with him. He felt that it was because
they had no opportunity to meet him. I suggested
that he invite some to his home for an informal
“get together.” A few days later on the chalk board
in the fourth ﬂoor lounge, there appeared at the
top the message: “Graduate students desiring to
see the Xs in their natural habitat, please stop in
between 10 and 11 PM on . .˙” - a date was given.
Perhaps not from this eﬀort, but X did men-
tor one graduate students who had a distinguished
career.
X’s success with undergraduate students was
close to disastrous. A later Assistant Head, Bob
Gambill, considered him part of a small group re-
ferred to as “the wrecking crew.” That is, if there
was a course the department wanted to drop, but
was still requested by other departments, assign-
ing members of this group to the course over a
period of several semesters would reduce it’s de-
sirability to zero.
Another incident which had some bad eﬀect,
but could have been disastrous occurred when a
graduate student jumped or fell from a third ﬂoor
window in the Recitation Building. He sustained
compound fractures in both legs.
The broken
bones came out the sides of his legs and punched
two round holes in the ground where he landed. I
witnessed these holes the following morning. He
was with a group of other graduate students at
the time. It was widely thought that he jumped
because of a bet that he could do so without in-
jury. The students stoutly maintained that he was
sitting in the window sill and fell. This event oc-
curred on April 23, 1963 my 20th wedding anniver-
sary.
Various experiences led me to coin an adage:
“A university is to sweep”
This adage was occasioned when the head of
the janitors wrote me that professors were using
class rooms after hours for instruction. This meant
that the ﬁrst class in the morning wouldn’t have a
clean chalkboard. Of course, that was the only one
that had clean boards anyway. I was told that: “If
You can’t keep professors from teaching in those
class rooms they will be locked up!”
And a concept called:
“The egocentric theory of the universe.”
This concept derives from the fact that for
most people the view of the world starts from their
immediate view of how things ought to work.
And, ﬁnally, anyone who has attended a lot
of committee meetings knows that:
Punctuality is the thief of time!
Until 1962, some departmental social life was,
essentially, mandated. The department wives had
monthly “Teas” at which attendance was consid-
ered obligatory.
These were not Lou’s favorite
thing, by any means, but I guess she felt she had
to participate because of my position. The Pur-
due Women’s Club was also considered important.
These matters were overseen by the Dean’s wife,
Julliette Ayres. Newly appointed faculty were as-
signed sponsors from among the ongoing members.
It was in this way that we met George and Dorothy
Pedrick. Our long relationship with them contin-
ued by correspondence after they moved to Cali-
fornia where George worked for the Committee on
the Undergraduate Program in Mathematics.
As I re-read this account I think I would ﬁnd
it diﬃcult to believe it had I not lived it. How
could a person only two years beyond the Ph.D.
degree be asked to head a department in a major
state school? How could such a person accept the
job? How could that person elect not to “sit on
his hands” and simply shuﬄe the papers neces-
sary to survive? How could a faculty presume to
tell the administration what kind of department
and school should be provided for the people of
Indiana? I don’t have answers. I just know the
foregoing is what happened!
89

1961 Policy Statement by Dean W.L. Ayres
This statement was not dated. A copy from the
Dean of Engineering was time stamped January
17, 1961
Policy Statement for Department of Mathe-
matics and Statistics “I think you are all aware
that Professor Fuller has asked to be relieved
of his assignment as Head of the Department of
Mathematics and Statistics. President Hovde
and I held several conferences and invited Pro-
fessor Michael Golomb to accept the headship
of the Department.
This he declined to do.
After additional conferences we have decided
that I should become Head of the Department
of Mathematics and Statistics on a part time
basis until a permanent solution can be found
inside or outside the Department. I hope this
may continue for a short time only, but it will
be for the remainder of this year and perhaps
for all of next year at least. We must continue
this interim administration until the proper
person can be identiﬁed to give proper leader-
ship to this Department on a permanent basis.
“In accepting the leadership of this De-
partment at this time, I think I should make
clear to all of you our belief in certain policy
matters that are essential. I should add that
President Hovde has read this policy statement
and endorsed it fully. You may thus consider
it a joint statement from the two of us.
“The Department of Mathematics and
Statistics is one of the largest and most es-
sential departments of the entire campus. Its
duties include many and various assignments
each of which must be performed competently.
In considering its total assignment, it seems to
me that we must establish the following prior-
ities:
Priority 1. Appropriate and competent teach-
ing at the undergraduate level.
Priority 2. Competent teaching at the grad-
uate level and guidance of graduate student
research.
Priority 3. Personal research and scholarship
by members of the faculty.
“President Hovde has stated on many oc-
casions that Purdue’s ﬁrst responsibility is the
education of undergraduates, and I agree with
this attitude whole-heartedly. While I consider
that the other functions of the University are
important and must be given serious atten-
tion, it is my belief that wherever a conﬂict
between priorities forces a choice, the train-
ing and teaching of undergraduates must be
paramount. I make this judgment even though
I am a strong believer in graduate education
and in research.
“Our undergraduate teaching program in-
volves a large service program, primarily to en-
gineering but also to all other schools of the
University.
In addition to this, we have our
own program of undergraduate majors with the
development of a small nucleus of undergradu-
ate students who will become the professional
mathematicians of the future. We have a need
to train undergraduates in the ﬁeld of statistics
to meet the strong demand in industrial and
government laboratories. All of these functions
are important and must be done with compe-
tence.
“The magnitude, diversity and high pri-
ority of our undergraduate programs makes it
imperative that we have on our faculty many
professors gifted in the great art of teach-
ing. We have on our present staﬀmany per-
sons whose primary function is undergraduate
teaching with little activity in mathematical
research. These are valuable members of our
staﬀand it is desirable to add to this group
in the future as well as increase our research
staﬀ. While the combination of a gifted teacher
and ﬁne researcher is the ideal combination
in a professor, such a great scholar-teacher is
rare, and we must expect to achieve the desir-
able balance between instruction and research
through the eﬀorts of many people of diﬀerent
abilities rather than to ﬁnd it in each particular
individual. Some members of our faculty today
and in the future will be of greatest usefulness
at the graduate and research level; others will
ﬁnd their greatest usefulness in the undergrad-
uate teaching programs. Both types are highly
desirable members of the faculty and we shall
continue to appreciate both types in our cur-
rent faculty and to seek both in our future ad-
ditions.
“Priority 2 is graduate instruction and
Priority 3 is individual faculty research. These
two priorities are closely related and perhaps
could be stated as a single priority which must
take second place to the undergraduate pro-
gram but should by no means be crowded out
of the picture by the demands of Priority 1.
“Here, the great scarcity of persons capa-
ble and experienced in guiding research makes
it necessary for us to make some diﬃcult de-
cisions.
Probably no Department of Mathe-
matics can cover the waterfront and be ﬁrst-
90

class in all research ﬁelds of mathematics and
statistics.
Once you have struggled through
the painful decisions with me as to a few ar-
eas where Purdue should be outstanding, Pres-
ident Hovde has assured us that there will be
money to strengthen these areas. He has as-
sured me that he will given (SIC) this depart-
ment all the ﬁnancial support possible consis-
tent with the valid needs of other departments
and schools.
“This should provide the staﬀto train our
share of future mathematicians and statisti-
cians.
But we have several other obligations
in our graduate program, each of solid valid-
ity and desirable in the overall program of the
University. We have to provide the mathemati-
cal and statistical training to persons who need
these skills as tools in their professional inter-
est which may be engineering, social science,
or agriculture. Such programs are vital to the
whole University and must be given the best of
our abilities.
“Finally, we have the graduate programs
concerned with secondary school teachers and
with the retired military personnel.
Purdue
University has been a leader in the former area
and a pioneer in the second.
Both of these
programs are clearly useful in the development
of education in the years ahead and must be
continued and supported with real enthusiasm.
We cannot ignore the secondary school teacher
and expect that our entering University stu-
dents will be properly trained. For this self-
ish reason alone, our programs for secondary
teachers are important. But more than this,
we owe an obligation to American education
as a whole to bring our best minds into this
program.
“Our Retired Oﬃcer program was the ﬁrst
one established in the nation and has been im-
itated at a number of other universities.
Its
graduates have been sought by colleges and
universities across the country.
The growing
scarcity of Ph.D. mathematicians in the years
ahead will increase this demand.
This fact
alone is a clear signal of the value of the pro-
gram. In addition, it would not have been im-
itated in other universities if they had not rec-
ognized that the Purdue pioneering eﬀort pre-
sented a solid and useful program.
“It is my desire to state in simple terms the
various aspects of the program of the Depart-
ment of Mathematics and the importance of
each of its component parts. No individual in
this room may be concerned with all of the var-
ious programs that I have discussed, but each
person must contribute his best ability to those
parts of the program for which his training best
ﬁts. And each must recognize the importance
of the other areas, even though he may not par-
ticipate in those particular programs. We have
a large, important, and varied role to play in
the work of Purdue University. Each of these
programs is valuable and contributes its bit to
the good of the Department and of the Univer-
sity.
“In assuming the Headship of the depart-
ment once again, I must of necessity work with
you on a part time basis. This means that I will
need support from each of you in working out
the speciﬁc policies and practices of the pro-
grams, which I have discussed here in general
terms. I will welcome your advice and assis-
tance in developing the proper policies which
will make these programs a success.
“I have attempted to set forth the most
important policies,
which the Department
must follow. I hope that my colleagues in the
Department can subscribe to them in principle
and support them in practice. Much remains
to be done and the good will of all of us is
necessary to accomplish it. If, however, there
are any who cannot honestly subscribe to the
policies here stated, these persons should seek
posts in other universities. I urge all of you to
cooperate with me in the development of our
Department, but I will not beg you to stay if
the policies upon which it must be built are
distasteful to you.
“I hope my tenure as Head of this Depart-
ment will be reasonably short, and that by the
end of this next year, we may settle this mat-
ter on a permanent basis. I also ask all of you
to give me suggestions as to the proper person
who can take over as Chairman of this Depart-
ment.”
End of Dean Ayres Statement
91

Signers of supporting letter
Norman L. Alling
Imanuel Marx
Ali R. Amir-Moez
Harlley E. McKean
Virgil L. Anderson
Dale M. Mesner
L.G. Black
James H. Michael
Robert L. Blair
Glen T. Miller
Helen Bozivich
Christof J. Nuegebauer
Irving Burr
James Norton
Melvin W. Carter
R.A. Oesterle
Arthur H. Copeland, Jr.
Paul W. Overman
Louis J. Cote
George Pedrick
Karleton Crain
Sam Perlis
Marvin W. DeJonge
C.R. Putnam
Ph. Dwinger
L.D. Pyle
Harley Flanders
Stanley Reiter
Cleota G. Fry
Paul H. Randolph
Robert Gambill
Georg J. Rieger
Casper Goﬀman
Roger F. Scott
Michael Golomb
Merrill Shanks
James H. Hogg
Edward Silverman
H.K. Hughes
Annette Sinclair
M. Jerison
Morris Skibinsky
Robert B. Kane
Aubrey H. Smith
M. Wiles Keller
Merritt Webster
Earl L. Klinger
G.N.Wollan
Clarence Lane
Robert E. Zink
James C. Lillo
I was also pleased to receive a letter from Mel
Henriksen asking to be added to the list.
92

From Here To . . .
August, 1964 – ??
By the Fall of 1964 I would have completed
ten rather tumultuous years at Purdue. I had been
a graduate student with the rank of Instructor for
three of them and for seven of them in ranks from
Assistant Professor to Professor. I had been heav-
ily involved in administrative matters as well as
teaching, as the previous chapter indicates. Hav-
ing completed the Ph. D. at age thirty-seven, I
had never sought to follow a career in research in
pure mathematics, but did feel that I had become
rather far removed from the subject. I felt that
it was time for a break and decided to apply for
a Sabbatical Leave. Under most conditions, such
leaves are due to professors after six years of ser-
vice and, normally, pay half the usual salary for a
year or the full salary for half a year.
Dean Felix (Phil) Haas felt that it should be
possible to raise the amount needed to make the
leave one for a full year. I applied to the National
Science Foundation, but there was no program di-
rected toward supporting sabbaticals and my lack
of research background did not qualify me for a
research grant.
At Phil’s request,
Leonard D. Berkovitz
agreed to put me on his NSF grant for three
months and NSF agreed to this use of funds in
a letter dated March 20, 1964, from Robert H.
Owens of the Mathematical Sciences Section.
I
had one month of vacation leave due me. These
together with the half year at full pay sabbatical
leave provision provided me with the nine months
salary needed to be away for the academic year.
Thus equipped, I applied to President Fred-
erick L. Hovde for a Sabbatical Leave on May
26. The request was approved by Vice President
Paul Chenea on June 8, although presidential as-
sistant John Hicks wondered why an administrator
needed such a leave.
M. H. Protter (Murray), Head of the Berke-
ley Mathematics Department, agreed, in a letter
dated March 19, to provide me oﬃce space which
I would share with another visitor.
He also ar-
ranged for library and university faculty privileges
for me. This he accomplished by appointing me
as a Research Associate without pay.
Finding housing was a major problem. Harley
Flanders suggested that I contact Sarah Hallam,
the departments head’s secretary and administra-
tive assistant for guidance. Sarah was one of those
people people that keeps things working; the oil
that lubricates, the fuel that powers. Wonderfully
knowledgeable about campus aﬀairs, she put me
in touch with Ronald Shephard, whose house we
ended up renting. See Life with . . .
While these activities were continuing I was
doing my usual work as Assistant Dean and Pro-
fessor of Mathematics. I didn’t usually teach dur-
ing the summer, but other aspects of directing the
Science Counseling Oﬃce and preparing for the
new Mathematics building went on. Also, I took
a week in June to participate in an NSF sponsored
Principals Conference, organized by Ralph Nie-
mann at Colorado State University in Fort Collins.
On the Berkeley campus, I had an oﬃce
across the street from Campbell Hall, the math
building at that time. I attended courses in Alge-
braic Topology, a area I had not been exposed to
in my graduate study. I also attended seminars in
Diﬀerential Equations with Professor Steve Dilib-
erto and his students.
Exploring the bookstores along Telegraph Av-
enue, south of the campus, was a never ending
source of pleasure. A distraction was the co-called
“Free Speech” movement about which I’ll say more
in the Chapter Life with. . . I also relaxed.
Back in West Lafayette in August of 1965, I
was ready to return to my duties at Purdue.
In a letter to Phil Haas written July 29, 1965,
from Berkeley, I indicated that in addition to my
duties in the Deanery, I wished to be involved with
undergraduate concerns. Among other areas, I felt
that my observation of the Berkeley administra-
tion would be helpful if similar events occurred
at Purdue.
I felt that the administration there
has been less than forthright with the students. I
oﬀered such help to some people in the Executive
Building. They assured me that they had followed
the events in Berkeley and were well prepared. In
any case, such happenings appeared unlikely at
Purdue which had been characterized in a national
news magazine as a “hot bed of rest.” In spite of
this snub, I served on the Committee on Special
Student Problems, created by the University Sen-
ate to deal with such eventualities.
I returned to Purdue University as Associate
Dean of the School of Science.
Dean Haas had
sought this promotion for me in March, 1994, but
President Hovde and Vice President Paul Che-
nea thought that, in view of my impending leave,
this action should be postponed until I returned.
Phil conﬁrmed their expected approval of this pro-
motion in a letter dated March 3, 1964. Appar-
ently he felt, as had Carl Kossack before him, that
mere verbal agreements are somewhat tenuous and
needed to be backed up in writing. In any case,
I returned as Associate Dean – with a reserved
93

parking space!
At that time the Deanery was located on
the third ﬂoor of the Engineering Administration
Building. The Computing Center occupied most
of the ﬁrst ﬂoor. A series of vacuum tube based
computers, leading up to the IBM 7090, provided
the computing power for the campus. The new
Mathematical Sciences Building was under con-
struction. The professional staﬀof the School of
Science consisted of Dean Felix Haas, Associate
Dean William R. Fuller, Head Counselor William
T. Kiernan and Mr.
James Thatcher, Business
Manager.
The latter was actually a member of
VP and Treasurer Lytle Freehafer’s staﬀ, but per-
manently assigned to us.
All departments and schools except the Physics
Department had a member of the business oﬃce
staﬀassigned to maintain the ﬁnancial records and
protect the university’s ﬁnancial integrity. Some-
how Hubert James, head of Physics, had success-
fully avoided this intrusion.
In 1967 I interviewed for and was oﬀered the
deanship in Arts and Science at Colorado State
University. Although CSU oﬀered a pleasing lo-
cale in which to work, the emoluments were insuf-
ﬁcient and I was happy at Purdue so I declined the
oﬀer. I speak more about this passeds opportunity
in the chapter Life with . . .
I have remarked that both Phil Haas and I
kept a strong attachment to the Division of Math-
ematical Sciences and especially to the Depart-
ment of Mathematics.
We both taught courses
every semester. My focus came to be on the Fresh-
man/Sophomore Engineering and Science calculus
courses. In the mid-60s these courses enrolled in
excess of 6,000 students.
Unfortunately, these courses were, nation-
wide, often marked by uneven teaching and high
failure rates. In the Spring semester of 1967-68,
41% of freshman students in Calculus received
grades of D or F.
Our Engineering colleagues were distressed by
these facts.
Some of them wanted to take over
the teaching of calculus within the Schools of En-
gineering. From the standpoint of our graduate
program, these courses were important; they sup-
ported approximately 100 graduate teaching assis-
tants who were working toward advanced degrees
in our department.
At this point I proposed, and the department
accepted, a policy with regard to calculus instruc-
tion which involved the appointment of a Calculus
Coordinator, who had the conﬁdence of our engi-
neering colleagues, to chair a Calculus Committee,
involvement of engineering colleagues as members
of the committee, engineering professors as class-
room teachers of calculus (in practice, these only
participated as lecturers), and to improve the ﬁt
of freshman courses to the entering class. I was
named Coordinator and held the post until 1979,
when other demands on my time (the PNC ad-
venture; see My Life on the Road) required that I
give it up.
The committee was no less a Mathematics de-
partment committee than it ever was. It was ap-
pointed by the Head of the department from de-
partmental professors and a set of nominees pro-
vided by the Dean of Engineering.
Engineering
professors to lecture were selected the same way
and were given temporary appointments in math-
ematics and paid from its budget. As Coordinator
of Calculus, I was involved in making these deci-
sions.
The inclusion of engineering colleagues in the
calculus program not only gave them ﬁrst hand
knowledge of it, but also underlined the problems
in teaching large masses of students.
A bright student and an excellent teacher is
often held as the exemplar of education.
One-
on-one instruction was not possible. I conceived
of a tri-furcated approach based on the idea that
there are ill-prepared students who can be reme-
diated, well prepared students who should be al-
lowed to develop, perhaps to becoming mathe-
maticians or scientists, and a large majority of
competent students whose main goal was a de-
gree, the admission ticket to the “good life.” The
ﬁrst group was to be served by a three-semester se-
quence covering the material of the standard fresh-
man course, but providing time for review of Al-
gebra and Trigonometry, inadequately covered in
high school, and taught in small classes. The sec-
ond, by an “advanced placement” course, again
taught in small classes. The large middle group
was to be taught by the lecture-recitation method.
This pattern continued for several years.
The three-semester sequence suﬀered from
the fact that no text book existed which integrated
material in the correct way, making it incumbent
upon the teacher to provide the integration and,
largely because of this diﬃculty, was eventually
discontinued.
Advanced placement also provided for stu-
dents qualiﬁed for multivariate calculus and even
diﬀerential equations.
An interesting aside is that, in 1972, one
student successfully established credit for all the
courses of the ﬁrst two years in mathematics. She
94

was Janice Voss who went on to become an astro-
naut and make ﬁve trips into outer space.
To start with, I conducted a study of grade
variations by instructor at Purdue over a ﬁve year
period and found that the average grade in Fresh-
man/Sophomore calculus, by section, could vary
by two letter grades, e.g., from an average of D
for one section to an average of B for another in
the same semester.
To remove the variability between sections,
thorough coordination was provided. Each course
had a set of “Ground Rules” which was given to
each student, problem assignment sheets were pre-
pared for each course, common examinations were
given to all students in a particular course at the
same time, grading “keys” and uniform grading
procedures were employed. Although the lectur-
ers determined the ranges of scores for each letter
grade, guidance, based on the averages of the ﬁve
year study, were supplied.
Further to assist the students, a program of
“common oﬃce hours” was established.
Under
this program, all teaching assistants, in addition
to whatever oﬃce hours they might provide for
their own students, signed up for two hours per
week when they would be available to any student
in the course. This resulted in approximately 40
hours per week at which times a student could ﬁnd
a teacher teaching his/her particular course.
A COUNSELORS CALCULUS PACKET
was written to summarize all this for academic
counselors. This 99 page booklet included lists of
texts, how placement was achieved, sample tests
on the various courses and other details to as-
sist counselors, and hence students, in appropriate
courses. Feed back was provided to counselors in
the case of students who were performing badly
for whatever reason.
A Calculus Oﬃce was established to provide
for collection of data, dissemination of informa-
tion, exam preparation, etc. Dr. Dennis Sorge was
the ﬁrst, and only to date, manager of this oﬃce.
Because of his excellent work with the calculus
program, this oﬃce expanded to the Undergradu-
ate Services Oﬃce for the whole department and
eventually to a service oﬃce for the School of Sci-
ence.
In 1971 Purdue’s Freshman Engineering stu-
dents rated their mathematics courses higher than
any other academic experience.
In 1967 I felt that it was time to be involved
more broadly in the aﬀairs of Purdue University
and I stood for election to the University Senate.
I was elected and served a three year term dur-
ing which time I served on the Educational Policy
Committee. As chairman of subcommittees of this
committee, I led it to rewrite the Final Examina-
tion program and also to change the University
calendar.
Up to that time, the traditional calendar
across the U.S. involved two academic semesters;
the ﬁrst began late in September and was inter-
rupted by Christmas vacation.
This created an
awkward period known as the “Lame Duck” ses-
sion. The students went home for Christmas, then
returned for a week of classes and ﬁnal examina-
tions and then went home again for a two week
inter-session. This had long been considered inef-
fective and wasteful.
The alternatives included an earlier start or a
trimester system. Some university colleagues, per-
haps tongue in cheek, suggested changes in timing
of religious observances which would have solved
the problem but were unlikely to be accepted. In-
cluded were suggestions to celebrate the birth of
Jesus on January 6 (Twelfth Night). Another sug-
gested that the birth probably occurred in the
Spring and, hence, Christmas could be combined
with Spring Vacation. Our ﬁnal report contained
several such interesting contributions.
Nothing kills a proposed academic action as
easily as having it found to have overlooked almost
any aspect. I saw to it that my committee was
very thorough. We checked with all constituen-
cies: The faculty, naturally, the student govern-
ment and samples of the student body, the coun-
seling staﬀs of the various schools, student housing
administration, physical plant operations, commu-
nity leaders and, especially, the public school au-
thorities. Many expressions of resistance to change
were encountered.
The operators of the Universities facilities
were properly concerned about the eﬀects of Au-
gust temperature because not many buildings were
air-conditioned in 1967. There was concern about
having enough water for showers. It was claimed
that there was no way of telling what the reserve
in the water tank was. I never knew if this was a
real problem, but I asked for the drawings for the
water tank. Then using Purdue’s computer and
a simple technique that we teach our freshmen in
calculus, I computed the volume of water in the
tank as a function of depth. Whether real or not,
when I presented the physical plant staﬀwith a ta-
ble of depths versus volume of water, this concern
vanished.
As complete as was our report, the change
was not wholeheartedly welcomed by any group
95

except the students.
Many people’s traditional
summer plans had to be changed, etc.
A vote
of the entire faculty was called for and conducted.
With over 1200 votes cast, the new calendar was
accepted by a majority of seven votes. President
Hovde forwarded the faculty action to the Board
of trustees and the new calendar went into eﬀect.
I served another three-year
term in 1973-1976.
During
this term I was assigned to the
Steering Committee which de-
termined the agenda for Senate
meetings.
I chaired this com-
mittee during the 1975-76 aca-
demic year.
I was elected to
a third term in the 1980s and
elected Chairman of the Senate
for the year 1984-85.
Photo By
Jane Beering
This was early in Steven C.
Beering’s presidency of Purdue.
Several new trappings had been
introduced by the Board of Trustees. One of these
was a new design of academic regalia which the
President wore at Graduation ceremonies.
An-
other was the introduction of a “Mace” carried
by the leader of the academic procession at com-
mencements. This role was played by the Chair-
man of the Senate. Thus, it was my privilege to
be the ﬁrst to carry the Mace at a West Lafayette
Commencement. I carried at about six other exer-
cises around the state as the President and Chair
of the Senate participated in all these events. I
can’t claim to be the ﬁrst to carry it in general as
one campus insisted that their faculty leader do it
on that campus.
I lectured to a large class almost every
semester. These classes were typically given in EE
129 to groups of up to 450 students. Thus, I esti-
mate that I taught Calculus to at least 20,000 stu-
dent between 1965 and 1991 when I retired. I soon
learned that it is diﬃcult to judge the reception of
the material by such a large group. The technique
that I thought worked well was to focus on a group
of about 30 students immediately in front of me.
From observing them I could judge how well my
explanations were going over. Of course, they were
probably the more gung ho students.
Somewhere I have referred to a national news
magazine characterizing Purdue as a ”hot bed of
rest.” That is, while students on campuses nation-
wide were expressing their frustration and anger
with government policies, Purdue had remained
quiet.
In the spring of 1969 a serious shortfall
in legislative appropriations for the Purdue bud-
get forced the Trustees to approve a signiﬁcant fee
increase. This caught the students attention. Ef-
forts to explain the need for the increase failed.
Returning from spring vacation rallies were orga-
nized and a sit-in was held in the Executive Build-
ing (Later named Hovde Hall). The police were
called in. Members of the Committee on Special
Student Problems, of which I was a member, went
there to moderate the situation if necessary. How-
ever, the students dispersed and no arrest were
made.
At this time the University was preparing to
celebrate its Centennial. I was the School of Sci-
ence representative on the committee to organize
the event. A speciﬁc task that I had was to secure
the attendance of Representative Earl Landgrebe
to present a congressional resolution of congratu-
lations.
Just before the Founder’s Day program a
group of student occupied the Purdue Memorial
Union. Considerable damage was done and some
friends and alumni who had reveled in Purdue’s
calmness, threatened to withdraw their support.
Representative Landgrebe called me the day be-
fore he was to appear concerned about the volatil-
ity of the situation. I thought things were pretty
calm compared to Berkeley, so I told him there
was nothing to fear.
That night over 200 students were arrested
for “trespassing.” Founders Day, May 6, 1969 (See
Bob Topping’s The Hovde Years for details), was
then marked by a large group of students entering
the Hall of Music, where the oﬃcial celebration
was to be held; standing with a raised clenched
ﬁst as the President began his introductions and
walked out of the Hall. Landgrebe suﬀered no ill-
eﬀects from these confrontational episodes.
Be-
cause of the legal controversy surround the arrest
for trespassing, The Union was oﬃcially closed at
night after that.
I don’t recall Vietnam being speciﬁcally a
part of this unrest, but it was a major factor in
the general malaise on campuses and in the whole
country.
The course I usually taught was the freshman
calculus course, taught to about 450 students, usu-
ally in EE 129, a lecture hall built to accommo-
date 480 students.
In the course of one lecture
period in 1967 or 1968 I had worked out the so-
lution to a complicated exercise which required 5
or 10 minutes of overhead projector work. At the
conclusion a student remarked on this length of
time and asked me if I didn’t “know that a com-
puter could have solved it in 30 seconds?” There
96

was widespread applause for this question. While
I was not at all current on the developments in
computing, my past experience told me that it
probably wouldn’t have taken a computer even 30
seconds to solve the problem, but that it might
have taken several hours to get it ready for the
computer.
I felt that the students should experience both
aspects of this issue – the speed of the computer in
producing numbers, as well as the processes asso-
ciated with programming the solution. The Com-
mittee on the Undergraduate Program in Math-
ematics (CUPM) of the American Mathematical
Association had, in the post-Sputnik years, pro-
posed that mathematics should be taught “with
an awareness of computers,” whatever that might
mean.
The National Science Foundation was
sponsoring a program along those lines through
the Center for Research in College Instruction of
Science and Mathematics (CRICISAM) at Florida
State University.
I decided to explore this ap-
proach and also was accepted to their program.
In the Fall of 1969, I began a series of approaches
to the use of computers in calculus instruction.
My failure to be intrigued by Carl Kossack’s
oﬀer to show me the new programming techniques
ten years earlier now came back to haunt me. I
was amazed at how far computing had progressed
when I began to examine FORTRAN for use in
my course. I studied FORTRAN while sitting at
Lou’s bedside in a Denver hospital. I describe this
ordeal in the Chapter Life with . . . I was essen-
tially in the position of the teacher who said to his
students: “I’m on page nine; catch me if you can.”
I also found that most books on FORTRAN
were not well organized for use in calculus courses.
One could simply not wait for mastery in pro-
gramming to start applying it in calculus. I wrote
my own notes and asked the computing center to
provide a special subroutine to provide easy out-
put before the students had time to learn about
formatting.
The Computing Center prepared a
special sub-routine named OUT. This allowed to
students to obtain the results of computations by
simply writing CALL OUT in their FORTRAN
programs.
Springer Verlag published my book “FOR-
TRAN, A Supplement for Calculus Courses” in
1977. I applied the computer to all the courses up
through diﬀerential equations and matrices. Over
the years several other colleagues were involved
in teaching computer oriented courses using my
book.
I gave reports on these eﬀorts at a CUPM
panel on computing at a conference in Atlanta,
an AAAS meeting in Chicago and an MAA meet-
ing in Missoula, Montana. I was also invited to
present it at an in-service teachers institute in Col-
orado Springs, Colorado,
Unfortunately, I had caught the “back side” of
the wave. My book was based on punched cards
and FORTRAN. The wave of the future, which
was forming up at that moment was programming
and data entry via terminals rather than punched
cards. Other high level languages were also being
put forth by computer science departments and
programs to handle many mathematical problems
were being developed.
A question that pervaded many early at-
tempts to use the computer in mathematics
courses turned on whether programming would be
a teaching device or whether the computer would
become a “giant” slide rule. My concept was that
by “teaching” the computer to solve a problem,
the students would better understand the mathe-
matics involved. Eventually, the “giant” slide rule
approach prevailed.
I think I received about $1,000 in royalties
from my book. Obviously, it was not a best seller!
For me, at least, it was very interesting.
I
continue to program in BASIC and FORTRAN
and, more recently, HTML, the language of the
World Wide Web. Some of my students from those
early days have made careers in computing. One
is on the staﬀof Information Technology at Pur-
due (ITaP) which succeeded the Computing Cen-
ter.
Another is a distinguished professor at the
University of Maryland and one is the Apple rep-
resentative to the schools in midwest.
Another problem that I noticed was what
might be called a “lock step” approach to teach-
ing. A student starts a course on a speciﬁc date
and ends on another, passing through a collection
of mathematical topics enroute. I felt that there
were students who might proﬁt from the opportu-
nity to proceed at their own pace, in an indepen-
dent study environment. Accordingly, in the Fall
of 1974, Professor Jean E. Rubin and I started
an independent study approach to MA 262, the
ﬁrst course in Diﬀerential Equations. In 1975 the
course in multi-variate calculus was added to the
program.
We were assigned a room in the physics build-
ing which was dedicated to our courses. We sup-
plied the room with auxiliary study materials,
course outlines, and exams to be taken as certain
bench marks were completed. Several exams cov-
ering each block of material allowed students to
97

take exams as they individually progressed to the
point. Many students liked this approach. How-
ever, counselors were wary of it as they did not
know how their advisees were progressing. Stu-
dents were required to register for these courses
as for any course; if a student did not complete
the course within the semester, an Incomplete was
given. Many faculty members, especially in En-
gineering, did not like the idea of these incom-
pletes and the lack of classroom discipline. Pro-
fessor Bouendi, the Head of the Mathematics De-
partment at that time thought the approach re-
quired more man-power than conventional class-
rooms. After several years, we gave up and aban-
doned the idea.
While involved with these activities, I contin-
ued as Associate Dean of the School of Science.
In 1974, Phil Haas accepted the role of Provost
and Vice President and I was asked to serve as
Acting Dean of the School of Science. This was
another busy year, as searches were underway for
new Heads for both Biological Sciences and Math-
ematics. As Acting Dean I kept very close con-
tact with Provost Haas, but much of the negotiat-
ing, entertaining, etc., fell to me (and of course, to
Lou). It was traditional for the Dean to chair the
search committee. As such I met regularly with
search committees from both departments, help-
ing them obtain references and other data needed
to help them make their ﬁnal decisions. Leonard
Berkovitz, was chosen Head of Math, and Struther
Arnott Head of Biological Sciences. Concurrently,
a committee chaired by Provost Haas chose Allan
Clark, a mathematician from Brown University to
be the new Dean of Science.
In 1974 Meyer Jerison, Head of the Mathe-
matics Department, unsuccessfully recommended
me for the AMOCO Outstanding Undergraduate
Teaching Award. The following year Professor Ru-
bin, Chairman of the Undergraduate Majors Com-
mittee, and Professor Robert A. Gambill, Acting
Head of the Department of Mathematics, submit-
ted a similar recommendation. This was successful
and I received this award at a faculty convoca-
tion in April, 1976. (See Page 257) Both propos-
als contained supporting statements from Beverly
Stone, Dean of Students, Cliﬀord S. Gerde, Assis-
tant Dean of Engineering and Director of Fresh-
man Engineering, and Professor Floyd Nordland,
School of Science Counseling Staﬀ.
An award of $1,000 and a certiﬁcate accom-
panied the award.
A more lasting recognition
came in 1999. At that time President Steven C.
Bering created the Academy Park. ”The Park was
named for the public garden established by Plato
in 387 B.C.E. where he and other Greek philoso-
phers imparted their wisdom.
The Park honors
faculty who, throughout Purdue’s history, have
contributed much to the lives of their students
through excellence in teaching and scholarship.”
At the same time a bronze plaque was installed in
the Purdue Memorial Union called Purdue’s Book
of Great Teachers. At that time departments nom-
inated all past faculty members who merited in-
clusion on this plaque. Winners of past teaching
awards such as the AMOCO Award were automat-
ically included.
The ﬁrst group of inductees included six from
the Mathematics Department among 267 persons
representing the ﬁrst 130 years of Purdue history.
The six included only one deceased person, G.N.
Wollan. History may have overlooked some great
teachers of the remote past.
R.E. Zink, M. Golomb, J.J. Price, J. Brown and me
In 1975-76 I continued my usual activities as
Associate Dean of Science and Professor of Math-
ematics, the former under newly appointed Dean
Clark.
I was not too happy with the choice of Clark
for the deanship. I felt that his background did not
equip him to appreciate the “Land Grant” tradi-
tion. However, I wasn’t unhappy enough to leave
98

even though I had inquiries about becoming Vice
President for Academic Aﬀairs at the State Uni-
versity College of Buﬀalo and Virginia Polytech-
nic Institute and State University at Blacksburg.
Of course, impending hip replacement surgery was
one of the main reason for not following up on
these opportunities.
The presentation of the Amoco Undergradu-
ate Teaching Award at a Faculty Convocation in
April, 1976 was a bright spot for me. (See Page
257)
In May, 1976, I went on extended “sick” leave
in order to have total prostheses installed in both
hips, My arthritic problems derived both from my
accident in 1937 and a genetic propensity. See Life
with . . . for more details.
After a year in oﬃce, Dean Clark indicated
that he would like to have an Associate Dean of
his own choosing, It was not hard for me to of-
fer my resignation and to return, full time, to my
Professorship in Mathematics.
I was succeeded
by James Yackel, who later became Chancellor of
Purdue’s campus in Michigan City.
The serenity of my professorial life was again
interrupted in the Spring of 1978 by a new call to
service of Purdue. A delegation of faculty mem-
bers from the Purdue campus south of Michigan
City, Purdue North Central (PNC), visited Presi-
dent Arthur G. Hansen and presented him with a
list of complaints about their Chancellor John W.
Tucker.
I am unaware of what options were available
to Hansen and Haas, but shortly following the visit
of this group, Phil asked me if I would be inter-
ested in moving to PNC. I didn’t ﬁnd this appeal-
ing. I liked West Lafayette and was involved in
the community. I was asked if, as a “personal fa-
vor” to the President, I would be willing to spend a
year there as Vice Chancellor for Academic Aﬀairs
while sorting out the problems and oﬀering recom-
mendations. The actual rationale was something
like: “You used to be a rebel, perhaps you can
understand these people.” I imagine they thought
that I would be captivated by the place and decide
to stay. I did agree to this year of investigation.
It extended to four years before it was over. The
story of these next four years, 1978-1982, is in the
chapter My Life on the Road.
I returned to full time status in the depart-
ment in the Fall of 1982.
I was still teaching
my computer oriented calculus course and lectur-
ing to science and engineering students in calculus
courses. But, as a former administrator, I was not
allowed to relax for long. In 1980, Eltherio (Terry)
Zachmanaglou, Assistant Head of the Mathemat-
ics Department, asked me if would take on the su-
pervision of graduate teaching assistants (TAs). In
this capacity, I organized screening programs for
new TAs to verify both their language and math-
ematical competencies, worked out their teach-
ing schedules, handled student complaints about
teaching problems, etc.
As Coordinator of Calculus at a major Engi-
neering school, I was frequently called on by repre-
sentatives of publishers. One of my peripheral ac-
tivities became refereeing books proposed for pub-
lication. Most of these were Calculus books, but
there were also books on Elementary Diﬀerential
Equations, and Linear Algebra. When I recently
discarded my ﬁle of these reviews, I found that I
had read and commented on more than 75 books
between 1968 and 1988. I still did one or two more
up to 1993. Some of these became successful texts.
I may have helped keep some really bad ones out
of print. Sometimes a really good teacher would
think it possible to translate his/her style into a
text. This was almost always a bad idea. This
was a period when the public was becoming more
conscious of gender roles.
I was able to advise
against exercises with males plowing, and females
grocery shopping, etc.
My favorite was: “Mrs.
A invites Mrs. B to morning coﬀee.” It was also
a time when the use of metric units was on the
rise. Simply changing the name of the units pro-
duced surprising results. Changing “cubic feet per
minute” to “cubic meters per minute” can be dra-
matic. I remember urging that a baby be gotten
out the tub as soon as possible.
I also refereed a few articles with mathemat-
ical or pedagogical content for American Society
for Engineering Education (ASSE) journals.
Glee Club Dinner – Upstairs at Bruno’s – ca 1985
Around the outside:
Felix Haas, Ron Fruitt, Jack
Stockton, Bill Fuller, xxx, Bill Fischang, Student, Bill
Allen, Student, xxx, Fred Ford, Maury Williamson, Al
Stewart, xxx, Dick Kohls.
On August 16, 1982, William E. Luhman, Di-
99

rector of the Purdue Glee Club announced that I
had accepted the role of Glee Club Sire. The Sires
were a collection of senior faculty and administra-
tors who served as sponsors for the Sirs. The latter
were the chairs of various committees attending to
the details of Club activities. I was the sponsor
of the Scholarship Committee. The Sire/Sir con-
cept originated with Albert P. Stewart, founder
and longtime director of the Glee Club.
I enjoyed this activity for many years, be-
coming inactive when I was made Sire emeritus in
1991. One of the ways I helped the men of the Glee
Club was by interceding with faculty members to
provide alternate exam times when a scheduled
evening exam coincided with a performance. This
was not an inconsiderable task as the group per-
formed somewhere at least weekly.
On one oc-
casion, I presented a slide show of some the at-
tractions they would visit on a performing tour of
England.
I also entered into two new oﬀ-campus activi-
ties during this period. In 1984, Professors Harold
Michaels and D. Richard Smith approached me
about becoming a Rotarian.
In 1986, Lou and
I decided that we would like to make a trip
to South America where we understood Halley’s
comet could be seen better. This lead to an asso-
ciation with the Partners of the Americas. I’ll tell
more about these activities elsewhere.
I continued thus until June 30, 1991, at which
time I retired. Retiring with me were Phil Haas
and Meyer Jerison.
Growing up in the 1930s
along White River north of Indianapolis, I never
dreamed of retiring in such company, nor could
I have conceived of the professional and personal
life I have tried to describe. I cannot give enough
credit to my wife Lou for her love, comfort, under-
standing and endurance as these events unfolded.
100

My Life on the Road
Brookston, Chalmers, Smithson, Reynolds,
Monon,
Francesville,
San Pierre,
La Crosse,
Wanatah, and Westville are the villages along In-
diana 43 and US 241 that one drives through
between Lafayette and Purdue University North
Central (PNC), a campus just south of Michigan
City, Indiana. A few more place names appear on
the map, but since one isn’t aware of any actual
settlement, I didn’t list them. In the Fall of 1978
I began to become very familiar with these places.
In May, 1978, President Arthur Hansen was
visited by a delegation from PNC seeking some
kind of relief from certain actions of their Chan-
cellor, John Tucker. In addition to certain per-
ceived administrative shortcomings, there were
speciﬁc complaints about discrepancies between
“promised” and “actual” salaries of several per-
sons.
Shortly thereafter Phil Haas, now University
Provost, called to ask me if I would be interested
in becoming the Chancellor of PNC. I enlarge here
on the report of this period that I referred to in
the Chapter From here to . . .
As I reported in Life with Lou, . . ., I had
left the Dean’s oﬃce in 1976. I had served as As-
sistant Dean in 1963-64; Associate Dean in 1965-
1976; and Acting Dean in 1974-1975. These ac-
tivities followed the tempestuous years 1959-1962.
Now for the ﬁrst time in my academic career I had
only professorial duties; primarily teaching plus a
few committee assignments.
I was enjoying life
and had no particular interest in northern Indi-
ana. Frankly, I didn’t regard this request as the
oﬀer of a “plum.”
Arthur G. Hansen
My reluctance to give up the “cushy” life
of a professor was met with the claim that tak-
ing on this job would
be a “Personal favor
to President Hansen”
and, I suppose, to the
Provost, my old friend,
Phil Haas. Words like
“You used to be a rebel,
maybe you can under-
stand what they want.”
were used as further
persuasion.
I agreed
to go up there for a
year as Vice Chancellor
for Academic Aﬀairs to
sort out the issues and make recommendations to
President Hansen.
I’m not sure of the dates, but my Calendar
for May, 1978, shows a meeting with Haas at 3:30
PM on Wednesday, May 10, and at 11 AM on the
11th the notation: “Leave for Westville” followed
by “Meet with Bednar, NCC” and possibly John
Tucker that afternoon.
The faculty assembled that afternoon were a
grim lot. In retrospect, I suspect that they were
reacting to years of neglect and uncertainty about
what this meeting was going to bring. What could
be done to help them? At that ﬁrst meeting, Phil
assured the assembled faculty of the University’s
interest in the well being of the North Central
Campus. He told them that I had agreed to come
there as Acting Vice Chancellor for Academic Af-
fairs, to sort out the issues and make recommenda-
tions to President Hansen. Indeed, he stated that
in sending Professor Bill Fuller there they were
“sending their very best.” Since those words were
the slogan of the Hallmark Greeting Card Com-
pany, I was known forever after as the Hallmark
Chancellor.
Arthur Hansen’s signature pasted on a photo of me
When it was my turn to speak I acknowledged
that I was indeed Professor Fuller, but that in my
home department I was just called SOB. I contin-
ued that I assumed this stood for Sweet Ol’ Bill.
This broke the ice and the tension. SOB became
my sobriquet for life.
The ﬁrst up-side of my agreeing to work on
the PNC situation was an expanded opportunity
for ﬂying. During my ﬁrst year at PNC I ﬂew a
StaﬀAero Club plane up there and landed on a
strip across U.S. 421 from the campus. This lit-
tle private strip was maintained by an orthodontic
laboratory, for use by dentists ﬂying in to learn
about new appliances. It had only one east-west
grass runway.
I usually ﬂew up there on Tuesday, Thurs-
day and Friday, teaching a class at West Lafayette
on Monday, Wednesday and Saturday. I describe
135

this more fully in the Chapter My Life in the Air.
When this proved too time consuming, I drove my
own car.
Vice Chancellor for Administration Bill Back
convinced his boss Treasurer Fred Ford to let me
keep and drive a University car. I was assigned
a little brown Chevette. Fred gave strict instruc-
tions that I was to drive it nowhere except to PNC
and back and for necessary business while at PNC.
After I started driving, I usually spent Thursday
night at the Michigan City Holiday Inn.
A little background about Purdue’s Regional
Campus system may be useful before proceeding
with this account.
To assist in meeting the educational demands
of the men and women returning to civilian life
after World War II, universities opened regional
campuses in various parts of their service area.
In the Purdue system, these grew in a more or
less uncontrolled manner until President Freder-
ick L. Hovde appointed Professor Charles (Chuck)
Lawsche, a professor of Clinical Psychology, to
head up the operation in 1958. Many details of
“Chuck’s” operation are to be found in the books
by Bob Topping The Hovde Years and A Century
and Beyond.
One of the features of the opera-
tion was the appointment of a representative from
each department on the West Lafayette campus
to oversee the way that department’s courses and
programs were conducted in centers around the
state.
PNC commenced operations in the late 1940s
as an Extension Center in LaPorte, Indiana. In
1948 the Barker family, he a local industrialist, of-
fered the family home, the Barker Center in Michi-
gan City, to the university as a permanent home
for the center. In 1967 the operation was moved
to 155 acres of farmland along U.S. Highway 421
south of Michigan City.
Accordingly, it was of-
ten referred to as the “Campus in a cornﬁeld.” At
that time, the campus took on the name Purdue
University North Central (PNC).
My personal knowledge of this operation ﬁrst
came from my association with a colleague – M.
Wiles Keller, the mathematics representative on
Lawsche’s team. About half of Wiles’ time was
assigned to this function and assured that the
quality of teaching appointment, instruction and
course content was appropriate. He oversaw the
mathematics operations at all regional centers: In-
dianapolis, Fort Wayne, Gary and Michigan city.
The campuses at Indianapolis, Fort Wayne
and Gary, being in metropolitan areas grew to
be larger and to have more diverse oﬀerings than
many colleges. The local faculties and the local
citizens chafed under the West Lafayette control
and one by one these campuses were granted au-
tonomy by the Board of Trustees.
This meant
that within the Board mandate of transferability
of course credit, these larger operations were freed
of West Lafayette supervision and control.
PNC, the smallest regional campus, did not
have as broad a base of community support nor
anything like as many students.
Its authoriza-
tion under the Indiana Commission for Higher Ed-
ucation (ICHE) included mainly Freshman and
Sophomore courses.
No baccalaureate degrees
were authorized for the campus.
The end of the central supervision of the Re-
gional Campuses left PNC to ﬁnd its own avenues
of survival in its eﬀorts to serve the needs of of the
Porter/LaPorte county area.
In addition to addressing the issues presented
by the faculty delegation, I found a plethora of
“arrangements” under which permission had been
granted to PNC faculty members by individual
West Lafayette departments for oﬀering courses
beyond the level of ICHE authorization. Under
these arrangements area students could complete
baccalaureate programs at PNC and receive their
diplomas at a local commencement.
The diplo-
mas stated “Awarded at West Lafayette.” These
arrangements were the result of trying to satisfy
the educational needs of a “Region Bound” popu-
lation. In fact, “Region Bound” was virtually the
slogan for the campaign that was mounted during
my tenure to meet these area needs.
All the regional campuses did, and still do,
deal with a student population which is signiﬁ-
cantly older than for the typical college. Many of
those seeking degrees could not move to a residen-
tial campus. Among the binding factors was, of
course, their jobs. They often needed advanced
course work to progress at their places of employ-
ment. It was to meet these needs that arrange-
ments described above were made.
Still another issue that I had to address was
that of “credit for life experience.” Many of the
older local students had considerable professional
experience. It had been judged that these individ-
uals should qualify for “unassigned” college credit
for these work experiences. Unfortunately, when
carried to extreme, this can become a “degree give
away.” Some really egregious cases came to my at-
tention which resulted in the removal from oﬃce
of at least one “experience” evaluator. I found it
ironic when Art Hansen asked me “What kind of
diploma mill are you running there?” My retort
136

was to remind him pointedly of my reason for be-
ing there.
As the academic year 1978-79 wore on, it
became clear to me that the progress of Purdue
North Central depended, as a ﬁrst step, on re-
placing Chancellor Tucker. When I reported this
to President Hansen and Provost Haas, they said
that they would agree if I would stay on as Chan-
cellor. I still didn’t want to do that; a compro-
mise was reached under which I would stay for
some number of years until the viability of the
Purdue presence in that area was proved. Starting
with the 1979-80 academic year I became Interim
Chancellor of Purdue, North Central.
I’m not
sure what “Interim” implies that “Acting” does
not, but Dean of Agriculture, Dick Kohls, was de-
lighted that I had the former title rather than the
latter.
This was when I asked Bob Schwartz to return
to administration as Acting Vice Chancellor for
Academic Aﬀairs. He graciously agreed to do so
and served two years in this position at this time.
Another issue was the attitude of the West
Lafayette administration. From the accounts that
President Hansen was receiving about the opera-
tion at Westville, he had serious doubts about the
long range viability of the campus.
At a meet-
ing of the faculty on March 27, 1979, he expressed
these concerns and directed me, as Chancellor, to
appoint a committee or committees to study and
report on:
• Enrollment projections for the Campus,
• The role of adult education on the Campus,
• The educational needs of the region served by
the Campus and
• An organizational structure for the Campus.
The ﬁrst three of these issues were related to
concerns that the population of college aged stu-
dents was falling nation-wide and that the north-
ern tier of Indiana counties had not experienced
the growth to a megalopolis that had once been
predicted. The last was the part and parcel of the
dissatisfaction on the part of the faculty.
The future existence of PNC may well have
depended upon the responses to these issues. Dale
Alspaugh, my successor at PNC, expressed this
generally held view in a letter he wrote to Lou
and me on the occasion of our 50th wedding an-
niversary:
“I think it is entirely possible that with-
out your intervention, the North Central Cam-
pus might well not exist today.”
As a result of my ﬁrst year there, I felt that
the existence of the campus, and its enlargement,
was vital to the area. To address these issues, af-
ter consulting with Bob Schwarz and Bill Back, I
established a task force consisting of, in addition
to them, Mrs. Jo Ellen Burnham, director of cam-
pus and alumni relations; Mr. David P. Konzel-
man, admissions oﬃcer; English Professor Roger
C. Schlobin; and Mathematics Professor L. Ed-
ward Bednar.
For professional expertise I contacted Profes-
sor Jack Jacoby, who, together with one of his
classes, had helped me pro bono in surveying com-
munity attitudes toward the Lafayette Symphony
Orchestra. (See: Other Adventures) Because of
the remoteness from West Lafayette and the time
urgency, he was unable to assist us, but referred
us to Mrs. Shay Kohne who operated Student Re-
cruitment Services in West Lafayette, Indiana.
To formulate, collect, analyze and present the
data necessary for these responses, a contract was
negotiated with this organization. Shay became
a regular visitor to the campus, driving her over-
sized brown Checker automobile, overseeing many
details of the study needed to answer President
Hansen’s concerns. Under her direction, we pre-
pared, distributed and analyzed data from our two
principal counties, Porter and LaPorte, our cur-
rent students, and high school seniors in these two
counties.
The data and conclusions are presented in full
in the report Viability to Vitality. In brief they
were:
• Signiﬁcant growth in the area was expected,
• Adults are a signiﬁcant portion of the student
population and are region bound,
• The campus had a positive image for prospec-
tive students and should develop bachelor de-
gree programs in Supervision, Liberal Arts,
Nursing and Elementary Teacher Training.
While these studies were going on, the issue
of organizational structure was being dealt with
as well.
Because PNC was a small operation,
many Purdue, WL, departments were represented
at PNC by a single professor. This isolation re-
sulted in a lack of collegiality among the faculty
and the burden on the Vice Chancellor for Aca-
demic Aﬀairs of dealing with some as individu-
als and with others through Section heads. Only
about half of the faculty were represented by sec-
tion heads in 1979 when I became Interim Chan-
cellor.
According to Purdue University Executive
Memorandum A-221, academic units composed of
ﬁve or more members could have section heads.
Since it was unlikely that the campus would soon
137

grow enough to put all disciplines in this category,
I proposed the creation of units made up of indi-
viduals from kindred disciplines. In a few cases
it would be necessary to add individuals to exist-
ing sections.
To bring this oﬀit was necessary
not only to convince the local faculty, but the as-
sociated West Lafayette department heads. I did
manage to pull this oﬀ.
The sections thus created were:
• Social Science and Education (Psychology,
Philosophy, History, Education);
• Letters and Languages (English and Foreign
Languages);
• Biology and Chemistry;
• Mathematics and Physics (Physics added to
the existing Mathematics section);
• Technology and Engineering;
• Nursing (already a section); and
• Community College (business, secretarial arts,
etc.).
Two additional and important activities be-
gan in 1979, the ﬁrst year of my Chancellorship.
They were the creation of an Advisory Board and
a Chancellor’s Council. The former was composed
of 29 community leaders including, mayors, news-
paper publishers, executives from area businesses
and industries and social leaders. It had the pur-
pose of marshaling community support for the
push to bring more degree opportunities to the
area via PNC. The second was a fundraising op-
eration. Bill Back’s and Bob Schwarz’s knowledge
of the community was instrumental in assembling
a group which could speak forcefully for the com-
munity and its needs.
Regular meetings, often over lunch on cam-
pus, were held with the Advisory Board.
This
provided an expansion of knowledge among these
leaders about Purdue University and the North
Central Campus in particular. Much fruitful dis-
cussion took place at these meetings and from
them came community support, in the form of pe-
titions, for proposed new programs.
The fund-raising Chancellor’s Council was
composed of both faculty members and town per-
sons and, as such, provided an ideal interaction
between these groups which had previously been
mostly unaware of the existence of the other.
Several activities for the Council were also ar-
ranged. A gala dinner was held annually at the
Barker Center, an elegant older mansion which
had been the early home for PNC. This was nor-
mally a “Black Tie” aﬀair with multiple dinner
courses, appropriate wines, etc.
These were el-
egantly organized by JoEllen Burnham.
I com-
plained to Bill Back that we were spending too
much money on these events. He felt they were
worth it for good will.
I suppose he was right
as they were very successful and brought about
yearly growth in the Council’s membership. many
of these individuals became long term friends and
supporters of PNC.
Me, Arthur Hansen, Felix Haas
At the Barker Center
In addition to these dinners there was also one
bus trip a year to Lafayette for a football game.
I asked Executive Assistant Vice President, John
Hicks, who had always been helpful to me, to ar-
range for us to have a block of tickets for these
games. After the game a catered “tailgate party”
along side the bus was enjoyed by all.
I think
there were three of these trips during my tenure.
After one of these games, Shay Kohne invited the
group to her home for a party. This marvelous ex-
perience was somewhat marred by the bus driver
inadvertently removing a signiﬁcant portion of a
neighbor’s hedge due to the busses turning radius!
I also thought it important to obtain a non-
golf membership in the Potawatamie Country
Club for contacts with the town. Since the uni-
versity could not pay for such memberships, I had
to pay for everything that wasn’t strictly univer-
sity business out of my own pocket.
I also was
required to spend a certain amount each month
in the dining room. To meet these expenses, my
local colleagues went with me there frequently, re-
paying me for their meals so that I could meet the
use requirement.
Armed with the data of Viability to Vitality,
a proposal to ICHE was prepared and approved by
Purdue’s Board of Trustees. This regularized the
bachelor’s degree in Supervision which had been
operating under the aegis described earlier. This
program was much in demand, especially in the
western portions of PNC’s service area and was
approved by ICHE in 1980.
My ﬁrst visit to the ICHE oﬃce in Indianapo-
138

lis was one of those quasi-comic aﬀairs that sticks
in the mind. After reviewing at some length, the
PNC situation, the needs of the area, the inabil-
ity of the population to seek needed courses else-
where, etc., in short, the need for the Bachelor’s
degree in Supervision, the functionary with whom
I was speaking pulled out a large tome, turned to
the appropriate section and declared: “PNC is not
authorized to oﬀer bachelor’s degrees.” I informed
him that I knew that, but was there to propose a
needed change in the authorizations.
Years later I was reminded of this scene, by
the M*A*S*H episode in which the unit was told
they weren’t authorized to have an incubator, but
could have a popcorn machine. Fortunately, PNC
already had a popcorn machine.
The Bachelor’s degree in Supervision was ap-
proved by ICHE in May 1980, and was ﬁrst oﬀered
at PNC that Fall. With this precedent setting ac-
tion, I began to be more conﬁdant that other de-
grees would be approved.
The next degree to be sought was to be called
the B.S. in Liberal Studies. Technically this de-
gree ﬁrst needed approval by the School of Hu-
manities, Social Science and Education (HSSE) on
the main campus because, as an Extension Center
without autonomy, PNC could only oﬀer programs
approved for the West Lafayette Campus.
What might have been a road block to this
eﬀort was a study released by ICHE in January,
1981.
In the interest of avoiding duplication of
eﬀort, ICHE proposed to merge the Purdue and
Indiana University campuses in the Northern area
of Indiana. The resulting campus would have been
in the Gary area and would have required a com-
mute of up to 50 miles for some of our students.
Because of the region bound nature of many of the
more mature students, I felt this move would be
unwise. My criticism of this proposal was carried
in several local newspapers.
All existing programs in Liberal Arts involved
a major in one ﬁeld of study in this area. It was
not anticipated that, in the short run, there would
be enough students interested in any one ﬁeld such
as Literature or Philosophy, etc., to oﬀer majors
in those areas. Therefore, I appointed a commit-
tee of PNC faculty members to work with their
counterparts in West Lafayette to design a general
program. The idea was to provide students with
a wide latitude in the choice of courses from hu-
manistic studies to enable them to move forward
at their places of employment. The program was
aimed at the more mature student, typically with
a family and, especially, region bound.
Approval of the BLS degree from the faculty
of HSSE and Purdue’s Board of Trustees came
early in 1981 with ICHE approval in September
of that year.
Bob Schwarz did not really want to be bur-
dened with the job of Vice Chancellor for Aca-
demic Aﬀairs. He had given great service to Pur-
due and to the North Central Campus starting
with its location in the Barker Center in Michi-
gan City. After the current site was acquired and
the campus moved there, Bob had then returned
to teaching. Now he wanted to be relieved of the
recall duty I had imposed on him.
Accordingly, I began to think of a more per-
manent replacement. My goal was to bring along
a new Vice Chancellor who could also become the
next Chancellor, since I still considered my work
at PNC to be temporary.
Dale W. Alspaugh became that person. Dale
was an Associate Professor of
Electrical Engineering on the
West Lafayette campus. I don’t
recall what brought him to mind
in this capacity beyond a chance
meeting in a parking lot near the
Mathematical Sciences Building
in West Lafayette.
I presume I talked with
Provost Felix Haas about this possibility. I then
contacted Professor Henry Yang who was head of
the School of Electrical Engineering to obtain his
permission to approach Dale.
The details were completed and Dale assumed
the position of Vice Chancellor for Academic af-
fairs in the fall of 1981.
When I appointed Dale Alspaugh to the po-
sition of Vice Chancellor for Academic Aﬀairs, I
made the blunder of announcing to the faculty
that I was bringing them a Vice Chancellor who
could become Chancellor when I left. You should
never tell a faculty group that you have made a
decision for them.
Of course, I was only talk-
ing about Dale’s qualiﬁcations, but, to them, it
sounded like a fait accompli.
This ultimately delayed Dale’s ascension to
the Chancellorship for two years.
Especially in
the position as their link to the main campus, they
did want someone appointed without their bless-
ing. Provost Haas determined that the search for
a new Chancellor should be made from within the
Purdue system. Alspaugh was appointed Acting
Chancellor eﬀective July 1, 1982 and the “acting”
was dropped in 1984.
The people at PNC that I was most involved
139

with were: Ed Bednar, Bob Schwartz and Bill
Back.
L. Edward Bednar, Profes-
sor of Mathematics at PNC. I
had known Ed for several years
through my work as coordina-
tor of the Calculus Program. If
I was going to have something
to do with PNC I considered
him my best source of informa-
tion about the situation there. I
knew him to be a level headed professional person,
not given to extremes of judgement.
Robert F. (Bob) Schwartz was known as
Mr. North Central Campus. He
was instrumental in establish-
ing the permanent location of
the campus on U.S. Highway
421 south of Michigan City. Af-
ter my year as Acting Vice
Chancellor for Academic Aﬀairs
I asked him to help by taking on
the role I was vacating to be-
come Interim Chancellor.
G. William (Bill) Back was
the Vice Chancellor for Admin-
istration.
As such he was the
Purdue’s Treasurer’s represen-
tative at PNC. He was respon-
sible for the physical operation
of the campus.
He supervised
maintenance, police, etc.
He
was a very knowledgeable person about important
people in the PNC service area.
I also had two great assistants during those
years. Diane Carpenter, while Vice Chancellor for
Academic Aﬀairs and Debra Nielsen, while Chan-
cellor.
By 1982 the anomalies of degree oﬀerings had
been dealt with, two degrees had been authorized
by ICHE, an organizational structure had been
put in place for the academic operations, commu-
nity support had been solidiﬁed and an outstand-
ing replacement for me was on hand. I felt that
I had accomplished the initial phase of Viability
to Vitality.
Although the PNC experience had
been rewarding in very many ways and left me
with many new friends, I felt that my home was
in West Lafayette. So I asked President Hansen
to allow me to return to full-time activity on the
West Lafayette campus. He did.
My “Pilot’s Log” records 90 some ﬂying hours
during my ﬁrst year at PNC. In the ensuing three
years I probably drove more than 50,000 miles.
The contributions of these colleagues and oth-
ers with whom I worked are not easily distinguish-
able in my mind twenty years after completing my
work there. They all were part of the team and I
regret not being able to single them out in recount-
ing our accomplishments. They were largely re-
sponsible for charting a future course for the cam-
pus which won the approval of the Trustees and
the Indiana Commission on Higher Education.
The campus held a “going away party” for
Lou and me when my work there was completed.
The aﬀection I felt at this party was as nice an ex-
perience as I have ever had. In addition to the well
wishes of many faculty and students, I received a
“Sagamore of the Wabash” from Governor Robert
Orr.
This is Indiana’s highest honor.
The cer-
tiﬁcate was presented by Representative Mary K.
Budak. (See Page 258)
Other gifts included a chef’s hat and apron.
The former bore the letters S.O.B. The latter was
appliqu´eed with the words “A Hamburger on a
Pun.” The S.O.B. was in recollection of my quip at
the ﬁrst meeting with rge faculty (see earlier in this
Chapter.) The pun reference recalls a propensity
for this kind of humor. I wish I could recall some
of my puns.
I think the inspiration for this outdoor chef’s
outﬁt sprang from an occasion when I brought
many of the PNC secretaries to West Lafayette
to meet the counterparts they talked to regularly
by telephone. After visits to the West Lafayette
campus we had a cook-out at our house on Car-
rolton Boulevard.
Another treasured gift was a painting ex-
ecuted on a map of the State of Indiana.
It
showed me driving the
little brown Chevette
up U.S. 421 reading a
report while I drove.
Because of the light traf-
ﬁc on the road I was ac-
tually able to do some
reading enroute. I also
dictated my thoughts
on these items enroute.
The painting was done
by Edward Blackwell of
the Audio-Visual Aids
Department.
In 2000, PNC recommended to the Board of
Trustees that I be awarded the degree Doctor of
Science, honoris causa. This degree was presented
by President Steven C. Beering at the May, 2000,
PNC Commencement exercises in the Valparaiso
140

University Chapel. Lou and Jim were able to be
in attendance at the ceremony. (See Page 253)
President Steven C. Bering, left
Chancellor James Dworkin, right
141

