Reassessing Realism
 
On the Ontology of the Unobservable
 
Simon Allzén
Doctoral Thesis in Philosophy at Stockholm University, Sweden 2022


Reassessing Realism
On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Simon Allzén
Academic dissertation for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy at Stockholm
University to be publicly defended on Tuesday 20 September 2022 at 13.00 in sal 4204, hus 3,
plan 4, Albano, Hannes Alfvéns väg 11.
Abstract
It is widely believed that science is in the business of finding out what the world is really like. The philosophical version of
this belief is scientific realism -- a doctrine about science that tells us that we ought to believe that the best theories in science
are true, and that the world is occupied with the objects that those theories contain. If scientific realism was not correct,
the argument goes, the incredible success of science would be a miracle. The best explanation for the success of science
however, is not that it is a miracle, but that scientific theories are true. This argument is an instance of inference to the
best explanation, or IBE. Skeptics have questioned why scientific success must imply its truth given that there are so many
abandoned, false scientific theories in the history of science that were nevertheless successful. One of the controversies
in the debate between scientific realists and anti-realists surrounds the legitimacy of reasoning in accordance with IBE.
Realists need IBE to be a justified and reliable guide to truth.  In this compilation thesis, I address various questions related
to IBE and scientific realism. Paper 1 argues that scientific realism without IBE loses too much of its epistemic optimism,
and that it in some contexts even becomes more pessimistic than the most prominent rival philosophical doctrine about
science -- constructive empiricism. To avoid deflating realism, I argue, a defense of IBE is necessary. Paper 2 addresses
whether methodological similarities between science and metaphysics force scientific realists to also be realists with respect
to metaphysics. If IBE is legitimate, it should not only be valid in science, but also in metaphysics, effectively inflating
the ontology that scientific realists are rationally bound to accept. I argue against this conclusion. Paper 3 offers a proof of
concept regarding a novel way to justify inferences to unobservable objects. Paper 4 establishes a novel critique of non-
probabilistic versions of IBE in scientific realism.
Keywords: Scientific Realism, Inference to the best explanation, Scientific Method.
Stockholm 2022
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:su:diva-207718
ISBN 978-91-7911-958-4
ISBN 978-91-7911-959-1
Department of Philosophy
Stockholm University, 106 91 Stockholm


REASSESSING REALISM
 
Simon Allzén


Reassessing Realism
 
On the Ontology of the Unobservable
 
Simon Allzén

©Simon Allzén, Stockholm University 2022
 
ISBN print 978-91-7911-958-4
ISBN PDF 978-91-7911-959-1
 
Cover image: The Carina Nebula - a star forming Nebula in the Milky Way.
Image credit: NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI.
 
Printed in Sweden by Universitetsservice US-AB, Stockholm 2022

To my family and
friends, for unwavering
support. Thank you.


Acknowledgments
To write a thesis, especially one in philosophy of science, was
not something I ever thought that I would do. As is the case for
many in academia, I have sometimes felt out of my depth and
like I did not belong. When I received an email from the de-
partment of philosophy in Stockholm o↵ering me a position as a
PhD student in theoretical philosophy, my immediate thought
was that someone must have messed up. An administrative er-
ror perhaps, or a mix-up in the announcement that the depart-
ment could not retract. During my years at the department,
I received so much support and encouragement that the traces
of imposter syndrome grew fainter for every passing week. Al-
though I stand as the sole author of this thesis, it is by all ac-
counts a collective e↵ort. So many deserve acknowledgment for
its completion, but ﬁrst and foremost I wish to thank my main
supervisor Richard Dawid. A rigorous and dynamic thinker; a
patient and enthusiastic supervisor; a supportive friend and a
great tennis partner, Richard has been absolutely essential to
the completion of this thesis.
Secondly, I want to thank my
secondary supervisor S¨oren H¨aggqvist for his keen eye and at-
tention to detail.
Many others, mentioned here in no particular order of signif-
icance, have contributed immensely to improving the philo-
sophical quality of my work: Siska De Baerdemaeker, Karim
Th´ebault, Casey McCoy, Ylwa Sj¨olin Wirling, Stina Bj¨orkholm,
Richard End¨orfer, Hana M¨oller Kalpak, Alexander Andersson,
Bob Hartmann, and Jaco de Swart.
A special thank you to
Stina for supporting me at my deepest lows, cheering me on
at my highest peaks, and for being an amazing friend and col-
league. Thank you Hana for always taking the time to discuss
what have arguably been many, many annoying questions over
co↵ee and cigarettes at the department parking lot. To Alexan-
der: we began this journey together many years ago, and I will
i

be forever grateful that we did. Grateful to philosophy for the
opportunity to get to know such a kind, smart, and humble
person, and grateful to you for showing me the joys and in-
tellectual depths of philosophy. Thank you. To Mattias and
Dan: it’s pretty cool to play music together with others, but
it’s even cooler to play music together with you. My otherwise
deep disdain for Tuesdays has transformed into deep appreci-
ation because of our time spent in the rehearsal space.
For
whatever merits this thesis may have, all of you have been in-
strumental, but none should be held responsible for its many
errors and misconceptions.
A big thanks should also be extended to all who are, or were,
PhD students at the department of philosophy during my time
there.
Thank you for making it an incredibly friendly and
supportive experience: Anders Lundstedt, Mattias H¨ogstr¨om,
Madeleine Hyde,
Conrad Bakka,
Eric Johannesson,
Sara
Packal´en, Niklas Olsson Youzis, Mats Ingelstr¨om, Karl Nygren,
Olle Torpman, William B¨ulow, Jonathan Egeland Harouny,
Romy Eskens, Nils Sylvan, Sama Agahi, Henrik Ahlenius, Tanja
Nanavazadeh, Daniel Ram¨oller, Amanda Thorell, Henning
Strandin, Lisa Hecht, Alice Damirjian, Andrea Asker Svedberg,
Guido Alt, and Meradjuddin Khan Oidermaa.
During my time as a PhD student I beneﬁted greatly from
two research visits.
In 2020, I spent a (Covid interrupted)
period at the Department of Philosophy at the university of
Bristol, funded by Bergstr¨oms Stiftelse, where parts of my the-
sis improved greatly thanks to the e↵orts of Karim Th´ebault,
James Ladyman, and the great graduate community. In 2021,
I spent two months as a junior research fellow at the Institute
of Physics, as a part of the Vossius Center for the History of
Humanities and Sciences. This research was supported by fund-
ing from a generous seed fellowship from the New Directions in
Philosophy of Cosmology research project, which was funded by
ii

a grant from the John Templeton Foundation. It was also sup-
ported with a fellowship award from the Vossius Center for the
History of Humanities and Sciences. My time there was ﬁlled
with great conversations and exchanges of ideas, thanks to the
hospitality and curiosity of Jeroen van Dongen, Sebastian de
Haro, and Robert van Leeuwen.
Last, but certainly not least, I want to thank my wonderful fam-
ily, and my love Klara, for believing in me and always, always
having my back.
Simon Allz´en, Stockholm, June 2022.
iii


Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
What is scientiﬁc realism? . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Three central theses . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
The No-Miracles Argument . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.3
The Pessimistic Meta-Induction . . . . . .
8
1.3
Realism Fragmented . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Entity realism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Structural realism
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3.3
Divide et Impera Realism . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4
Inference to Best Explanation . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.1
Ampliation and Epistemic Warrant . . . .
18
1.4.2
IBE and epistemic warrant
. . . . . . . .
20
1.5
Arguments Against IBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5.1
Eliminativism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5.2
Vicious circularity
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1.5.3
Best of a bad lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
1.6
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
1.7
Paper summaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.7.1
Paper I: Modest Scientiﬁc Realism and
Belief in Astronomical Entities . . . . . .
29
1.7.2
Paper II: Against Methodological Conti-
nuity and Metaphysical Knowledge . . . .
29
v

1.7.3
Paper III: Scientiﬁc Realism and the Dis-
covery of Radium . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.7.4
Paper IV: Scientiﬁc Realism and Empiri-
cal Conﬁrmation: a Puzzle
. . . . . . . .
30
1.8
Swedish summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2
Modest Scientiﬁc Realism and Belief in Astro-
nomical Entities
1
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Scientiﬁcally informed realism . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Detectionism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Chakravartty’s account
. . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Azzouni’s account
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Semi-realism and the cosmic event horizon . . . .
10
2.5
The Evidence for dark matter . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Galaxy rotation curves . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.2
Gravitational lensing . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.3
Large structure formation . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.4
Dark matter and theoretical irrealism
. .
20
2.5.5
Interpreting the evidence
. . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Against Methodological Continuation and Meta-
physical Knowledge
1
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Methodological continuation . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Defending IBE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3.1
The explanationist defense of IBE
. . . .
7
3.3.2
The inductive defense of IBE . . . . . . .
10
3.4
The Galilean strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.1
Reliability (dis)continued? . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Defending inferences to unobservables
. . . . . .
18
3.5.1
Marie Curie’s inference to radium
. . . .
19
3.6
Disagreement and metaphysical knowledge . . . .
23
3.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
vi

4
From Unobservable to Observable: Scientiﬁc Re-
alism and the Discovery of Radium
1
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4.2
The two problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2.1
Are entities in predictively successful the-
ories retained or abandoned?
. . . . . . .
4
4.2.2
The reliability of IBE
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3
The inductive defense of IBE
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3.1
The Galilean Strategy . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3.2
Bird’s defense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3.3
The problem with inductive defenses of IBE 10
4.4
Change in conceptual understanding . . . . . . .
13
4.5
A case study of the discovery of Radium . . . . .
15
4.6
Implications for realism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6.1
An empiricist objection
. . . . . . . . . .
20
4.6.2
Another empiricist objection
. . . . . . .
21
4.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Scientiﬁc Realism and Empirical Conﬁrmation: a
Puzzle
1
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
5.2
The epistemology of scientiﬁc realism . . . . . . .
3
5.2.1
IBE and Bayesianism
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
5.2.2
IBE and empirical conﬁrmation . . . . . .
6
5.3
Dark matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.4
The epistemic relevance of empirical conﬁrmation
11
5.4.1
Existential quantiﬁer realism? . . . . . . .
12
5.4.2
Referential success . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.4.3
Dependence on alternatives . . . . . . . .
16
5.5
Probabilistic IBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.5.1
Meta-empirical theory conﬁrmation
. . .
21
5.5.2
The no-alternatives argument . . . . . . .
22
5.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
vii


1. Introduction
1.1
The project
The central theme discussed in this thesis is scientiﬁc realism.
As a rough deﬁnition, scientiﬁc realism is a philosophical doc-
trine that says that we, under certain speciﬁed conditions, ought
to believe that our best scientiﬁc theories are true or approx-
imately true, that their terms successfully refer, and that we
are justiﬁed in believing that the entities described by success-
ful scientiﬁc theories exist.1 For many, myself included, science
has an intuitive appeal, given the central role it has in society
and how much we rely on it for our everyday lives to func-
tion.
Providing a rigorous philosophical defense of scientiﬁc
realism, especially regarding the ‘certain speciﬁed conditions’
under which it applies, has proven to be a diﬃcult task. One of
the largest conceptual and empirical obstacles for scientiﬁc re-
alism has been how to account for past scientiﬁc theories which
we now believe were wrong. Given that many such theories can
be found in the history of science, and assuming that we have
no reason to believe that we are located in an especially truth-
conducive part of history, we have no reason to believe that our
current best scientiﬁc theories are any di↵erent in that respect
1I will not engage in the conceptually alternative deﬁnition of scientiﬁc
realism as a doctrine about the aim of science, as o↵ered by van Fraassen
(1980) and Lyons (2005), although some of their criticism against scientiﬁc
realism will be addressed.
1

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
from our past theories. Another issue which is coupled with the
historical challenge is that most defenses of scientiﬁc realism
depend on the legitimacy of explanatory reasoning, speciﬁcally
an inference where explanation is taken to be a guide to truth.
If it should turn out that explanatory reasoning of the relevant
kind can be argued to be irrational, this would undermine the
rationale for scientiﬁc realism.
This introduction to the thesis provides a rough explication
of scientiﬁc realism, and its main supporting argument – the
no-miracles argument. It also outlines one of the main objec-
tions to realism – the pessimistic meta-induction – and how
realists have responded to it. Given that the most optimistic
of those responses still depend on the legitimacy of explanatory
reasoning, a section devoted to the explication of a particular
instance of explanatory reasoning – inference to the best expla-
nation (IBE) – is provided. Lastly, the introduction o↵ers a set
of salient objections to this particular inference rule.
Given that the most optimistic realist project of the di↵erent
propositions is sensitive to the fate of explanatory reasoning,
the ﬁrst paper explores a view that relies less on explanatory
reasoning and more on causation.
I o↵er an analysis of the
consequences for realism that this view entails by studying the
case of the cosmic event horizon. Ultimately, I reject this version
of realism because it turns out that in some ways, it is less
epistemically optimistic than anti-realism, but more liberal than
realism in terms of metaphysical inﬂuence on physics.
If one, as I do, takes this less explanatory realism to be in a
sore state, one must face the challenges coupled with defending
inference to the best explanation. Papers 2 and 3 attempt to
deal with these challenges. One challenge is to decouple the use
and justiﬁcation of IBE in metaphysics from the use of IBE in
science and realism so as not to conﬂate the epistemic grounds
for believing in the posits of science with our epistemic grounds
for believing in the posits of metaphysics. An argument to this
e↵ect is presented in paper 2. Paper 3 aims to provide some
2
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
additional substance to paper 2 by means of a case study of the
discovery of radium. This case study is meant to convince you
that IBE with respect to entities considered unobservables can
in some cases be conﬁrmed observationally, giving us a proof
of concept for the justiﬁcation of IBE with respect to objects
considered unobservable.
The usual problems facing a scien-
tiﬁc realism dependent on explanatory reasoning, I argue, can
thus be mitigated. The last paper is devoted to a novel way
in which non-probabilistic versions of IBE spell trouble for re-
alism – the problem of undermining empirical conﬁrmation in
contexts where IBE nevertheless is applicable.
The overarching argument in the thesis can be summarized
as something like the following: realists do not need to abandon
IBE for fear of being epistemically on a par with, or accidentally
justifying, metaphysics; nor need they abandon IBE because it
is unjustiﬁed with respect to unobservables. What they do need
to worry about, and pay more attention to, is how IBE oper-
ates in theoretical contexts where it is applicable despite the
fact that the central objects of the theory are not yet empir-
ically conﬁrmed.
These contexts show that non-probabilistic
IBE is in principled conﬂict with canonical ideas of empirical
conﬁrmation, which is a conﬂict that realists will have, not with
metaphysicians or constructive empiricists, but with scientists
and conﬁrmation theorists.
1.2
What is scientiﬁc realism?
There are many ways to express the idea or view that our sci-
entiﬁc theories correctly describe the world we live in:
To a very rough, ﬁrst approximation, realism is the view
that our best scientiﬁc theories correctly describe both
observable and unobservable parts of the world. (Chakravartty,
2007, preface)
[...] scientiﬁc realism is the view that we ought to believe
that our best current scientiﬁc theories are approximately
Simon Allz´en
3

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
true, and that their central theoretical terms successfully
refer to the unobservable entities they posit. (Ladyman
et al., 2007, 68)
Di↵erent formulations of this idea come in as many varieties
as philosophers who engage with it, but common for all of the
formulations is a positive epistemic attitude towards the con-
clusions and results o↵ered by scientiﬁc practice.2 We have good
reason to believe that the world works according to well estab-
lished and conﬁrmed scientiﬁc theories and that it is populated
with the entities posited therein.
The core in all the di↵er-
ent versions of the claim is that science produces knowledge in
the philosophical sense.
To further unpack and clarify what
scientiﬁc realists mean when they claim that science produces
knowledge, it is customary to distinguish between the di↵erent
philosophical commitments that facilitate the claim.
1.2.1
Three central theses
In comparison to the history of philosophy, the history of phi-
losophy of science is relatively short.3 Despite its ‘short’ his-
tory the core claims central in the debate about the topic of
scientiﬁc realism have evolved and changed substantially more
than once. Though it may be an imprecise and perhaps even
anachronistic perspective, I think it is fair and instructive to say
that its historical morphology can be viewed by distinguishing
the di↵erences in emphasis it has placed on what Psillos (1999;
2009) refers to as the three central theses of scientiﬁc realism:
the epistemic thesis, the semantic thesis, and the metaphysical
thesis:
2See for example Maxwell (1962); Putnam (1975); Boyd (1980); Hacking
(1983); Harr´e (1986); Worrall (1989); Kitcher (1995); Psillos (1999); Vickers
(2013) for di↵erent formulations of scientiﬁc realism.
3Here, I’m taking ‘science’ to refer to the systematic and modern ap-
proach characterized by theory construction, prediction, and experimenta-
tion.
4
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
The Metaphysical Thesis: The world has a deﬁnite and
mind-independent structure.
The Semantic Thesis: Scientiﬁc theories should be taken
at face value.
They are truth-conditioned descriptions
of their intended domain, both observable and unobserv-
able. Hence, they are capable of being true or false. The
theoretical terms featuring in theories have putative fac-
tual reference. So, if scientiﬁc theories are true, the un-
observable entities they posit populate the world.
The Epistemic Thesis: Mature and predictively success-
ful scientiﬁc theories are well conﬁrmed and approximately
true of the world. So, the entities posited by them, or,
at any rate, entities very similar to those posited, inhabit
the world. (Psillos, 1999, xix), (Psillos, 2009, 4)
Although the ﬁrst thesis is accepted by realists, it is not only
accepted by realists. One contrasting view with respect to the
acceptance of the metaphysical thesis would be idealism – the
idea that reality is a construction or collection of ideas generated
by the mind. According to this view, the world is dependent on
the mind, and does not have an existence external to it. In the
modern context of philosophy of science, however, idealism has
no lasting o↵spring despite being a historically important view,
so will not be further addressed here.4
Acceptance of the second thesis is supposed to facilitate the
idea that we can take the claims that scientists make with re-
spect to the world literally. The realist interpretation of claims
in science, for example ‘the electron has a negative charge’ is
that is has a deﬁnite truth-value, whether it is true or false.
This means that realists take electrons to actually exist and
that they actually have a negative electric charge. One con-
trasting view, in the sense of denying the semantic thesis, is
instrumentalism. Most instrumentalists hold that scientiﬁc de-
scriptions of entities which can not be observed are meaningless,
4One may also view logical empiricism – the idea that the mind-
independent structure of the world is a meaningless statement – as a doc-
trine that rejects the metaphysical thesis.
Simon Allz´en
5

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
or devoid of semantic content, beyond the mere pragmatic use
of them to create predictive systems with respect to observable
phenomena.5
For instrumentalists, the interpretation of ‘the
electron has a negative charge’ is just to say that if we treat
the world as if it contained things like electrons with negative
charge, we can create systems that allow us to predict behavior
at the observational level. There is no need, strictly speaking,
to interpret scientiﬁc claims literally in order to make those
predictive systems work. Historically, instrumentalism is con-
nected to philosophy of science at the turn of the last century,
especially to the philosophy of Duhem (1991) and Mach (1907),
but it has also been considered in more contemporary debates,
then by Rowbottom (2011) and Dion (2013).
Accepting the third thesis is a matter of accepting some ver-
sion of the claim that the claims made by scientists are justiﬁed.
The epistemic thesis is a license to be optimistic about the idea
that science is in the business of generating knowledge about the
world, and that it is successful in this endeavor. The acceptance
of this thesis leads to a full scientiﬁc realist view: scientiﬁc the-
ories are about the mind-independent world, the claims within
those theories can be true or false, and we are justiﬁed in be-
lieving that those claims are true, even when it is theoretical
truth such that those claims are about unobservable objects. In
contrast to the full ﬂedged scientiﬁc realism which is the result
of accepting these three theses, there are positions which accept
the metaphysical and the semantic theses, but which deny the
epistemic one. One set of views which denies that we are, or
will ever be, in possession of knowledge of theoretical truth is
agnostic empiricism. These views take it that there is a mind-
independent structure to the world, that scientiﬁc claims are
to be taken literally, but that the only statements we can be
in a position to know are true or false are observational state-
5Some instrumentalists may be exempted from this general implication.
A Ramsay sentence may be interpreted as instrumental, in which case the-
ories are on par with their empirical content in terms of being meaningful.
6
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
ments. The agnostic part of such views consists of the fact that
scientiﬁc theories may contain true statements about the mind-
independent world, but that we have no safe epistemic route to
checking if this is so. By far, the dominant view in this spirit is
the constructive empiricism developed and championed by van
Fraassen (1980; 1985; 1989; 2001).
Generally speaking, early scientiﬁc realists tended to put more
emphasis on the semantic thesis given the questions concern-
ing the meaningfulness and reference of theoretical terms asked
by the logical positivist movement. Later realists have instead
given more attention to the epistemic thesis and the ability of
science to generate knowledge about the unobservable parts of
our world. Despite putting di↵erent amounts of e↵ort on de-
fending the di↵erent theses realists subscribe to some form of
all of them. Given that realism can be conceptually understood
as accepting these theses, what reasons do realists o↵er in sup-
port of that acceptance?
1.2.2
The No-Miracles Argument
Historically speaking, the no-miracles argument (NMA) is prob-
ably the most inﬂuential one in favor of scientiﬁc realism. The
argument was ﬁrst formulated by Putnam (1975) and can be
stated as follows:
1. Our best scientiﬁc theories are predictively successful.
2. The hypothesis that our best scientiﬁc theories are true
(or approximately true) is the best explanation of the pre-
dictive success.
3. Therefore: Our best scientiﬁc theories are true (or approx-
imately true).
The argument is taken to establish the (approximate) truth of
our best theories because the denial of that conclusion entails
Simon Allz´en
7

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
the acceptance of the claim that the astonishing level of predic-
tive success in science comes about by chance, or, by a miracle.
If we must choose between a miracle and the truth of our best
scientiﬁc theories in order to account for the predictive success
of science, realists argue, we should pick the latter.6 Since its
conception, NMA has, in some form, been the dominant argu-
ment for realism. We may already at this point take note of the
fact that the inference at play in various NMA type arguments
is inference to the best explanation. IBE is a form of inference
that takes explanation and truth to be connected such that a
suﬃciently good explanation of some phenomena can be taken
to be true. The nature and justiﬁcation of IBE will in some
sense function as a recurring thread throughout this thesis, and
will therefore be addressed in detail in the individual papers,
but it also plays an important role in the history of the devel-
opment of realism. The reason why is that if NMA is to succeed
as an argument for realism, two things need to be the case: (i)
there must be a clear explanatory connection between predic-
tive success and truth, and; (ii) IBE must be a reliable form
of inference. Realizing this, anti-realist arguments against re-
alism have traditionally focused on objecting against (i) or (ii)
or both. One argument that seeks to deny (i) is the so called
pessimistic meta-induction (PMI).
1.2.3
The Pessimistic Meta-Induction
If NMA is the strongest argument for realism, then PMI is the
strongest argument against it. PMI is an argument that targets
the claim in NMA that there is an explanatory connection be-
tween predictive success and truth. First introduced by Laudan
(1981), PMI takes the explanatory claim in NMA to involve a
prediction with respect to the history of science – if predictive
6An earlier version of the same argument can be found in Smart (1963),
and subsequent versions have been defended by Boyd (1983), Lipton (2003),
and Psillos (1999).
8
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
success is linked to truth, then we will not ﬁnd any instances
of predictive success in abandoned scientiﬁc theories. This, as
Laudan shows, is not the case:
[...] what the history of science o↵ers us is a plethora
of theories which were both successful and (so far as we
can judge) non-referential with respect to many of their
central explanatory concepts. (Laudan, 1981, 33)
The use of ‘non-reference’ here is to say that the objects corre-
sponding to central terms in many predictively successful theo-
ries in the past were ontologically empty. This means that we
cannot assert the truth of theories which are empirically pre-
dictively successful, and we cannot take their central objects to
exist. Laudan proceeds to give a list of scientiﬁc theories which
were once predictively successful but nevertheless false:
– the crystalline spheres of ancient and medieval astronomy;
– the humoral theory of medicine;
– the e✏uvial theory of static electricity;
– ‘catastrophist’ geology, with its commitment to a univer-
sal (Noachian) deluge;
– the phlogiston theory of chemistry;
– the caloric theory of heat;
– the vibratory theory of heat;
– the vital force theories of physiology;
– the electromagnetic aether;
– the optical aether;
– the theory of circular inertia;
– theories of spontaneous gene (Ibid, p. 33)
The eﬃcacy of the argument is easy to see – success and truth
cannot be connected in the way realists need it to be on pain of
being realist about abandoned scientiﬁc theories like the ones
mentioned above. This shows that the semantic thesis of scien-
tiﬁc realism – that the theoretical terms in successful scientiﬁc
theories, which we can take to be true on account of their suc-
cess, must populate the world – cannot be correct.
This is
Simon Allz´en
9

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
because the putative entities which, for example, phlogiston,
was supposed to refer to did not exist.
If we take Laudan’s
argument seriously, we ought to revise our doxastic attitudes
towards current predictively successful theories from believing
that they are true to agnosticism about their truth. It prompts
a suspension of belief, but it does not require us to believe that
current predictively successful theories are false. This histori-
cal gambit can, however, also be used in a stronger argument
against realism. The stronger argument uses the false theories
in the history of science as an inductive base for the evaluation
of our current theories. In doing so it becomes clear that the
appropriate doxastic attitude to have with respect to current
scientiﬁc theories is pessimism, in the sense of being skeptical
towards their truth, hence the name of the argument. The rea-
son for this is that given that most of our predictively successful
theories in the history of science have turned out to be false, and
if we have no reason to believe that our current position is in
some way privileged, then we have reason to believe that our
current scientiﬁc theories are likely to turn out to be false as
well.
PMI has proven to be a powerful argument against the re-
alist, causing di↵erent proponents of realism to adopt di↵erent
strategies to combat its rather stark conclusion. Below, I will
sketch some of the salient modiﬁcations to the realist view that
have been made in response to PMI.
1.3
Realism Fragmented
Most realists who have aimed to tackle PMI have opted for a
reduction of the domain where realism is attainable. This re-
duction can, as we shall see, be approached in various ways.
One approach is to make a distinction between being realist in
the sense of claiming that a theory is true, and being realist
about the existence of some of the objects or entities that a
theory uses, or contains. This view is embodied by entity real-
10
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
ism, and restricts the domain of realism to entities, instead of
theories. Another approach is to take the appropriate domain
of realism to be structure, meaning that the internal structure
of scientiﬁc theories represents actual structures in the world.
This approach is aptly named structural realism and bans en-
tities from realism. Realists who are uncomfortable with these
revisions to the domain of realism may instead wish to include
both theory and entities, but instead introduce restrictions on
exactly which entities and which parts of a theory one may be
realist about. This approach is known as the ‘Divide et impera’
view, courtesy of Psillos (1999).
Common to these three versions of restricted realism is that
they respond to PMI by becoming selective in their realism.
Below, I will brieﬂy describe the core claims for each type of
selective realism.
1.3.1
Entity realism
The core of entity realism is, not surprisingly, a realist com-
mitment to scientiﬁc entities only, as opposed to entities and
theoretical truth. The ambition to obtain theoretical truth is,
entity realists argue, a goal set too high. While the corpuscles
present in the cathode ray tubes of J.J. Thomson in the late
19th century and the electrons used in electron microscopes
today are claimed to be the same kind of entity, the theories
that describe the nature of the electron have seen a number of
changes during this time. These changes make it hard to assert
the truth of theoretical statements concerning the nature of the
electron, given the inconsistent descriptions found in the di↵er-
ent theories. It is epistemic humility, in light of the PMI, that
drives the omission of theoretical truth, narrowing the scope
of realism to just the entities. How, then, are the conditions
for realism about entities spelled out? Hacking (1983), one of
the founders of, and primary advocates for, entity realism, sug-
gests taking the manipulation of entities to be central to realist
Simon Allz´en
11

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
commitment:
Experimenting on an entity does not commit you to be-
lieving that it exists.
Only manipulating an entity, in
order to experiment on something else, need do that.
(Hacking, 1983, 263)
In order to manipulate an entity, scientists must ﬁrst establish
a certain level of causal connection to it. The causal connec-
tion enables scientists to extract some of the causal properties
of the entity in order to build devices that can manipulate it.
The core premise for realism outlined by Hacking o↵ers a sig-
niﬁcantly smaller but epistemically safer scope of things to be
realist about: we may not be licensed to believe in the truth of
the standard model of particle physics or the theory of electro-
magnetism, but we are licensed to believe in the reality of the
electron and some of its causal properties. Hacking is in a sense
employing a methodological approach to realism: since experi-
mentation by manipulation of electrons does not require a full
theory of the nature of the electron, philosophers can take a leaf
from the experimentalists’ book and be realist with respect to
entities which functions, to us, as tools.
Another philosopher who embraces the existence of theoret-
ical entities (meaning unobservable entities) is Cartwright:
I think that van Fraassen and Duhem eliminate more
than they should. It is apparent from earlier essays that
I share their anti-realism about theoretical laws. On the
other hand, I believe in theoretical entities, and that is
my main topic in this essay. (Cartwright, 1983, 89)
Like Hacking, Cartwright puts emphasis on the role played by
causality in homing in on what she considers to be the proper
objects of realism: the entities. For her, however, the connection
between causation and realism is not modeled on the manipula-
tion of entities by experimentalists. Instead, causal explanation
is the epistemic route to realism. Causal explanations, she ar-
gues, only make sense if we take the causes described by the
12
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
explanations to be real. That is, if we want to take the causal
explanations o↵ered by science seriously, we have to believe in
the entities to which they refer. Or as Cartwright herself puts
it: “In causal explanations truth is essential to explanatory suc-
cess.” (1983, 10)
Both Hacking and Cartwright restrict realism to entities be-
cause they are worried about the consequences brought about
when accepting theoretical truth, as demonstrated by PMI. Re-
alism about theories may only be achievable if we are at the
‘end of science’ in some sense. That is, given the supposition
that science converges to truth, theoretical truth can only be
asserted once we have a ﬁnal theory of everything. Even if we
arrive at such a point, threats of underdetermination may still
hold theoretical realism hostage given that there are alterna-
tives to the ﬁnal theory in logical space. For entities, however,
things may not be so bleak. The entities manipulated today,
to take Hacking’s example, may very well be the same as those
described by whatever ﬁnal theory we end up with. The entities
we can manipulate are stable during the discontinuous nature of
theory change and this is why realism about them is attainable,
pace PMI.
1.3.2
Structural realism
The acceptance of radical theoretical discontinuity is shared by
structural realists, but instead of identifying the manipulable
entities as the stable elements during theory change, they iden-
tify the core mathematical structure of scientiﬁc theories as the
appropriate and stable objects for realism. The move is to sug-
gest that there is a way for theoretical continuity to be broken
while structural continuity obtains. Worrall (1989), commonly
associated with the introduction of structural realism as a rem-
edy for realism in response to radical theory-change, takes it
to be supported by the fact that the mathematical structure –
i.e. the equations – found in Fresnel’s theory of light is retained
Simon Allz´en
13

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
in the succeeding theory of light by Maxwell. This strategy, as
Worrall notes in his (1989) abstract, has deep roots, starting
with Henri Poincar´e:7
It cannot be said that this is reducing physical theories
to simple practical recipes; these equations express rela-
tions, and if the equations remain true, it is because the
relations they express preserve their reality. They teach
us now, as they did then, that there is such and such a re-
lation between this and that; only that something which
we called motion, we now call electric current. But these
are merely names of the images we substitute for the real
objects which Nature will hide from our eyes. The true
relations between these real objects are the only reality
we can attain [...] Poincar´e (1905, 179)
The idea of structural stability in theory change thus has some
pedigree and can be backed with cases beyond the retention of
equations from Fresnel to Maxwell:
Simon Saunders (1993a) discusses the structural continu-
ities between classical and quantum mechanics and also
shows how much structure Ptolemaic and Copernican as-
tronomy have in common. Harvey Brown (1993) explains
the correspondence between Special Relativity and clas-
sical mechanics. Jonathan Bain and John Norton (2001)
discuss the structural continuity in descriptions of the
electron, as does Angelo Cei (2004). Votsis (2011) consid-
ers examples of continuity and discontinuity in physics.
Ladyman (2020)
Noting that the structure of theories survives radical theory
change leaves open questions concerning what, exactly, struc-
tural realists are realists about. If the relations are the things
we are supposed to be realists about, and we are eliminativist
with respect to entities, we are what Ladyman (1997) refers
7Arguments to the e↵ect that Poincar´e was a structural realist (of the
epistemic kind) can be found in Psillos (1999, 149-51) and Frigg and Votsis
(2011, 20).
14
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
to as ontic structural realists. Epistemic structural realism, in
contrast, can be taken to be the view that accepts that we can
have knowledge with respect to the relations between entities,
but that we have no knowledge about the entities themselves.
In this sense, ontic structural realism says that structure is all
there is, while epistemic structural realism says that structure
is all we know.
The version put forward in Worrall’s (1989)
account of structural realism can be taken to be ontic, given its
explicit aim as a response to PMI where ontological content is
in focus. If one takes the focus on ontological content in PMI
as an indicative feature of the fact that scientiﬁc theories were
false, as opposed to an intrinsic one, Worrall’s realism may not
so apparently be classiﬁed as ontic instead of epistemic. The
classical interpretation of ontic structural realism has, however,
been contested due to issues arising from having relations with-
out relata.
1.3.3
Divide et Impera Realism
The response that arguably seeks to save the most content from
the original realist claim – that science can deliver knowledge
about both theory and unobservable entities – is the ‘Divide et
impera’ approach developed by Psillos (1999). The basic idea
is to argue that much of the content in the abandoned theo-
ries from the history of science has, pace PMI, been retained
in succeeding scientiﬁc theories. This strategy is reminiscent
of the previous two realist strategies in terms of arguing for
partial continuity during theory-change, but Psillos introduces
a framework speciﬁcally designed for the identiﬁcation of re-
tained content during theory change that is invariant with re-
spect to entities, structure or theory. This enables Psillos to
concede Laudan’s argument – that empirically successful the-
ories have been abandoned – while simultaneously making the
claim that parts of those theories, as well as their entities and
structure, have been retained in succeeding theories. It is those
Simon Allz´en
15

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
parts, Psillos claims, that we can be realist about. The heart
of the ‘Divide et impera’ approach to dealing with PMI is that
its piecemeal realism with respect to scientiﬁc theories is a way
of maintaining that there is, in fact, an explanatory connection
between predictive success and truth. The parts of a theory
that are retained are also the parts responsible for the predic-
tive success of its precursor. The best explanation of this fact
is that those parts are true. There is, so to speak, a red thread
of truth running through the history of predictively successful
theories.
There are three reasons for presenting these particular three
varieties of realism. The ﬁrst reason is that they, taken together,
by and large make up the bulk of contemporary approaches to
scientiﬁc realism. The second reason is that they all serve a
dialectical purpose given that they o↵er explicit solutions to
the PMI. The third reason is that two of these views – entity
realism and selective explanatory realism – will be discussed in
more detail in the upcoming papers.
At this point, we may notice that the response to the PMI
that depends the most on the eﬃcacy of explanatory reasoning
(although in some sense, all responses may so depend), is the
‘Divide et impera’ approach.
The next section will o↵er an
explication of what explanatory reasoning, in terms of IBE, has
been taken to be.
1.4
Inference to Best Explanation
The core idea of IBE is that one can infer that the best expla-
nation of some fact is true. This inference, under the current
moniker, is attributed to Harman (1965):8
8The philosopher credited with the ﬁrst analytic treatment of this form
of reasoning, under the label ‘abduction’, is Charles Sanders Peirce in the
early 20th century. His work on abduction has, however, been argued to
have its place in the scientiﬁc context of discovery, not justiﬁcation (Douven
16
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
In making this inference one infers, from the fact that
a certain hypothesis would explain the evidence, to the
truth of that hypothesis. In general, there will be sev-
eral hypotheses which might explain the evidence, so one
must be able to reject all such alternative hypotheses be-
fore one is warranted in making the inference. Thus one
infers, from the premise that a given hypothesis would
provide a “better” explanation for the evidence than would
any other hypothesis, to the conclusion that the given hy-
pothesis is true. (Harman, 1965, 89)
Harman, originally arguing that enumerative induction is merely
a species of IBE, is trying to explicate and make clear the work-
ings of a particular way of reasoning already known under sev-
eral other names.9 In doing so, he provides a strong case for
IBE given the numerous contexts in which this particular way
of reasoning is successfully used: scientists use explanatory rea-
soning to infer causes of phenomena; detectives use it to draw
conclusions about suspects; doctors use it as a method in medi-
cal diagnostics. Following Josephson (1996, 5), one may express
IBE more formally in the following way:
D is a collection of data (facts, observations, givens).
H explains D (H would, if true, explain D).
No other hypothesis can explain D as well as H does.
Therefore, H is probably true
That IBE should be a kind of inference di↵erent from induction
is contested (for example by Harman himself), but one can at
2021). The mode of reasoning that we today recognize as IBE is thought
to be an inference in the scientiﬁc context of justiﬁcation. Roughly, Perice
thought of abductive reasoning as a pragmatic tool, while Harman thought
of it as an epistemic one.
9“‘The inference to the best explanation’ corresponds approximately
to what others have called ‘abduction,’ ‘the method of hypothesis,’ ‘hypo-
thetic inference,’ ‘the method of elimination,’ ‘eliminative induction,’ and
‘theoretical inference.’”(Harman, 1965, 88-9)
Simon Allz´en
17

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
least distinguish it from deductive reasoning on account of IBE
being an ampliative mode of reasoning.
1.4.1
Ampliation and Epistemic Warrant
For an inference to be ampliative just means that it outputs
conclusions which are logically stronger than the premises it
uses as input. The most commonly known ampliative inference
is of course regular enumerative induction, where the ampliﬁ-
cation is purely quantitative. Science, being an empirical en-
deavor, regularly deals with generalizations and universal laws
and contains theories which infer causes beyond the observa-
tional evidence.
These are practices to which ampliative in-
ferences lend themselves well. There is, however, a downside
to ampliation. The content-increasing nature of ampliﬁcation
means that its conclusions are susceptible to being false. Taking
the realist’s perspective, scientists’ are not (that) interested in
universal laws if they are false or in postulated entities which
are not real. While strictly false theories like Newtonian me-
chanics have their rightful place in the history of science, and
can be seen as important stepping stones to a complete picture
of reality, they are no longer contenders for being true. Given
that science is not in the business of aiming at false theories,
it simply isn’t enough for an inference to be ampliative, it also
needs to be epistemically probative. Psillos, a defender of IBE
as a rational epistemic tool of science and a defender of scientiﬁc
realism, argues that ampliation and epistemic warrant are two
desiderata in the deﬁnition of the abstract characterization of
the scientiﬁc method:10
Any attempt to characterise the abstract structure of sci-
entiﬁc method should make the method satisfy two gen-
eral and intuitively compelling desiderata: it should be
10Other defenses of IBE as a rational methodological tool in science and
scientiﬁc realism include Harr´e (1986), Lipton (1994; 2003), Kitcher (2001),
and Bird (2006).
18
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
ampliative and epistemically probative.
Ampliation is
necessary if the method is to deliver informative hypothe-
ses and theories, namely, hypotheses and theories that
exceed in content the observations, data, experimental re-
sults and, in general, the experiences which prompt them.
This ‘content-increasing’ aspect of scientiﬁc method is in-
dispensable, if science is seen, at least prima facie, as an
activity which purports to extend our knowledge (and our
understanding) beyond what is observed by means of the
senses. But this ampliation would be merely illusory, qua
increase of content, if the method was not epistemically
probative: if it did not convey epistemic warrant to the
excess content produced thus (viz., hypotheses and the-
ories). To say that the method produces – as its output
– more information than what there is in its input is one
thing. To say that this extra information can reasonably
be held to be warranted is quite another. (Psillos, 2009,
173-4)
The need for ampliation is simply necessary if science is sup-
posed to go beyond what we already know based on ordinary
sensory experience. The extra content is precisely what epis-
temic warrant is needed for.
In his (2009), Psillos provides
an analysis of how enumerative induction and the hypothetico-
deductive method fare with respect to the two desiderata. Enu-
merative induction is argued to satisfy epistemic warrant, but
only in a quantitative way. If all observed A’s are B’s, then we
may infer that the ampliﬁed conclusion that all A’s are B’s is
epistemically warranted. While ampliation is clearly involved,
it may be characterized as ‘horizontal’, meaning that the con-
tent that is being increased is restricted to the entity which
one already have observed, so one is not able to infer anything
beyond what is observable. It is not able to introduce new on-
tology, for example, and so is not ampliative in that particular
sense. The H-D method is argued to be compatible with both
‘vertical’ ampliation and epistemic warrant, but is, according to
Psillos, too epistemically permissive: it has no discriminatory
Simon Allz´en
19

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
function vis-´a-vis two (or more) hypotheses which deductively
entail the empirical data. The consequence is that the applica-
tion of the H-D method selects both (or all) hypotheses which
deductively entail the empirical data, leading to an underde-
termination problem. In Psillos’s terminology, enumerative in-
duction is minimally ampliative and maximally epistemically
probative, while the H-D method is maximally ampliative but
minimally epistemically probative. The analysis of the methods
with respect to the desiderata highlights the dynamic between
ampliation and epistemic warrant:
[A]mpliation is inversely proportional to epistemic war-
rant.
This is clearly not accidental, since ampliation
amounts to risk and the more the risk taken, the less
the epistemic security it enjoys. (Psillos, 2009, 182)
What is needed is a healthy balance between suﬃcient am-
pliative strength and suﬃciently robust epistemic warrant. It
should come as no surprise that Psillos argues that IBE strikes
precisely this balance.
1.4.2
IBE and epistemic warrant
The problem with the H-D method – that it can’t discrim-
inate between multiple hypotheses from which the empirical
data could be derived – is precisely the issue Psillos argues that
IBE has the resources to deal with. This evaluative function
is grounded in the comparison of hypotheses with respect to a
number of explanatory virtues:
Those hypotheses are ranked higher which a) explain all
the facts that led to the search for hypotheses; b) are
licensed by the existing background beliefs; c) are, as
far as possible, simple; d) have unifying power, e) are
more testable, and especially, are such that entail novel
predictions. (Psillos, 2000, 65)
That IBE can discriminate between hypotheses by selecting for
their explanatory virtues does of course not itself imply that
20
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
the explanation that ranks highest is epistemically warranted.
In order to achieve epistemic warrant, Psillos uses elimination
of doubt with respect to the best explanation. That is, he uses
the absence of defeaters to provide prima facie epistemic war-
rant for the best explanation. The two kinds of defeaters in
play are rebutting and undercutting defeaters. A rebutting de-
feater may simply be an observation that refutes the hypothesis
in question11, and an undercutting defeater can be that several
other hypotheses can derive the evidence, making the proba-
bility that the considered hypothesis is true signiﬁcantly lower.
With respect to rebutting defeaters, Psillos claims that since
IBE, unlike the H-D method, is not an inference where the ev-
idence must be entailed by the hypothesis, one may attribute
the inconsistency between observation and hypothesis to one of
the auxiliaries. While this may seem like gerrymandering, Psil-
los claims that unless there is some other reason for abandoning
the best explanation (perhaps the new observation renders an
alternative hypothesis the best explanation, or perhaps there
are reasons to think that new explanations will supersede the
currently best one), it is still rational to stick with the best
explanation.
With respect to undercutting defeaters, it is a
problem which only marginally a↵ects IBE. Not every hypoth-
esis that can derive the evidence o↵ers any explanation of it, so
only the hypotheses which entails and explains the evidence will
survive an initial screening. The ones that do will be evaluated
with respect to the above explanatory virtues. We may then
have a set of alternative hypotheses which explain the evidence
worse, in which case their existence cannot be seen as epistem-
ically undercutting the best explanation.
11In this sense, rebutting looks very much like ordinary falsiﬁcation.
Simon Allz´en
21

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
1.5
Arguments Against IBE
Given that scientiﬁc realism is tightly knit to the epistemic cre-
dentials of IBE, it makes sense for critics of realism to scrutinize
IBE. What, then, are some of the salient arguments against the
legitimacy of reasoning in accordance with IBE? Given that one
of the reasons why philosophers have taken IBE to be rational
is its success in science (and elsewhere), one may attempt to
undermine the speciﬁc use of IBE in the defense of scientiﬁc
realism by eliminating IBE in science, or reducing apparent in-
stances of IBE to inductive or deductive reasoning. This elimi-
nativist approach would, if successful, undermine the argument
that scientiﬁc realism, by using IBE in NMA, employs rational
scientiﬁc reasoning. A second attempt to undermine realism via
attacking IBE is to point out that NMA actually defends the
claim that IBE works in science by using IBE, thereby manifest-
ing a circularity – IBE cannot be defended without assuming
that IBE works. This argument focuses on the claim that such
a defense would be viciously circular.
A third attempt is to
concede the logical mechanics of IBE – that IBE can select a
true explanation among a set of available explanations – while
arguing that we have no reason to expect that the true explana-
tion should be an element in the set of explanations available.
If the true explanation is one we have not yet considered, it will
not be present in the set of available ones and the mechanics of
IBE will select the best of a bad lot.
1.5.1
Eliminativism
According to many philosophers, IBE is at work in much of our
ordinary and scientiﬁc reasoning:
The sleuth infers that the butler did it, since this is the
best explanation of the evidence before him. The doctor
infers that his patient has the measles, since this is the
best explanation of the symptoms. The astronomer infers
22
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
the existence and motion of Neptune, since that is the
best explanation of the observed pertubations of Uranus.
Chomsky infers that our language faculty has a particular
structure because this provides the best explanation of
the way we learn to speak. (Lipton, 2003, 56)
It is one thing to point out that IBE permeates di↵erent con-
texts of reasoning, but it is quite another to say that it is ratio-
nal to employ IBE, or that one ought to do so. For friends of
IBE, however, this further normative claim is never far away:
“The abductive methodology is the best science provides, and
we should use it.” (Williamson, 2017, 15)12 The descriptive and
normative claim taken together o↵er something like a ﬁrewall
with respect to criticism of realism via IBE: if IBE is rationally
undermined, it would not only undermine scientiﬁc realism but
also all the contexts in which it is used. If one thinks that un-
dermining IBE in this way risks throwing the baby out with the
bathwater, one viable approach to circumvent this problem is
to eliminate IBE, or reduce it to other forms of reasoning, in
the contexts one thinks are worth saving.
Fumerton (1980) o↵ers an argument in which the canonical il-
lustration of reasoning in accordance with IBE – that when we
see the presence of footsteps in the sand we infer that a human
walked there – can be reduced to a case of general inductive rea-
soning with premises derived from observation, thus eliminating
the presence of IBE from the inferential schema entirely:
I want to cast doubt on the claim that there is a legiti-
mate process of reasoning to the best explanation which
can serve as an alternative to either straightforward in-
ductive reasoning or a combination of inductive and de-
ductive reasoning. (Fumerton, 1980, 590)
He goes on to dismount this “locus classicus” of explanatory
12For additional claims that IBE is (and ought to be) indispensable for
scientiﬁc reasoning see Boyd (1980; 1983), Harr´e (1986), McMullin (2013).
Simon Allz´en
23

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
reasoning and suggests that IBE is indeed dispensable in our
rational practices. If Fumerton’s argument can be generalized,
it would decouple IBE used in rational contexts from IBE used
in the defense of scientiﬁc realism, thereby undermining the ra-
tionality of NMA. The prospect of generalizing this argument
is, however, bleak. To eliminate IBE from scientiﬁc contexts
would be to eliminate all type of inferences to unobservable ob-
jects. If only inductive reasoning can be rationally used, science
would simply not have suﬃcient resources to infer unobservable
causes and processes, for a reason we have already encountered:
induction is only ampliative horizontally, quantifying over ob-
served objects. Perhaps a subset of scientiﬁc cases of IBE can be
reduced to induction and deduction from observables, but not
all, and especially not inferences to unobservables. (Weintraub,
2017, 191)
1.5.2
Vicious circularity
Following Putnam’s canonical description of NMA, Boyd (1980;
1983) sets out to reﬁne NMA in order provide an a posteriori
defense for the reliability of IBE in science. He starts by ask-
ing why it is the case that the methodology that scientists use
when conducting experiments is so successful in terms of gen-
erating accurate predictions. The methodology – consisting of
experimental design, models of ruling out confounding e↵ects,
data analysis and so on – is, according to Boyd, heavily depen-
dent on background and auxiliary theories. The best explana-
tion for the reliability of the methodology is the fact that the
background and auxiliary theories used in the methodology are
approximately true:
No scientiﬁcally plausible explanation of the instrumental
reliability of actual scientiﬁc methods is possible which
does not portray those methods as reliable for the ac-
quisition of theoretical knowledge as well. Moreover, the
reliability (instrumental or theoretical) of scientiﬁc meth-
24
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
ods at a given time will typically be explicable only on
the assumption that the existing theoretical beliefs which
form the background for its operation are (in relevant re-
spects) approximately true. (Boyd, 1980, 617-8)
Boyd can be taken to aim at a naturalistic defense of an epis-
temology of science, an epistemology that includes concrete in-
stances of explanatory reasoning. So far, however, the realism
we get from Boyd’s approach is coupled to whatever theories
scientists rely on when instrumental reliability is a fact, and the
predictions are correct. That is, we get particular instances of
explanatory reasoning in science, and we get particular theories
that are involved in instrumental reliability. NMA is a far more
general argument for scientiﬁc realism, but gets strengthened by
Boyd’s argument in two ways: (i) the fact that explanatory rea-
soning is reliable in science reinforces NMA because it is itself
an instance of such reasoning. In this sense, NMA can be taken
to involve a mode of inference that is part and parcel of the
naturalized epistemology of science. (ii) Boyd’s argument can
be used to support the claim that theoretical truth is possible,
thereby supporting the claim in NMA that seeks to establish
the achievability of theoretical truth. (Psillos, 1999, 79)
To use the instrumental reliability (including explanatory rea-
soning) in science in order to defend an explanatory defense of
scientiﬁc realism has been accused of being viciously circular
since it uses IBE in order to defend IBE:
[T]he issue under discussion in judging realism in this
debate is precisely whether explanatory success provides
grounds for belief in the truth of the explanatory story.
To use explanatory success to ground belief in realism,
as the explanationist defense does, is to employ the very
type of argument whose cogency is the question under
discussion. In this light the explanationist defense seems
a paradigm case of begging the question, involving a cir-
cularity so small as to make its viciousness apparent.
Simon Allz´en
25

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
(Fine, 1991, 82)
We might break down the argument against a defense of IBE
in the following way. Presumably, there are inferential rules or
practices which we are rationally permitted to use – modus tol-
lens, IBE, induction – and ones we are not rationally permitted
to use – inference to the worst explanation, aﬃrming the conse-
quent. The distinction between these groups of inferential rules
by rational allowance must be justiﬁed somehow. That is, we
need to have justiﬁcation for why some inferential rules are ra-
tional and some not. (Boghossian, 2007; Enoch and Schechter,
2008) What Fine argues that Boyd’s defense amounts to is the
attempt to justify IBE as a rational inference rule by referring
to the fact that IBE is a rational inference rule.
The move
against scientiﬁc realism is to argue against the very possibility
of a justiﬁcation for IBE. The argument, in its epistemic form,
can be framed as follows:
1. We cannot justify our use of IBE with a justiﬁcation
that relies upon IBE (or otherwise assumes its privileged
epistemic status), since such a justiﬁcation would be ob-
jectionably circular.
2. We cannot justify our use of IBE by appealing to other
belief-forming methods, since IBE is a basic rule.
3. Thus, there is nothing in virtue of which we are justi-
ﬁed in using IBE. (Carter and Pritchard, 2017, 134)
One may of course argue that what’s good for the goose is good
for the gander – if the above argument applies to IBE then
it also applies to other, supposedly more legitimate, inference
rules. Are we prepared to say that it is irrational to employ
modus tollens as well?13 Even if we are not, we must admit that
a circular justiﬁcation of any inference rule, as in Boyd’s case,
must amount to an epistemically illegitimate way to approach
13As Carroll argues in his (in)famous (1895), deductive inferences are
not intrinsically justiﬁed, but only work if assumed.
26
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
the issue.
This question will be discussed in more detail in
papers two and three.
1.5.3
Best of a bad lot
One way to restrict the practical utility of IBE is to concede that
while the best explanation does track true theories, this can only
happen if the true theory is among the set of alternatives that
we apply IBE to. That is, it can be conceded that if the true
theory is a theory that scientists have conceived and is among
the alternatives that we consider when applying IBE, it will be
selected. The problem is that we have no idea if the true theory
is, in fact, conceived of and among the alternatives:
The argument of the bad lot purports to show that, even
if it were in general the case that the best explanation
of the evidence is true (or highly probable), that would
not suﬃce by itself to make IBE acceptable as a rule of
inference. For, evidently, the potential explanations be-
tween which we can choose are the ones we have actually
come up with. So to conclude that the best of these is
true an additional premise is required, viz., that none of
the possible explanations we have failed to come up with
is as good as the best of the ones we have. (Ladyman
et al., 1997, 306)
Only if we know that the true theory is in the set of alternatives
can we rely on IBE to select it, but, so the argument goes,
we don’t, so we can’t. This, skeptics say, shows that IBE is
unjustiﬁed as an inferential rule.
One way in which proponents of IBE have responded to the
argument from the bad lot has been to point out that the con-
cession of explanatory power as a guide to truth still means that
one can reformulate IBE as a comparative inference. This means
that one states that, given the set of alternatives H1, ..., Hn and
some evidence E, if H1 explains E better than any alternative,
H1 is closer to the truth than any alternative in the set. Douven
Simon Allz´en
27

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
(2021) As Douven points out, this requires a theory of closeness
to truth, but such theories are on o↵er.14 One way to strengthen
the comparative version of IBE is to limit underdetermination,
i.e.
to provide arguments that support the claim that there
are few (or no) alternative hypotheses to the currently accepted
one. Arguments of this kind have been pursued in cases where
empirical conﬁrmation of a theory is not likely to appear, for
example in string theory.15 If one could persuasively argue that
the number of alternative theories that are consistent with the
known data, make testable predictions and fulﬁll a set of theo-
retical constraints is low, or even null, the comparative version
of IBE would be as strong as the original version. The con-
sequences of this move are examined in more detail in paper
four.
1.6
Concluding remarks
As we have seen, contemporary versions of scientiﬁc realism
are deﬁned by their various responses to the pessimistic meta-
induction. Acceptance of the pessimistic conclusion generated
a variety of restrictions to the realist ontology, either to entities
or to structures. More optimistic realists tried to maintain as
much of the spirit of realism as possible by imposing restric-
tions on indispensable contributions to predictive success. This
approach relied heavily on the prospects of justifying a form of
IBE that can secure an epistemology of unobservables. Conse-
quently, anti-realists amassed a number of arguments aimed at
undermining or defeating the justiﬁcation of IBE as a rational
and legitimate inference. The question guiding the four indi-
vidual papers in this thesis is whether the pessimistic approach
14See, for example, Niiniluoto (1998).
See (Lipton, 2003, 61) for an
alternative which does not require a theory of truth-proximity.
15See Dawid (2013); Dawid et al. (2015); Dawid (2016, 2017a,b) for a
rigorous treatment of limitations to underdetermination and meta-empirical
conﬁrmation.
28
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
restricting realist ontology is suﬃcient for a plausible and ro-
bust scientiﬁc realism, or if the optimistic approach relying on
IBE is the way to go.
1.7
Paper summaries
The format of this thesis is known as a compilation thesis, which
means that it consists of a number of papers accompanied by an
introductory text. Below I provide short summaries of the four
included papers together with information about their publica-
tion status.
1.7.1
Paper I: Modest Scientiﬁc Realism and Be-
lief in Astronomical Entities
The ﬁrst paper examines the status of a version of realism which
relies on causality, or detection, as the hallmark of realist epis-
temology, thereby removing itself from the contested epistemic
status of explanatory reasoning. The paper raises a challenge
to detectionists – calling on them to clarify how their view ad-
dresses astronomical objects, properties, and entities. I use a
case-study of astronomical objects passing beyond the cosmic
event horizon in order to mount this challenge.
A version of this paper is accepted at the Philosophy of Science
Association’s biannual conference in Pittsburgh 2022.
1.7.2
Paper II: Against Methodological Continu-
ity and Metaphysical Knowledge
Paper two argues against the so called methodological con-
tinuation argument which claims that (some) metaphysics is
methodologically continuous with the sciences, on the grounds
that both rely on inference to the best explanation. I raise two
major grounds for concern: (1) that the justiﬁcation of IBE
Simon Allz´en
29

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
is domain-speciﬁc and does not transfer to metaphysics, and
(2): that metaphysicians are unable to specify particular re-
sults about which we ought to be realist.
This paper is under review at the European Journal for Philos-
ophy of Science.
1.7.3
Paper III: Scientiﬁc Realism and the Discov-
ery of Radium
The debate between scientiﬁc realists and anti-realists concerns
the epistemic status of our claims about unobservable entities.
It has been assumed by both parties to the debate that there is
a ﬁxed distinction between observables and unobservables, al-
though some authors have dissented from this opinion. Building
on work from the dissenters, I argue that what counts as unob-
servable can change over time, due to theoretical and empirical
discoveries. These changes are then brought to bear on the jus-
tiﬁcation of IBE with respect to unobservables. The claim is
illustrated by giving a detailed account of the discovery of ra-
dium.
This paper is published in Journal for General Philosophy of
Science. See Allz´en, S. From Unobservable to Observable: Sci-
entiﬁc Realism and the Discovery of Radium. J Gen Philos Sci
(2022).
Reprinted with permission.
1.7.4
Paper IV: Scientiﬁc Realism and Empirical
Conﬁrmation: a Puzzle
The last paper argues that a principled issue arises when non-
probabilistic IBE is applied in theoretical contexts lacking canon-
ical empirical conﬁrmation. More speciﬁcally, I argue that the
30
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
application of non-probabilistic IBE in the case of dark matter
may undermine the role of empirical conﬁrmation as a signiﬁ-
cant epistemic arbiter for realism. I consider how probabilistic
accounts of conﬁrmation may mitigate the situation for the re-
alist without infringing on the core epistemic values of explana-
tion.
This paper is published in Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part A. See Allz´en, S., 2021, Scientiﬁc Realism and
Empirical Conﬁrmation: A Puzzle, Studies in History and Phi-
losophy of Science Part A, 90, pp. 153–159.
Reprinted with permission.
1.8
Swedish summary
M˚anga anser att vetenskapens huvudsakliga m˚al ¨ar att ta reda
p˚a hur v¨arlden egentligen ¨ar beska↵ad, ut¨over det begr¨ansade
perspektiv om verkligheten som m¨anniskan har tillg˚ang till.
Den ﬁlosoﬁska doktrinen kopplad till denna f¨orest¨allning g˚ar un-
der namnet ‘vetenskaplig realism’ och vidh˚aller att vi har goda
sk¨al att tro att v˚ara b¨asta vetenskapliga teorier ¨ar sanna och
att v¨arlden inneh˚aller de entiteter som dessa teorier beskriver.
Det fr¨amsta ﬁlosoﬁska argumentet f¨or denna doktrin menar att
den enda rimliga f¨orklaringen till vetenskapliga teoriers otroliga
f¨orm˚aga att f¨oruts¨aga och f¨orklara v¨arlden ¨ar att de ¨ar sanna.
Vore de inte sanna, menar man, s˚a skulle det vara ett mirakel
att dessa teorier fungerar s˚a bra. Detta argument f¨or veten-
skaplig realism kallas d¨arf¨or ofta f¨or ‘inga-mirakel argumentet’
(‘the no-miracles argument’ p˚a engelska) och anv¨ander sig av
en s¨arskild slags slutledning: slutledning till b¨asta f¨orklaringen
(‘inference to the best explanation’ p˚a engelska). Id´en bakom
denna slutledningsmetod ¨ar relativt enkel (och v¨al anv¨and) –
den hypotes som b¨ast f¨orklarar relevant evidens (av en m¨angd
alternativa hypoteser) ¨ar den sanna, eller ˚atminstone mest san-
Simon Allz´en
31

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
nolika. Vetenskapliga teoriers framg˚ang ¨ar ett empiriskt faktum
som beh¨over f¨orklaras, och vetenskapliga teoriers sanning ¨ar hy-
potesen som b¨ast f¨orklarar detta faktum. Sundheten i veten-
skaplig realism ¨ar allts˚a till viss del beroende av legitimiteten
i anv¨andandet av denna slutledning. Detta beroende har ut-
nyttjats av anti-realister som menar att det inte existerar n˚agot
samband mellan en teoris f¨orklaringskraft och dess sanningshalt.
Att detta samband existerar ¨ar n˚agonting som g˚ar att falsiﬁera
(¨aven om det inte g˚ar att veriﬁera). Teorier vars f¨orklaringskraft
vi har tagit som en indikation p˚a deras sanningshalt b¨or, om
sambandet ﬁnns, vara exakt de teorier som ocks˚a har ¨overlevt
vetenskapens progression. Detta, menar anti-realisterna, ¨ar inte
fallet.
M˚anga vetenskapliga teorier, till exempel teorin om Flogis-
ton – ett hypotetiskt ¨amne som f¨orklarade f¨orbr¨anningsprocesser
– anv¨andes framg˚angsrikt f¨or att g¨ora f¨oruts¨agelser om olika
kemiska reaktioner. Teorin om Flogiston vederlades dock n¨ar
Antoine Lavoisier uppt¨ackte syre och ersattes d˚a med Caloric-
hypotesen som i sin tur senare ersattes med termodynamiken.
Om de ﬂesta teorier i den vetenskapliga hisorien ¨ar som Flogis-
ton, d.v.s empiriskt framg˚angsrika men falska, s˚a menar anti-
realisterna att vi ist¨allet har goda sk¨al att tro att v˚ara nu-
varande teorier kommer att m¨ota samma ¨ode. Inte nog med
att vi inte har goda sk¨al att tro att v˚ara mest framg˚angsrika
teorier ¨ar sanna, vi har nu ¨aven goda sk¨al att tro att de ¨ar
falska. Detta argument g˚ar under det passande namnet ‘den
pessimistiska meta-induktionen’ (PMI).
32
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Det ¨ar i dispyten mellan dessa tv˚a positioner som denna avhand-
lar tar avstamp i. F¨or att ¨overkomma PMI s˚a beh¨over veten-
skapsrealisten visa att slutledning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen
¨ar en slutledning som ¨ar p˚alitlig, allts˚a en slutledning som of-
tast (men inte alltid) genererar korrekta slutsatser.
Ett s¨att
att argumentera f¨or detta ¨ar att f¨ors¨oka visa att de aspekter av
historiskt verderlagda, men empiriskt framg˚angrika, teorier som
l˚ag bakom den empiriska framg˚angen som oftast ¨overf¨ordes in
i de nyare teorierna. Detta argument, framf¨ort av framf¨orallt
Psillos (1999), kallas ibland f¨or ‘divide et impera’, eller ‘s¨ondra
och h¨arska’ argumentet. Den grundl¨aggande id´en ¨ar helt enkelt
att vi inte ska ta vetenskapliga teorier i sin helhet n¨ar vi bed¨omer
deras sanningshalt, utan dess delar. N¨ar vi g¨or det m¨arker vi
att m˚anga av de delar som var ansvariga f¨or empirisk framg˚ang
ocks˚a ¨ar de delar som beh¨olls i efterf¨oljande teorier. L¨anken mel-
lan empirisk framg˚ang och sanningshalt uppr¨attas allts˚a igen
och slutledning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen f˚ar st¨od av historien.
Det ﬁnns dock andra s¨att att inv¨anda mot denna slutled-
ning. En s¨arskild typ av anti-realister – konstruktiva empirister
– menar bland annat att skiljelinjen mellan vad vi kan veta och
inte b¨or dras vid v˚ara observationsf¨orm˚agor, eller sinneserfaren-
heter. Kom ih˚ag att vetenskapsrealistens m˚al ¨ar att ¨overtyga
oss om att vetenskapen ger oss en sann bild av hur v¨arlden ¨ar
beska↵ad ¨aven bortom v˚ara sinneserfarenheter. Dessa empiris-
ter utmanar allts˚a vetenskapsrealisterna att visa hur, utan lo-
giska felslut, slutledning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen ¨ar en p˚alitlig
slutledning bortom denna sinneserfarenhetens gr¨ans. Hur vet vi
att den fungerar utan att anta att den fungerar? H¨ar tar artik-
larna i denna avhandling vid.
Artikel I
Den f¨orsta artikeln utg˚ar ifr˚an en vetenskapsrealism som medger
att f¨orklaringskraft ¨ar en d˚alig utg˚angspunkt f¨or att bed¨oma
vad vi ska vara realister om. Denna form av realism tar ist¨allet
kausalitet som realismens signum. Artikeln argumenterar f¨or
Simon Allz´en
33

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
att denna realism ¨ar f¨or fj¨attrad vid exempel fr˚an 1900-talets
partikelfysik och d¨arf¨or blir en alldeles f¨or begr¨ansad form av
realism. I kontexter som t.ex. kosmologi blir konsekvenserna
av detta att vi b¨or vara anti-realister med avseende p˚a as-
tronomiska objekt som vi kan observera, men som vid obser-
vations¨ogonblicket t =nu ¨ar s˚a l˚angt borta att hastigheten med
vilket det astronomiska objektet r¨or sig bort fr˚an oss ¨ar st¨orre
¨an ljusets hastighet (p˚a grund utav universums expansion s˚a blir
Vrec > c) och d¨arf¨or ligger bortom den s˚a kallade kosmologiska
h¨andelsehorisonten. Detta inneb¨ar allts˚a att vi i princip kan ob-
servera objekt som vi inte l¨angre kan komma i kausal kontakt
med, givet att ljusets hastighet ocks˚a ¨ar v˚ar kausala gr¨ans. I
detta fallet ¨ar vetenskapsrealisten allts˚a mer anti-realistisk ¨an
de kontruktivistiska empiristerna. Ett f¨orsvar av slutledning till
den b¨asta f¨orklaringen ¨ar allts˚a fortsatt ett alternativ v¨al v¨art
att utforska.
Artikel II
Den andra artikeln utg˚ar ifr˚an en annan dispyt g¨allande slutled-
ning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen, denna g˚ang mellan vetenskap-
srealister och metafysiker. En del menar att metafysikens epis-
temologi
¨ar
ber¨attigad
i
den
m˚an
dess
metodologi
¨ar
ber¨attigad.
D˚a man inom metafysiken anv¨ander sig av slut-
ledning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen, s˚a borde vetenskapsrealis-
ter inte kunna f¨orneka att dess applikation inom metafysiken
inte fungerar. Detta argument menar allts˚a att vetenskapsre-
alister som t¨anker sig att s˚atillvida slutledning till den b¨asta
f¨orklaringen ¨ar en p˚alitlig inferens, s˚a b¨or dess p˚alitlighet inte
vara begr¨ansad till den vetenskapliga kontexten, utan b¨or ac-
cepteras ¨aven inom metafysiken. Artikeln argumenterar f¨or att
det ﬁnns sk¨al att tro att s˚adana slutledningar ¨ar p˚alitliga i en
vetenskaplig kontext, och att de sk¨alen ¨ar begr¨ansade till just
den vetenskapliga kontexten. Vetenskapsrealister kan acceptera
slutledning till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen utan att f¨orbinda sig till
att metoden ¨ar ber¨attigad inom metafysik. De beh¨over d¨armed
34
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
inte heller acceptera de slutsatser som metafysiken inneh˚aller.
Artikel IV
Samma man¨over som vetenskapsrealisten kan anv¨anda sig av,
g¨allande
i
vilka
kontexter
som
slutledning
till
b¨asta
f¨orklaringen ¨ar giltig i, kan anv¨andas av konstruktiva empiris-
ter f¨or att argumentera mot vetenskapsrealister. Det ¨ar upp till
vetenskapsrealister att p˚avisa slutledningens legitimitet, men d˚a
empiristerna enbart godtar sinnesintryck som epistemiskt rel-
evanta s˚a ¨ar slutledningens legitimitet begr¨ansad till den ob-
serverbara delen av v¨arlden.
P˚alitligheten i slutledning till
b¨asta f¨orklaringen ¨ar allts˚a inte p˚avisbar bortom sinnesintryck-
ens dom¨an.
Den tredje artikeln argumenterar f¨or att det, i
princip, ¨ar m¨ojligt att p˚avisa motsatsen. Argumentet tar som
fallstudie Marie Curies uppt¨ackt av radium. Curie drog slut-
satsen att det existerade ett nytt och ouppt¨ackt radioaktivt
grund¨amne baserat p˚a att det b¨ast f¨orklarade utfallet av ett
experiment hon utf¨orde tillsammans med sin make och kollega
Pierre Curie.
Denna slutsats skulle de sedan m¨odosamt visa
st¨amde, genom att extrahera en observerbar m¨angd radium i
saltform. Argumentet f¨or att detta fall skulle st¨odja slutsatsen
till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen i en icke-observerbar kontext ¨ar att
det vid tiden inte fanns n˚agon indikation f¨or huruvida radium
var observerbart eller inte. Radiums kritiska massa hade kun-
nat vara bortom gr¨ansen f¨or observerbarhet, men Curies slutsats
hade varit lika legitim ¨and˚a, vilket visar att observerbarhet inte
har med slutsatsens giltighetsdom¨an att g¨ora.
Artikel V
Den fj¨arde och sista artikeln behandlar ett fall d¨ar slutsatsen
till b¨asta f¨orklaringen trots allt f˚ar besv¨arliga konsekvenser f¨or
vetenskapsrealisten. En av de mest popul¨ara alternativen till
slutsats till b¨asta f¨orklaringen ¨ar Bayesianism, en gren av san-
nolikhetsl¨ara som menar att vi som b¨ast kan veta till vilken grad
viss evidens st¨odjer en teori eller en hypotes. F¨or vetenskapsre-
Simon Allz´en
35

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
alisten ¨ar detta bekymmersamt p˚a grund av att de vill att vi
ska acceptera vissa teorier som sanna. Artikeln tar som fokus
en av den moderna fysikens st¨orsta ¨oppna fr˚agor: m¨ork mate-
rias existens. Applikationen av realisternas f¨oredragna slutsats
till den b¨asta f¨orklaringen p˚a hypotesen om m¨ork materia visar
att de b¨or vara rationellt bundna till att m¨ork materia exis-
terar. Problemet blir att det i s˚a fall verkar vara epistemiskt
¨overﬂ¨odigt att uppt¨acka m¨ork materia experimentellt. Varf¨or
bygga stora och dyra experiment f¨or att p˚avisa m¨ork materias
existens om vi redan b¨or tro p˚a att den ﬁnns?
36
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Bibliography
Bird, A. (2006). Philosophy of science. Routledge.
Boghossian, P. (2007). Fear of knowledge: Against relativism
and constructivism. Clarendon Press.
Boyd, R. (1980). Scientiﬁc realism and naturalistic epistemol-
ogy. In PSA: Proceedings of the biennial meeting of the Phi-
losophy of Science Association, pp. 613–662. Philosophy of
Science Association.
Boyd, R. N. (1983). On the current status of the issue of sci-
entiﬁc realism. In Methodology, epistemology, and philosophy
of science, pp. 45–90. Springer.
Carroll,
L. (1895).
What the tortoise said to achilles.
Mind 4(14), 278–280.
Carter, J. A. and D. Pritchard (2017). Inference to the best ex-
planation and epistemic circularity. Best Explanations: New
Essays on Inference to the Best Explanation, 133.
Cartwright, N. (1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford
University Press.
Chakravartty, A. (2007). A metaphysics for scientiﬁc realism:
Knowing the unobservable. Cambridge University Press.
Dawid, R. (2013). String theory and the scientiﬁc method. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Dawid, R. (2016). Modelling non-empirical conﬁrmation. In
Models and inferences in science, pp. 191–205. Springer.
Dawid, R. (2017a). Bayesian perspectives on the discovery of
the higgs particle. Synthese 194(2), 377–394.
Simon Allz´en
37

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Dawid, R. (2017b).
The signiﬁcance of non-empirical conﬁr-
mation in fundamental physics. In Why Trust a Theory, pp.
99–119. Cambridge University Press.
Dawid, R., S. Hartmann, and J. Sprenger (2015). The no alter-
natives argument. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 66(1), 213–234.
Dion, S. M. (2013). Pierre duhem and the inconsistency between
instrumentalism and natural classiﬁcation. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part A 44(1), 12–19.
Douven, I. (2021). Abduction. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 ed.). Meta-
physics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Duhem, P. M. M. (1914/1991). The aim and structure of phys-
ical theory, Volume 13. Princeton University Press.
Enoch, D. and J. Schechter (2008). How are basic belief-forming
methods justiﬁed?
Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search 76(3), 547–579.
Fine, A. (1991). Piecemeal realism. Philosophical Studies 61(1),
79–96.
Frigg, R. and I. Votsis (2011). Everything you always wanted
to know about structural realism but were afraid to ask. Eu-
ropean journal for philosophy of science 1(2), 227–276.
Fumerton, R. A. (1980). Induction and reasoning to the best
explanation. Philosophy of Science 47(4), 589–600.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and Intervening: Introductory
Topics in the Philosophy of Natural Science. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Harman, G. H. (1965). The inference to the best explanation.
The philosophical review 74(1), 88–95.
38
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Harr´e, R. (1986). Varieties of realism: A rationale for the nat-
ural sciences.
Josephson, J. R. and S. G. Josephson (1996). Abductive infer-
ence: Computation, philosophy, technology. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kitcher, P. (1995). The advancement of science: Science with-
out legend, objectivity without illusions.
Oxford University
Press on Demand.
Kitcher, P. (2001). Real realism: The galilean strategy. The
Philosophical Review 110(2), 151–197.
Ladyman, J. (2020). Structural Realism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2020 ed.).
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Ladyman, J., I. Douven, L. Horsten, and B. van Fraassen
(1997). A defence of van fraassen’s critique of abductive infer-
ence: Reply to psillos. The Philosophical Quarterly 47(188),
305–321.
Ladyman, J., D. Ross, J. Collier, D. Spurrett, D. Spurrett, J. G.
Collier, et al. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics nat-
uralized. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Laudan, L. (1981). A confutation of convergent realism. Phi-
losophy of science 48(1), 19–49.
Lipton, P. (1994). Truth, existence, and the best explanation.
In A. A. Derksen (Ed.), The Scientiﬁc Realism of Rom Harr´e.
Tilburg University Press.
Lipton, P. (2003). Inference to the best explanation. Routledge.
Lyons, T. D. (2005). Toward a purely axiological scientiﬁc re-
alism. Erkenntnis 63(2), 167–204.
Simon Allz´en
39

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
Mach, E. (1907). The science of mechanics. Prabhat Prakashan.
Maxwell, G. (1962). The ontological status of theoretical enti-
ties.
McMullin, E. (2013). The inference that makes science. Zy-
gon® 48(1), 143–191.
Niiniluoto, I. (1998).
Verisimilitude: The third period.
The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 49(1), 1–29.
Poincar´e, H. (1905). Science and hypothesis. Science Press.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientiﬁc realism: How science tracks truth.
Routledge.
Psillos, S. (2000). Abduction: Between conceptual richness and
computational complexity. In Abduction and induction, pp.
59–74. Springer.
Psillos, S. (2009). Knowing the structure of nature: Essays on
realism and explanation. Springer.
Putnam, H. (1975). Mathematics, Matter and Method: Volume
1, Philosophical Papers. CUP Archive.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2011). The instrumentalist’s new clothes.
Philosophy of Science 78(5), 1200–1211.
Smart, J. J. C. (1963). Philosophy and scientiﬁc realism. Lon-
don: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The scientiﬁc image. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1985). Empiricism in the philosophy of
science. Images of science: Essays on realism and empiricism,
with a reply from Bas C. van Fraassen, 245.
40
Simon Allz´en

Reassessing Realism: On the Ontology of the Unobservable
van Fraassen, B. C. (1989).
Laws and symmetry.
Oxford:
Clarendon.
van Fraassen, B. C. (2001). Constructive empiricism now. Philo-
sophical Studies 106(1), 151–170.
Vickers, P. (2013). A confrontation of convergent realism. Phi-
losophy of Science 80(2), 189–211.
Weintraub, R. (2017). Scepticism about inference to the best
explanation. Best Explanations: New Essays on Inference to
the Best Explanation, 188.
Williamson, T. (2017).
Semantic paradoxes and abductive
methodology.
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural realism: The best of both worlds?
Dialectica 43(1-2), 99–124.
Simon Allz´en
41

