Applied Ontology 11 (2016) 103–128
103
DOI 10.3233/AO-160164
IOS Press
Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
Andrew D. Spear a,∗, Werner Ceusters b and Barry Smith c
a Philosophy Department, Grand Valley State University, 1 Campus Drive, Allendale, MI 49401, USA
Tel.: +1 616 331 2847; Fax: +1 616 331 2601; E-mail: speara@gvsu.edu
b Departments of Biomedical Informatics and Psychiatry, University at Buffalo, 77 Goodell street,
Buffalo, NY 14203, USA
E-mail: ceusters@buffalo.edu
c Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo, 135 Park Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA
E-mail: phismith@buffalo.edu
Abstract. The notion of function is indispensable to our understanding of distinctions such as that between being broken and
being in working order (for artifacts) and between being diseased and being healthy (for organisms). A clear account of the
ontology of functions and functioning is thus an important desideratum for any top-level ontology intended for application to
domains such as engineering or medicine. The beneﬁt of using top-level ontologies in applied ontology can only be realized
when each of the categories identiﬁed and deﬁned by a top-level ontology is integrated with the others in a coherent fashion.
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) has from the beginning included function as one of its categories, exploiting a version of the
etiological account of function that is framed at a level of generality sufﬁcient to accommodate both biological and artifactual
functions. This account has been subjected to a series of criticisms and reﬁnements. We here articulate BFO’s account of
function, provide some reasons for favoring it over competing views, and defend it against objections.
Keywords: Function, disposition, Basic Formal Ontology, biological function, artifacts, malfunction
Accepted by: Pawel Garbacz
1. Function and ontology
It seems clear that any ontology intended for use in the domain of biology will eventually need to
include the category of function, while any ontology intended for use in the domain of biomedicine –
including for example surgery or radiography – will need to include an account that can handle both
biological and artifactual functions. Functions are ontologically challenging in that they are generally
taken to involve a normative element: for a thing to have a function is for it to have something it is
supposed to do and that it can do more or less well. There is a large and still growing literature on function
(Buller, 1998; Wouters, 2005; Krohs and Kroes, 2009) and the topic has a long history documented for
example by Gilson (1984) and Leunissen (2010). When approaching a complex issue of this sort it is
therefore helpful to approach it with some basic ontological commitments already in place, and viewing
the issue of function through the lens of an already developed and widely used top-level ontology is one
effective way of doing this. This essay may be read, in part, as an illustration of how a formal ontology
can constrain and assist in the development of an elucidation of a complex ontological phenomenon such
as function. In the following we introduce the core commitments of Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 616 331 2847; Fax: +1 616 331 2601; E-mail: speara@gvsu.edu.
1570-5838/16/$35.00 © 2016 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

104
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
consider in this light some inﬂuential accounts of function taken from the recent literature. In the ﬁnal
section of the paper we defend the BFO elucidation of function against a number of objections, ﬁnishing
with those recently lodged by Röhl and Jansen (2014) and to some extent reiterated by Marc Artiga in
his introduction to this special issue.
2. Basic Formal Ontology
BFO is a top-level ontology initially developed for use in scientiﬁc domains such as biomedicine.1
BFO sees reality in terms of a top-level division of all particular entities (individuals) into the two disjoint
categories of continuant and occurrent. Continuant entities include objects, attributes, and locations
and are contrasted with occurrent entities, which include processes and temporal regions. Processes
happen in time and so have temporal parts (for example, the beginning, middle, and end of a cricket
match). Continuants, in contrast, exist in full at any time at which they exist at all. It is accordingly
not the organism or cricket ball that has temporal parts but rather its associated life or history. The is_a
hierarchies in Figs 1 and 2 summarize the continuant and occurrent halves of BFO, respectively.
In addition to the distinction at the level of particulars between continuants and occurrents, BFO
presupposes also a fundamental division between universals and particulars. The former are repeatable
features of reality, typically instantiated in multiple particulars. The latter are non-repeatable entities
that instantiate universals but are not themselves instantiated by or in anything. BFO, in effect, is an
attempt to capture the most general universals – those categories of entities which are instantiated in all
domains of reality – on the basis of the assumption that universals at lower levels will be represented in
domain ontologies created through downward population from BFO. According to the methodology of
Fig. 1. Continuant universals in Basic Formal Ontology.
1The BFO 2.0 reference document (Smith et al., 2015) is available at https://github.com/BFO-ontology/BFO, accessed
May 9, 2016. For a comprehensive introduction to Basic Formal Ontology and the approach to ontology on which it is based,
see Arp et al. (2015). For a list of BFO users see http://ifomis.uni-saarland.de/bfo/users, accessed December 10, 2015.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
105
Fig. 2. Occurrent universals in Basic Formal Ontology.
Fig. 3. Instances and universals together making it true that a certain apple is round.
ontological realism underlying BFO, general statements, such as mammals have hearts, electrons have
negative charge, salt is soluble in water, or perspiring functions to cool the body – despite being deﬁned
in terms of particulars – are true or false in virtue of the existence of corresponding universals in reality.
The universal heart, for example, is instantiated in each individual heart; the universal pumping in each
individual process of pumping.
According to BFO, the truth of there is a round apple implies the existence of (at least) four distinct
entities: the universal apple in the BFO category object, the universal roundness in the BFO category
quality, an individual apple, and a particular instance of roundness inhering in the apple (see Fig. 3.)
BFO thus anticipates the four-category ontology defended by E. J. Lowe (2006)2 but extends the latter
to include universals and instances not only of dependent and independent continuants (roughly: objects
and properties) but also of occurrents (Smith, 2005).
For our purposes here it is the dependent continuant BFO categories of quality, role, disposition, and
function that are of most importance. On the ontological realist view, instances of universals in each of
these categories exist in reality and are studied by science. Data about molecular functions, for example,
are captured by the annotations created by biocurators using terms from the Gene Ontology Molecular
2See also Díaz Herrera (2006) and Smith (2012). Both BFO and Lowe, of course, belong to a long tradition, currently
discussed for example under the heading ‘Aristotle’s ontological square’.

106
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
Function Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000). We will ﬁrst consider the intuitive notion of function as it
relates to accounts found in current literature. We will then introduce the BFO elucidation of function in
the context of these accounts.
3. Function
We take it to be characteristic of what it is to have a function that for an object to have a function does
not imply that it is realizing this function at every moment in which it exists, or indeed at any moment
(consider a knife that is never used; or a sperm that never successfully fuses with an ovum). Functions
are certainly intimately related to the processes that realize them, their functionings. But they are not
identical therewith, and they are not existentially dependent thereon.
Second, the function of a thing is, approximately, what it is supposed to do. This typically involves
both what is popularly called a goal or end of some sort and a way of achieving that end. A thing
is functioning well when it does what it is supposed to do reliably or effectively and in the, for it,
appropriate way. A thing is malfunctioning when it does what it is supposed to do poorly or not at all.
The function of the heart is to pump blood. When this function is realized – when the heart is pumping –
then blood ﬂows through the circulatory system. This is a consequence of the realization of the heart’s
function. A healthy or well-functioning heart does this well. An unhealthy or malfunctioning heart does
this poorly. Similarly, the purpose of a pair of sunglasses is to shield the eyes from the sun or other
source of bright light while still enabling vision. A good pair of sunglasses does this well. A defective
or bad pair of sunglasses does it poorly (either by failing to shield the eyes from the light source or
by obstructing the vision of the wearer). Talk of functions is thus in some sense teleological (involves
reference to goals or ends or purposes) and normative (reference to functions serves as the basis of
certain sorts of judgments of good and bad, better and worse).
Central tasks in elucidating the notion of function are, then, to account for the independence of func-
tions from their functionings, and to account for the sense in which these functions are normative for the
bearers that possess or instantiate them.
3.1. Etiological and other accounts of function
While there is a large array of different accounts of function in the literature,3 we distinguish here
between three major positions:
• the etiological view (Millikan, 1984; Buller, 1999),
• the so-called “systemic” or “causal contribution” view (Wouters, 2005, pp. 135–136; Röhl and
Jansen, 2014, pp. 6–7),
• “the life chances approach” (Bigelow and Pargetter, 1987; Wouters, 2005).4
Artiga (2011, p. 110) identiﬁes four major desiderata that an account of function should try to satisfy.
Reformulated slightly for the sake of terminological consistency they read as follows:
3See the surveys provided by Wouters (2005) and by Röhl and Jansen (2014).
4Note that all of these are realist views: they hold that functions exist, that they are ingredients of being. We do not here
address those accounts – maintained for example by Searle (1995) – according to which function talk is a mere façon de parler
about other things and thus in principle eliminable.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
107
• TELEOLOGY: reference to the function of an entity should play an important role in explaining
why the entity exists.
• NORMATIVITY: the function of an entity determines a criterion against which the activity of the
entity can be normatively evaluated, which means: it can be evaluated as better or worse relative to
some norm relating to its exercise of the function.
• EPIPHENOMENALISM: the function of an entity is determined by the entity’s current perfor-
mance.5
• ACCIDENT: An entity’s function is appropriately distinguished from its accidental effects (called
“side-effects” in what follows).
Artiga also presents a strong case for the thesis that any account of function that satisﬁes the criteria of
TELEOLOGY, NORMATIVITY, and ACCIDENT will likely fail to satisfy EPIPHENOMENALISM.
In addition to the above desiderata, two additional criteria that will be of relevance below are discussed
by Röhl and Jansen (2014), these are:
• SUPPORT: the function of a thing should be, in some sense, supported by (be a consequence of) its
physical structure, not merely of historical or cultural facts.6
• MALFUNCTIONING requires of such a theory that it does justice to the phenomenon of malfunc-
tioning, including the case where a thing manifests total failure to perform its function.
Röhl and Jansen recognize that there is a prima facie conﬂict between NORMATIVITY and SUP-
PORT similar in nature to the conﬂict between the four criteria identiﬁed by Artiga. It is characteristic
of normative statements that they can be true even when the world fails to conform to them. Thus “John
ought not to kill” does not imply “John does not kill”. Similarly, for functional language, “John’s heart
is supposed to pump blood through his body” does not imply “John’s heart does indeed pump blood
through his body”. Whatever functions are, there can be true statements about them (such as “the func-
tion of the heart is to pump blood”) even when no actually existing thing does what those true statements
purport (imagine a world in which all hearts have momentarily ceased functioning). SUPPORT, on the
other hand, requires that functions be grounded in the physical structures of their bearers. According to
this criterion, functions are not epiphenomenal add-ons or mere results of cultural context or reﬂections
of widespread belief. That a thing has a function is supposed to follow, at least in part, from its physical
structure. This implies that for a thing to have a function of a certain kind it must at the same time have
a physical structure of a certain kind.
An account of function can thus be judged by how well it satisﬁes the desiderata just introduced, where
it is probably the case that no account will satisfy them all. The BFO account of function to be introduced
in more detail below is an etiological or history of selection account in the spirit of those offered by
Millikan (1984) and surveyed by Buller (1998). For BFO, as we shall see, a function is a disposition
of its bearer that (1) exists in virtue of the bearer’s physical makeup where (2) this bearer came into
existence as a result of a historical process of a certain sort (evolutionary selection for biological entities
and intentional design or selection for artifacts). Our position is that the etiological view embraced by
BFO fairs better, with regard to the desiderata distinguished by Artiga and by Röhl and Jansen, than do
the other mentioned accounts.
5In Artiga’s original formulation: “The trait’s function is determined by the trait’s current performances.” Artiga does not
provide a deﬁnition of what he means by ‘trait’ or by ‘current’.
6This criterion is also discussed by Smith et al. (2015) under the heading of ‘material basis’.

108
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
3.2. The systemic/causal contribution account
Consider ﬁrst the systemic or causal contribution accounts according to which the function of an
entity has to do with the contribution that it makes to bringing about a state or behavior of some system
or context of which it is a part (Cummins, 1975; Mossio et al., 2009). Both artifacts and biological
entities are complex systems whose parts play certain roles in sustaining them and guiding their behavior.
It seems, therefore, that a view along these lines is attractive. Further, the view seems to satisfy the
EPIPHENOMENALISM constraint rather easily as it is built into the view that how the relevant part of
the system is currently performing determines what its function is. However, such views do not do so
well by the other three desiderata. Concerning TELEOLOGY: just because an entity plays a causal role
in a system does not mean that its doing so explains why that entity exists or continues to exist. The right
combination of sunlight and moisture in the air can produce a rainbow; but playing this causal role does
not explain why sunlight or moisture exist. Concerning NORMATIVITY: the fact that some factor plays
a causal role in a system does not imply that it is supposed to do so or that it does so more or less well.
A heart in atrial ﬁbrillation is making a causal contribution to the overall state of the system of which it
is a part, but it would be a mistake to identify its quivering heartbeat as a function of the heart. Such a
heart is precisely malfunctioning, and it is not clear how the causal contribution account can do justice
to this fact.
Such accounts face for similar reasons a difﬁculty in distinguishing between the side effects produced
by an entity functioning within a system and the functioning of that same entity. Insofar as both make
causal contributions to some state of the system, both would seem to count as functions of the entity
in question thus contravening the ACCIDENT desideratum. To see this, consider the version of the
systemic or causal approach defended by Mizoguchi et al. (2012). This deﬁnes the function of an entity
A in terms of the contribution A makes in the relevant systemic context C. For A to have a function in C,
A must be a component of some subsystem of C and some behavior of A must play the functional role
determined by C. This deﬁnition of the function of A will work well so long as it is clear what deﬁnes
the goal of the systemic context C to which A’s functioning contributes. However, to determine what
ﬁxes this goal they must appeal to something external to the systemic context. In the case of artifacts,
they appeal to the intentions of the designer of the system. In the case of biological entities it seems that
they will be forced to draw on one or other of the extant accounts of biological function.
3.3. The life chances view: Bigelow and Pargetter
Bigelow and Pargetter (1987) offer a view of biological function that takes its inspiration from evolu-
tionary biology but avoids considerations involving the selection history of organisms and their parts in
favor of the possession by an organism or part of an organism of a “survival-enhancing propensity” in the
present. As they put it, “Something has a (biological) function just when it confers a survival-enhancing
propensity on a creature that possesses it” (Bigelow and Pargetter, 1987, p. 108).7 As Wouters, who calls
this the “life chances view”, puts it:
it is the function of the heart to pump blood because pumping blood is an effect of the heart and the
life chances of organisms that have hearts are better if their heart pumps blood than if it does not
(Wouters, 2005, p. 139).
7This account comes with provisos, the central one being that what counts as a survival-enhancing propensity for an organism
is to be determined relative to that creature’s “natural habitat”, the one that is usual or normal for it.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
109
Views of this sort avoid the appeal to a history of selection used by etiological theories and distinguish
themselves from systemic approaches by introducing survival (sometimes also reproductive success)
into the determination of a thing’s function. Their view does well in relation to the criterion of EPIPHE-
NOMENALISM, since an organism’s functions are explained in terms of its current propensities. It
also satisﬁes ACCIDENT by conceiving functional (as opposed to accidental) effects as those that are
survival-enhancing. However, it faces problems regarding TELEOLOGY and MALFUNCTION. First,
it is not clear how an organism or organ having a survival-enhancing propensity in the present serves to
explain the existence of that very propensity. On the view of Bigelow and Pargetter, an entity that has
just come into existence and happens to have a survival-enhancing propensity for the organism would
count as having a function, yet its having this function could not be part of the explanation for why it
exists. Second, the view does little to distinguish, for example with regard to a given organ, what counts
as functioning and malfunctioning, and so does little to satisfy NORMATIVITY. A heart that pumps
blood surely confers a survival-enhancing propensity on an organism that would not be possessed by an
organism whose heart did not pump blood. Thus, a heart that pumps blood counts as having the func-
tion to pump blood. But what about a malfunctioning heart? Such a heart may well confer a counter-
propensity to survival on the organism that is its host, and thus not have a function. Yet this seems
incorrect. The malfunctioning heart is supposed to pump blood and is failing to do so. We describe it as
malfunctioning precisely because it has or is at least supposed to have a function.
3.4. Virtues of etiological accounts of function
Etiological views of function determine what the function of a thing is in the present by appeal to
the history of that thing or of things like it. In the case of biological functions, the current function or
functions of a thing will be determined by the evolutionary history of that thing, speciﬁcally by which
characteristics of that thing played a role in the evolutionary success of ancestors possessing similar
characteristics. In the case of artifacts, the current function of an artifact is determined by its history
of intentional design or selection by some agent. Thus an etiological account is, by contrast with both
systemic and life chances accounts, able to satisfy at least three of Artiga’s four desiderata. It satisﬁes
TELEOLOGY because it sees the function of for example an organ as determined by those traits of
precursor anatomical structures that were selected for in ancestors of the organism. The function of the
organ thus contributes to explaining, causally, its existence. Etiological views also handle NORMATIV-
ITY and ACCIDENT. The heart is supposed to pump blood, not to make a thumping sound, because it
is pumping blood that contributed to the survival of past members of the species who possessed hearts
or precursor structures.8 The heart is supposed to pump blood because this is what was selected for in
the history of organisms possessing hearts, and this is also why a heart that does not pump blood where
it ought to do so, or that does not pump blood effectively, is malfunctioning.
The one desideratum that the etiological theory runs afoul of is EPIPHENOMENALISM, since it is
not the current state of the organism or artifact that determines its functions, but rather the past history
of selection. EPIPHENOMENALISM is however by far the weakest of Artiga’s desiderata, since it
clearly cannot deal with a host of cases where entities – both artifacts and biological continuants –
have functions but are not at any given time functioning. Artiga indeed – as is clear in his formulation
8It is of course possible that there is some selective advantage in pumping with a certain amount of noise, for instance because
more noise might have made certain animals more likely to be heard by predators, less noise might have made their mothers
think that they were dead while they were merely asleep, resulting in abandonment. Pumping blood outside the relevant noise
thresholds would then be a case of malfunctioning.

110
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
of ACCIDENT – does not seem to clearly distinguish between function (continuant) and functioning
(occurrent). We hypothesize that his acceptance of EPIPHENOMENALISM ﬂows from the fact that he
is seeking to answer epistemological questions (how can we know or explain that a function exists?)
rather than the ontological question (what is it for an entity to be a function?) which is of interest to us
here.
It is for all of these reasons that we adopted the etiological account in the BFO elucidation of function.9
BFO retains the Bigelow and Pargetter thesis that a function is something like a propensity (for us:
a disposition) that an entity has; but adds to this the view that the normative features of this propensity,
its status as a function proper, are to be derived from it being the outcome of particular kinds of historical
processes.
4. Disposition, role, and function in BFO
As can be seen in Fig. 1, dispositions, roles, and functions are all, from the BFO standpoint, speciﬁcally
dependent realizable continuant entities. A continuant entity is dependent if, in order for it to exist, it
must inhere_in some other entity, for example as a quality of roundness inheres in some round object.10
The temperature of a motor depends on – and so inheres in – the motor; and the fragility of a vase
depends on – and so inheres in – the vase.
To see what BFO means by realizable, note that, as the previous examples illustrate, dependent entities
divide into (at least) two signiﬁcant kinds:
1. those that are completely exhibited by an object at all times at which they exist at all (such as
temperature, height, diameter, thickness, mass, and shape),
2. those that are associated with a characteristic process of realization or manifestation – as in the case
of fragility, elasticity, the ability to play tennis, the responsibility of a legal guardian, the duties of
a policeman.
Dependent entities of the ﬁrst type fall under the BFO category of quality; those of the second type are
included under the category of realizable entities and are distinguished by the fact that they are features
of an object that are only realized or become manifest under certain conditions. Realizable entities are
therefore in a sense modal: it is only possible that they be realized. A vase is always fragile, but its
disposition to break is only realized or made manifest when (or if) it is, for example, dropped or hit with
a hammer. Dispositions, functions, and roles are all realizable features of their bearers, and thus they are
all ﬁrst class entities in the BFO sense. Committing to their existence provides us with a way of dealing
with modality which does not require appeal to anything like modal logic or possible worlds.
Dispositions are the most familiar of these three types of realizable entity. Examples include the dis-
position of a vegetable to decay; the disposition of a block of ice to melt; the disposition of a portion of
blood to coagulate; the disposition of a patient with a weakened immune system to contract infectious
9We use the term ‘elucidation’ here in reﬂection of the fact that the categories in a top-level ontology are generally so basic
to our understanding of reality that it is difﬁcult or impossible to provide deﬁnitions of them in the strict sense of the term.
To provide elucidations of such categories means to describe the key features that entities falling within these categories have
by providing examples and by specifying axioms that represent how these categories relate to others within the ontology (Arp
et al., 2015, pp. 89, 135–136).
10BFO also makes use of the distinction between generically dependent and speciﬁcally dependent continuant entities, but
this distinction will not be important in what follows here.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
111
disease; the disposition of a portion of metal to conduct electricity. There is a vast philosophical litera-
ture on dispositions (also sometimes called ‘powers’) ranging over a number of signiﬁcant metaphysical
issues.11 While BFO is a realist ontology committed to taking such issues seriously wherever they might
help to identify potential problems with the BFO framework, BFO’s primary goal is to assist scientists
and others in the development of practically useful, accurate, coherent, and interoperable domain on-
tologies by providing a starting point for downward population through the formulation of Aristotelian
deﬁnitions (Arp et al., 2015, p. 69). As such, BFO incorporates ontological categories and associated
elucidations that have proven relevant to the practical endeavors of information-driven scientists while,
wherever possible, remaining neutral on more contentious questions of metaphysics.
Dispositions are described by reference to the types of processes which would realize them under
certain conditions (Ellis and Liese, 1994). To be fragile is to break under these or those circumstances;
to be soluble is to dissolve in liquid under these or those other circumstances. Each disposition will exist
because of some physical quality or qualities of its bearer, but different quality patterns or arrangements
may serve as this ground or basis under different circumstances or in different types of bearers. For
example, the disposition of fragility might be instantiated in virtue of the different underlying molecular
structures of a dry pine board, an ice sculpture, or the inﬂorescence of a rose.
Whether a disposition is realized will in many cases depend on the situation in which the object
possessing it is located. Matches have in normal circumstances the disposition to be ﬂammable, and this
disposition will be founded on certain qualities of the matches. However, a match possessing the normal
set of ﬂammable-making qualities (of, predominantly, portions of phosphorus, sulfur, and potassium
chlorate) will not be able to realize its disposition if it is located in an environment from which all
oxygen has been removed.12
Changes in the environment of an object may result in temporary or even complete loss of dispositions,
but only if they also bring about physical changes in the object for instance of the sort which occur when
a match is inserted into water (Mumford, 1996). The environment, from the BFO perspective, cannot
bring about these effects alone, since the dispositions that an object has are determined by its physical
structure (a pattern of qualities in BFO terms).
Accordingly, the current BFO 2.0 elucidation of disposition reads as follows:
d is a disposition means:
d is a realizable entity,
& d’s bearer is some material entity,
& d is such that, if it ceases to exist, then its bearer is physically changed,
11Examples of such issues include:
• Is the correct analysis of dispositions to be achieved through logical analysis of sentences such as “this vase is fragile” or
in terms of conditionals along the lines of: “this vase is fragile if and only if were it to be struck with a hard object it would
crack or shatter”? (Lewis, 1997; Fara, 2005).
• If we refer to a patient with a weakened immune system as having an enhanced disposition to contract some disease, are
we referring to just one disposition (to contract disease), or to what may be a large number of distinct dispositions (to
contract inﬂuenza, to contract pneumonia, and so on)? And as the disposition (for example) to contract the ﬂu becomes
stronger or weaker is there then some single disposition that is undergoing a series of changes or is it rather a series of
dispositions (each weaker or stronger than the next, and each giving way to its successor) as the patient’s condition evolves
with time? (Lowe, 2010).
• Do dispositions ground laws of nature, or do they themselves require some further categorical (which is to say non-
dispositional) ground or basis, for example in molecular structures or patterns? (Handﬁeld, 2009).
12Realizability may also be affected by the presence of blocking dispositions (Goldfain et al., 2011).

112
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
& d’s realization occurs when and because this bearer is in some special physical circumstances,
& this realization occurs in virtue of the bearer’s physical make-up.
Roles, by contrast with dispositions, do not follow from fundamental features of the physical structure
of their bearers. Rather, they have to do with the natural or social context in which their bearers are
located. Examples include the role of a person to be a doorman, the role of a chemical compound to
be an analyte in an experiment, the role of a drug in the treatment of a disease, the role of a certain
piece of fruit as food for an animal, the role of a patient’s family member as deﬁned by a certain hospital
administration form, and so on. What is crucial for understanding roles is that they are realizable features
that an object can have, but that it need not have. Thus roles are always optional. For example, when a
piece of granite is used to mark the property line between two houses, then it has the role of property
line marker; but if the same piece of granite is used in a museum as an example of a property marker
then it has instead the role of a historical display object.
The current BFO 2.0 elucidation of role reﬂects these points:
r is a role means:
r is a realizable entity,
& r exists because there is some single bearer that is in some special physical, social, or institu-
tional set of circumstances in which this bearer does not have to be,
& r is not such that, if it ceases to exist, then the physical make-up of the bearer is thereby
changed (Smith et al., 2015).
4.1. BFO function
The BFO ontology of realizable entities does not claim to be complete. Currently it divides realizable
entities into the two disjoint subcategories of disposition and role; but it is possible that further subcate-
gories will be recognized in the future in order to address as yet unidentiﬁed needs (for example arising
from new scientiﬁc discoveries or from applications of BFO to new sorts of domains).13 Already now,
however, BFO recognizes function as a subcategory of disposition, and thus as a third realizable entity
category. Examples under this heading are: the function of a liver to store glycogen, the function of a
birth canal to enable transport, the function of an eye to see, the function of a water pump to move water,
the function of a mitochondrion to produce ATP, and so on.
Note that these are all examples of objects (or, more generally, material entities) having functions of
one or other sort. There are some who talk of entities in other categories, for example of certain types of
processes, as having functions. Certainly, by deﬁnition, processes do not have functions in the BFO sense
of this term. But BFO makes no claim to completeness, and thus it leaves open whether there are entities
properly to be conceived of as functions of processes which might form an additional category deserving
to be recognized by BFO. Favored examples of functional processes – for example the cycle of green-red
or of green-amber-red illuminations of trafﬁc lights, or the process of blinking when exposed to bright
lights, or the process of blood ﬂowing through the body to bring oxygen to its cells – are all, as far as we
have been able to ascertain, capable of being treated as examples of functions of material entities in the
BFO sense (of trafﬁc light installations, of the upper eyelid musculature, and of the circulatory system,
respectively) (Smith et al., 2003).
13On the open-endedness of BFO’s ontology design process, and also on its commitment to fallibilism and, more generally,
to the importance of responding to developments in science, see the discussion by Arp et al. (2015, Chapter 3).

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
113
Fig. 4. Speciﬁcally dependent continuants in BFO 1.1.1.
4.1.1. Function in BFO 1.1.1 and BFO 2.0
BFO by now has some hundreds of users, including not only many biological and biomedical research
consortia but also major government agencies in defense and security.14 To accommodate the needs of
these users we have sought to ensure that changes to BFO are carried out only very infrequently, and that
when these changes do occur they are as non-disruptive as possible to the ontology as a whole. In all,
three versions have been approved since the original BFO 1.0: versions 1.1, 1.1.1 and 2.0 respectively.
We here consider only the two most recent versions, since their different treatments of function have a
direct impact on our arguments here.
In BFO 1.1.1, ﬁrst of all, function, role, and disposition are treated as sibling categories on the same
level, with realizable entity as their common parent, as in Fig. 4 above.
The elucidation of function provided by Spear (2006) and encoded in BFO version 1.1.1 reads as
follows:
[a function is] a realizable entity the manifestation of which is an essentially end-directed activity
of a continuant entity in virtue of that continuant entity being a speciﬁc kind of entity in the kind or
kinds of contexts that it is made for (Spear, 2006).
This elucidation captures some important features of the notion of function. In particular, it includes
the idea that the function of a thing is directly connected to what kind of thing its bearer is. However,
it leaves open exactly how the function of a thing is related to its other qualities and to its parts. This
elucidation also leaves unspeciﬁed just how the function of a thing is determined. Of all of the features of
a thing, which are the ones that are to count as functions? Hanging in the balance here was also the need
to clearly distinguish between functions on the one hand and roles on the other. Functions are supposed
to be essential or integral to their bearers in a way that roles are not. But what grounds this difference?
It was primarily in order to respond to questions of this sort that the elucidation of function was
modiﬁed in BFO 2.0 to:
f is a function means:
f is a disposition,
& f exists in virtue of its bearer’s physical make-up,
14For a list of the (currently 71) scientiﬁc ontologies that reuse the BFO elucidation of function, go to: http://bioportal.
bioontology.org/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&query=function&commit=Search and scroll down to BFO:Function.

114
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
& this physical make-up is something that this bearer possesses because it came into being, either
through evolution (in the case of natural biological entities) or through intentional design (in the
case of artifacts), in order to realize processes of a certain sort (Smith et al., 2015).
The category of functions in BFO 2.0, accordingly, is identiﬁed as a subcategory of dispositions.
Speciﬁcally, functions are dispositions whose bearers have speciﬁc histories of intentional design or
evolution. Since dispositions are themselves a reﬂection of the physical structure of their bearers, it
follows that functions, too, reﬂect this same physical structure. This means in turn that a loss of function
or a failure of functioning on the part of the bearer – with certain exceptions which we will identify in
what follows – implies some change in this bearer’s physical structure. Recognizing that functions are
types of dispositions serves also to differentiate them from roles, since the latter can be gained and lost
without any change in the physical features of the relevant bearer. A piece of granite can start and stop
playing the role of a property marker and a human being can start and stop having the role of being a
bar-certiﬁed lawyer without undergoing any change in physical structure. The most obvious way for a
heart, by contrast, to lose its function is for the heart to undergo some physical change of this sort.
4.1.2. Functions as dispositions
In addition to the above, ﬁve further considerations speak in favor of the view that functions are,
ontologically speaking, dispositions.
First, while functions are most identiﬁable when they are being realized in processes of various sorts,
that is in functionings, it is a normal occurrence for objects that have a function not to realize that
function at all. Many (indeed almost all) spermatozoa never fertilize an ovum, yet it remains true that
this is their function. A plastic fork may never actually be used for eating (it may be destroyed or thrown
away before such use), yet its function is to serve the lifting of food all the same.
Second, otherwise indistinguishable processes can be functionings in some cases and not in others.
Examples would include a cooling process, a process of wind-propelled ﬂight, or a cutting process. If
the cooling process is realized as a result of the bodily dispositions responsible for perspiration, then it is
a functioning. If it is brought about as a result of the death of the organism, then it is not. The difference
is not in the type of process itself.
Third, that an entity has a function is supposed to play a role in explaining the existence of that
entity, or at least of some parts of that entity (this is Artiga’s TELEOLOGY desideratum). Assuming a
view of explanation that requires a causal component, it follows that dispositions are a good candidate
continuant entity to do this explaining, because they are centrally involved in the physical makeup and
causal behavior of the entities that possess them.
Fourth, we think that functions, when they exist, are both subject to causal inﬂuences and themselves
have a causal impact on the world via their manifestations, and dispositions satisfy both of these condi-
tions.
Fifth, and ﬁnally, the function of a thing is supposed to be in some sense fundamental or central to that
thing or to things of that kind. By identifying functions with dispositions we are tying the notion of a
thing’s having a function directly to that thing’s physical structure. On the assumption that some aspects
of a thing’s physical structure are fundamental to it, we are then tying functions to fundamental features
of their bearers by identifying those functions with (certain) dispositions.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
115
4.1.3. Functions as dispositions with an etiology
Functions in BFO 2.0 are dispositions which are the result of a certain kind of historical develop-
ment.15 In the biological case, a part or system in an organism has a function now if having that part or
system has contributed in the past to the survival and reproductive success of members (or ancestors of
members) of the species to which the organism belongs.16 It is not the physical structure and disposition
alone that determines an entity’s biological function, but rather the way in which physical structures of
the relevant type have affected the ﬁtness of their bearers and of their precursor organisms. Thus, when
we say that the function of the heart is to pump blood, we are saying this in virtue of our recognition of
the fact that organisms whose hearts have done this in the past have for this reason enjoyed enhanced
prospects of survival and reproductive success. In the artifact case, when we say that the function of a
calculator is to carry out various kinds of mathematical operations we are saying this because we know
that the item in question was intentionally designed and made by some intentional agent to do precisely
that.
5. Implications of the BFO elucidation of function
In this section we develop some of the implications of the BFO elucidation of function with special
attention to the ways in which changes in history can effect changes in function, and the persistence
conditions of function instances, especially in cases of transplant (such as the relocation of a watch
spring from one watch to another, or of a heart from one person to another).
5.1. An example of evolutionary change
The evolutionary view of biological function encoded in BFO implies that (i) physical structures
that currently have no function might have precursor physical structures that had a function, and that
(ii) a physical structure that currently has a function might have descendant physical structures of which
this is no longer the case. Moreover, (iii) physical structures that currently have one function could, in
the course of time, have descendant physical structures with additional or entirely different functions.17
As is well known, the processes of evolution are such that they often involve types of physical structure
being repurposed to new ends in the course of time. It is then sometimes difﬁcult to determine which
processes are the relevant functional ones on the basis of current knowledge.18
To see how this works consider the following example. Currently, what we can call the glycogen
system functions in the presence of certain enzymes to synthesize glycogen in amounts necessary to
15Note that ‘history’ is used in BFO in a technical sense: the history of a material entity is for BFO the sum of all pro-
cesses occurring in the spatiotemporal region occupied by that entity over the course of its existence. Thus we use ‘historical
development’ in what follows to avoid confusion with this usage.
16Millikan (1984) is a classic statement of the evolutionary view of biological function, while the introduction in Buller
(1999) provides a helpful overview. On biological systems – for instance the cardiovascular system – as parts of organisms see
Smith et al. (2003). Following the account of ‘canonical anatomical structures’ in Rosse and Mejino (2003), we may say that
a biological function is a function which inheres in an entity that is (i) part of an organism and (ii) exists and has the physical
structure it has as a result of the coordinated expression of that organism’s structural genes.
17Some recent research suggests that the appendix may be an example of a biological structure with just such a history,
having ﬁrst functioned in digestive processes, then become vestigial (and so lost this function), and yet later taken on a function
in immune responses to stomach illness (Laurin et al., 2011).
18Epistemological considerations of this sort seem to be a large part of the motivation behind Amundson and Lauder’s
(1994) criticism of etiological accounts of function. Our own view is that the ﬁrst task in accounting for function is to elucidate
correctly what functions are. This makes epistemological issues orthogonal to our main concern.

116
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
maintain blood glucose levels (Berg et al., 2002). Suppose that through some mutation a different system
develops that more successfully regulates the amount of glucose present in the blood. Imagine now that
under these conditions some organisms in the population continue to synthesize glycogen in the old way,
while some begin to take advantage of systems of the new type. The latter will then have a decreased
risk of developing a glycogen storage disease and will thereby enjoy an evolutionary advantage. It is
a consequence of our view that, in the initial generations after a mutation of this sort, even in those
organisms that can avail themselves of both the old and the new and more efﬁcient system, it will still
be the old system that has the function of regulating blood glucose. In course of time, however, on the
assumption that the new system proves evolutionarily advantageous, the new system will take over from
the old, and it will then be the new system that will have this function. This is in spite of the fact that
the physical structure of the original system, taken by itself, need not be changed in any way in the
organisms which survive to realize the corresponding dispositions. This is also in spite of the fact that
we have no way of knowing when, precisely, the switch occurs. Evolutionary changes are almost always
such that it is only retrospectively – often after many generations – that we are able to assert that the
change in question has occurred.
This example, which we take to illustrate a phenomenon that is relatively common in evolutionary
history, shows the crucial role played by the historical element in the BFO 2.0 elucidation of function.
Every function is a disposition, but for a disposition to be a function the relevant historical elements must
be in place as well – and what these historical elements are may be determined only in the course of
time, when we are able to see which of (for example) two alternative systems survives in a given species
and which becomes vestigial. We will see below that similar considerations apply also to the case of
artifactual functions.
5.2. A potential dilemma for the view of functions as dispositions with a history
The discussion above makes it necessary to amend one common way of characterizing BFO function
according to which it is the case that, because functions are dispositions, the loss of a function always
entails some physical change in its bearer.19 Certainly it is true that the loss of a disposition involves
a change of this sort. But this will not always be so in case of the loss of a function. The retained old
glycogen system still has the disposition to synthesize glycogen, but it is no longer the function of the
corresponding physical structures.
It will still be true that in almost every case a bearer’s losing a function is because of some physical
change in the bearer: it is because a heart has been severely punctured that it no longer has the function
to pump blood; it is because a fan heater has been crushed that it will no longer have the function to emit
heat. However, as the glycogen synthesis example once again shows, it is possible for a given disposition
of a given bearer to become or to cease to be a function of that bearer solely as a result of certain changes
in the bearer’s history.
We can now see how we can address an apparent dilemma in our approach, which might be formulated
as follows:
An entity can acquire a function through mere selection.
An entity cannot acquire a disposition through mere selection.
How then it is possible that every function is a disposition?
Another formulation is:
19See, e.g. the discussion by Arp et al. (2015, pp. 102–103).

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
117
An entity can acquire (or lose) a disposition only through some physical change in the entity.
An entity can acquire (or lose) a function without any physical change in the entity
How then is it possible that every function is a disposition?
5.2.1. Responding to the dilemma
The dilemma is resolved precisely through the BFO deﬁnition of a function as a disposition of a bearer
with a speciﬁc kind of historical development. In the biological case the answer is that dispositions that
were functions for an ancestor of a given organism (and so of its parts) can have ceased to be functions for
the current organism as a result of the fact that ancestors still more recent in time were not evolutionarily
successful as a result of possessing the dispositions in question. The glycogen example above is such a
case, and it illustrates how the mechanisms of historical selection themselves might bring it about that an
entity whose physical structure (and concomitant dispositions) remain unchanged from one generation
to the next may nevertheless gain or lose a function that is (or is not) realized by the physical structure
and dispositions in question.
The situation is trickier for artifacts. Whereas the gain or loss of biological function by a single phys-
ical structure will typically take place across successive generations of organisms belonging to the same
species, it is possible for a natural object (such as a stick, a tree, or a cave) to be assigned a use by
intentional agents merely as a result of their selecting the object for such use without any further change
to its physical structure.20 Does such a selection result in the object having a function in just the way that
ordinary artifacts that have been designed and manufactured do? To answer yes would be to imply that
a smooth rock selected from the lakeshore and used as a paperweight would exemplify the exact same
function universal as would a stone paperweight that had been intentionally designed and manufactured
for this purpose.
But there is an alternative position, which is to maintain instead that cases of novel use or repurposing
of an object do not amount to its acquiring a new function, but rather involve an already existing natural
object or artifact taking on a new role in the technical BFO sense of this term discussed in Section 4
above.21 Here and in what follows we adopt this second option and so reject the idea that the mere
ﬁnding and repurposing of an already existing entity amounts to that entity taking on a new artifactual
function.22
5.3. Function instances and transplant cases
We have been considering more speciﬁcally the conditions under which an instance of function can
come into or go out of existence. In some artifactual cases, for example hammers or chairs, it is the whole
object which is the bearer of the function. In other cases, however, and in particular in all biological
20Compare Dipert’s view (1993), according to which the artifactuality of an entity rests not on physical qualities we can
presently see but on features of the entity’s deliberative history.
21Artifacts that have been intentionally designed and made for one purpose can be selected for use in some other way by
intentional agents (such as an anvil that is repurposed for use as a doorstop or paperweight without undergoing any changes
in its physical structure). When portions of a drug, manufactured to serve the function of curing disease A, are discovered
to be effective in curing a second disease B, then these portions play the curing disease B role. Portions of the same drug
manufactured at a later stage with the intention of being used to cure disease B, in contrast, can properly be said to have the
corresponding function.
22For further consideration of this view see Section 7.1 below and our response to Marc Artiga’s introduction to this special
issue of Applied Ontology appended to this essay. We are indebted to Artiga and to an anonymous reviewer for pressing us for
clarity on this point. The position taken here is consistent with what is said about BFO function by Arp et al. (2015) and by
Smith et al. (2015). It revises some claims made by Spear and Smith (2015).

118
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
cases, we will require a distinction between the bearer of the function (such as a heart or lung) and the
organism of which this bearer is a proper part. An important question, now, is whether, in the latter sort
of case, an entity loses its function when it is removed from its circumcluding host, for example in a
case of transplantation.
For BFO, functions are continuants. Thus, like other continuants, they persist through time. An in-
dependent continuant such as a mouse persists as the same (numerically identical) mouse from the
beginning to the end of its existence, even while gaining and losing new parts and new qualities as it
develops and grows. Dependent continuants, too, persist through time from the BFO perspective, and
thus in particular so also do instances in the category function. As the mouse develops and grows so also,
in the normal course of events (the course of events typical or canonical for instances of this species),
does its heart, which initially grows larger and stronger until the mouse reaches its peak of cardiac ﬁtness
from where it then slowly descends to the point of cardiac arrest. Through all of this, the function of the
mouse’s heart remains identical, even though it is realized in different phases of the mouse’s life through
functionings (above all processes of pumping blood) which manifest characteristic differences in virtue
of increasing and decreasing cardiac capacities.
A watch spring, similarly, has a single identical function – of storing mechanical energy to power
a watch – from the beginning to the end of its existence, and this function remains in existence even
when the watch is taken apart for repair, and even when the remainder of the watch is destroyed (since
the spring retains exactly the dispositions it had when ﬁrst created, as is shown by the fact that these
dispositions are capable of being realized, for example, if the spring is transferred to a new housing).
It is for this reason that, when we discover intact stone artifacts, some of them dating back millions of
years, we can in very many cases not merely determine what functions they were initially designed to
serve, but also exercise these same functions in actions that we ourselves perform.
And so too, we now argue, for the biological case. The function of the mouse’s heart (this function
of this mouse’s heart) is preserved even when the heart is transplanted into another mouse. It would
be preserved even were it to be transplanted from the mouse to some cardiac chamber that functions
(perhaps for purposes of storage or of research) to preserve those physical features of the heart in virtue
of which it has the disposition to pump. The cardiac chamber preserves, in such a case, not merely the
disposition, but also the function of the particular heart in question.
6. Objections to the BFO/etiological view
In this section we respond to three objections to the BFO elucidation of function. We then consider in
Section 7 a direct challenge to the BFO identiﬁcation of functions with dispositions.
6.1. Etiology and the epiphenomenalism desideratum
A ﬁrst objection to the BFO view is that, because we reject Artiga’s criterion of EPIPHENOMENAL-
ISM, this means that we view functions as epiphenomenal. For BFO, however, functions are a special
subtype of dispositions, and to say that functions are dispositions is not to say that they are causally
inert. Indeed quite the contrary: dispositions and their realizations are paradigmatically caught up in
causal relations in nature, so that any function will itself be caught up in relations of being caused and of
causing other things. We thus need to distinguish two ways in which the term “epiphenomenal” might be
understood when applied to functions: as asserting (1) that for an entity to have a certain function it is not
necessary that there be current realizations of this function; or (2) that the function has no causal impact

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
119
in nature whatsoever. We accept (1) without hesitation as a simple consequence of our etiological view.
But our identiﬁcation of functions as a type of disposition, where dispositions are full-ﬂedged entities in
reality, allows us to reject (2) categorically.
6.2. ‘Function’ and ‘functioning’ in ordinary language
A second objection, now speciﬁcally aimed at the BFO identiﬁcation of functions as special sorts of
dispositions, reads as follows. Ordinary language draws a distinction between dispositions (continuants)
and disposition-realizing processes (occurrents). Thus, there is the disposition: being soluble and there is
the corresponding process of realization: dissolving. If functions are dispositions, then we would expect
there to be similar term pairs in ordinary language. If the functioning of the heart is the process indicated
by the verb ‘to pump’, then what is the correlated English nominal expression for the realizable attribute
or feature? Our response to this is two-fold.
First, while we do give some weight to considerations based on ordinary language when formulating
our ontological views, we hold that such considerations are of little force when making decisions as
to the correctness or incorrectness of these views themselves. Our reasons for holding that functions
are realizable entities turn on ontological arguments to the effect that what is functional exists both as
features of bearers and in the realization of those features in processes of functioning.
Second, while the function verb ‘to pump’ does not have an immediately correlated feature or attribute
term (analogous to ‘solubility’ for ‘to dissolve’ in English), we note that the disposition to pump is a
complex one, resting on a constellation of sub-dispositions for some of which there do indeed exist
English terms such as ‘ductility,’ ‘elasticity,’ ‘resistance,’ and so on. Thus we are not overly worried by
the lack of English nominal complements for verbs such as ‘to pump’ or ‘to provide oxygen’.
6.3. Processes and parsimony
The third objection is that BFO’s treatment of functions as dispositions with a history is redundant.
Since functions are characteristically realized in processes, would it not be more parsimonious to deﬁne
functions entirely in terms of processes? To this objection we reiterate the point already made above,
namely that there are many entities that clearly do have functions that are never realized, even when
the entire lifespan of the entity in question is considered. Even in simple cases such as a knife or a
hand there is a signiﬁcant sense in which they have functions even at times when these functions are
in no way being realized. Thus, while acknowledging that what is most conspicuous about functions
is their realization in functionings, we insist also that a full account of function that does justice to
the facts cannot coherently restrict itself to viewing functions only in terms of the ontological category
of processes. Some grounding in continuant features of the relevant entities is necessary, and we have
already provided reasons for thinking that dispositions are the best candidates to serve this purpose.
7. Normativity and malfunctioning
Röhl and Jansen (2014) have recently offered two further arguments directed speciﬁcally against the
thesis that a function is (a special subcategory of) disposition, a critique that is embedded in a larger
discussion of the recent literature on the ontology of functions.23
23Their critique is based on the elucidation of function in the BFO 2.0 Speciﬁcation by Smith et al. (2015) discussed above
rather than on the more recent formulation in by Arp et al. (2015). While we think the latter is more congenial to some of Röhl

120
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
7.1. The context-dependence objection
The ﬁrst turns on the fact that function ascriptions seem to be context dependent in a way that disposi-
tion ascriptions are not (Röhl and Jansen, 2014, p. 12). As they point out, a pair of chopsticks available
for use in a restaurant and a physically exactly similar pair of sticks lying in the woods may have all
their dispositions in common, yet the ﬁrst has the function of being an eating utensil while the second
does not.
Röhl and Jansen describe this case as illustrating a “central difference” between functions and dispo-
sitions. If this case is to provide an argument against the BFO thesis that functions are dispositions, then
we can imagine two ways in which such an argument might be formulated (see Table 1 below).
Both of these arguments fail, however, for the BFO elucidation of function says only that all functions
are dispositions. It does not say that all dispositions are functions. This means that just because two
entities have all their dispositions in common, it does not follow that they also have all their functions in
common (as was explained in some detail in Section 5.2.1 above). An artifact function is (i) a disposition
associated with (ii) a particular historical development of intentional selection or design – and the
chopsticks have, while the sticks in the woods lack, a historical development of the needed sort. We thus
reject the ﬁrst premise (P1) of Argument 1. In Argument 2, for reasons discussed in Section 5.2.1 above,
we reject the ﬁrst premise (P1′). The sticks in the woods do not gain a function in the BFO sense, but
rather take on what BFO calls a role. The chopstick role is optional for the sticks – its loss will in no
way affect their physical structure.24
7.2. The malfunction objection
Röhl and Jansen’s second challenge to the thesis that functions are a kind of disposition turns on the
question of whether functions depend for their existence on dispositions. One thing existentially depends
on another just in case the ﬁrst cannot exist without the second. Thus to say that John’s height depends
upon John is to say that if John did not exist his height would not exist either. On the other hand, a shape’s
being rectangular does not depend on its being a square, since it is possible for a rectangle to exist that
is not a square. According to the BFO elucidation of function as given in Section 4.1 above, however,
functions are not dependent on but rather identical to certain dispositions. It is thus not the thesis that
functions existentially depend on dispositions that underlies the BFO elucidation of function, yet it is
Table 1
Two formulations of the chopsticks objection
Chopsticks Argument 1
Chopsticks Argument 2
P1. If functions are dispositions, then two entities that have
all dispositions in common have all functions in common as
well.
P2. This is not true for the chopsticks and the sticks in the
above example.
C. It is not the case that functions are dispositions.
P1′. When the sticks described above are selected for use as
chopsticks and moved to a restaurant they gain a function.
P2′. If functions are dispositions, then to gain a function is
always to gain at least one new disposition.
P3′. Mere change of context cannot change the dispositions
that a thing has.
C′. Functions are not dispositions.
and Jansen’s concerns, it does retain the same core commitments against which their criticisms are addressed, in particular the
thesis that functions are dispositions.
24As noted in Section 5.2.1, for further discussion of this point, see our response to Artiga’s introduction to this special issue
of Applied Ontology, which is appended at the end of this paper.

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
121
this latter thesis that Röhl and Jansen strive to argue against. We can ignore this point here, however,
since on either reading it should still never be the case that a function exists (a thing “has a function”)
while the corresponding disposition is lacking.
Röhl and Jansen, however, think that malfunctioning provides precisely such a case, as they purport to
show through the example of a carcinomatous lung (Röhl and Jansen, 2014, p. 13). The normal function
of a lung is to provide oxygen to the body. When a lung is functioning normally, it has a disposition (or
collection of dispositions) that allow it to do this. In the case of a carcinomatous lung, however, there
will come a time where these dispositions no longer exist. Yet even then, Röhl and Jansen argue, it is
still the function of the lung to provide oxygen to the body. This, therefore, is for them a case where a
function exists (the lung “has the function” to do such and such) but the underlying dispositions do not.
Thus, they argue, the BFO elucidation of function must be rejected.
This elucidation however conforms to Röhl and Jansen’s criterion of SUPPORT, which requires that
functions be grounded in the physical structure of their bearers. It also conforms to NORMATIVITY
through the fact that this physical structure (and so the associated dispositions) is the result of an inten-
tional design or evolutionary process through which an entity came into (or is maintained in) existence
in order to realize processes of a certain sort. It thus seems to get a lot right even by Röhl and Jansen’s
criteria. So, how much of a challenge is the phenomenon of malfunctioning to this elucidation?
First, we note that functions are often realized along various dimensions to different degrees. Our legs
have the function to walk (or to serve walking), but sometimes they serve walking more or less quickly,
more or less surely, and so forth. Even where – as for example in the case of the human heart and its
function of pumping blood – there is an optimal range of functioning, it is still possible for a heart to be
functioning more or less well, including functioning outside of this range, at different times and along
different dimensions (for example as concerns regularity of pumping, amount of blood being pumped,
efﬁciency of pumping, rate of pumping, and so forth), and even (in case of transplantation) in different
organisms.
The same applies to dispositions in general: a disposition to pump could be at one time a disposition
to pump at different rates and with different degrees of vigor at different times. In each of these cases,
however, it is still a disposition to pump. Most cases of malfunction do not involve a total annihilation
of function, but only non-optimal functioning. There is no challenge to the identiﬁcation of function as
a subtype of disposition here. Indeed, the results of malfunctioning are just what one would expect if
functions were a kind of disposition: diminution of functioning is accompanied by a change in enduring
underlying disposition.
The only remaining candidate problem case arises when functioning completely and irreversibly
stops – for instance when the heart ceases to function entirely and the patient dies or when the heart
has been so severely damaged that the patient needs to be kept alive by means of some artiﬁcial heart.
7.2.1. Total malfunction
For total malfunction to cause problems for the BFO elucidation of function, the dispositions that
normally underlie the malfunction in question would need to have been completely destroyed, but in
such a way that the associated function can still rightly be said to exist. A case of this sort would be
one in which a function exists in the absence of any disposition with which it could be identiﬁed. We
will thus understand total or complete malfunction to mean just this: a case where the entity in question
has been physically damaged to the point where it no longer instantiates to any degree the dispositions
normally involved in its functioning.
Can there be a case of this sort where it still seems right to say that the bearer has the associated
function? Consider for example a case where the carcinoma in the lungs of a patient is so severe that the

122
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
lungs are incapable of providing oxygen to the body, yet the lungs (in some residual form) survive, and
the patient survives because he is still being kept alive by some artiﬁcial means. The relevant bearer, the
lungs, have completely lost the dispositions that normally underlie their functioning: these dispositions
no longer exist.
What, in such a case, is the correct story to tell about the function of the bearer? There seem to us to
be three salient ways of understanding such an entity’s relation to its function:
Option (1) is the view of Röhl and Jansen, according to which there still survives an instance of the
dependent particular function in such a case even when the disposition that would normally make the
realization of this function possible is completely absent. According to Röhl and Jansen, this function
is (i) essential to its bearer (and so is had by its bearer at any time when the bearer exists at all) and
yet (ii) externally grounded (so grounded in or dependent upon something other than the hitherto func-
tionally salient physical structures of the bearer). This then would provide a counterexample to the BFO
thesis that functions are a subtype of dispositions.
However, there are at least two further options for describing the case in hand, both of which provide
ways of understanding what happens when the dispositions underlying a function cease to exist which do
not posit the continued existence of an instance of function as a feature of the bearer under consideration
(in this case the lung).
Option (2) says that in a case such as this there is no longer an instance of either disposition or function
that inheres in the bearer in question. Both have been destroyed. What is the case is that the lungs in
question are supposed to have the instance-level function of providing oxygen to the body but in fact they
lack this function.25 What grounds this supposed to is the kind of thing that the bearer is, in this case:
an instance of the kind lung. On this view being an instance of a kind (such as lung, hand, hammer, and
so on) has normative entailments. Instances of a kind are supposed to have features canonical for things
of that kind, in particular the functions and dispositions centrally characteristic of the kind. A given
instance of a kind may, due to damage, lose these functions and dispositions, but insofar as it still is an
instance of that kind, it remains true of it that it is supposed to have them. A key assumption of this view
is that historical features and other properties of a completely malfunctioning lung are still sufﬁcient to
qualify it as an instance of the kind lung. We note in passing that some form of this assumption is shared
also by Röhl and Jansen.
Option (3) also says that in a case such as this there is no longer an instance of either disposition or
function that inheres in the bearer in question. Both have been destroyed. However, this view denies
that a completely and irreversibly malfunctioning lung can count as an instance of the kind lung. A rel-
atively natural line of reasoning suggests that once an instance of a functional kind such as lung has
been rendered completely unable to function as a lung, that entity is no longer an instance of the kind in
question.26 This view amounts to a rejection of the premise upon which Röhl and Jansen’s objection is
ultimately based, that a completely malfunctioning lung is still a lung. Options (2) and (3) both repre-
sent responses to the argument from complete malfunction that are consistent with the BFO thesis that
functions are dispositions.
7.2.2. Kinds and the deﬁnition of function
While reference to kinds or universals is not explicit in our elucidation of function, it bears repeating
that the BFO framework has a built-in commitment to the distinction between universals and particulars.
25Compare the formal treatment of the lacks relation by Ceusters et al. (2007). See also the discussion in Hoehndorf et al.
(2010).
26Compare Aristotle, On the Soul, 412b17 (Aristotle, 1985): An eye which cannot see “is no longer an eye, except in name,
just like an eye in stone or a painted eye.”

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
123
For BFO, functions are in every case functions of certain bearers (material entities), and if a function of
a given kind exists, then its bearer must instantiate some independent continuant biological or artifactual
universal. Moreover, fully specifying those universals whose instances bear functions – for example
placentas or carburetors – will require identifying the function that things of that kind perform. For
example, fully describing what lungs are will require identifying the characteristic functions of drawing
in oxygen, transmitting it to the bloodstream, exhaling waste gases, and so forth. Fully describing the
function of the lung will moreover require a description of the kinds of contexts in which lungs function –
for example as parts of a human body and in an environment satisfying certain basic conditions regarding
atmospheric pressure and so forth. In light of this we take reference to kinds to be unavoidable in almost
all talk of functions and take the question of whether or not a given thing has a function to be, at least in
part, a question of the kind of thing it is.27
7.3. Advantages of the BFO view of function
Clearly, therefore, BFO has no problem in withstanding Röhl and Jansen’s criticism. But are there rea-
sons to prefer the BFO view over the alternative view which they propose, to the effect that function and
disposition are disjoint categories? We can think of at least two. As discussed above, a virtue of the BFO
view to the effect that functions are dispositions is that it provides a clear way of understanding the sense
in which the function of a thing is a non-optional feature of that thing. While Röhl and Jansen share the
BFO view of functions as non-optional, their rejection of the view that functions are tied to the physical
structures of their bearers leaves it unclear exactly what makes them non-optional (or “essential,” in their
idiolect) without appeal to social constructionism or some other variant of epiphenomenalism. Another
virtue of the BFO view is that it can account for the causal efﬁcacy of function instances. When an
object has a certain function, that function has a causal impact on the world through its identity with a
certain disposition instance that is realized under appropriate circumstances. Conversely, when an object
does not realize its function (for example because it is completely malfunctioning in the strong sense
discussed above) this implies that something about the physical structure of the individual, speciﬁcally
some of its dispositions, has itself changed or been lost, and this explains its lack of causal efﬁcacy. This
is an advantage that the view of Röhl and Jansen lacks, since they are committed to positing instances
of function even in cases where these instances make no causal difference whatsoever.
Conclusion.
BFO is designed as a top-level domain-neutral ontology that can support the consistent
computational representation of empirical data of a maximally broad range of different types. Its success
in this regard rests at least in part on its methodology of ontological realism, whereby each of the cat-
egories acknowledged by BFO are defended as categories which exist (have instances) in reality. Thus
BFO encapsulates the view that there are instances of the kind function in reality, and that the function
of your heart to pump blood is one such instance. In the foregoing we have shown how thinking about
27The signiﬁcance of associated kinds and contexts for understanding function is explicitly acknowledged in the treatment of
function in the recent BFO guidebook (Arp et al., 2015), which elaborates on (Smith et al., 2015) by adding the phrases picked
out in bold in what follows:
A function is a special kind of disposition. It is a realizable entity whose realization is an end-directed activity of its
bearer that occurs because this bearer is (a) of a speciﬁc kind and (b) in the kind or kinds of contexts that it is made
or selected for. Thus a function is a disposition that exists in virtue of the bearer’s physical make-up, and this physical
make-up is something the bearer possesses because of how it came into being – either through natural selection (in the case
of biological entities) or through intentional design (in the case of artifacts). Roughly, the entities in question came into
being in order to perform activities of a certain sort, called “functionings” (Arp et al., 2015, p. 102).

124
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
the issues surrounding the ontology of function in the BFO framework leads to an etiological view of
functions as dispositions and have articulated some of the implications of such a view. We believe that
we have shown satisfactorily that the BFO account of function can respond to a number of objections to
etiological accounts, and we believe that it is robust enough to deal with a range of related criticisms of
etiological accounts of function that have been put forward in the literature.
The bearer of a function for BFO is in every case an independent continuant. It is not an objection
to BFO that ‘function’ is sometimes used in other ways, for example to refer to functional processes
(when, for example, we smash two randomly selected stones together to light a ﬁre). This is a simple
consequence of the fact that BFO is a controlled vocabulary that is designed to provide a regimentation
of the way in which general categories are represented that will support interoperability of the domain
ontologies deﬁned in its terms. If, on the other hand, we were confronted with a case where we needed to
address data concerning such putatively functional processes of a sort which could not be accommodated
on the basis of the existing set of BFO categories, then we would consider modifying BFO accordingly
in reﬂection of our commitment to fallibilism.
A related concern turns on BFO’s treatment of persons and roles. President Obama the ofﬁce-holder
and Barack Obama the organism are for BFO one and the same entity. In its treatment of functions BFO
assumes further that – leaving aside certain artifactual examples such as bacteria speciﬁcally cultured
to address a certain purpose – only proper parts of organisms can have functions in the BFO sense.
How then can BFO deal with what are called the “powers and functions” of the President? How are we
to deal with ofﬁce-holders and organizational entities more generally, where it is not tempting to hold
that the putative functions involved would be possessed by their bearers in virtue of the latter’s physical
structure? BFO has been applied thus far almost always in support of ontologies in scientiﬁc domains
such as biomedicine or chemistry. Now, however, as BFO is applied in areas such as organizational
management and also in intelligence, defense and security, issues relating to the obligations and powers
of ofﬁce-holders are being addressed (Smith et al., 2013).
Acknowledgements
We thank Adrien Barton, Randall Dipert, Ludger Jansen, Neil Williams, and three anonymous referees
for helpful comments and criticisms. We would also like to thank Marc Artiga for his introduction and
critical comments on the paper, and Alan Ruttenberg for many valuable contributions.
Appendix. Response to Artiga
In the foregoing we have developed the BFO view of functions as dispositions whose bearers have a
certain type of etiology. Speciﬁcally, according to BFO 2.0, f is a function means:
(1) f is a disposition,
(2) f exists in virtue of its bearer’s physical make-up
and
(3) this physical make-up is something that this bearer possesses because it came into being, either
through evolution (in the case of natural biological entities) or through intentional design (in the
case of artifacts), in order to realize processes of a certain sort (Smith et al., 2015).

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
125
We claim that this elucidation satisﬁes Artiga’s desiderata of NORMATIVITY, ACCIDENT, and
TELEOLOGY, but hold that Artiga and others are ultimately mistaken in applying to functions the
criterion of EPIPHENOMENALISM. Artiga, in his introduction to this special issue, presses us on two
main issues, which we deal with in turn.
Total malfunction.
The ﬁrst concerns what we say concerning what makes function ascriptions true
in the case of entities that are completely malfunctioning in such a way that the relevant dispositions
to function have been destroyed. The speciﬁc challenge raised by Artiga is not that our solution is
unsuccessful, but rather that it tacitly concedes that functions are not really or not essentially dispositions
after all, making our view indistinguishable from standard etiological accounts, for which the truth-
maker for x has function f when x is completely malfunctioning would be just the relevant etiology
or history of x or of xs. He wants to conclude from this that we must admit “a sort of normativity that
exclusively depends on history and which is possessed by any item irrespective of its actual physical
make-up” (Artiga, 2011, pp. 8–9).
Focusing on Artiga’s conclusion in the case of totally or completely malfunctioning entities (where rel-
evant dispositions have been completely destroyed) we are tasked with explaining the non-dispositional
source of the normativity of functions in a way that still depends on the current physical make-up of
the bearer. In responding to Röhl and Jansen’s criticisms, we have made it clear that we want to avoid
positing a concrete instance of function inhering in a bearer in those cases where the bearer possess no
dispositions that could, even in principle, realize that function. The entities we have to work with in
providing a response to Artiga are: (i) the remaining physical structure of the entity itself (the lung in
our exchange with Röhl and Jansen), (ii) the evolutionary history of that structure as traced through its
current possessor’s ancestors and its role in their evolutionary success, and (iii) the kind or kinds of thing
that the entity is an instance of.
We acknowledge the possibility that a lung might be so physically damaged that it not only completely
ceases functioning as a lung but even that it ceases to be a lung at all. We take it that the case where the
physical structure of the lung has been completely altered by disease or time such that only a mass of
lung cells remain in the chest cavity is no longer a case where we are dealing with a lung properly
so called, and so no longer a case where it is true even that the mass of cells is supposed to have the
disposition (and so function) to provide oxygen to the body, let alone that it actually has that function.
However, we also acknowledge the possibility of an intermediate state, where the physical structure
of the lung has been too incapacitated to continue instantiating the dispositions responsible for its func-
tioning, but not so damaged as to cause the entity in question to no longer instantiate the universal lung.
If we call the concrete completely dysfunctional (and so relevant dispositionless) lung l, then our view
is that it is false to say that l has the function to provide oxygen to the body where this means that there
is a concrete functional property instantiated in the lung itself. What we think is true is the assertion
that l is supposed to have the function to provide oxygen to the body, which on our view entails that l
is supposed to have the relevant disposition involved in providing oxygen to the body. In this case the
normative claim is grounded both in the etiology (history) of the entity in question, and in its physical
structure, which, though impaired, is still the physical structure of a lung. Against Artiga’s suggestion
above, the normativity in this case does not depend “exclusively” on the history, but rather both on the
history and on the fact that the entity under consideration still has enough determinate physical structure
to count as a lung and so as a descendant of past lungs whose possessing certain additional structures
and dispositions played a role in the evolutionary success of the organisms of which they were parts.
We thus have a non-dispositional source of normativity that depends, at least in part, on the physical
makeup of the entity in question, and so – against the conclusion drawn by Artiga, no need “to add a

126
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
non-dispositional category for a property that gives rise to normativity and which is independent of the
bearer’s current physical make-up” (p. 9).
Naturefacts, repurposed artifacts, and novelty.
The second challenge Artiga raises is connected with
the possibility of artifactual functions that come into existence solely as the result of intentionally select-
ing a natural object (what Artiga also calls a “naturefact”) or repurposing an already existing artifact. An
example of these would be the sticks taken from the woods and intentionally used as chopsticks (where
the physical properties of the sticks are assumed to already coincide perfectly with those necessary for
chopsticks) already proposed by Röhl and Jansen and discussed by us in Section 7.1. Artiga points out
that examples such as these do not sit well with the requirement that the relevant physical structure
underlying the function “came into being” in order to realize processes of certain sorts. Here Artiga’s
challenge can be read as a direct challenge to our deﬁnition: there are examples of artifact functions that
the deﬁnition does not recognize so it is extensionally inadequate.
Artiga’s objection can be understood as turning the chopsticks example to a different end: the sticks
from the woods are found by someone, recognized as dispositionally suited for use as chopsticks, and
then intentionally selected for this purpose. As Artiga points out, one of BFO’s criteria for a disposition
to count as a function is that the physical make-up that instantiates it must be “something that [its]
bearer possesses because it came into being ...in order to realize processes of a certain sort”. “Came
into being” here strongly suggests that a functional disposition is one whose existence helps to causally
explain the existence of the entity, or at least of the physical structure, that it is a disposition of, which is
what Artiga’s TELEOLOGY desideratum for function requires. Indeed, read in this way our elucidation
makes satisfying the teleology desideratum constitutive of something’s counting as a function at all. This
is a problem, however, since the dispositions (and instantiating physical structures) of the sticks in the
woods did not “come into being” in order to realize any particular processes. They are not the result of
natural selection, and they pre-exist the human intention to utilize them as chopsticks. If this is right, then
the class of entities that Artiga calls “naturefacts”, as well as repurposed artifacts (anvils intentionally
used as doorstops) pose a challenge to our elucidation. Sections 5.2.1 and 7.1 above discuss this issue to
some extent. Our considered view is that, when sticks from the woods are merely intentionally selected
to be used as chopsticks, then they do not take on or have a function at all in the BFO sense, but rather a
role.
Artiga suggests that satisfying the desideratum of TELEOLOGY according to which the function
of a thing helps to explain the existence of that thing seems to come into conﬂict with satisfying an
additional desideratum, which he calls the desideratum of NOVELTY. This requires that an account of
artifactual function be able to handle innovative or atypical artifacts such as the chopsticks taken from
the woods. Indeed, Artiga goes so far as to suggest that there may be a fundamental conﬂict in theories of
function, such that any theory that satisﬁes teleology will fail to satisfy novelty, and conversely. If such
a fundamental conﬂict really does exist then it would be as good a sign as any that there are two distinct
categories of thing under investigation. The etiological account of functions as dispositions that we are
offering here is able to account for both biological and artifactual functions, so long as the functions
in question satisfy the TELEOLOGY desideratum. In the biological case, it seems unproblematic to
assume that the physical structures and dispositions currently realizing a function in an organism came
into being as a result of evolutionary forces related to the survival and reproduction of organisms of
the relevant kind. In the artifactual case, the physical structures and dispositions currently realizing a
function in an artifact can be seen as coming into being causally as a result of intentional design and
manipulation: any artifact whose status and functioning as an artifact depends on physical manipulation
or reorganization of its parts conforms to this desideratum. In light of these considerations our view is

A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
127
that apparent cases of functioning that fail to conform to the TELEOLOGY desideratum do not involve
functions at all, but rather roles (and concomitant dispositions) of the entities in question.
We provided a statement of the current BFO 2.0 elucidation of role in Section 4 above. When a thing
has a role it may, in virtue of this fact take on certain powers, duties, or obligations; it may acquire new
dispositions to support the sorts of activities associated with the role. But roles do not satisfy anything
like Artiga’s TELEOLOGY desideratum: the fact that a man is a lawyer in no way explains why he
exists, and the fact that mitochondria play a certain role in an experiment equally does not explain why
they exist; yet the roles these entities have in those contexts will make them appear to have functions of
various sorts. The same could be said of naturefacts and of (merely intentionally) repurposed artifacts
generally. These things do not have functions in the BFO sense; but rather roles which, precisely because
they do not play any part in explaining the existence of the entities that bear them, are entities of a
different kind.
We are thus able to embrace our etiological view of functions as dispositions and thereby satisfy the
criteria of TELEOLOGY, NORMATIVITY, and ACCIDENT, while identifying a separate family of
entities, namely entities playing certain roles, which are able to satisfy the demands of NOVELTY. In
this way we resolve the apparent impasse in theories of function between those that satisfy teleology,
normativity and accident on the one hand, and those that satisfy novelty on the other. At the same time
we defend ourselves against Artiga’s criticism to the effect that BFO falls short of providing a uniﬁed
elucidation of function of a sort that is applicable to both biological and artifactual functions. This
objection would gain a toehold only if chopsticks and naturefacts in general must be assigned to the
category of function on our account. However, as we have just argued, this is not the case.
References
Amundson, R. & Lauder, G.V. (1994). Function without purpose: The uses of causal role function in evolutionary biology.
Biology and Philosophy, 9, 443–469. doi:10.1007/BF00850375.
Aristotle (1985). The Complete Works of Aristotle (Vol. 2). J. Barnes (Ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arp, R., Smith, B. & Spear, A. (2015). Building Ontologies with Basic Formal Ontology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Artiga, M. (2011). Re-organizing organizational accounts of function. Applied Ontology, 6, 105–124.
Ashburner, M., Ball, C.A., Blake, J.A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry, J.M., Davis, A.P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S.S., Ep-
pig, J.T., Harris, M.A., Hill, D.P., Issel-Tarver, L., Kasarskis, A., Lewis, S., Matese, J.C., Richardson, J.E., Ringwald, M.,
Rubin, G.M. & Sherlock, G. (2000). Gene ontology: Tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nature Genetics, 25(1), 25–29.
doi:10.1038/75556.
Berg, J.M., Tymoczko, J.L. & Styer, L. (2002). Biochemistry (5th ed.). New York: W H Freeman.
Bigelow, J. & Pargetter, R. (1987). Functions. Journal of Philosophy, 84, 181–196. doi:10.2307/2027157.
Buller, D. (Ed.) (1999). Function, Selection, and Design Albany. NY: SUNY Press.
Buller, D.J. (1998). Etiological theories of function: A geographical survey. Biology and Philosophy, 13, 505–527. doi:10.1023/
A:1006559512367.
Ceusters, W., Elkin, P. & Smith, B. (2007). Negative ﬁndings in Electronic Health Records and biomedical ontologies: A realist
approach. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 76, 326–333. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.02.003.
Cummins, R. (1975). Functional analysis. Journal of Philosophy, 72, 741–765. doi:10.2307/2024640.
Díaz-Herrera, P. (2006). What is a biological function? In Proceedings of FOIS 2006 (pp. 128–140).
Dipert, R. (1993). Artifacts, Art Works, and Agency. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Ellis, B. & Liese, C. (1994). Dispositional essentialism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 72(1), 27–45. doi:10.1080/
00048409412345861.
Fara, M. (2005). Dispositions and habituals. Noûs, 39, 43–82.
Gilson, E. (1984). From Aristotle to Darwin and Back Again: A Journey in Final Causality, Species, and Evolution. San
Francisco: Ignatius Press.
Goldfain, A., Smith, B. & Cowell, L.G. (2011). Towards an ontological representation of resistance: The case of MRSA. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics (Feb.), 44(1), 35–41. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.02.008.

128
A.D. Spear et al. / Functions in Basic Formal Ontology
Handﬁeld, T. (Ed.) (2009). Dispositions and Causes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hoehndorf, R., Ngomo, A.-C.N. & Kelso, J. (2010). Applying the functional abnormality ontology pattern to anatomical func-
tions. Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 1, 4. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-1-4.
Krohs, U. & Kroes, P. (2009). Functions in Biological and Artiﬁcial Worlds: Comparative Philosophical Perspectives. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Laurin, M., Everett, M.L. & Parker, W. (2011). The cecal appendix: One more immune component with a function disturbed
by post-industrial culture. The Anatomical Record, 294(4), 567–579. doi:10.1002/ar.21357.
Lewis, D. (1997). Finkish dispositions. The Philosophical Quarterly, 47, 143–158. doi:10.1111/1467-9213.00052.
Leunissen, M. (2010). Explanation and Teleology in Aristotle’s Science of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lowe, E.J. (2006). The Four-Category Ontology. A Metaphysical Foundation for Natural Science. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lowe, E.J. (2010). On the individuation of powers. In A. Marmodoro (Ed.), The Metaphysics of Powers: Their Grounding and
Their Manifestations (pp. 8–26). New York: Routledge.
Millikan, R. (1984). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mizoguchi, R., Kitamura, Y. & Borgo, S. (2012). Towards a uniﬁed deﬁnition of function. In M. Donnelly and G. Guizzardi
(Eds.), Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS 2012) (pp. 103–116). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Mossio, M., Saborido, C. & Moreno, A. (2009). An organisational account of biological functions. British Journal for Philos-
ophy of Science, 60, 813–841. doi:10.1093/bjps/axp036.
Mumford, S. (1996). Conditionals, functional essences, and Martin on dispositions. The Philosophical Quarterly, 46(182),
86–92. doi:10.2307/2956310.
Röhl, J. & Jansen, L. (2014). Why functions are not special dispositions: An improved classiﬁcation of realizables for top-level
ontologies. Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 5, 27. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-5-27.
Rosse, C. & Mejino, J.L.V. (2003). A reference ontology for bioinformatics: The foundational model of anatomy. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 36, 478–500. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2003.11.007.
Searle, J. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press.
Smith, B. (2005). Against fantology. In J.C. Marek and M.E. Reicher (Eds.), Experience and Analysis (pp. 153–170). Vienna:
HPT&ÖBV.
Smith,
B.
(2012).
Classifying
processes:
An
essay
in
applied
ontology.
Ratio,
25(4),
463–488.
doi:10.1111/
j.1467-9329.2012.00557.x.
Smith, B., et al. (2015). Basic Formal Ontology 2.0: Speciﬁcation and user’s guide. Available at: https://github.com/
BFO-ontology/BFO, accessed December 14, 2015.
Smith, B., Malyuta, T., Rudnicki, R., Mandrick, W., Salmen, D., Morosoff, P., Duff, D.K., Schoening, J. & Parent, K. (2013).
IAO-Intel: An Ontology of Information Artifacts in the Intelligence Domain. In K.B. Laskey and P.C.G. Costa (Eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Semantic Technologies for Intelligence, Defense, and Security (STIDS
2013), Fairfax, VA, CEUR Workshop Proceedings (Vol. 1097, pp. 33–40).
Smith, B., Papakin, I. & Munn, K. (2003). Bodily systems and the modular structure of the human body. In Proceedings of
the 9th Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. Lecture Notes on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Vol. 2780, pp. 86–90),
Berlin: Springer.
Spear, A.D. (2006). Ontology for the 21st century: An introduction with recommendations. Available at: http://www.ifomis.
org/bfo/documents/manual.pdf.
Spear, A.D. & Smith, B. (2015). Deﬁning ‘function’. In Third International Workshop on Deﬁnitions in Ontologies. Available
at: https://sites.google.com/site/defsinontos2015/accepted-papers, accessed May 9, 2016.
Wouters, A. (2005). The function debate in philosophy. Acta Biotheoretica, 53, 123–151. doi:10.1007/s10441-005-5353-6.

