
functional OTOLOGY 
THE PRACTICE OF AUDIOLOGY 

unctional 
OTOLOGY 
THE PRACTICE OF 
AUDIOLOGY 
By MORRIS F. HELLER, M.D. 
Assistant AUending Otolaryngologist for Audiology, Chief of the 
Audiology Clinic, The Mount Sinai Hospital, New York. 
with 
Bernard M. Anderrnan, M.A. 
and Ellis E. Singer, M.A. 
SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, LLC 

Copyright, 1955 
Springer Science+Business Media New York 
Originally published by Springer Publishing Company, Inc. in 1955 
Softcoverreprint ofthe hardcoverist edition 1955 
ISBN 978-3-662-39162-4 
ISBN 978-3-662-40154-5 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-40154-5 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
Lihrary of Congress Catalog Card Numher: 55-12218 

PREFACE 
This book has been written to show how the auditory func-
tional examination and the rehabilitation of the acoustically 
handicapped patient can be integrated into otological prac-
tice. The scope and operation of large audiology centers 
of hospitals and universities are also considered. 
The developments in audio-communication have been 
enormaus during the past ten or twenty years. Similarly, 
the general interest in hearing has increased, as shown for 
instance by such terms as high fidelity an dstereophonic sound 
systems. 
Specifically, industries and the military are concerned 
about injurious noise causing darnage and loss of acoustic 
function; school systems and departments of health aim at 
early detection of hearing Iosses and at their correction. The 
problems connected with hearing are being investigated by 
otologists, pathologists, physiologists, psychologists, physicists, 
electro-engineers, audiologists, teachers of lip reading and 
speech, and teachers of the deaf. 
These trends and their results are changing the practice 
of otology. The function of hearing is now probed and 
tested more easily, more exactly and more comprehensively 
than before. There is greater promise for alleviation of the 
handicap of deafness. The physician is expected to examine 
his patients with otic disease so that he can evaluate the 
pathology and the impairment of hearing which is the 
result of the pathology. 
V 

vi 
PREFACE 
To make this book as widely useful as possible, effort has 
been made to take nothing for granted. The testing area is 
described as weil as the equipment and how to use it and 
take care of it. Though technical proficiency and proven 
routines are shown to be necessary, the emphasis is on the 
judicious application and combination of tests and their 
relation to all other phases of the examination and diagnosis. 
The otologist must be able to determine whether a hearing 
loss is of organic causation or a manifestation of psychologi-
cal problems of the patient; whether a child is deaf, or 
whether other organic factors exist that make it appear 
that a child cannot speak or hear. By showing how to pro-
duce detailed and meaningful audiograms of many kinds of 
hearing loss, their correct interpretation is explained also. 
The ultimate purpose of this book is to aid the physician 
and others participating in the field of functional otology 
in determining the rehabilitative requirements of the 
patient, how they shall be met, and who will institute the 
program of rehabilitation. 
The indications for medical and surgical therapy are not 
included, as these are readily found in the available 
literature. 
Two associates have contributed to this book, and I am 
happy to thank them for their participation. Bernard M. 
Anderman wrote the chapters on Speech Audiometry and 
on Hearing Aids which includes a timely description of 
transistor hearing aids. Ellis E. Singer wrote the important 
chapters on Voice and Speech Production, Speech Devia-
tions in Conductive Deafness and in Perceptive Deafness, 
and on Auditory Rehabilitation. 
New York, N. Y. 
October 1955 
MüRRIS F. HELLER, M.D. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: 
For arrangements made with various publishing houses 
and authors whereby certain (copyrighted) material was 
permitted to be reprinted, acknowledgments are gratefully 
made. 
To I. J. Hirsh and to Wayne University, publishers of 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, and to the 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, publishers of The Measure-
ment of Hearing, for letting us reprint the Auditory Test 
Lists W-1, W-2, and W-22. 
To the Annals Publishing Company for letting us reprint 
(1) the Iist of equipment and supplies, in Chapter 3, and 
the chronology of study and care, at the end of the book, 
both taken from a paper by Heller and Lindenberg pub-
lished in the Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngol-
ogy; (2) portians of "Tinnitus aurium in normal hearing 
persons" by Heller and Bergman published also in the 
Annals. 
To the American Medical Association for material taken 
from "Evaluation of deafness of non-organic origin" by 
Heller and Lindenberg, published in the A.M.A. Archives 
of Otolaryngology. 
To the Bureau of Handicapped Children, Department of 
Health, New York City, for its "Recommended Standards 
for Audiology Centers" the substance of which forms the 
second chapter of this book. 
vzz 

CONTENTS 
Preface 
1 Office Testing Area 
2 Audiology Centers 
3 Equipment 
4 The Patient's History • 
5 Pure Tone Audiometry . 
6 Recruitment 
7 Deafness of N onorganic Origin 
8 Tuning Forks and Bars 
9 Tinnitus 
I 0 Infants and Children 
11 Speech Audiometry 
12 Hearing Aids 
13 Voice and Speech Production 
14 Speech Deviations in Conductive Deafness 
15 Speech Deviations in Perceptive Deafness 
16 Auditory Rehabilitation 
. . . . . . 
Bibliography 
Index 
V 
1 
6 
14 
31 
45 
65 
81 
94 
100 
110 
118 
149 
175 
187 
193 
201 
2ll 
217 
tX 

functional OTOLOGY 
THE PRACTICE OF AUDIOLOGY 

1------------------------------
OFFICE TESTING AREA 
The noise level of a quiet domestic dwelling is about 35 
to 40 decibels. The noise level of a relatively quiet business 
office may vary from 40 to 50 decibels. In a noisier area the 
level may be as much as 70 decibels. Heavy industry, rivet-
ing, chipping, caulking, and drilling in compressed air will 
produce noise levels well in excess of 100 decibels. 
It is apparent that testing people's hearing at different 
noise levels will result in obtaining different thresholds of 
hearing. Day in and day out we who have normal hearing 
modify our voice volume depending upon the loudness of 
the environmental masking noise above which we must talk 
in order to be heard. High ambient noise levels mask the 
hearing, and the hearing threshold of the moment is altered 
depending upon the masking level. When testing hearing, 
the ambient noise level should therefore be reduced so that 
it will not materially affect the test findings. An ambient 
noise level of less than 30 decibels can be discounted as a 
masking factor for clinical testing and can be obtained with-
out too much constructional difficulties. 
Although in ordinary daily living hearing is not per-
formed in artificially created quiet surroundings, we can find 
the maximum acuity of an ear only under quiet and con-
1 

2 
OFFICE TESTING AREA 
trolled conditions. If all the factors in testing are constant 
except the patients themselves, we have a stable starting 
point. In addition, the same patient may be tested at inter-
vals over many years; if all external factors remain constant, 
the stability or changes in the test results will be of real 
significance. 
Two adjoining rooms, each of modest size, are desirable; 
one for the patient and the other for the observer and the 
equipment. A cubicle for the patient is not as satisfactory. 
A one-way vision window, installed directly to the side of 
the seated patient and permitting a direct view by the tester 
is decidedly advantageous. Most patients are more relaxed 
when they think they are not being observed, and the pa-
tient's spontaneaus behavior at times offers useful clues 
revealing his personality and reliability. The sound damped 
room in which the patient sits can be approximately 8' x 8' 
x 4'. This is large enough to permit pure tone audiometry 
with head phones, free field speech hearing testing, and 
hearing aid fitting. A somewhat larger room will allow space 
for testing infants and young children which requires addi-
tional equipment. These tests, such as galvanic skin response 
audiometry and peep show audiometry, can also be per-
formed in an untreated room; generally, the clinical problern 
is to determine whether these little patients are severely deaf-
ened or their hearing is within near-normal values. 
The Sound Treated Room 
The walls of the sound-treated test room can be of einder 
block or plaster to which is attached some material that 
effectively sound damps the room. There are several ma-
terials which satisfactorily attenuate noise. 
The author built his own sound damped room with only 

THE SOUND TREATED ROOM 
3 
a little architectural advice and with the assistance of un-
skilled labor. Strips of wood, l" x 2" and 2" x 2", known as 
furring, were nailed to the walls, horizontally at the junc-
tion of the walls and the ceiling, vertically at the junction 
of adjoining walls. 2" x 2" strips were nailed low down on 
the walls, horizontally. By this means frames were formed 
in depth equal to the thickness of the attenuating material, 
which in this instance was fiber glass. 
Fiber glass boards are available 48" x 24" x 2". They are 
light in weight and are easily cut with a knife or scissors. 
Gloves were worn when handling the board, as the glass 
spicules rub off and stick into the skin. The boards were af-
fixed to the walls and ceiling within the wooden frames with 
appropriate adhesive paste, which can be purchased with the 
fiber glass. 
An inexpensive cotton fabric which blended with the 
office decor was used to cover the fiber glass on the walls and 
ceiling. The fabric was stapled to the furring strips, covering 
all construction, except for outlets and window. Cut-outs in 
the walls were made for electrical oultets, for leads to and 
from the testing equipment and for a window, approxi-
mately 2' x 2'. 
A free field speaker baffle, described in Chapter 3, was in-
stalled within this room during the course of construction. 
The baffle was attached to the ceiling about eight feet from 
the patient's position and the speaker was beamed directly 
at the patient. A portable corner baffle is suitable, also. The 
choice of baffle may be dictated by the available space in the 
room. The speaker should be installed within the baffle in 
such a manner that it can be removed for repairs without 
making it necessary to remove the cabinet. The cabinet was 
lined with fiber glass in order to dampen unwanted reflec-
tion of sound from the walls of the baffle. 
The door also was treated with the fiber glass. Special 

4 
OFFICE TESTING AREA 
doors and their jambs are commercially available; these 
have a sound seal along the bottom of the door, which auto-
matically drops down when the door is closed and seals the 
door and floor. Weather stripping attached to the edges of 
the door produces an inexpensive but somewhat less effective 
seal. 
The floor may also be sound treated. The attenuating 
material is laid on the floor and a metal grill placed over it. 
Carpeting is used to cover the grill. 
If the remainder of the office is generally quiet, a room 
so constructed should have an ambient noise Ievel of 30 de-
cibels or less. The noise Ievel should be measured after the 
furniture has been put into the room. 
To ventilate such a room without increasing the noise 
Ievel may present a problem. An induction and retum ven-
tilating and cooling system is expensive and may be noisy. 
The installation of air ducts requires additional openings 
in the room which tend to nullify the effort made to obtain 
sufficient dampening. If the room is about as large as pre-
viously described, ordinary electric fans which operate when 
the room is vacant, though less than ideal, are serviceable. 
The ambient decibel value of the room should be in-
cluded in reports of the test findings. This is important 
when tests are compared which were performed on one 
patient at several different places. 
The Equipment Room 
The equipment room is immediately adjacent to the 
sound treated room. The equipment itself is grouped about 
the one-way vision window, so that the observer performing 
the tests can manipulate the apparatus easily while observ-
ing the patient. 

THE EQUIPMENT ROOM 
5 
This room should be !arger than the other as additional 
uses are made of it. Some of the equipment will be used 
during the dass work of auditory rehabilitation. Glasses con-
sist of groups of 4 to 6 patients and a teacher. 
This room need not be sound-treated. One of the advan-
tages of such a "live" room is that during auditory training 
periods the patients will be listening with their hearing aids 
under environmental conditions more like those with which 
they are familiar. lf patients learn to use hearing aids at low 
ambient levels, which is a more comfortable environment 
for hearing with amplification, they will be more distressed 
by the higher levels of the everyday "live" situations. 

2-----------------------------
AUDIOLOGY CENTERS 
Large audiology centers are usually affiliated with hos-
pitals or universities, carry a heavy case load, and are con-
cerned also with teaching and research programs. Such 
centers require an appreciable amount of space and con-
struction. The following description of an audiology center 
is based on recommendations of the N ew York City Depart-
ment of Health.* 
The standards were developed, with the assistance of an 
advisory committee, as a guide for hospitals that are inter-
ested in developing audiology centers. Although the recom-
mended standards relate to the care of children and youth, 
it is not intended that the audiology centers limit themselves 
to their care. The advisory committee was of the opinion 
that the "team method" is necessary in such centers, namely, 
that the professional personnel must be brought together 
and work together. 
Functions of an Audiology Center 
It aids in the education of the community regarding the 
prevention of hearing loss, by understanding the causes of 
" Recommended Standards for Audiology Centers, Bureau of Handicapperl 
Children, Helen M. Wallace, M.D., Director, Department of Health, New 
York City, 1953 (mimeographed). 
6 

PERSONNEL 
7 
hearing problems and the need for early detection, treat-
ment, training and rehabilitation. 
It provides services in which children and youth who have 
or are suspected of having defective hearing can be exam-
ined, diagnosed and treated. 
It provides services for children and youth whose hearing 
loss necessitates special instruction andjor the use of a hear-
ing aid. 
Recommended Personnel. Patient-Personnel Ratios 
A. Director 
The Director or Coordinator of the auditory center, pre-
ferably full time, will serve as the administrator, responsible 
for the maintenance of a high quality of service and for the 
coordination of the work of each member of the staff. The 
director or coordinator should be a physician, preferably an 
otolaryngologist, or an audiologist. The latter must hold an 
Advanced Certificate in Hearing issued by the American 
Speech and Hearing Association (A.S.H.A.) or equivalent. 
B. Medical Stafj 
(1) One or more qualified otologists for the complete 
otological evaluation of patients. One otologist should see no 
more than twelve patients per three-hour session. 
(2) One or more qualified pediatricians for the complete 
pediatric evaluation of patients. One pediatrician should see 
no more than twelve patients per three-hour session. 
(3) Consultants in the fields of neurology, orthodontia, 
orthopedic surgery, plastic surgery, psychiatry, etc. These 
should be readily available to the staff of the audiology 
center. Qualification: Diplomates of the respective specialty 
board or physicians who have the training and experience 

8 
A UDIOLOGY CENTERS 
necessary for admission to the examination of the respective 
boards. 
C. Non-Medical Professional Staff 
(1) A minimum of two full-time audiologists, each seeing 
an average of four to six patients a day. Qualification: Must 
meet the requirements for the Basic Certificate in Hearing 
issued by the A.S.H.A. 
(2) A minimum of two audiometric technicians, each 
seeing an average of twenty patients per day. Qualifications: 
Must meet the requirements for the Basic Certificate in 
Hearing issued by the A.S.H.A. 
(3) A minimum of two hearing therapists, one of whom 
should have had experience in the education of the deaf. 
Each therapist should see no more than twenty-five patients 
per day in individual and group therapy. Qualifications: 
Must meet the requirements for the Basic Certificate in 
Hearing issued by the A.S.H.A. plus the certification re-
quirements set up by the Conference of Executives of the 
American Schools for the Deaf. 
(4) A minimum of two speech therapists, each seeing no 
more than twenty-five patients per day in individual and 
group therapy. Qualifications: Must meet the requirements 
for the Basic Certificate in Speech issued by the A.S.H.A. 
(5) A psychologist. The hospital should have a psychol-
ogy department which meets professional standards. The 
psychologist assigned to the audiology center should be well-
grounded in the problems arising from disorders of com-
munication. Preferably, he should be trained in education 
of the handicapped child. 
(6) At least one full-time social worker. The hospital 
should have a social service department which meets pro-
fessional standards. Qualifications: The case worker should 
have a full graduate curriculum in social case work in an 

PHYSICAL SETUP 
9 
accredited school of social work; he must be working un-
der supervision of a social work supervisor or have previ-
ously worked two years in a social service department of 
acceptable standards in a medical setting under qualified 
superv1s10n. 
The supervisor must meet the same educational require-
ments as the caseworker and have a minimum of two years' 
full-time paid supervised casework experience in a social 
service department of acceptable standards in a medical set-
ting. When responsibility for supervision of social casework 
is carried by a single person, the qualifications should be 
identical to those of a supervisor. 
Recommended Physical Setup 
An integrated unit should be provided for all facilities 
and services of the center, within a hospital which can furn-
ish the recommended consultative services. 
The center should be located in a quiet section of the 
hospital, away from any heavy machinery, main plumbings, 
etc. An adequate amount of space must be provided within 
the center which should be treated for sound absorption 
and exclusion in its entirety. 
Rooms N ecessary 
(1) Reception area and waiting space (30' x 20') 
(2) Office for director or coordinator (10' x 15') 
(3) Office for social worker (10' x 10') 
(4) Office for psychologist (10' x 10') 
(5) Playroom, adequately equipped (20' x 20') 
(6) Auditory training rooms (two). Small room for in-
dividual training; large room for group training (10' x 10' 
and 1 0' x 20'). 

10 
AUDIOLOGY CENTERS 
(7) Speech therapy rooms (two). Small room for indi-
vidual training; large room for group training. Both rooms 
should have running water. (10' x 10' and 10' x 20'). 
(8) Office for general personnel. For record keeping, 
record filing and staff conferences. (20' x 10') 
(9) Medical examination rooms. Their number will de-
pend on the case load of patients and on the number of 
physicians assigned to the center. Each room should have 
running water and suction. 
(10) Sound-proofed section. Must be thoroughly treated 
for sound absorption and transmission; special doors, no 
windows; air conditioning (acoustically treated) desirable. 
N oise Ievel of not more than 30 decibels overall. 
a. Testing suites. There should be two two-room testing 
suites, each consisting of a test room for the patient and a 
control room for the technician. (30' x 15') 
b. Audiometric testing rooms (two). (10' x 5' each). 
(11) Ear mold laboratory. Shou1d have running water. 
(5' X 5'). 
(12) Storage space. In general area and sound-proofed 
section. 
(13) Electronics workshop. This may be a part of the 
general instrument repair shop of the hospital. 
Recommended Minimum Equipment 
A. Bas,ic A udiometric T esting Rooms 
One basic two-channel audiometer in each room. 
B. A uditory Training Rooms 
(1) Group equipment for large room; individual equip-
ment for small room; mirror in each room. 

GENERAL POLICIES 
11 
(2) One motion picture projector. 
C. Speech therapy rooms 
(I) For each room: full length mirror; relaxation table; 
orthopedic chair. 
(2) One tape recorder. 
D. Sound-proofed Section 
(1) Foreach two-room testing suite: One hearing evalua-
tion assembly consisting of (a) two channel units, one for 
speech, one for noise. (b) Outputs through any combina-
tion of head phones andfor through speaker, for one or both 
channels. The maximum output through phones should 
be 100 decibels or more, and for speaker 85 decibels. 
(2) Foreach (advanced) audiometric testing room: Two-
channel pure tone audiometer (advanced clinical audio-
meter). 
E. General 
Table model hearing aids should be provided in each 
room of the center except the audiometric testing rooms 
and auditory training rooms. 
General Policies 
Evaluation of Patient 
Each patient seen in the center should have audiometric 
testing with an individual pure-tone audiometer. If any pa-
tient shows, on the basis of an audiometric test, a loss of 20 
decibels or more in any two frequencies in either ear, the 
patient would then: 
(1) Receive a complete evaluation by the otologist. 
(2) Receive a complete evaluation by the pediatrician 

12 
AUDIOLOGY CENTERS 
unless a recent pediatric evaluation report is sent to the 
center. 
(3) Receive a complete pure-tone and speech audio-
metric evaluation (threshold and supra threshold) by the 
audiologist. 
(4) Receive a speech evaluation. 
(5) Receive a psychological evaluation if indicated. 
(6) lf indicated, would be seen by any of the medical 
specialists (neurologist, orthodontist, orthopedic surgeon, 
plastic surgeon, psychiatrist, etc.). 
(7) The findings of the diagnostic work-up and its evalua-
tion are then presented at the staff conference of the pro-
fessional personnel, at which time a decision on the plan 
for treatment is decided on for the patient, including medical 
treatment, surgical treatment and/or auditory rehabilitation. 
(8) After the plan has been made the patient would be 
seen by the social worker. 
Treatment and Rehabilitation 
The services provided might be ( 1) M edical. (2) Non-
medical: Speech reading; speech therapy; auditory training; 
psychological guidance; selection, fitting and instruction in 
use of hearing aids; parent guidance; social casework; Iiaison 
with referral to schools and (for youths 14 years and over 
who require it) to the appropriate vocational guidance 
agency. 
Staff Conterences 
All the professional personnel of the center should meet 
periodically, preferably every week. These conferences 
should include not only a review of individual patients but 
also of problems in the operation of the services of the 
center and of advances in the field. 

GENERAL POLICIES 
Records and Statistics 
13 
Complete records of patients should be maintained by the 
center. The center should routinely provide copies of the 
records ( 1) to the school which the child is attending; (2) 
to any referring physician. Statistics should be kept of all 
patients to whom casework services have been given. 
A ppointments 
Patients should be seen in the center by appointment 
only, except in the case of an emergency. The center should 
provide a method of follow-up for those patients who do not 
keep their appointment. 

3-----------------------------
EQUIPMENT 
Equipment suggests many things-apparatus as weil as 
their quality, quantity, reliability, versatility. Equipment 
implies one's ingenuity and ability to use the units and 
component parts effectively, to recognize when they are op-
erating properly and when they are defective. Maintaining 
the equipment in satisfactory working order may require 
the skill of a competent audio engineer familiar with this 
specialized field. 
The equipment consists of two basic units, one for pure 
tone testing and the other for speech hearing testing. Other 
apparatus contribute their share so that these tests can be 
accomplished properly and accurately. 
It is not imperative that all the equipment be obtained 
at one time. A pure tone two channel audiometer can be 
purchased to which the subsidiary components can be added 
later. A turn table or tape player for speech hearing testing 
by phones can be added, and subsequently free field testing 
equipment. Units such as the peep show and psychogalvano-
meter and accessory elements may be selected as needed. 
The Audiometer 
Prior to the first quarter of the twentieth century, hearing 
14 

THE AUDIOMETER 
15 
tests were performed with percussion, string and wind in-
struments, among them tuning forks, monochord, Galton 
whistle, and with the spoken and whispered voice. The pre-
cision of tests was limited. The audiometer was introduced 
as a tool which could be relied upon to emit acoustic signals 
at frequencies and intensities which could be selected and 
reproduced at will. 
Advantages of the audiometer are: any frequency within 
the limitations of the audiometer can be reproduced as often 
as needed for any one patient and from patient to patient. 
Any intensity within the limits of the audiometer can also 
be reproduced as frequently as necessary, within clinical 
tolerances. The signal can be emitted at an intensity for as 
long a duration as is desired. The signal can be interrupted 
and reproduced as frequently as need be. Records can be 
made of the findings of the tests, which are charted in sym-
bolic language and numerical values. These are permanent 
records, and reasonably accurate comparisons with other sim-
ilar tests can be made. 
Most audiometers are rather expensive, heavy, usually 
bulky, and require some maintenance. Recently, small port-
able audiometers, light in weight, have been manufactured. 
Audiometers require care and attention, and at times they 
must be repaired. At such times one loses the services of this 
equipment. Air conduction receivers and bone conductors 
are easily damaged by rough handling. The cords may wear 
and break. Such units are susceptible to the hazards of all 
electric audio apparatus. 
Clinical audiometers are designed for practical daily use. 
These audiometers have sufficient range of frequencies and 
intensities so that a reasonable evaluation of hearing can be 
obtained. 
Some audiometers are of the discrete frequency type, 
others are sweep frequency audiometers. The discrete fre-

16 
EQUIPMENT 
quency type contains a frequency selector by which only 
several individual frequencies can be selected and no others. 
Sweep frequency audiometers are built so that the frequency 
selector can be rotated uninterruptedly, sweeping from the 
lowest to the highest frequency of the instrument. However, 
except for the major frequencies, the calibration of these 
audiometers is not necessarily accurate, so that sweep fre-
quency audiometers offer only little more flexibility or 
latitude than the others. 
The frequencies incorporated in audiometers vary only 
slightly amongst the several different makes of instruments. 
These frequencies are: 128 (125) cycles per second, 256 
(250) cps, 512 (500) cps, 1024 (1000) cps, 2048 (2000) cps, 
4096 (4000) cps, 8192 (8000) cps, 9747 (10000) cps. Some 
discrete frequency audiometers also include frequencies of 
3000 cps, 5000 cps, and 6000 cps. 
The audiometric mensuration is the decibel, * which al-
lows for the easy handling of large numbers. 
The tone produced by the audiometer can be interrupted 
• The decibel is a tenth of a bei. It is a dimensionless, logarithmic unit 
expressing the ratio of two amounts of power. The expression of the in-
tensity of a sound Ievel is meaningful only when it is related to a reference 
intensity. Mathematically the ratio is described as follows: 
I 
decibellevel = 10 log10 yL 
2 
where I is the intensity under consideration at any moment, and I2 is the 
basic relerence intensity. A sound which has ten times the power of that of 
the reference is 10 decibels above the reference. If I1 is 100 times the power 
of the reference 12, the logarithm of their ratio, 100, is 2; and the number 
of decibels is lOx 2 = 20 decibels. Each successive ten-fold increase in 
acoustic power indicates a corresponding addition of JP decibels. 
In most sound measurements, the reference &pund intensity has been 
established as the quantity of 10-16 watts per square centimeter. This factor 
is related to the more familiar reference of acoustic pressure at 0.0002 dynes 
per square centimeter. These values are less than those of minimal physio-
logical acoustic awareness. 
Clinically, in testing hearing, the average sensitivity values of young adult 
normal ears for pure tones of the audiometric spectrum is taken to be 0 
decibels. This value is above the acoustic zero reference intensity of 0.0002 
dynes per square centimeter. 

THE AUDIOMETER 
17 
and recalled hy the operation of an interrupter switch. The 
spring type of interrupter key must he held in the "off" 
position or the attenuator must he turned down to prevent 
the signal from reaching the receiver and he heard. Some 
interrupter keys have another position, which is not activa-
ted hy a spring and the key must he manually operated to 
either "on" or "off." 
The electrical energy output of the audiometer is con-
verted into sound hy the air conduction receiver or hone 
conductor just as a telephone receiver converts electrical 
energy into sound. Contemporary hone conductors lack the 
fidelity of air conduction receivers, especially at the highest 
frequencies. More electrical energy is required to activate 
the hone conductor and have the signal heard through the 
skull. For this reason audiometer attenuators are calihrated 
hoth for air conduction audiometry and for hone conduc-
tion audiometry. Some audiometers have two sets of num-
hers on the attenuator dial in contrasting colors indicating 
the decihel scale, one scale for air conduction and the other 
scale for hone conduction. Some earlier audiometers have 
a metal ring appropriately inscrihed which is fitted over the 
air conduction numerals when hone conduction tests are 
performed. The hone conduction thresholds are read on the 
metal ring scale. 
The internal design of audiometers consists of a chassis 
on which is mounted an audio signal generator and ampli-
fier. This includes an attenuator (volume), frequency selec-
tor (tone), vacuum tuhes, transformers, resistors, conden-
sers, filters and other components. The function is such that 
an oscillating vacuum tuhe whose frequency is controlled 
hy a network of resistors, capacitors, and inductors produces 
an alternating current which, when amplified hy other 
vacuum tuhes, ultimately is transformed into sound hy the 
rece1ver. 

18 
EQUIPMENT 
The frequency of the alternating current can be selected; 
only one frequency is generated at a given moment. The 
amplitude of each frequency is controlled by the attenuator. 
The net results, in subjective terms, are that various tones 
can be heard and their loudness can be altered, increased 
and decreased. 
In audio circuits adventitious sounds may occur from any 
defective component, or from switch noises, or with changes 
during the movements of the attenuator or frequency selec-
tor. If adventitious sounds are detected, there is indication 
of some defect in the audiometer which should be corrected. 
The earlier audiometers consisted of a single output cir-
cuit, with one receiver. Such single channel audiometers 
are still available and usually are less expensive than two 
channel instruments. The two channel audiometers are more 
flexible for the administration of the various tests and offer 
advantages not obtainable in single channel units. Dual 
systems simplify the administration of such techniques as 
masking, recruitment testing, and Stenger audiometry. Two 
channel audiometers usually incorporate one frequency 
selector and two attenuators; each attenuator controls its 
own rece1ver. 
Masking Apparatus 
Masking is a method whereby the acoustic function of an 
ear can be removed from participating in hearing sound 
stimuli which are presented to the other ear. The objective 
of masking is to occlude the ear not being tested, just as 
the ophthalmologist occludes an eye he wishes to remove 
from the visual testing situation by covering it. It is apparent 
that merely covering an ear will not successfully prevent it 
from being aware of acoustic stimuli in the environment if 
the intensities of the stimuli are great enough. 

SPEECH HEARING EQUIPMENT 
19 
The transmission of intensities greater than 50 decibels 
may be airborne araund the skull and through the skull by 
hone conduction, vibrating the skull and with it both 
cochleae. 
Many masking devices have been used from time to time. 
A widely known instrument is the Barany alarm apparatus. 
The masking noise produced by the Barany is composed 
almost entirely of low frequencies, the instrument vibrates 
excessively and it cannot be calibrated. 
An audio system with its receiver can be assembled to pro-
duce a noise which serves for masking. Either of two mask-
ing noises. is used in audiometry: white noise or saw tooth 
noise. White noise is composed of the audible frequencies 
emitted with uniform electrical energy. The term white is 
derived from a comparison to white light, which includes 
all the visual frequencies. Saw tooth noise contains only 
certain frequencies, in descending amplitudes. 
An audio noise generator may be an independent unit, or 
may be physically contained within the audiometer. The 
masking intensity, controlled by its own attenuator, can be 
measured in decibels. 
Speech Hearing Equipment 
In order to measure the patient's ability to hear speech 
and to understand speech, additional equipment and selected 
speech material are required. Speech reception threshold 
tests and speech discrimination tests are performed with ear 
phones and with a free field speaker. The phones are re-
quired so that the speech hearing function of each ear can be 
measured individually. The free field speaker is necessary for 
hearing aid fittings, whereby measurements are made both of 
the unaided hearing and whatever improvement is obtained 
by means of the amplification of a hearing aid. 

20 
EQUIPMENT 
The units for speech hearing testing are composed of: (1) 
a speech reproducer, either phonograph disc player or mag-
netic tape reproducer; (2) recorded lists on disc or tape of 
spondaic words (See Chapter 11) and phonetically balanced 
words; (3) an audiometer with an input for the disc player 
or tape reproducer. 
For these tests the speech stimuli replace the pure tone 
stimuli of the audiometer. The speech testing equipment is 
wired into the audiometer, and with selection of the proper 
circuits by a switch, speech from the reproducing equipment 
reaches the audiometer phone and is heard by the patient. 
The intensity of the speech is controlled by the attenuator 
of the audiometer, as in pure tone audiometry. The tech-
niques of obtaining speech reception thresholds and speech 
discrimination scores are described in Chapter 11, Speech 
Audiometry. 
A microphone for live voice is inserted into the circuit, 
essentially paralleling the circuit of the reproducing unit. 
Again, selecting the microphone circuit by a switch, the 
tester can make use of his own voice instead of recorded 
speech. A V-U meter for monitoring (see next page) is in-
corporated in the microphone circuit. 
Free Field Equipment 
The loud-speaker for free field testing is placed in the 
sound damped room, six to eight feet from the patient's 
position. The loud-speaker's response curve-fidelity-is im-
portant. The loud-speaker, of 12-inch to 15-inch diameter, 
must be contained in a suitable cabinet; the bass refiex or 
infinite baffie are common types. These cabinets are of the 
kind used in high fidelity radio and phonograph systems. 
The purpose of the baffie is to prevent the back waves of 

VOLUME UNIT METER 
21 
the loud-speaker's diaphragm from cancelling its front 
waves. The signals from the speaker are directed forward 
from the front of the speaker cone and also from its other 
surfaces. These latter sounds are reßected from the walls of 
the speaker cabinet and the walls of the room unless these 
are treated with acoustic damping material. 
Speakers of this size and for this purpose are usually of 
the permanent magnetic type and require an amplifier to 
drive them. The amplifier has its own volume control. If no 
calibrated attenuator is in this amplifying circuit one must 
be inserted in the circuit in order that the tester will be 
able to deliver the material in measured amounts. The 
amplifier can be wired through the audiometer circuit, and 
the audiometer attenuator is then relied upon. 
With a unit consisting of amplifier and speaker, stimulus 
from a sound source can be delivered to the patient. These 
sources are the pure tones of the audiometer, masking noise, 
recorded speech material from disc players and magnetic 
tape recorder-players, and live voice spoken into a micro-
phone. 
Basically this is an annunciator system in which the sev-
eral components are of high fidelity and in proper calibra-
tion designed to serve the needs of testing hearing for speech 
reception and speech discrimination. 
"olu~ne lJnit nleter 
A V-U (volume unit) meter should be included in the 
live voice circuit. This is a small meter the needle of which 
is moved when speech or any other sound energy enters the 
microphone. The meter permits calibration of voice and 
speech; as one speaks into the microphone he can read on the 
meter the levels to which his voice volume drives the needle. 

22 
EQUIPMENT 
With experience one can speak into the microphone and 
keep one's speech volume to a fairly uniform level. With this 
accomplished the intensity of the speech will then be con-
trolled by the attenuator of the audiometer or amplifier. 
The monitared live voice technique is more effective 
when testing children and those adults who cannot easily 
adapt themselves to the machine-like rate of recorded speech. 
Talk Back Unit 
Because the patient is alone in the sound-damped test 
room and because he must repeat aloud the words as he 
hears them during the speech hearing tests, there is need of 
another sound communication system whereby the tester can 
hear what the patient says. This talk-back system consists of 
a microphone, in the immediate vicinity of the patient, 
which is wired to a smaller amplifier unit and speaker in 
front of the tester permitting the observer to listen to the 
patient as he speaks. The amplifier has in addition to the 
speaker a phone receiver head set; the observer can listen 
either with the speaker or with the phones, selecting either 
by turning a switch. The talk-back unit is indispensable 
when speech hearing tests are performed. Additionally, as 
the tester has a microphone through which he can communi-
cate with the patient, either by the free field speaker or 
through the patient's receivers, and also a talk-back system 
through which the patient can speak with the observer; the 
two can converse whenever necessary. 
Hearing Aid Baffle 
Hearing aid fittings can be performed somewhat on the 
order of a blindfold test. lf the hearing aids with which the 

EQUIPMENT 
23 
patient is fitted are not exposed to the patient's view he is 
less likely to venture an opinion about any of the aids by 
any preconceptions, or by what he may have heard about 
any one make of aid. If the patient does not know with 
which aid he is being fitted, he can make a comparison sub-
jectively only on what and how he hears with the aids. He 
will not even know when his own aid is included during the 
fitting process. 
A receptacle for the hearing aid consists of a baffie mount-
ed behind the patient. This baffie consists of a wooden board 
about ten or twelve inches square, on which is attached some 
acoustic attenuating material such as an acoustic tile block. 
Tothis is fastened a small cloth pocket into which a hearing 
aid is inserted. The distance between this baffie and the 
patient's ear is somewhat less than the average length of a 
hearing aid cord, which permits the hearing aid receiver to 
be inserted into the patient's ear and the cord to be con-
nected both to the receiver and to the hearing aid. 
Furniture 
The furniture within the sound treated room can be 
simple and of as few individual pieces as consistent with 
comfort. When changes are made in the furnishings in such 
a room the acoustic values of the room may be altered. A 
chair is needed for adults who are tested, and a table and 
smaller chair for children, who may object to being placed 
alone in a room and may want a parent to be in the room 
with them. 
Psychogalvanic Skin Equipment 
The equipment for performing psychogalvanic skin re-

24 
EQUIPMENT 
sponse audiometry consists of an audiometer, a galvano-
meter, and an inductorium. * The inductorium is of the 
type often used in physiology laboratories. It is composed of 
two coils, of which the primary is energized by a dry cell 
battery. The interrupter of the inductorium rapidly makes 
and breaks the flow of current through the primary coil. 
The induced current of the secondary coil, faradic current, 
is used to shock the patient gently during the preliminary 
conditioning period of the testing. 
The galvanometer must be sensitive enough to detect 
changes of electrical potentials in the skin. Both inductor-
ium and galvanometer are commercially available in inex-
pensive battery operated models. They can also be obtained 
with audiometers. The shelf life of batteries is reasonably 
long; nevertheless, they may have deteriorated to a degree 
to vitiate successful testing. Accordingly, battery energized 
equipment should be inspected in advance of the perform-
ance of a test, in order that one may be assured that the 
several units function satisfactorily. 
PeepShow 
Various "peep shows" have been described by their de-
signers. The purpose of the peep show is to entertain the 
children, interest them in the test and condition them to 
respond to the acoustic stimuli. One type of peep show con-
sists of a cabinet whose dimensions are about 24" x 24" xl6". 
" Recently, vacuum tube electro-stimulators have been designed. 
Apparatus are available also which combine the several components. A 
stylus records the skin potential changes on a moving spool of paper. These 
records do not show characteristics such as seen in electrocardiographs. 
Accordingly the examiner must determine which 'curves' are responses due 
to acoustic stimulation, distinguishing them from random traces. 1t is neces-
sary to write notalions on the graph paper as the test proceeds. Unfor-
tunately present equipment construction fails to make adequate provision 
for this. 

PEEPSHOW 
25 
The front wall of the cabinet contains a window approxi-
mately 6" x 6". A small inexpensive turntable of about two 
revolutions per minute, such as those used in store window 
displays, is placed within the cabinet and operates from the 
house electric current. On the turntable are mounted 
small toys which will amuse children, such as tin soldiers 
and similar figures for the boys, and small dolls and doll-
house furniture for the girls. Within the cabinet a light 
socket is mounted, into which a smalllight bulb is inserted. 
Beneath the window on the front wall of the cabinet is an 
electric spring switch for the child to manipulate. 
A separate component is a switch box; the switch itself can 
be a single-throw, double pole anticapacity switch. The 
wiring Iayouts of the switch box circuits (Fig. 1) are as fol-
lows: from the audiometer there extend to the input-legs 
on one side of the switch in the switch box the Ieads through 
receiver circu it 
Q 
: aud iometer 
0~ 
® 
1 double pole single throw 
1 anticapacity switch 
0 y-----" standard lighting 
0~------------~ocurrent 
patient's switch 
light circuit 
Fig. 1-Peep show audiometric and light circuits. 
which the electrical energy of the tone stimulus flows; to 
other outgoing legs of this switch are attached the wire Ieads 
which connect either with the air conductor receiver, which 
is held to the child's ear, or to a free field speaker. Two other 
Ieads, from the house current, are attached to other inde-

26 
EQUIPMENT 
pendent legs of this same switch. The output of this second 
circuit is connected to the switch and light socket of the 
peep show. Accordingly, when the switch of the switch box 
is at the "on" position the tone from the audiometer is heard 
at the receiver, or speaker, and the current to the light bulb 
in the cabinet is interrupted only by the patient's switch on 
the cabinet. The patient is taught to push his peep show 
switch only when he hears the tone, and in so doing illumin-
ates the interior of the cabinet so that the peep show is 
visible to him through the window. When the switch in the 
box is turned to "off" by the tester, both the tone and the 
light circuits are interrupted. If the child operates his own 
switch at this time the light cannot be turned on. The child 
becomes conditioned to activate his own switch only when 
he hears the tone. Once the child learns this sequence audio-
metry can be performed in an orderly manner for the several 
frequencies. Since the child does not know when the opera-
tor turns on the stimulus unless he hears the tone, the 
thresholds can be determined just as with regular audio-
metry. 
The peep show will usually hold the child's interest and 
entertain him, and the test usually may be completed at one 
sitting. Some children soon become bored, however, and the 
test may have to be completed at a later date. 
N oise-makers 
Other sound producing apparatus used to test infants and 
little children are whistles, bells, musical triangles, toy 
"crickets" and others which the tester may select. A rough 
estimate of the frequencies of these various items and their 
intensities can be made. 
Usually two observers are required when testing with 

EQUIPMENT 
27 
noise-makers; one observes the child and holds his attention, 
while the other stands behind the patient and activates the 
noise producers. A mentally healthy, normal-hearing, active 
child will respond when he hears these sounds, whereas a 
deaf child will remain unresponsive. A child may hear only 
some of these sounds but not all, and the observers will have 
obtained some evidence of the status of the infant's hearing. 
(See Chapter 10). 
Ear Insert Supplies 
The otologist should prepare the impression of the pa-
tient's auricle and meatus for the permanent ear insert. The 
insert which is clipped to the air conduction receiver of the 
hearing aid is inserted into the external auditory canal, as 
the hearing aid is worn. Each insert, as with dentures, re-
quires individual fabrication. 
A commercial laboratory which converts the impression 
of the canal and auricle into the permanent acrylic insert 
will supply the otologist with the necessary ingredients with 
which the original impression can be made. 
Formerly plaster of Paris was used as the impression com-
pound, but new synthetic materials have been developed 
which are easier to apply. The mix is prepared into a viscid 
mass which is inserted and molded to the contour of the 
auricle and meatus. The impression material is permitted 
to set and harden; it is removed from the ear, and sent to 
the laboratory. From this model the permanent insert is 
fabricated. 
Because some inserts may be too long or have high spots, 
the otologist will need a small dental engine or bench engine 
and some small abrasive stones, buffers, and polishers in 
order to make minor changes in the configuration of the 

28 
EQUIPMENT 
acrylic insert. The laboratory or a dental associate can advise 
the otologist when he purchases these supplies. 
Auditory Training Unit 
The instruction program in auditory training is designed 
to teach patients to learn how to hear sounds and speech 
artificially amplified by the audio system of the hearing aid. 
Appropriate recorded material is presented by record player 
or magnetic tape player through a loud-speaker, to which 
the patients Iisten with the hearing aid. Phonograph records 
can be cut with the environmental sounds of life recorded 
on them. They can be similarly recorded on tape. Some of 
these sounds are derived from horns, buzzers, bells, barking 
dogs, telephone signals, running water, rustling of paper, 
matches being struck, and others ad infinitum. 
The audio equipment used for speech testing can be util-
ized during these lessons for listening purposes. An addi-
tional portable loud-speaker in its own cabinet can be added 
to the amplifier circuit. 
Additional Supplies 
Demonstrations with skulls, anatomic pictures, and other 
anatomical illustrations of the head can be used effectively 
to help the patients understand the complexity of the otic 
structures. Motion pictures are available illustrating in 
simple diagrammatic form the otic anatomy and function. 
With an interoffi.ce telephone system connecting several 
instruments, the patients can be taught to Iisten to phone 
conversation with their hearing aids. Communal office tele-
phones are available and the interoffice system can be 
brought into service by push button control. 

EQUIPMENT 
29 
Check List of Equipment and Audiologie Supplies* 
(1) Hearing Evaluation Unit 
a. Master control panel switches, meter, etc. 
b. Pure tone audiometers 
c. Masking unit 
d. Tape recorder-reproducer 
e. Disc record player 
f. Power amplifier 
g. Headphones, cushions, and headbands 
h. Loudspeaker in infinite or hass reflex baffie 
i. Disc and tape recordings of test material 
j. Talk-back unit including microphone, amplifier, head· 
phones and monitor loud-speaker 
k. Tuning forks 
1. Microphone for live voice 
m. Peepshow 
n. Calibrated noise makers 
(2) Psychogalvanic Skin Resistance Unit 
a. Direct current galvanometer 
b. Leads and electrodes 
c. Faradic inductorium 
(3) Auditory Training Unit 
a. Reproducer unit including microphone, record player, 
amplifier, loud-speaker and headphone sets 
b. Special teaching disc recordings, noise makers, etc. 
c. Skulls,' anatomic models, illustrations, etc. 
d. Interoffice telephone system with amplified telephone for 
practice 
(4) Speech 
a. Films for practice 
b. Hand mirrors, wall mirror, tongue blades 
c. Desk type hearing aid 
• Reprinted, by permission, from Heller, M. F., and Lindenberg, P.: The 
private practice of auditory rehabilitation. Ann. Otol., Rhin. &: Laryng. 63: 
130. Copyright 1954, Anna1s Pub. Co. 

30 
EQUIPMENT 
(5) Speech (Lip) Reading 
a. Films for practice 
b. Motion picture projector and screen 
c. Reproducer (can be the same as for auditory training) 
(6) Hearing Aid Selection 
a. Representative hearing aids 
b. Extra batteries for fittings 
c. Universal and stock ear inserts 
d. Fixed, common bafße for mounting hearing aids during 
fittings 
(7) Calibration and Repair Equipment 
a. Vacuum tube voltmeter 
b. Soldering iron, tool kit, etc. 
c. Hearing aid battery tester 
(8) Ear Insert Equipment 
a. Impression material 
b. Dental engine, polishing stones, buffers for adjustments 
(9) Miscellaneous 
a. Blackboard and related supplies 
b. Toys, selected for testing as well as entertaining children 

4~-----------------------------
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
Usually when a patient presents hirnself to an otologist 
because of impaired hearing he does so with some uneasi-
ness. He has been experiencing, over some length of time, 
anxiety about himself. Is he really hard of hearing; has his 
attitude towards his fellows changed, or their attitude to-
wards him? He has been embarrassed and has embarrassed 
others by failing to hear, or failing to hear correctly. 
For example, two people are about to go their separate 
ways. They make their adieus when suddenly one says some-
thing to the other, who is hard of hearing. The latter turns 
and walks away. The speaker feels rebuffed although his 
companion is unaware of the incident, and their relation-
ship has suffered a blow. It needs little imagination to real-
ize how such incidents alter social, business, professional 
and economic relationships. 
The man whose hearing is impaired is fearful of his 
job security. The woman may have similar fears, either of 
a threat to a job or to her domestic or social situations. The 
student has difficulties in his scholastic life and anticipates 
greater problems as he approaches a career. The young Iady 
may have already experienced social difficulties, and fears 
that she is afflicted with a handicap which is a threat to mar-
riage and a home. The mother is apprehensive about the 
31 

32 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
hearing of her child; and the child with poor hearing may 
have grown fearful, suspicious or resentful because of the 
hurts he has suffered without understanding that his defec-
tive hearing, of which he knows nothing, has victimized him. 
Many hard of hearing people postpone facing the reality 
of their hearing loss. When at last they admit the necessity 
of seeking help, their psychological resources may be strained 
to the utmost. 
Most people are not too reticent about their ailments. 
They will talk about their operations, illnesses, ophthal-
mological or dermatological problems. But rarely will an 
individual divulge his acoustic handicap. The one expres-
sion used so frequently by hard of hearing people is, 'Tm 
em barrassed." 
But deafness is more than embarrassing; it is isolating. The 
normal hearing public finds difficulty in trying to communi-
cate with the hard of hearing, and tends to shy away. The 
hard of hearing are hurt and afraid to expose their defect 
and themselves, so that two factors contribute to separate 
this handicapped group from society. 
Parental impaired hearing contaminates a home. The 
acoustically handicapped mother becomes apprehensive be-
cause she fears she will be unable to hear her baby when he 
cries or calls. The baby who cannot attract his mother's at-
tention may develop behavioral problems because of this 
seeming rejection. As tots, such children cannot understand 
why father or mother fails to answer or why the response 
is irrelevant; it even happens that a child is accused by the 
hard of hearing parent of having said something "wrong," 
when in reality the parent has failed to hear correctly. In 
addition, since with hearing losses defective speech patterns 
develop as a complication, children in homes in which one 
parent has defective speech may themselves learn to speak 
defectively. 

THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
33 
Furthermore, patients with conductive deafness frequently 
reduce voice volume. Employers and associates complain that 
such a person mumbles, speaks too softly, makes a poor 
impression on the public because the speech is monotonous, 
dull, and difficult to hear, suggesting that the speaker is 
disinterested. In the home, a parent with such speech may 
not be heard even by the normal-hearing children, or may 
be misunderstood. The parent, in turn, may be angered by 
his child's apparent indifference. 
Binaural loss of hearing is a tremendous social, education-
al, economic and psychological handicap. Many people can 
make effective use of a hearing aid, some cannot. Same 
patients find the aid serviceable under ideal listening con-
ditions, but much less so under the many varied conditions 
of living. A short order cook in a noisy kitchen complains 
that although he hears well enough with the aid at home 
he cannot hear efficiently at work. Many people such as 
order clerks and dispatchers conduct their business over the 
telephone. Severely defective ears may be unable to hear or 
to understand conversation over this system. 
The Iist of examples is inexhaustible. Same of these prob-
lems may be alleviated with relatively little effort, some are 
almost insurmountable. 
Monaural deafness, too, causes much distress. The indi-
vidual with monaural deafness cannot stroll down the street 
with a person on each side of him and be able to hear both 
companions. At round table discussions he misses the con-
versation on the side of bis impaired ear, or he constantly 
gyrates to catch all the conversation coming from his im-
paired side. When such conferences become animated the 
monaurally deafened person lags behind and loses the trend 
öf the conversation. 
The person with monaural deafness usually demonstrate~ 
astereophonia. He is unable to localize the source of a sound. 

34 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
If he is engrossed in some activity and is called, he looks all 
about, first to the side of his good ear, then everywhere until 
he sees the origin of the stimulus. Such persons have lost 
their acoustic depth perception, their acoustic spatial rela-
tionships. This is distressing and can endanger the patient 
who cannot localize a sound of warning such as an auto-
mobile horn, and may just as readily walk into the path of 
injury as turn away from it. 
Monaural deafness is handicapping in many occupations. A 
taxicab driver complains that because of his left deafness he 
cannot hear potential passengers who hail him from the 
left side of the cab. An interviewer has his desk placed to 
conform with a general office plan, turns 90 degrees in his 
chair to bring his good ear into a conversation, and misses 
what his visitor says when he turns away. A leoturer at 
school hears only questions directed from one side of the 
room. A child in school sits with his good ear towards a wall, 
his poor ear towards the teacher. At such times he may fail 
to hear when called upon, which is misinterpreted as dull-
ness, unruliness and inattention. He may suffer unearned 
punishment as a consequence. 
Examples such as these are innumerable; each is an in-
dividual problem. Some can be resolved with some relief 
to the patient, others are more difficult of resolution, and 
some patients may not be helped at all. 
Obtaining the History 
For the otologist's understanding of the problems of his 
patient and his auditory handicap, the patient is the best 
textbook. Our patients teach us, if we are but willing to 
listen, think and learn. 
Obtaining the history from a patient with a hearing im-

OBTAINING THE HISTORY 
35 
pairment is a little different than that of taking a history 
generally. A patient with some acute pathological process 
may enter the office and state that he has an acute sinusitis 
or peritonsillar abscess. He has had similar experiences which 
have responded to treatment. He knows what is wrong with 
him this time and seeks relief. These histories are simple 
and direct. But the patient with impaired hearing presents 
a less simple story. His attitude toward his defect is an un-
happy one. He is resentful, bitter, angry, frightened, wor-
ried, apprehensive. Often he has come to the otologist not 
of his own volition, but because of pressure from his family 
or employer. 
Taking a patient's history should accomplish many things. 
As much as possible should be learned of the onset, origin, 
course and previous treatment. \Ve want to know how the 
deafness has affected his relationships at home, at work and 
at play; how it has altered his behavior; what the patient 
thinks of his difficulties and what he thinks of himself; 
what previous attempts have been made to alleviate his 
deafness and his disappointment because of the failure of 
improvement. We want to know what jobs he has lost or 
failed to get, and why he has postponed seeking help for so 
many years. 
We inquire about his impaired hearing, how it inter-
feres with direct conversation with only one speaker, and 
with several speakers, over the phone, in noisy places, over 
distances, listening to the radio and television, at church, 
lectures, movies, theater, meetings. Some people hear satis-
factorily in a quiet place, but under noisier conditions can-
not understand the speech they hear. Some hear speech 
better in the presence of noise. 
We inquire further, when was the hearing loss first dis-
covered and by whom (the patient or bis associates); whether 
the loss increased gradually and insidiously, or suddenly. 

36 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
Have head noises or dizziness been experienced, in conjunc-
tion with the deafness, or with improvement or increased 
loss of hearing? I-lad one ear become involved before the 
other, are there differences between the two ears at present. 
Are there influences in daily living which alter the hearing 
or sensations in the ears: fatigue, nervousness, alcohol, to-
bacco, allergies, foods, drugs, atmospheric changes, flying, 
noises? 
Is dizziness a symptom; did it precede the onset of the 
deafness, or appear at a later date? Has the loss of hearing 
increased with episodes of dizziness? I-las there been nausea, 
vomiting, falling? Were any injuries sustained if the patient 
fell? If the hearing has become worse during a dizzy spell, 
does it recover at all when the vertiginous episode subsides? 
Did the onset of deafness occur in very early life, before 
the age at which speech appears, or during the formative 
years of speech development, or after speech was fully estab-
lished? 
I-las the patient had any medical or surgical treatment 
designed to improve the hearing? We also wish to know the 
general medical history of the patient, and if there has been 
any psychotherapy at any time. 
Has the patient had any kind of rehabilitation? Has a 
hearing aid been used, was it satisfactory or if rejected why? 
Has he had any lip reading lessons, where, when, and by 
whom, and can he read lips efficiently? Similarly, the pa-
tient should be asked about speech correction lessons. 
Is there a history of deafness in any member in the family, 
in near and distant relatives, who of these and how many 
relatives? What was the presumed cause of the deafness in 
these people? 
Obtaining the history is a most significant phase in the 
entire investigation and in the care of the hard of hearing 
patient. lt is a measured, steady, gentle, sympathetic ap-

OBTAINING THE HISTORY 
37 
proach to grasping the problern and initiating its resolution. 
The history sets the stage for all that will follow. 
The history cannot be hurried, anticipated or taken for 
granted. Only by giving the patient an opportunity to talk 
can we learn the many ramifications of his problems. Only 
by permitting the patient to give of hirnself can he bring 
to the fore his fears, his anxieties, his misgivings. Only by 
permitting him to elaborate fully can we gain his confidence 
and have him sense that he has found sympathy, under-
standing, strength, and hope. 
The technique of history taking consists basically in the 
willingness to listen, and when little is forthcoming in draw-
ing the patient out of himself, out of his isolation. Obtain-
ing a history does not consist of asking questions from a 
prepared questionnaire, or asking stereotyped questions. 
Rapport between doctor and patient enters into and pre-
dominates the discussion. 
Just as life itself does not travel in a direct line as on 
railroad tracks, but weaves and meanders through byways 
as well as highways, so does the history follow these paths. 
The otologist must be prepared to spend the time neces-
sary to uncover some of what the patient has suppressed con-
sciously and unconsciously over many years. Often a woman, 
and occasionally a man, will break down and weep during 
a gentle interview, indicating the great and suppressed anx-
ieties. This episode can be crucial, for on it may turn the 
patient's willingness to accept the physician's assistance and 
counsel. 
When a history is secured for medicolegal purposes an 
exact chronological sequence of events should be obtained. 
Was there acoustic or otic impairment prior to the injury or 
illness? How soon after the alleged insult were the symptoms 
noted? What are the characteristics and the duration of the 
symptoms? How have they been modified or altered subse-

38 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
quently? These and many other pertinent facts should be 
fully elucidated. A medical witness unsure of the facts may 
find hirnself on the stand in an unenviable position. 
The same circumspection applies to acoustic problems 
alleged to be the consequence of many noisy occupations. 
In fairness to all concerned-the patient, the employer and 
his representatives, referees, judges, juries, and the doctor 
himself- a complete history, thorough physical examination, 
and exhaustive functional examinations will help to bring 
the facts into focus and proper perspective. 
The process of getting the history encompasses even more. 
By the patient's recital, his allegations, by the consistency 
and reinforcement of the factors involved, by his contra-
dictions, lapses, by his behavior and by his speech patterns, 
the otologist may be able to gauge the validity of the com-
plaints. This, again, is of importance in medicolegal cases, 
since unconsciously motivated psychogenic deafness or de-
liberate feigning of deafness are encountered. 
Same patients may present the symptom of deafness as 
their dominant problern when in reality they are psycho-
logically ill. They may have auditory hallucinations, and 
the sounds they seem to hear may be symptomatic of their 
mental illness and not tinnitus at all. Other patients may 
have fugue-like states or momentary episodes of detachment 
which members of the family or friends may interpret as 
deafness. The otologist must be alert to many factors which 
in one fashion or another may simulate deafness or other 
otic or auditory symptoms. This is no less a problern among 
children. 
Sometimes the crux in the history is reached after all the 
medical and functional studies have been completed, and 
possibly quite accidentally. Two experiences in clinical prac-
tice, not necessarily typical but illustrative, demonstrate the 

OBTAINING THE HISTORY 
39 
far reaches to which a history may extend. The first is that 
of a five year old girl who was investigated because the 
parents suspected that she had some impairment of hearing. 
The child, sweet and pretty, vehemently denied that there 
was anything wrang with her hearing. To her parents' 
astonishment and dismay she protested violently against 
any examination or tests. Nevertheless, she was cajoled into 
submitting to an examination which determined that she 
had a profound monaural deafness. When this was ade-
quately determined the child was again queried when sud-
denly she hurst into tears. After being soothed she blurted 
out that one of the children in the community was deaf and 
wore a hearing aid. All the children in the neighborhood 
mocked the youngster, and the little patient feared the same 
fate. For this reason she had tried to hide her own deafness 
of which she was fully aware. She was assured that she 
had no grounds for her fears. 
The second patient was a woman of about forty years, 
who complained of difficulty in hearing dictation. Her em-
ployer dictated with a pipe in his mouth, which made it 
difficult for her to understand clearly what he said. She had 
noted the onset of this about three years prior to the exam-
ination. Her history seemed free of any etiologic factors. 
The otological examination was negative. The functional 
examination revealed an air conduction and bone conduc-
tion loss at 4000 cps only. The speech reception threshold by 
phones and in the free field were within normal limits. 
There was no discrimination loss. She was informed that 
her hearing was normal and serviceable for ordinary acous-
tic living. While gazing at the audiogram and almost idly 
speculating the otologist mused, "you know, were I forced to 
make just one guess at what might have caused this discrete 
loss, I'd say gunfire." The patient and her husband stirred 

40 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
with interest and the wife replied, "ten years ago for four 
months I had riße and pistol practice on an indoor range." 
One wonders at the limitlessness of history. 
The initial interview during which the history is obtained 
is designed also to prepare the patient psychologically for 
what may follow. Patients enter with the hope that they will 
be told their hearing loss is inconsequential, or the hope that 
they can find a eure in the hands of the otologist. They fear 
that they may be told that the lass is permanent and that it 
may become total, and there are no therapies to restore their 
hearing. Of course, some hearing defects can be alleviated 
by medical or surgical measures, but many hearing defects 
cannot. 
Hence it is important for the welfare of the patient that 
the tenor of the interview be in such a key that the patient 
feels he can lower his psychological defense and feel secure 
in the care of the otologist. In this vein the patient may 
begin to become reconciled to his infirmity and to accept 
rehabilitation. 
Evaluation of Hearing Defects in Children 
The importance of the evaluation of hearing defects in 
infants and young children cannot be overestimated. lt is 
during the first years of life that the brain is stimulated to 
grow and the personality is molded by the environment. 
Inability to hear normal sounds and distinguish and dis-
criminate speech create educational and emotional deficits. 
Lack of hearing, Iack of sensory and motor communication, 
inevitably penalizes intellectual and emotional maturation. 
It is necessary for the infant to hear the many sounds of 
life as well as those of speech. During the first eighteen to 
twenty-four months of life, the child stores up a vocabulary 

EVALUATION OF HEARING DEFECTS IN CHILDREN 
41 
and prepares to communicate his own ideas through speech. 
The failure of the auditory mechanism retards development 
in the growth of ideas and of self-expression. Since spoken 
and written words make concrete ideation and thinking, 
the failure of the auditory sensory organ, and as a corollary 
the failure of the development of the motor responses of 
speech, seriously impedes the development of the cerebral, 
intellectual and psychological processes. 
For a clearer understanding of deafness of infancy it is 
desirable, when possible, to determine when the patient 
sustained the otic injury; prenatally, neonatally, or post-
natally. Usually parents do not supect deafness in an infant 
until he is about nine months of age. The causative factor 
which produced the otic darnage could have been operative 
at any time after conception. Accordingly, information is 
desired in the history with the purpose of trying to determine 
when the injury or defect might have been sustained. 
At times there is a history of some matemal infection 
during the pregnancy, such as measles, pertussis, lues, in-
fluenza, or some febrile undiagnosed illness. Sometimes 
there is a matemal history of the ingestion of drugs, such 
as quinine, salicylates or alcohol. Occasionally there is a 
story of some physical trauma, as a blow to the abdomen of 
the mother. There may have been an episode of uterine 
bleeding during the pregnancy. 
Other histories reveal prolonged strenuous labor, heavy 
sedation, prolonged obstetrical anesthesia. There may be a 
history of instrumental delivery, or breech delivery. There 
may have been neonatal icterus with or without evidence of 
Rh negativity. There may have been neonatal cyanosis, pe-
riods of apnea; the newbom may have required oxygen for 
some period of time. 
During the first several months of life the infant may 
have suffered from some illness or intoxication. He may have 

42 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
experienced afebrile episode, often with vomiting and other 
symptoms. Viral infections producing precipitate perceptive 
deafness have been observed in the adult, and presumably 
will produce the same sudden darnage in the infant. lnfants 
often sustain head injuries, falling off a bed, out of a chair or 
carriage, or down a flight of stairs. Sometimes they are struck 
by falling objects. There may have been little or no evidence 
of significant intracranial damage, but, again, as an ap-
parently minor head injury in the adult may produce per-
ceptive deafness, the same kind of injury may cause deafness 
in the infant. 
It is important for the parents to be told that the deafness 
is not inherited but congenital whenever this is the case; 
that the infant was born with deafness, or aquired it post-
natally, from some extrinsic cause rather than because of 
some genetic defect which adversely affects the normal devel-
opment of the embryonie acoustic structures. lf an extrinsic 
cause can be determined with reasonable clinical certainty, 
one may be optimistic that subsequent children of this 
couple will be born with normal hearing. 
With increasing understanding and management in the 
care of the new-born many hazards of the neonatal period 
may be reduced, thereby protecting the new-born's auditory 
end organ and lessening the risks of the occurrence of deaf-
ness at this level of life. The prevention of accidents and 
illnesses during the early months of life need not be stressed 
for the sake of protecting the hearing alone; it must be 
remembered, however, that apparently minor illnesses or 
accidents may have as their only sequela perceptive deafness. 
In the light of this, obtaining a history from the parents 
may be a searching process. One wants to know why the 
parents suspect that the infant cannot hear; how recently 
this thought has been entertained. A mother may say how 
proud she felt because the new baby slept so soundly, un-

EVALUATION OF HEARING DEFECTS IN CHILDREN 
43 
disturbed by the noises in the home. But now he still sleeps 
in the presenee of noises which presumably should awaken 
him. The baby may make an effort to mirnie the mother's 
voiee, but does not respond when called by his name. He 
fails to turn towards her at the sound of her approaeh, as 
other ehildren do. Oeeasionally he jumps beeause of a sud-
den loud sound, as if eaught by surprise, but is inattentive 
unless the sound is unusually loud. 
If the baby is at the age when speeeh should appear he 
makes no effort to speak; he may laugh or emit various 
voeal sounds, but no word, or rarely an oceasional word, is 
uttered. Deaf infants will emit sounds for many months but 
if speeeh is not heard these voeal manifestations will beeome 
less and less frequent. 
Additional history will be enlightening in terms of other 
behavioral expressions of the infant. Are his height and 
weight development within normal limits? Has the infant 
attempted to crawl, sit, stand, walk? Does he grasp at objeets 
and play with them as do normal children of the same age. 
The presenee of other organie or psyehological pathology 
must be determined or excluded. The deviant behavior of 
some ehildren may be interpreted as the result of deafness, 
but on further examination entirely different pathology may 
be uneavered whereas the hearing turns out to be normal. 
The funetional examination of the pediatrie patient is de-
seribed in Chapter 10. 
(1) History 
Chronology of Study and Care of the 
Hard-of-Hearing Patient* 
(2) ENT Examination 
" Reprinted, by permission, from Heller, M. F., and Lindenberg, P.: The 
private practice of auditory rehabilitation. Ann. Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 63: 
130. Copyright 1954, Annals Pub. Co. 

44 
THE PATIENT'S HISTORY 
(3) Tests of equilibration when indicated 
(4) Additional medical studies when indicated 
(5) Tests of auditory function 
a. Pure tone threshold audiometry 
Air conduction 
Bone conduction 
b. Lateralization when indicated 
c. Stenger audiometry when indicated 
d. Recruitment audiometry when indicated 
Binaural alternate loudness balance 
Monaural loudness contours 
e. Speech reception tests 
Phones 
Free field 
f. Speech discrimination tests 
Phones 
Free field 
g. Speech to noise ratio 
h. Galvanic skin response pure tone audiometry when indicated 
i. Hearing aid selection 
(6) Impression made of auricle and meatus, model for perma-
nent insert 
(7) Speech analysis 
(8) Staff consultation 
(9) Patient consultation 
a. Discussion of problern 
b. Recommendations 
Medical therapy 
Surgical therapy 
Rehabilitation: Hearing aid (written prescription), Auditory 
training, Speech (lip) reading, Speech correction, Program 
planning. 
(10) Follow-up services 
a. Reexaminations and retesting 
b. Hearing aid reevaluations 
c. Studies of speech 
d. Studies of speech (lip) reading proficiency 

5 __________________________ _ 
PURE TONE A.UDIOMETRY 
The results of a test are no better than the eompeteney of 
the person performing the test. Perfeet equipment in the 
hands of someone untrained, disinterested, or unimagina-
tively following printed instruetions will not produee eon-
sistently aeeurate, worth-while test results. 
Testing the patient's hearing implies testing the tester's 
ability. Eaeh phase of testing is based on prineiples. Ex-
perienee and intelligenee permit one to reeognize when 
valid results are being obtained and when the results are 
spurious. Audiologie and otologie experienee are neeessary 
to reeognize inaeeuracies, ineonsisteneies and mistakes. Oe-
easionally apparent paradoxes in the findings are not in-
eonsistent. 
Testing a patient's hearing is more than the investigation 
of some diserete defeet of an organ loeated peripherally and 
physically on the lateral side of the skull. Intimately affili-
ated with the otic organ is a brain, a personality, a whole 
being, all of which are responding to test stimuli in a eritieal 
and often threatening situation. Testing a patient's hearing 
is really testing a whole person, and a mere pusher of but-
tans and twister of dials will fail utterly. 
Some patients eooperate well when tested. They aeeept 
the situation with equanimity and ean talerate being seru-
45 

46 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
tinized and challenged. Other patients are apathetic, tense, 
frightened, hostile, aggressive, resentful, indifferent, or pas-
sive. Some patients in addition to their otic physical ail-
ment may have other physical ailments. Still other patients 
have an anxiety neurosis, some are obsessive compulsive, 
some are schizophrenic, some have other psychoses. Some 
patients hallucinate, some are almost catatonic; others are 
challenged by any test and must "pass" it. Some try to squeeze 
out the last bit of sound they can hear, others will stop listen-
ing once the tone drops below a loudness level which holds 
their interest. There is nothing routine or automatic in the 
testing of hearing. There are steps of procedure which fol-
low one another, but occasionally the pattern may be changed 
because of the personality of the patient. It must be assumed 
that the otologist is expert in presenting the many tests, or 
enjoys the services of an audiometrician of such competency 
and integrity and intelligence that the latter's work can be 
depended upon without question. 
After the history has been obtained and the otorhino-
laryngological examination performed, testing of hearing 
is the next item on the agenda. The patient is told what he 
can expect and what is wanted of him. He is told that he 
will wear a phone or receiver over his ear through which 
soft sounds will be heard; when he hears a sound he is to 
signal that he has heard, and the sound will stop. He will 
then hear it a little softer and again he will signal that he 
has heard it and again the sound will stop. The sound will 
be made softer and softer until he no Ionger hears it. 
Adults may signal in several ways. In a usual method the 
patient raises his hand each time he hears the sound and 
lowers it when the sound stops. Another signaling device 
permits the patient to operate a button which activates a 
light in view of the tester. (Some patients forget to remove 

AIR CONDUCTION AUDIOMETRY 
47 
the finger after having pressed the button when the tone is 
in terru p ted.) 
Generally the most satisfactory signal on the patient's part 
is to Iet him respond with "yes" each time he hears the stim-
ulus. There are several advantages to this. He participates 
more actively and naturally when he replies to a sound with 
a verbal response. He is less isolated if he is permitted to 
speak, which relaxes him. He may demonstrate changes in 
his voice volume as the tone intensity becomes greater or 
less, which is a good indication to the tester of the patient's 
subconscious reactions to the changes of loudness. This is 
particularly important when testing patients with deafness 
of non-organic origin, so-called psychogenic deafness. 
Children's cooperation can be obtained by making the 
test a simple game. The child is given a noise-maker such as 
a cowbell or toy "cricket" and instructed to signal with the 
toy each time he hears the sound in his ear. 
Air Conduction Audiometry 
It is desirable to start with the intensity of each tone at 
about the suspected threshold of the patient's hearing. Same 
patients if they are first introduced to a loud sound may be 
unresponsive to softer ones that follow. lf they learn to Iisten 
to and for soft sounds at the beginning of the test, their 
thresholds may be obtained more easily and rapidly. Experi-
ence has demonstrated that the 1000 cycle frequency is an 
effective point of departure. After the threshold of this fre-
quency has been obtained, one may then test the ascending 
or descending octaves successively. The tester may prefer to 
start with an intensity below the patient's threshold and 
slowly increase the intensity until the patient signals that he 

48 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
has heard. The stimulus is immediately interrupted and the 
intensity is decreased 5 decibels and the stimulus is reintro-
duced. Each time the patient responds the intensity is re-
duced 5 decibel steps until the patient no Ionger indicates 
that he has heard. 
If one ear hears normally or better than the other, the 
better ear should be tested first. This allows the patient to 
become familiar with the procedure and will also demon-
strate if he is responding properly and accurately. 
The poorer ear is then tested for air conduction without 
masking. If the air conduction thresholds between the two 
ears at several frequencies are no greater than 35 decibels, 
usually masking of the better ear is not indicated. * If the 
difference between the two is greater than 35 decibels at 
some frequencies, the better ear should be masked at those 
frequencies where the difference is greater. lt is important to 
note whether there is a threshold shift of the poorer ear 
when the better ear is masked. Frequently the difference 
between the unmasked threshold and masked threshold may 
be only 5 decibels, which is negligible. At times the differ-
ence may be marked. The tester may find it necessary to re-
check by varying the masking intensity to determine if he 
has masked adequately. 
Masking 
The purpose of masking is to eliminate temporarily the 
hearing of the ear which is not being tested. If the intensity 
of a tone stimulusentering one ear is great enough, this tone 
can travel through the skull, or araund it, and be heard by 
the ear not being tested. The patient may not and usually 
• Opinions vary among authorities. It is the author's practice to test first 
without masking and then with masking in order to be able to evaluate the 
effect of the masking. Some factors which may influence the decision are (1) 
lateralization and (2) the acuity of hearing of the better ear. 

MASKING 
49 
does not recognize that the tone is crossing over and merely 
reports that he hears the stimulus. One way whereby the ear 
not being tested can be occluded is to keep it occupied by 
another sound-a masking sound. 
Measurements have determined that the skull has an im-
pedance of between 55 decibels and 65 decibels. Intensities 
greater than 65 decibels will cross through the skull, from 
one side to the other, and be heard as sound by the other 
ear. The problern is to obtain a masking sound whose own 
spectrum is wide enough to embrace the frequencies of the 
several tones used during the test, to obtain an intensity of 
sound that accomplishes effective masking, and to avoid such 
intensities of the masking sound that would cross over to 
the opposite ear-the one being tested-and thereby mask 
both ears. 
If no masking is employed, a totally deaf ear can demon-
strate an apparent threshold of hearing. This is a shadow 
curve reftecting a response to the stimulus by the better ear. 
The intensity of the stimulus entering the skull on the side 
of the deaf ear is great enough to penetrate the skull and 
cross over to excite the end organ of the opposite good ear. 
Sufficient masking of the better ear will suppress the shadow 
curve. Masking of between 60 decibels and 75 decibels will 
usually accomplish this. 
Several instruments have been used to produce a masking 
noise. An early masker was the Barany alarm apparatus 
which produced an uncalibrated rattling sound of low fre-
quencies. The contemporary masking instruments are elec-
tric vacuum tube systems which produce either a saw tooth 
noise or a white noise. Many audiometers have a masking 
circuit built into the instrument which can be brought into 
play by turning on the masking switch. The intensity of the 
masking tone can be controlled by an attenuator. 
Usually an intensity of 60 decibels of masking noise is suf-

50 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
ficient to assure adequate masking. At times 50 decibels of 
masking may be sufficient, and rarely 80 decibels and more 
may be necessary. There does not seem to be a hard and fast 
rule. The tester may have to repeat the audiometry with 
varying intensities of masking after which he should be able 
to decide which test demonstrates sufficient masking, insuffi-
cient masking or over-masking. Masking is to be used dis-
criminately, when there are appropriate indications. Rou-
tine unplanned masking may produce erroneous results just 
as readily as the lack of its application when masking is in-
dicated. 
An occasional patient will be met who has monaural per-
ceptive deafness of one ear and conductive deafness of the 
other ear. Such a situation will tax the ingenuity of the 
tester but by repeated testing of each ear with and without 
masking of the opposite ear an accurate audiogram of each 
ear can be obtained. 
Bone Conduction Audiometry 
Bone conduction audiometry is obligatory, because the 
functional diagnosis is predicated on a comparison of the air 
conduction thresholds and the hone conduction thresholds. 
This is fundamental. Functional diagnosis is generally im-
possible unless both procedures are performed. 
The technique of hone conduction audiometry is ident-
ical with that of air conduction audiometry. The hone con-
ductor should be placed firmly against the mastoid process. 
Occasionally a particular point on the skull in the region 
of the mastoid process will be found where the tone is heard 
better than in the immediate vicinity. The point where the 
patient reports that he hears best is selected for placement 
of the hone conductor. 

LATERALIZATION 
51 
If the air conduction thresholds of both ears throughout 
the auditory spectrum are essentially alike, masking of either 
ear is usually not indicated. If the difference between the 
two ears is more than 35 decibels masking of the better ear 
may be indicated, both for air conduction and for bone 
conduction. 
Lateralization 
In an effort to determine more exactly the necessity for 
masking, lateralization tests for each frequency should be 
performed. The hone conductor is placed on the forehead 
in the midline. The patient is exposed to each of the fre-
quencies of 250 cps through 4000 cps at the maximum of the 
attenuator. The patient reports to the tester where he hears 
the tone: in the head, in the midline, in the right ear or in 
the left ear. Some patients are not sure where they hear the 
tones. The patient's responses should be written on the audio-
gram at each frequency: R for lateralization to the right ear, 
L for lateralization to the left ear, and a vertical arrow if 
there is no lateralization. It is not unusual to find right 
lateralization at one frequency, left lateralization at another 
frequency, and no lateralization at other frequencies. Hence 
to report that a patient lateralizes to one ear or another 
without indicating the frequency and without having tested 
all the frequencies implies incomplete and inadequate test-
ing for lateralization. 
If lateralization is to the poorer-hearing ear (usually sug-
gesting conductive deafness), masking of the better-hearing 
ear is generally unnecessary. Lateralization to the better-
hearing ear invariably demands masking of this good ear 
when testing the poorer ear by bone conduction as well as 
by air conduction. 

52 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
Threshold 
The threshold point is not necessarily the softest tone, of 
least intensity, to which the patient responds at the moment. 
As in other physiological tests of threshold, it is an average 
of several repeated observations. The technique in testing 
hearing audiometrically is as follows: obtain, for each fre-
quency, the last and least intensity to which the patient re-
sponds, increase intensity by 5 decibels, obtain the pa-
tient's response, decrease intensity by 5 decibels thereby 
bracketing the threshold point. In this way a 50 per cent 
recognition of the presence of the tone is obtained, and this 
50 per cent average is the accepted threshold in decibels, for 
each specific frequency. 
Caution should be exercised when exposing the tones to 
the patient. With long exposures, particularly at high inten-
sities, ears may become fatigued, or adapt, thereby altering 
the threshold. The acuity of hearing may be reduced and 
erroneous thresholds will be obtained. To avoid such arti-
facts the tones should be exposed only briefly, particularly 
when the higher intensities are required. This same caution 
should be observed when the recruitment tests are performed 
(See Chapter 6). 
Warbling and Other Devices 
At about threshold some patients are not sure they are 
really hearing the tone. Sometimes the patient can be made 
more attentive by increasing the intensity just enough to 
remind him what he is listening for. At times warbling holds 
the patient's acoustic attention. Warbling consists of rapid 
minute changes of frequency about the frequency being 

WARBLING AND OTHER DEVICES 
53 
tested. This minute shifting of frequency catches the pa-
tient's hearing attention as he can more readily recognize 
contrasting frequencies at threshold than a steady pure-tone 
stimulus. 
A sweep frequency audiometer permits hand operation to 
produce warbling. The frequency selector is rotated rapidly 
and minutely about the frequency being tested. Same audio-
meters have a warbling unit built into the equipment, which 
when placed in the circuit automatically produces the warb-
ling effect. 
One of the problems the patient encounters is to distin-
guish between the tone at about threshold and his tinnitus. 
vVarbling is one method of circumventing the interference 
or masking effect of the tinnitus. Another effective tech-
nique is to tell the patient to listen for the nurober of times 
he hears the tone in a quick succession of "pips." The tester 
will interrupt the stimulus so that the patient is exposed to 
it from one to four times. The patient teils the tester the 
nurober of times he has heard the tone; as lang as he gives 
the correct numbers one can feel confident that the testing 
is progressing reliably. This technique is effective with some 
children, also, after about five years of age. 
Another method is to tell the patient to hum or whistle 
or sing the tone when he hears it. This helps him to dis-
tinguish the tone stimulus from his tinnitus and also tends 
to keep him more attentive. 
Occasionally a patient is loath to respond to minimum 
threshold stimuli. This may be psychological or may have 
medicolegal implications. The patient's facial expressions, 
fixity of the eyes and eyelids, and general body attitude offer 
clues by which the tester can suspect that the patient is hear-
ing but is doubtful about having heard or is trying to con-
ceal that he has heard. 

54 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
Equipment Check 
Familiarity with one's equipment is requisite for working 
competently and swiftly so that the patient does not tire or 
become confused. Familiarity with the testing techniques 
allows one to vary the procedure and thereby check on the 
patient's reactions, and to assure oneself that the replies are 
reasonably consistent and accurate. Some understanding of 
how and why the equipment works as it does helps the ob-
server to recognize that a test may or may not be progressing 
satisfactorily. The equipment may develop defects. It com-
prises wires, vacuum tubes, attenuators, frequency selector 
systems, electric contacts, soldered electric connections, air 
conduction receivers, hone conductors, magnetic tape re-
corders, disc players, amplifying systems, loud speakers and 
many other parts. A defect in any of these can alter the cal-
ibration of the equipment. For example, electric contacts 
may corrode, become dusty or dirty. These will interfere 
with the flow of electrical impulses or may produce scratchy 
noises in the receivers which the patient will hear and as-
sume are a test tone, and will reply accordingly. 
It is good practice to turn on the current of the system 
each working day, and leave it on until the day's work is 
completed. Turning off the current after each patient has 
been tested permits the system to heat and cool unevenly, 
thereby altering its performance. The wear and tear of keep-
ing the current on is negligible nor is the cost appreciable. It 
is advisable at least once a week to perform an audiometric 
test on oneself or someone else in the office, to check the 
operation of the equipment. Such a check is not time-
consuming and it avoids the sudden discovery, just as one 
wishes to test a patient, that the system is not in calibration. 
Air conduction receivers and hone conductors are rather 

THE AUDIOGRAM 
55 
delicate instruments, manufactured to perform faithfully 
and with fidelity. They can be damaged by falling to the 
floor or by some other similar impact. Over the years their 
acoustical characteristic may change. lf a receiver has been 
jarred, one should test its function before using it clinically. 
Audiometry should be performed on anormal hearing sub-
ject, who has been tested on previous occasions. If abnormal 
audiograms are obtained the receiver should be returned 
to the manufacturer for repair, recalibration or replacement. 
Since these receiversareexpensive to replace, and since time 
is lost while a receiver is useless, they demand respect and 
care. 
A certain feel for the equipment and the testing tech-
niques can be obtained by testing oneself. In doing so one 
realizes the sensations and efforts to Iisten to threshold in-
tensities. One becomes attuned to the subjectivity of tests 
and learns to anticipate the wonderment or bewilderment 
of many patients who may only partially realize the nature 
of these tests. When a patient is seated in a room which is 
sound treated, behind a closed door, and subjected to a test 
the outcome of which is of critical importance to him, the 
observer's empathy contributes to his comfort and coop-
eration. 
The Audiogram 
Uniformity of notations on the audiograms is desirable. 
There is growing a general agreement whereby certain sym-
bols have been standardized (Fig. 2). One satisfactory series 
of symbols is as follows: 
(1) Right EarJ Air Conduction 
A circle at each frequency indicates the threshold. The 

56 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
NAME 0F 
PATIENT---------------------------
DA~ ---------------
(fiiSTl 
CMIDOU) 
(LAll) 
AUDIOGRAM 
RECRUITMENT 
0 BINAURAL AlTER NA TE BALANCE 
(AUDIOMETER) 
0 EOUAL LOUDNESS CONTOUR 
-20 
-10 
0 
AVUA~O 
HEAIING 
10 
10 
20 
"' 
20 
30 
., 
30 
8 
e. 
<0 
<0 
30 
:ll 
30 
g 
60 
60 
70 
<!) 
70 
80 
z 
80 
"' 
~ 
90 
:I: 
100 
12S 
230 
SOll 
1000 2000 
<DOll 8000 
90 
1'oo 
12S 
230 
SOll 
1000 2000 
FIEOUENCY 
FREQUENCY 
LEGEND. 
TINNITUS 
RIGHT EAR 
LEFI EAR 
(RIO) 
IBlUE) 
AIR 
~ ·---· 
CONDUCTION 
b----0 ( WITH lfFT ) O--Q ( YIITH liGHT) 
~ 
I:AR MASKED 
f.At MASKEO 
NO RESPONSE 
• 
't' 
0 CONSTANT 
RIGHT 
0 INTERMITTENT 
0 NONE 
EAR 
CHARACTER 
SONE I I 
~I II I$ I I 
CONDUCTION 
NO RESPONSE 
FREOUENCY 
LEVEL (db) 
SUMMARY OF HEARING EVALUATION 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
LEFT 
RELIABILITY OF 
RESPONSES: 
NOTES-
SPUCH 
RECEPTION 
THRESHOlD 
(db) 
SPEECH OISCRIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
STENGER 
lOSS 
0POS. 0NEG. 
TOURANCE 
LEVEL (db) 
AVElAGE 
% 
DOEIFLU· 
LIMIT 
% 
lOSS 
LOSS 
INFEIIED THIESHOLD 
STEWART 
NOISE 
PBs 
LOSS 
.... ,.., 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
100 
"""' """ 
Fig. 2-Record form for hearing tests and hearing evaluation. 
<000 8000 
LEFT 
EAR 

THE AUDIOGRAM 
57 
thresholds are connected by a solid line. When a red pencil, 
(red for right ear) is used, the identification is emphasized. 
A triangle is used instead of a circle to indicate that left 
ear is masked. 
(2) Left Ear, Air Conduction 
A dot or "X" at each frequency indicates the threshold. 
The thresholds are connected by a broken line. A blue pen-
cil may be used for contrast. 
A square is used instead of a dot or "X" to indicate that 
right ear is masked. 
(3) Right Ear, Bane Conduction 
A box is drawn open to the right, and placed to the left 
of the frequency ordinate, with red pencil. 
(4) Left Ear, Bane Conduction 
A box is drawn open to the left, and placed to the right 
of the frequency ordinate, with blue pencil. 
(5) No Response 
When a patient fails to hear a tone at the maximum 
output of the audiometer the appropriate symbol with an 
arrow head or dart added is inscribed on the audiogram at 
the junction of the frequency ordinate and its maximum 
intensity abscissa. This indicates that the patient has been 
tested and has failed to hear at such frequencies either by 
hone conduction or air conduction or both. 
The shape and structure of these symbols permit them to 
be grouped neatly together when all the thresholds at a fre-
quency fall at the same point. There is no advantage to 
linking the hone conduction threshold symbols by lines. 
Familiarity with a uniform system of signs permits ready 
interpretation. The elimination of additional and unneces-

58 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
sary characters and lines makes for neatness and legihility. 
The appropriate symhols should he recorded on the audio-
gram, indicating that air conduction and hone conduction 
testing has heen performed at each frequency. There will 
he no misunderstanding as to whether or not all the fre-
quencies have heen tested, and what responses the patient 
has demonstrated. 
Functional Diagnosis 
The distinguishing feature contained in audiograms is 
the relationship hetween the air conduction thresholds and 
the hone conduction thresholds. An audiogram which por-
trays only air conduction thresholds depicts the threshold 
of hearing for pure tones. It depicts the comhined function 
of hoth the tympanic structures and the neural elements. 
But with air conduction thresholds alone, one cannot know 
audiometrically whether the lesion responsihle for the hear-
ing lass involves the middle ear conducting apparatus or the 
sensory end organ and neural tracts. When hone conduc-
tion thresholds are plotted, also, a differential may he dem-
anstrahle. An ohserver cannot determine from the con-
figuration of an audiogram the kind of pathology which has 
caused the deafness. The pathological diagnosis is hased on 
sound medical investigation only. 
Perceptive Deafness 
When raised air conduction thresholds and hone conduc-
tion thresholds are practically identical a functional diag-
nosis of perceptive, nerve, deafness is tenahle (Figs. 3, 4, 5). 

PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
-20 
-10 
AVERAGE O 
->-
H~A~ING 
10 
<JI 
20 
..... 
w 
Ol 
30 
ü 
uJ 
-40 
e. 
(/) 
50 
[ 
_r_ 
I 
-
[ 
--. 
~ 
< ~ 
r-
,..."\ 
I 
- ['\. 
I 
_r" V 
.... 
(.') 
0 
60 
..... 
"' 
70 
z 
80 
al 
<( 
90 
w :r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREOUENCY 
Fig. 3-Pure tone audiogram: right perceptive deafness, mild. 
-20 
- 10 
AVERA~Q 
H~ARING 
10 
Ui 
20 
..... 
LU 
Ol 
30 
u 
LU 
-40 
e. 
<JI 
50 
<JI 
0 
60 
..... 
"' 
70 
z 
80 
~ 
-~ 
-
(~ _,..._ 
~ 
~ 
_b 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
"""'i:IJ 
<( 
90 
w :r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
Fig. 4-Pure tone audiogram: right perceptive deafness, moderate, no 
bone conduction at 4000 cps. 
59 

60 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
_, 
.... 
II) 
30 
ü 
w 
4.0 
e. 
VI 
50 
VI 
0 
60 
..... 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
:;;;; 
< 
90 
w 
:X: 
100 
fl 
tt 
r+ 
l~ 
y 
'f 
li 
li 
" 
~ 
'\. 
) 
'""'1~ 
125 
250 
500 
1000 20 fo 
4C~o aoeo 
FREQUENCY 
Fig. 5-Pure tone audiogram: right perceptive deafness, severe, Jeft 
normal hearing ear masked both for air conduction and for hone 
conduction. 
-20 
-10 
AV~RA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
_, 
w 
[ 
[ 
,... -
[ 
,... 
---
'-
II) 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
VI 
50 
_.(D 
(p......,_ 
__,{. .,.--
"\ 
VI 
0 
60 
..... 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
"' 
< 
90 
.... 
:X: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREOUENCY 
Fig. 6-Pure tone audiogram: right conductive deafness. 

PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
61 
Conductive Deafness 
"\Vhen the bone conduction thresholds are approximately 
normal and the air conduction thresholds are raised (poor) 
the functional diagnosis is that of conductive deafness (Fig. 
6). 
Mixed Deafness 
Some audiograms reflect a functional loss suggesting a 
mixed, or combined, deafness. There is middle ear, conduc-
tive, deafness and also perceptive deafness (Fig. 7). 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
_. 
w 
c 
c 
c:a 
30 
u 
w 
40 
e. 
.(/J 
50 
Cl) 
0 
60 
_. 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
~ 
o .... 
c 
"""( ).... 
"""""( Lr 
I! 
~ 
~ 
< 
90 
w 
J: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
Fig. 7-Pure tone audiogram: right mixed deafness. 
Psychogalvanic Skin Response Audiometry 
Psychogalvanic skin response audiometry is a method of 
testing hearing with an audiometer by means of a condition-

62 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
ing process different from that ordinarily used. In routine 
audiometric testing the patient is instructed to signal each 
time he hears the test sound. These responses of the patient 
to an arbitrary acoustic stimulus are essentially artificial 
but purposeful as a means whereby the patient knows that 
the tester becomes aware the patient has heard the tone. 
Each time the patient signals he indicates that he has heard. 
Psychologically the test situation has become a conditioning 
experiment. 
There are times when this kind of conditioning cannot 
be effectively obtained. Infants and very young children ob-
viously cannot produce a predetermined motor response to 
communicate their awareness of test tones. Occasionally an 
adult may be unable to cooperate because of mental retarda-
tion. Also, there are patients who allege deafness which does 
not exist. Their motivation may be conscious for some ma-
terial gain, or it may be unconscious to serve some deep-
seated psychological need. 
Psychogalvanic skin response audiometry utilizes the elec-
trical potendals of the skin. These vary constantly as the 
result of physical, psychological and emotional influences. 
A sudden stimnlus often will produce a change in the skin 
potentials which can be registered by a sensitive galvano-
meter. 
Conditioning is obtained by exposing the patient to an 
audiometric tone, interrupting the tone, then shocking the 
patient with a mild faradic current produced by an induc-
torium (see Chapter 13). The stimuli of sound followed by 
a mild shock are repeated until conditioning has been es-
tablished. The patient, at some deeper than conscious Ievel, 
will equate the innocuous stimulus of sound with the un-
pleasant stimulus of electric shock, to which stimulus he 
will react. 
After conditioning has been established, the shock stim-

PSYCHOGALVANIC SKIN RESPONSE AUDIOMETRY 
63 
ulus is no Ionger employed. When the tone is heard-as long 
as the conditioning remains effective-the patient responds 
with momentary variations in his skin potentials. These 
brief changes are registered by the galvanometer and can be 
observed. With experience in this procedure the tester rec-
ognizes which changes in skin potentials are secondary to 
the stimulation produced by the test sound. 
The duration of conditioning varies considerably. Occa-
sionally the conditioning deteriorates as the audiometric 
testing is being performed, and when this occurs recondi-
tioning with the shock will have to be repeated. In some 
patients the original conditioning may be maintained 
throughout the entire testing operation for all the frequen-
cies. Frequently the patient must be conditioned when each 
new frequency is explored. 
The procedure is as follows: A frequency is selected-1000 
cps is a convenient point of departure-at an intensity which 
the tester thinks the patient can hear. The sequence of Stim-
ulation to effect conditioning is tone, interrupt, shock, in-
terrupt, pause; tone, interrupt, shock, interrupt, pause; this 
sequence is repeated several times. There is evidence that 
the conditioning has been established when the galvano-
meter indicates the patient's response to the sound before 
the shock occurs. Pure tone audiometry is performed while 
the tester notes the behavior of the galvanometer with each 
stimulation of the tone. When the galvanometer no Ionger 
indicates a response, the threshold of hearing is considered 
to be the last decibel value at which the galvanometer 
responded. 
Results are not uniformly satisfactory. As in so many 
tests, valid conclusions sometimes can be made, at other 
times the evidence is inconclusive. 
Some factors which have nullified successful psychogal-
vanic skin response audiometric testing are: (a) Inadequate 

64 
PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY 
conditions where the patient's skin is so dry that even if an 
electrolyte is used at the contact of the skin and electrodes 
of the galvanometer no responses are observed; (b) Insula-
tion, when the skin of the fingers and hands is thickly 
cornified; (c) Movement; some patients are so active that 
they keep the galvanometer in constant agitation, so that 
meter movements induced by sound stimulus cannot be dis-
tinguished from adventitious bodily movements. 
PeepShow 
Audiometry with a peep show involves a conditioning 
process a little different from the ordinary hand signaling. 
The purpose of using a peep show is to entertain the child 
and to reward him when he signals that he has heard. As 
described in the chapter on equipment, the tester has a 
double interrupter switch interposed between the audio-
meter peep show and the patient. When the tester turns his 
switch to "on" the tone signal arrives at the receiver or loud 
speaker and the peep show electric switch is "armed." If the 
patient pushes his switch the interior of the peep show cab-
inet will be illuminated and the toys can be seen rotating 
on the turn table. When the tester turns his interrupter 
switch to "off" the tone is interrupted and the light in the 
cabinet is extinguished. The child must wait until he again 
hears a sound before he can successfully light up the cabinet 
and sec the toys. When the child becomes conditioned to 
this situation, pure tone threshold audiometry throughout 
the auditory spectrum for each ear is performed, during 
which the patient signals each time he hears the tone by 
operating his switch and causing the cabinet to be il-
luminated. 

6-----------------------------
RECRUITMENT 
Recruitment of loudness is an acoustic phenomenon ob-
served in some cases of perceptive deafness. Notall ears with 
perceptive deafness recruit, but recruitment signifies per-
ceptive deafness. Recruitment in hearing indicates that the 
locus of the pathology causing the perceptive deafness is 
probably in the cochlear structures. Normal-hearing ears 
do not demonstrate recruitment, nor do ears with conduc-
tive deafness. In all probability recruitment does not occur 
in perceptive deafness due to retrocochlear lesions, although 
final opinion on this must be held in abeyance. 
Recruitment is the response of an ear with impaired hear-
ing to a sound stimulus of an intensity above its threshold 
of hearing, enabling the ear to hear the sound as loud as if 
the hearing of this ear were not impaired. An ear which 
recruits demonstrates subnormal sensitivity at low intensi-
ties but at higher intensities appears to approach normal 
sensitivity. You may recall that Grandma complained you 
were mumbling, but that when you talked loud enough for 
her to hear you she complained you were shouting. Quite 
right. You were shouting and she was recruiting and your 
voice was as loud to her as it sounded to you. 
Some impaired ears behave differently from other 1m-
65 

66 
RECRUITMENT 
paired ears at threshold intensities and at above threshold 
intensities. This has diagnostic significance. Recruitment 
tests may substantiate the diagnosis of conductive deafness. 
The tests may substantiate the diagnosis of nerve deafness 
due to cochlear pathology. They may also suggest as cause 
of the deafness the presence of pathology more centrally sit-
uated within the cranium. The clinical application of the 
phenomenon of recruitment described by Fowler opened up 
a new approach to understanding of cochlear physiology and 
functional pathology. Since his original clinical observations 
of binaural alternate loudness balance, considerable research 
has been performed for the further investigation of this 
fascinating subject, and undoubtedly much more knowledge 
of the behavior of the cochlea will be developed based on 
studies of recruitment. Shortly after Fowler's publications, 
Reger described the clinical application of interfrequency 
matching, which generally is expressed as "monaural loud-
ness contours." 
In a patient who has one normal hearing ear and one ear 
with perceptive deafness due to cochlear pathology, recruit-
ment can readily be demonstrated by the technique of bi-
naural alternate-loudness balance. If there is deafness of 
both ears they cannot be used for comparative exploration, 
and each ear must be matched against itself. One test for 
this is monaural loudness contours. 
Binaural Alternate-Loudness Balance 
Complete Recruitment 
Let us assume that the right ear has a normal threshold 
for hearing throughout the auditory spectrum, and that the 
left ear demonstrates a flat loss of 50 decibels both for air 
conduction and hone conduction. Although an audiometer 

BINAURAL ALTERNATE-LOUDNESS BALANCE 
67 
with one receiver can be used, the test is more easily per-
formed with a two-channel audiometer with two air con-
duction receivers. Place a receiver over each ear. • Set the 
frequency selector for example at 1000 cps. Set each attenua-
tor at 10 decibels above the threshold of each respective ear. 
Stimulate one ear, interrupt, stimulate the other ear, in-
terrupt. The patient has been instructed to report in which 
ear the tone sounds louder. Let us assume he says the sound 
is lauder in his poor left ear. We increase the intensity in 
the right ear and repeat the maneuver of matehing the two 
ears. We continue to increase the intensity until ultimately 
he reports the loudness in the two ears as equal; possibly 45 
decibels in the right ear and 60 decibels in the left ear. Then 
we raise the intensity in the left ear to 70 decibels and by 
comparing the ears, as before, we now find that 60 decibels 
in the right ear and 70 decibels in the left ear seem equally 
loud. Again, we add another 10 decibels to the left ear up 
to 80 decibels and compare. We now observe that 80 de-
cibels in both ears sound equally loud to the patient. We 
had to add 80 decibels to the right ear and only 30 decibels 
to the left ear, above their respective thresholds, for the tone 
to sound equally loud at the same intensity at the same fre-
quency. At 80 decibels the left ear caught up to the normal 
right ear. The left ear demonstrates recruitment (Fig. 8). 
Over-recruitment 
Let us go one step further. We now stimulate the right 
ear with an intensity of 90 decibels and find that only 85 
decibels are needed in the left ear to sound as loud as 90 
decibels in the normal-hearing right ear. The left ear has 
over-recruited. The left ear is oversensitive. This over-
• If a single channel audiometer is used, the patient holds the receiver to 
one ear and listens to the Stimulus. On command of the tester the patient 
transfers the receiver to the other ear and listens to the stimulus. The 
receiver is transferred from ear to ear as binaural matehing is performed. 

68 
IX) BINAURAL ALTERNATE BALANCE 
0 
EOUAL LOUDNESS CONTOUR 
9 
,.... 
10 
1 
20 
30 
.(() 
50 
Q 1... 
60 
,..... ~ 
""' -
70 
'""' 
80 
,..... r:: 
- ~ 
90 
,... 
._ 
RECR UITMENT 
00 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCV 
Fig. 8-Binaural alternate-loudness balance at 1000 cps: left deafness, 
complete recruitment at 80 db, over-recruitment at 90 db. 
recruitment is additional evidence of abnormal function of 
the cochlear mechanism. Over-recruitment is not necessarily 
dernonstrahle when an ear recruits. 
Having performed the test of binaural alternate-loudness 
balance at one frequency, we can proceed to study the other 
frequencies similarly. As we obtain this information we plot 
it on an audiometric form, as part of the permanent record. 
Conductive Deafness, Absence of Recruitment 
Now weshall assume another example of monaural deaf-
ness. The right ear has a normal threshold of 0 decibels 
throughout the spectrum, and again the left ear has a ftat 
loss of 50 decibels. The hone conduction of the left ear is 
normal. We follow the same steps for balancing the two ears 
and, no matter how much we increase the intensity in the 
left ear, the matehing continues to demonstrate a difference 

BINAURAL ALTERNATE-LOUDNESS BALANCE 
69 
of about 50 decibels, within the limits of the audiometer. 
Even when we stimulate the left ear with an intensity of 100 
decibels, the loudness which the patient experiences is only 
equal to the loudness which the patient experiences in the 
right ear at 50 decibels (Fig. 9) . The left ear lags consistent-
ly behind the right ear by a measured difference of approxi-
mately 50 decibels, it does not "catch up" with the right ear, 
it does not recruit. We therefore conclude that the im-
pedence of the middle ear, due to whatever pathology we 
had previously noted during the otological physical exami-
nation, persists regardless of the intensity with which the 
ear is stimulated. 
Perceptive Deafness, Absence of Recruitment 
A third example can be offered. The air conduction thresh-
olds of the ears are as described in the two previous in-
stances. However, as in the first example, the bone conduc-
tion threshold of the left ear is 50 decibels, the same as the 
air conduction threshold. The ears are matched, but this 
time the observations are similar to those in the second ex-
ample, the patient with left conductive deafness. Recruitment 
cannot be demonstrated in this third patient with left per-
ceptive deafness. As previously stated, it is the current think-
ing that recruitment is a function of the cochlear system 
and that the observation of perceptive deafness without 
recruitment implies that a retrocochlear lesion is respon-
sible. Since expanding lesions and vascular lesion in the 
posterior cranial fossa, among others, may cause deafness, 
the diagnostic implications of perceptive deafness without 
recruitment are evident. 
Incomplete Recruitment 
In a final example of recruitment in monaural deafness, 

70 
I]] BINAURAL ALTERNATE BALANCE 
0 
EOUAL LOUDNESS CONTOUR 
0 
..... 
"1 
10 
20 
..... 
\ 
30 
\ 
-40 
l 
50 
,... 
60 
\ ~-
70 
l[: 
['11111' 
80 
90 
l 
RECRUITMENT 
100 
125 
250 
500 
101M' 2000 
<4000 
8000 
FREOUENCY 
Fig. 9-Binaural alternate-loudness balance at 1000 cps: left deafness, 
no recruitment. 
the right ear demonstrates normal hearing and the left ear 
demonstrates mixed deafness. The loss of hearing for the 
left ear by air conduction is greater than the hone conduc-
tion loss but the latter threshold is not normal. Binaural 
alternate-loudness balancing reveals that the left ear tends 
to recruit but that the recruitment is incomplete. Since this 
ear has both impedence (middle ear) deafness and neural 
(cochlear) deafness, there will be evidence of the cochlear 
loss by the partial recruitment and also evidence of the mid-
dle ear pathology by the partial lack of recruitment (Fig. 
10). 
Demonstration 
As an interlude let us perform an experiment. After de-
termining the threshold of two normally hearing ears in one 
subject, we pack one external auditory meatus with cotton 

BINAURAL ALTERNATE-LOUDNESS BALANCE 
71 
(KI BINAURAL ALTERNATE BALANCE 
0 
EOUAL LOUDNESS CONTOUR 
0 
,.... 
1 
10 
' 
20 
30 
1\ 
40 
l 
50 
Q -
60 
' 
70 
r.. 
80 
Q 
._ 
90 
00 
1'\a 
125 
250 
500 
10!M" 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
Fig. 10-Binaura1 a1ternate-1oudness ba1ance at 1000 cps: 1eft deafness, 
incomplete recruitment. 
saturated with some bland oil or ointment. We then per-
form routine air conduction audiometry to determine the 
hearing loss produced by the packing. We will find that the 
occluded ear demonstrates a raised (poor) threshold for air 
conduction, and temporarily demonstrates conductive deaf-
ness. 
We now perform the test of binaural alternate-loudness 
balance. As previously described, the conductively deaf ear 
will be matched and balanced against the normal opposite 
ear at each frequency. We learn that we cannot find a com-
mon intensity where the tone will sound equally loud to 
both ears. The "poor" ear cannot catch up to the good ear; 
it will always lag behind. The intensity difference between 
the two ears remains approximately the same as the original 
difference of their thresholds. We have demonstrated that 
conductive deafness does not recruit (Fig. 9) . 

72 
RECRUITMENT 
Monaural Loudness Contours 
Bifrequency Matching; Interfrequency Matehing 
Let us assume that the patient presents an audiometric 
threshold of bilateral perceptive deafness; the curves of the 
two ears are identical and read: at 125 cps-0 decibels, 250 
cps-5 decibels, 500 cps-5 decibels, 1000 cps-10 decibels, 
2000 cps-40 decibels, 4000 cps-50 decibels, 8000 cps-60 
decibels. We cannot match or balance one ear against the 
other at the same frequencies, as in binaural alternate-loud-
ness balance, because at each frequency the thresholds of the 
two ears are the same. However we can match one frequency 
in an ear with another frequency in the same ear. We per-
form the following steps, all of which can be done with one 
audiometer but are accomplished more rapidly with a two-
channel system: 
The air conduction receiver is placed over one ear. The 
frequency selector is set at a frequency where the patient 
demonstrates a loss, as at 2000 cps. The attenuator is set at 
I 0 decibels above the threshold, which in this example 
would be 50 decibels. The second frequency selector is set 
at a lower frequency-at 1000 cps. The attenuator is set at 
10 decibels above this threshold, which would be 20 decibels. 
The tones will be introduced into one receiver successively 
with the result that the ear being tested will hear 1000 cps 
at 20 decibels and momentarily later 2000 cps at 50 decibels 
(stimulate at 1000 cps with 20 decibels, interrupt, stimulate 
at 2000 cps with 50 decibels, interrupt). The patient reports 
whether the first tone or the second tone seemed louder to 
him. Assurne that he states that the second tone (2000 cps) 
sounded louder. Leave the attenuator setting of 2000 cps at 
50 decibels and increase the intensity of 1000 cps, Iet us say, 
to 40 decibels. Stimulate at 2000 cps with 50 decibels, in-

MONAURAL LOUDNESS CONTOURS 
[XI EOUAL LÖUDNESS CONTOUR 
0 
10 
20 
~ 
30 
\ 
-40 
\ 
50 
~ 
60 
<>·--
70 
80 
90 
1 00 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
Fig. 11-Monaural (equal) loudness contours: right deafness at 2000 
cps, complete recruitment at 70 decibels. 
73 
terrupt, stimulate at 1000 cps with 40 decibels, interrupt. 
The patient now reports the second tone (1000 cps) sounds 
as loud to him as the first tone (2000 cps). Next increase 
the intensity of 2000 cps to 60 decibels and leave the atten-
uator of 1000 cps at 40 decibe1s. Stimu1ate at 1000 cps, in-
terrupt, stimulate at 2000 cps, interrupt. The patient states 
that 2000 cps sounds louder. Increase the intensity of 1000 
cps until it sounds as loud to the patient as 2000 cps. This 
time we find that 1000 cps at 55 decibels sounds as loud to 
this ear as 2000 cps at 60 decibels. W e will now set the 2000 
cps selector at 70 decibels and upon exploration we learn 
that 1000 cps at 70 decibels sounds as loud to the patient as 
2000 cps at 70 decibels. The two intensities seem equally 
loud to the same ear although the thresholds of hearing for 
this ear at the two frequencies differ by 30 decibels. Although 
there was a raised (poorer) threshold at 2000 cps, when the 
intensity was increased sufficiently the ear heard this tone 

74 
RECRUITMENT 
as loud as it heard another tone-1000 cps-which had a nor-
mal threshold (Fig. 11). 
Loudness Judgment 
Experiments on loudness judgments have been performed 
with normal hearing subjects. Observers listened to tones of 
predetermined intensities, then were instructed to alter the 
attenuator until the tone seemed half as loud as the original 
loudness, then subsequently twice as loud. These and other 
size differences at many frequencies were studied. Based on 
such observations a chart of loudness Ievels was drafted, in 
which the observers' subjective judgments of loudness were 
plotted against the decibels of physical intensities. Stevens 
employed the term sone as a unit of subjective loudness; one 
sone is the loudness to a normal hearing ear of 40 decibels 
of intensity of a 1000 cps tone. 
lt was observed that, with the same decibel increments, 
the loudness for low frequencies grows more rapidly than 
for high frequencies. Hence when monaural recruitment is 
observed by interfrequency matehing of a low frequency and 
a high frequency, although the intensities, in decibels, are 
the same and the apparent loudness of the two frequencies 
may appear to be the same, this may not necessarily be a I: I 
matching. Since, clinically, our purpose is to leam whether 
recruitment is present in a given instance, the quantitative 
values may be of relative consideration. 
The question may be raised at times which test should be 
performed, binaural altemate-loudness balance or monaural 
loudness contours. lt may be possible to perform both tests 
on a single patient. One ear may have a normal threshold 
while the other ear demonstrates unequal losses, the thresh-
olds being at different Ievels. Both tests can be performed 
in such an instance (Figs. 12 and 13). Some patients may 

LOUDNESS JUDGMENT 
75 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
-' 
w 
_, 
~ 
:J 
1-. 
-c r-
- ... 1 )-' 
'\ 
al 
30 
ü 
w 
4{) 
e. 
Cl) 
50 
Cl) 
0 
60 
_. 
C) 
70 
." 
t J:J ,, !lL! tl 
"t :r 
z 
80 
Cl! 
'"' 
90 
w 
:I: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
F!!EQUENCY 
Fig. 12-Pure tone audiogram: left perceptive deafness. See Fig. 13 
for recruitment tests. 
[]) BINAURAL ALTERNATE BALANCE 
00 EQUAL LOUDNESS CONTOUR 
0 
10 
20 
30 
-40 
50 
60 
Q 
,.... 
70 
LID>' 
r-
I• 
80 
a 
90 
L-. -
i ~"';.."C ~- ..... ~ 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
41~0 
FREQUENCY 
8000 
Fig. 13-Binaural alternate-loudness balance and monaural (equal) 
loudness contours demonstrated by one ear: left perceptive deafness. 
See Fig. 12 for audiogram. 

76 
RECR UITMENT 
think that a change of pitch is a change in loudness, so that 
they must be instructed to determine that they are deciding 
not on differences in pitch, but that they are measuring 
loudness only. 
Clinical Application 
The presence of recruitment has further practical and 
clinical significance. If we propose to a patient that he make 
use of the amplification provided by a hearing aid, we want 
to know in advance what difficulties may be encountered. 
Among these difficulties is a problern of recruitment. 
When a patient plans to wear a hearing aid, he anticipates 
that he will hear as a normal-hearing individual hears. This 
is what he wants. But if he requires amplification of such a 
magnitude that the ordinary sounds he hears through the 
aid are abnormally loud, he will rebel against the use of the 
aid. He notices that if he turns the volume of the aid down 
to a minimum he may hear just about as he would without 
the aid. If he increases the volume to what might be con-
sidered an average usable intensity, then all sounds are too 
loud. Ordinary speech sounds as though everyone were 
shouting; if he can reconcile hirnself to this problem, he 
notices that when a door slams, or when the horn of a motor 
car blasts, these noises are distressingly loud. He experiences 
pain in the ear, headache, occasionally dizziness, and other 
discomfitures. 
Frequently it is clinically observed that patients with per-
ceptive deafness demoostrate discrimination Iosses in the 
understanding of speech. Within acoustic tolerances, increas-
ing intensity of speech will not necessarily improve discrim-
ination. Often a Ievel of intensity is reached at which the 
patient's discrimination reaches its maximum, less than 100 

SUBJECTIVE FACTORS 
77 
per cent, after which further increases in intensity cause an 
increasing loss of discrimination. 
Discrimination Iosses are observed in perceptive deafness, 
usually among patients who recruit. Accordingly when re-
cruitment is found by the tests for it, discrimination Iosses 
can be anticipated. When prescribing a hearing aid, the 
otologist must anticipate that raising the volume of speech 
to which the patient listens may not improve the hearing 
for discrimination and may even aggravate the discrimina-
tion difficulties. 
Hence the study of recruitment has diagnostic signifi-
cance, prognostic implications, and research possibilities. In 
the functional examination of hearing, recruitment tests 
should be included whenever possible. 
Subjective Factors 
Recognition must be given to the mechanism beyond the 
ear; to the brain which is participating in these tests as weil 
as the patient's psychological structure. Because still other 
factors may be involved, a further consideration must be 
entertained. 
In performing the binaural alternate-loudness balance 
test, if one ear-for example, the right-is stimulated first 
each time, the patient may give consistent responses and 
appear to be able to make a valid comparison between the 
two ears. Whether or not recruitment is elicited is imma-
terial at this moment. We observe that the patient seems 
sure of his own observations. However, if we vary the pro-
cedure so that at one step in the matehing the right ear is 
stimulated first and then the left, and at the next step the 
left ear first and then the right, we may note that the pa-
tient's responses are not as consistent as they first appeared 

78 
RECRUITMENT 
to be. These variations may be physiological, functional, or 
psychological. lt is well, therefore, to vary the order of 
testing arbitrarily until there is assurance that-regardless of 
which ear is first stimulated-consistencies in responses can 
or cannot be determined. 
This applies also to the monaural loudness contour 
test, in beginning either with the lower frequency or the 
higher frequency and subsequently varying the order. Again 
a greater validity can be established. 
Difference Limen 
We now turn to the problern of determining the presence 
or absence of recruitment in those ears whose audiometric 
thresholds do not lend themselves to the technique of bi-
naural alternate-loudness balance or of monaural loudness 
contours. 
When we perform routine clinical audiometry we accept 
as the threshold of hearing a 50 per cent response at a fre-
quency with a certain intensity. Some patients, particularly 
those with perceptive deafness, respond 100 per cent of the 
time at one intensity and fail to respond 100 per cent of the 
time at an intensity of 5 decibels less. Their 50 per cent re-
sponse threshold must be somewhere between the two in-
tensities. Let us assume that a patient's 50 per cent response 
is between 50 and 45 decibels. With an attenuator of 5 de-
cibel gradations we cannot obtain a 50 per cent response, 
we know only that it is less than 50 and more than 45 
decibels. 
With a more discrete attenuator we can expose the pa-
tient to very small increases in intensity. The smaller the 
difference in intensity that an ear can detect in subjective 
terms as a change of loudness, the more sensitive that ear 

DIFFERENCE LIMEN 
79 
may be than another ear which requires greater increases 
in intensity before it recognizes an increase in loudness. Ac-
cordingly, an ear which can detect small increases in inten-
sity as increases in loudness may be recruiting, and the ear 
which requires larger increases in intensity may not be 
recruiting. 
Several clinical audiometers have been designed with an 
amplitude modulator, whereby the intensity can be in-
creased in steps of fractions of a decibel. The pulsing rate 
can be modified from 2 to 12 pulses per second, depending 
upon the specifications of the manufacturer. Two to 4 pulsa-
tions per second seems to be a satisfactory rate for clinical 
testing. 
After the threshold of a frequency has been determined, 
the difference Zirnen, D. L., can be sought by noting how 
much more intensity in fractions of a decibel is needed be-
fore the patient, or subject, notices some change in the tone. 
D. L. is the smallest <:hange in a given property of sound 
necessary to produce an observable change in sensation. The 
D. L. may be normal, abnormally small, or abnormally large. 
An abnormally small D. L. may indicate an increased sen-
sitivity of the ear, and an abnormally large D. L. may imply 
decreased sensitivity of the ear. 
Hirsh, in a recent study of a group of patients, has com-
pared their D. L.'s with the recruiting evidence as obtained 
by binaural or interfrequency matching, depending on each 
particular audiometric configuration. It was concluded that 
a correlation could not be established, and that there is in-
sufficient clinical experience and evidence to warraut the 
acceptance of the D. L. as a measurement of recruitment. 
Considerably more investigation is desirable before the D. L. 
can be accepted as a valid estimate of recruitment, compar-
ing favorably with the two established tests. 

80 
RECRUITMENT 
Difjerence Limen Difjerence 
Of the several techniques which have been developed to 
elicit the D. L., only the difference limen difference 
(D. L. D.) test will be described. The patient is informed 
that he will hear the tone continuously, but that he will 
eventually observe that the steady tonewill appear as a beat. 
He is to report when he becomes aware of the beat. 
A frequency, usually 1000 cps first, is selected on the 
audiometer at 10 decibels above the threshold of the fre-
quency and exposed to the patient through the air conduc-
tion receiver. The amplitude modulator is set in operation. 
At some point the patient reports that a beat of the tone is 
recognized. The decibel values are noted and the test is re-
peated until, after several trials, an average can be estimated. 
The attenuator is then raised to 40 decibels above the thresh-
old, and the procedure is repeated at this higher Ievel. The 
average decibel value of several trials is again obtained. The 
difference between the decibel ~ncrement obtained at 10 
decibels above threshold and at 4o decibels above threshold 
is the D. L. D. Smaller difference~ in increments in decibels 
presumably indicate an increased sensitivity, and also pre-
sumably this is evidence of recruitment. Greater differences 
in increments in decibels presumably indicate a lesser sen-
sitivity of the ear and an absence of recruitment. The sev-
eral frequencies of the spectrum pn be studied in this dual 
manner and the differences recorded. Jerger's original paper 
contains a description of his method of charting the results, 
whereby the D. L. D. is estimated. 

1----------------------------
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
Hearing ultimately is a psychological experience. Certain 
physical environmental changes act as stimuli which alter 
the minute-by-minute status of the organic physiological re-
ceptor acoustic apparatus. The stimulus must be of such 
dimensions that changes will occur in the receptors. This 
receptor system is part of a hierarchy in which the psycho-
logical mechanism plays a dominant role. 
One category of problems with which the otologist is con-
fronted has to do with patients whose receptor systems are 
impaired, so that an amount of defective hearing results. 
Another category concerns patients whose receptors function 
satisfactorily but whose psychological interpretation of 
acoustic stimuli becomes distorted, perverted, or is rejected. 
When tests are utilized in identifying so-called simulated 
deafness they should be considered not as isolated observa-
tions but within the context of the whole patient. 
The patient complaining of a hearing impairment but 
found to have a serviceable acoustic receptor organ and no 
cerebral pathology may psychologically reject the sounds of 
society since they would obligate him. He may be withdraw-
ing from responsibility, returning to a status of dependency, 
escaping from pressing reality. The deafness may also be 
81 

82 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
deliberately designed for some material gain. Resolving such 
problems calls upon the resources of the otologist and the 
psychiatrist, the former to diagnose, clarify and classify the 
deafness, the latter to uncover the motivation. 
Priest described his observations among military person-
nel. He reviewed and evaluated the many tests designed to 
study unilateral deafness. He emphasized the importance of 
examining the existence of unilateral deafness in military 
personnel, particularly when the patient denied the deaf-
ness, as weil as exposing feigned unilateral deafness. He also 
defined t:he role of the otologist and that of the psychiatrist. 
The tests for identifying deafness of nonorganic origin 
might be labeled "tests for the investigation of the com-
plaint of deafness." Be it remernbered that deafness is a 
symptom of disease, whether the pathology is organic or 
psychological or both. 
Observation during the Interview 
The observations begin when the patient first enters the 
physician's office. The otologist must be on the alert for 
clues of behavior, some of which may be gross, others min-
imal. The value of a patient's history depends not merely 
on what he says but how he says it, on his own interpreta-
tions and reactions to the chronological events he recites. 
One patient may appear overcomposed, another overanx-
ious, another indifferent, another vague, another overexact. 
Clinical judgment is taxed to the utmost in the effort to 
evaluate properly such behavior. 
The patient's history is explored in great detail. Some 
areas may be re-explored judiciously with different kinds of 
questions covering the same ground, possibly illuminating 
inconsistencies in the history. The physician can afford at 

OBSERVATION DURING INTERVIEW 
83 
least a benevolent skepticism of the complaint of any patient 
until he finds sufficient evidence to substantiate or doubt 
the patient's own opinions. 
To cite some examples: A patient may complain that he 
cannot hear the telephone ring, yet when the otologist's 
phone rings the patient may promptly stop conversing. Or 
the patient may state that he hears only when he faces the 
speaker directly, but if the otologist is careless or clumsy 
enough to drop an article to the floor, as he stoops to retrieve 
it he may ask the patient a question which is answered 
without faltering. A patient who has never had any 
auditory rehabilitation may volunteer that he depends pri-
marily on lip-reading (self-taught usually) , yet understand 
a conversation with the otologist who talks with a cigarette 
between his lips. The otologist upon completing the history 
may leave the patient to enter the examining room, calling 
to the patient to follow him. Alacrity in response may 
further fortify the physician's suspicions. Hirsh states that 
the clinical tests of hearing depend on arbitrary condition-
ing of the moment. Wehave shown examples of the patient's 
conditioning for everyday situations. Such an approach is 
sounder and more reasonable psychologically than are rec-
ommendations suggesting that derogatory remarks be made 
in the patient's presence and his reactions noted, or that a 
coin be dropped to see whether the patient hears the sound 
of impact. 
Patients with organic deafness tend to demonstrate behav-
ioral patterns as the result of their deafness. In the presence 
of the doctor they will usually face him and be attentive to 
the purpose of the meeting. They may make an effort to 
hear, but this effort usually appears controlled and subtle. 
In contrast, the patient alleging deafness, whether delib-
erately or unconsciously motivated, will often behave quite 
differently. He may sit down and assume an attitude as though 

84 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
he were unaware of the doctor's presence. He apparently is 
oblivious to the reason for this visit. The doctor may have 
to tap him to attract his attention, or remain ignored. Some-
times such patients will answer a question then turn away, 
so that with each question the patient demands some signal 
before he will pay attention to the doctor and attend to the 
next question. 
Other · patients may demonstrate exaggerated efforts to 
hear the doctor. They will draw up a chair and peer into the 
doctor's face, or each time the doctor addresses them they 
will throw their bodies forward as though to bridge the 
distance. Their efforts to hear are excessive, crude and elab-
orate. They may say they rely on lip reading, and may 
refuse to answer when the doctor obscures his face. However, 
they should be able to catch fragments of the conversation, 
and one can easily observe that the patient's eyes are leveled 
at the speaker's eyes and not at the speaker's lower face and 
lips. 
Some of these patients may wear a hearing aid, from which 
certain clues may be abstracted. The ear mold may not fit 
the auricle properly. The patient may fumble when he at-
tempts to remove the receiver and mold from his ear and 
when he tries to replace it. He may fail to turn off the hear-
ing aid when he removes the receiver from his ear. Efficient 
constant hearing aid users invariably turn off the instrument 
before they remove the receiver from the ear in order to 
avoid the squeal of acoustic feed-back and to economize on 
battery drain. The inexperienced or untrained individual 
is unfamiliar with these small measures. Such patients ex-
pose their lack of good hearing aid habits. 
Because such a person has serviceable unaided hearing, 
he usually turns the volume of the aid to a level which is 
comfortable for his relatively normal hearing. This amount 
of volume is insufficient for an individual who is as pro-

OBSERVATION DURING INTERVIEW 
85 
foundly deafened as he alleges. All one has to do is to listen 
with the hearing aid at the volume setting at which the 
patient is using it to know that the volume is insufficent 
for a very deaf person. 
If the doctor takes the aid from the patient he can inspect 
it to see if it shows evidence of usage and wear. A hearing 
aid which is in constant use will bear scratches and marks 
on the case and inside of the case from daily handling. An 
unused aid may appear brand new, or if the batteries have 
been left in the aid for a long time, the terminals may be 
corroded, and the case may be stained by a battery which 
has leaked. 
The doctor can remove the batteries from the case and 
casually return the aid and the batteries to the patient. The 
experienced hearing aid user will assemble the parts deftly. 
Other patients may study how to insert the batteries, and by 
their awkward movements reveal their unfamiliarity with 
the aid. 
lnterrogating the patient about how he uses the aid may 
expose him further. How many hours a day and under what 
conditions does he use the aid. How long will the batteries 
last, the "A" battery, the "B" battery. What is the cost of 
the batteries singly, and what is the annual cost. Where does 
he buy the batteries. How often does the aid need repairs 
and what are the costs. What is the life of a hearing aid cord 
before it wears and breaks, and must be replaced. How many 
cords are used a year. The organically hard of hearing aid 
user is able to answer such questions promptly and accu-
rately. The other patient may be no better informed than 
one unfamiliar with hearing aids. 
The organically hard of hearing patient who uses a hear-
ing aid and lip-reads efficiently will sometimes fail to hear 
exactly what has been said or will fail to understand. If a 
conversation is sufficiently lengthy he must fail occasionally 

86 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
in his acoustic and visual reception. Even with a hearing aid 
and expert lip reading, one cannot function with the same 
high efficiency as a normal-hearing person. lf a person is 
suspected of feigning deafness and performs as efficiently as 
a normal hearing individual, never mistaking what is said 
to him, one may justifiably wonder if the patient's hearing is 
as poor as he alleges. 
Out of his experience the doctor will learn to make use 
of certain words which are difficult for hard hearing persons 
to understand under their best listening conditions. When 
words like "illness" and "sickness" and others which are 
difficult to lip read are used during the course of conversa-
tion, the truly hard of hearing person may ask to have the 
sentence repeated, or may hesitate momentarily before reply-
ing as he tries to synthesize the meaning of the sentence. 
Other patients fail to demonstrate any difficulty in under-
standing these "difficult" words. They hear and understand 
more critically than most hard of hearing persons. They 
expose themselves by making mistakes of commission and 
omission. 
Generally patients with monaural deafness demonstrate 
astereophonia, difficulty in localizing the source of a sound, 
and when addressed from an unanticipated quarter invari-
ably gaze about in order to locate the speaker. The patient 
with non-organic monaural deafness fails to demonstrate the 
loss of localization of sound. 
Another clue, a very important one, is the patient's speech 
patterns, as described by Penn. Invariably in the presence of 
long-standing binaural deafness, abnormalities of speech 
will appear, the variations depending on the duration of the 
deafness, its severity and its type. Of course, factors other 
than impaired acoustic function will modify one's speech, 
but development of speech impairment is a concomitant 
of binaural deafness. Speech of normal intensity, inflection 

EXPLORATION BY TESTS 
87 
and quality tends to contradict the allegation of bilateral 
deafness until adequate explanations may be found. Speech 
is the consort of hearing, and impairment of the latter often 
results in deterioration of its companion. 
Clues during Clinical Exarnination 
U pon performance of the otorhinolaryngological examina-
tion, further clues may be observed. The patient may readily 
obey instructions given him. During the mirror inspection 
of the Iarynx, the patient is asked to close his eyes and then 
is instructed to phonate so that the movements of the Iarynx 
may be noted. The instructions are given at a low conversa-
tional Ievel. This examination is often sufficiently distract-
ing to make the patient forget about his hearing; if his deaf-
ness is nonorganic he may obey the instructions given by the 
otologist at a voice volume which he apparently had been 
unable to hear during the history interview. 
Exploration by Tests 
By this time, the otologist will have obtained some im-
pressions to be explored further by the various clinical tests 
of hearing. Often when preliminary observations have sug-
gested that the hearing loss cannot be severe, the air conduc-
tion audiogram may demoostrate a most profound loss. 
There may be marked discrepancies between the audiograms 
of the two ears; the presumed worse ear may be better audio-
metrically than the presumed better ear. The audiometric 
curves may reveal bizarre configurations not ordinarily 
encountered in organic deafness. The hone conduction 
thresholds may also demoostrate unusual patterns. 

88 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
If a continuous frequency audiometer is used, the follow-
ing may sometimes be observed. When the loss of hearing 
appears to be most profound audiometrically, the physician 
sets the attenuator at about 50 decibles for 1000 cps. Then 
without altering the attenuator he rotates the frequency dial 
up to 4000 cps. If the patient signals that he hears the tone 
at the higher frequency but signals that he no Ionger hears 
the same tone after an interruption, there is evidence that 
he has heard at an intensity which he now denies. He 
had mistaken change of frequency for an apparent in-
crease of loudness. This procedure can be repeated at lower 
intensities. 
If the audiometry is performed by having the patient 
respond with the word "yes" each timehe hears a tone, voice 
reactions may be observed. The moderately hard of hearing 
person and the normal hearing person usually will react with 
a change in voice volume to sudden wide fluctuations of 
intensity of the stimulus from the audiometer. If a patient 
alleging profound deafness responds with a loud "yes" to a 
tone of relatively great intensity and immediately with a 
soft "yes" to the same tone of much less intensity, the physi-
cian should infer that at some psychologicallevel the patient 
has reacted to the changes of intensities which he has heard 
and recognized as being of different levels of loudness. 
lf the patient is observed during the testing through a one-
way-vision window, not realizing that he is being watched, 
he may reveal by his facial and body reactions that he is 
restraining hirnself from responding or that he is in an 
anxiety-producing situation. If the patient uses the hand 
signal to indicate when he hears the tone, he may make 
small quivering movements of the fingers or hand, as though 
he is restraining hirnself from signaling while being aware 
of the tone. Many hard of hearing patients and normal 

EXPLORATION BY TESTS 
89 
subjects will demonstrate this kind of hesitating hand mo-
tion at threshold. The rate of eye blinking and the respira-
tory rate may change, indicating that the patient is aware 
of the stimulus, although he states that he does not hear the 
tone. 
Repeating pure tone audiograms at intervals of several 
days may demonstrate that the thresholds of hearing vary 
considerably and that the findings are consistently incon-
stant. 
Another test which explores hearing is the speech-to-
nois.e ratio test described by Doerfler and Stewart. They 
observed that the normal-hearing ear is able to hear and 
understand speech at an intensity level less than that of 
measured masking noise simultaneously introduced with the 
speech. The truly hard of hearing ear usually will behave in 
a similar fashion. The patient with nonorganic deafness may 
state that he cannot hear the words because of the noise or 
object to a noise level of less intensity than that at which 
he had apparently been unable to hear speech. This indicates 
that he has heard less noise (in decibels) interfering with 
lauder speech (in decibels) or he has heard the masking 
noise at an intensity which he previously had denied. 
Another clue during the speech reception test is obtained 
when the patient responds with half syllables of the spon-
daic words (see Chapter 11) . At other times such patients 
make up new words in response to the spondaic ward stimu-
lus. This kind of response, except in young children, 
mentally retarded patients, patients of foreign birth who 
speak and understand English poorly, and those with severe 
perceptive deafness, should make the observer suspicious of 
the patient's claims of acoustic impairment. 
The Lombard test sometimes exposes or confirms binaural 
alleged deafness and also monaural alleged deafness. Mask-

90 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
ing noise, such as compressed air from the pressure suction 
apparatus usually found in a nose and throat office, intro-
duced into both ears through a binaural stethoscope while 
the patient is reading aloud, often causes a variety of reac-
tions. If hearing is normal or nearly so, most people will 
raise their voice volume in response to the masking of their 
hearing created by the noise in order to hear themselves 
read. Patients with nonorganic deafness may raise their 
voices or may read in a halting fashion or may mispronounce 
words. Occasionally the patient will drop the voice to an 
almost inaudible level. These patients may complain of 
pain or discomfort or demonstrate some evidence of distress 
or anxiety. 
The Lombard test helps to confirm or uncover monaural 
deafness. The test may be performed in the following man-
ner: While the patient reads aloud, masking noise is first 
introduced into the "deaf" ear. If there is an increase in 
voice volume, we give credence to the thought that the ear 
does hear. Even if the voice does not change, we then mask 
the better ear. If there is an increase in voice volume, we sus-
pect that the "deafened" ear is impaired. If there is no 
change in voice volume when the good ear is masked, we 
suspect that the allegedly deafened ear is permitting the 
patient to monitor his own speech volume. 
The Stenger test for unmasking of simulated monaural 
deafness can be performed with tuning forks in two ways. 
V sually the 512 decibel fork will suffice for the procedure. 
Two identical forks are used. The distance at which the 
good ear has heard the fork is obtained. The patient is 
blindfolded. Both forks are excited simultaneously. One fork 
is brought close to the alleged deaf ear, say to three inches. 
If the "bad" hears well, the fork applied to this ear will 
mask the hearing of the good ear so that it will not hear 
its own fork at the distance at which it previously did; the 

EXPLORATION BY TESTS 
91 
patient will therefore fail to indicate that he hears the fork 
with the good ear. 
The Stenger phenomenon can be demonstrated with a 
binaurally normal hearing person. Two forks of the same 
frequency are excited at the same time. One fork is brought 
to about six inches from one ear. The subject states that he 
hears this fork. The second fork is then brought to within 
three inches from the other ear. The subject says that he no 
Ionger hears the first fork. The second fork is removed and 
the subject again hears the first fork. 
The patient with significant monaural deafness when so 
tested will signal that at all times he hears the fork in the 
good ear. By contrast, the patient with monaural non-
organic deafness will respond as does a binaurally normal 
hearing person. 
The Stenger test can be performed with one tuning fork. 
The stem 1s inserted into a piece of rubber tubing about 
3/8 inch in diameter and about thirty inches long. An olive 
tip is inserted into the other end of the tubing. The patient 
is instructed that he will inform the observer only when he 
hears the fork in the good ear. The patient is then blind-
folded. The olive tip is inserted into the external meatus 
of the good ear and the fork is excited. The patient signals 
that he hears the tone in the good ear. The prongs of the 
fork are then brought close to the "bad" ear. If the bad ear 
hears the tone, it will mask the hearing of the good ear 
cerebrally, the sound source of which is thirty inches away 
via the tubing. The patient will necessarily signal that the 
good ear no Ionger hears the sound, thereby indicating that 
the "bad" ear hears. As an experiment, the reader can 
readily perform this test on himself. 
The Stenger audiometry test requires more elaborate 
equipment, permitting more precise observations. One audi-
ometer and two receivers, with an additional switch and 

92 
DEAFNESS OF NONORGANIC ORIGIN 
circuit before the phones, can be used. Two balanced audio-
meters, each with its own receiver, or a two-channel audio-
meter, are equally serviceable. 
Usually the frequencies of 500, 1000, and 2000 cps. are 
tested. The better ear will receive the tone at an intensity 
Ievel of about 15 decibels greater than its threshold. The 
patient reports that he hears the tone in the good ear. The 
same tone is then poured into the impaired ear at a Ievel 
of 15 decibels greater than that which the good ear is hear-
ing. A patient with normal hearing will report that the 
"good" ear, or the one which first heard the sound, no Ionger 
hears it. When the tone to the second, or "bad" ear is inter-
rupted, the patient reports that he hears the tone in the first 
ear again. Actually, the two ears receive the same tone simul-
taneously although at two different intensities, the greater 
intensity in the "bad" ear masking, cerebrally, the tone in 
the better ear receiving the lower intensity. Patients with 
organic monaural deafness will not succumb to this masking 
until the intensity in the impaired ear is relatively large. 
Patients with nonorganic monaural deafness will demons-
trate the masking phenomenon. Two conclusions may then 
be drawn: First, the alleged deafened ear does hear, and, 
second, we know that the threshold for the particular fre-
quency is no higher than the number of decibels which 
masked the normal, or better, ear. For example, if 15 decibels 
in the good normal ear is masked by 30 decibels in the 
"deaf" ear, then the threshold of the "deaf" ear for a given 
frequency can be no higher than 30 decibels and may be 
lower (better). Testing the masking thresholds of the middle 
three frequencies and determining that a positive Stenger 
test is obtained at approximately serviceable hearing Ievels 
for these frequencies is evidence of, at most, minimal acoustic 
loss for the ear so tested. 
The testing of hearing by pure-tone audiometry with a 

EXPLORATION BY TESTS 
93 
psychogalvanometer offers one method whereby the coopera-
tion of the patient by volitional signaHing can be dispensed 
with. Reasonably accurate audiometric pure-tone thresholds 
can be elicited usually if technical, physical or mechanical 
factors do not interpose artifacts or uncontrollable variables. 
When reliable positive results are obtained, they can be 
given as much credence as subjective tests. Interestingly, 
many patients realizing that their hearing has been tested 
"electrically" without any contribution on their part, as by 
signaling, often give reasonably accurate subjective audio-
metric thresholds immediately thereafter. 

8-----------------------------
TUNING FORKS AND BARS 
Prior to the advent of the audiometer, tuning forks and 
other instruments were used for routine clinical testing of 
hearing. Tuning fork testing is still performed. Many hear-
ing tests are identified by the names of those who intro-
duced them. The Schwabach test compares the duration of 
bone conduction of the patient with the duration of the bone 
conduction of normal hearing. The Weber test is employed 
to ascertain the lateralization of sound by bone conduction. 
The Rinne test compares the duration of hearing by air 
conduction and by bone conduction. The Gelle test was 
conceived in an effort to determine the mobility of the 
stapes. The Stenger test is used to expose simulated monaural 
deafness. 
The earlier tuning forks were made of steel. The low 
frequency forks were very heavy and unwieldy. Steel forks 
rust, which results in alterations in their acoustic ~haracter­
istics. Often fingerprints become "etched" in the rust. Some 
forks were nickel-plated; when the plating peeled, adventi-
tious sounds were produced. 
Eventually aluminum alloy forks were developed. • Their 
weight is about one-third that of equivalent steel forks. They 
" By the Riverbank Laboratories of Geneva, Ill. 
94 

TUNING FORKS AND BARS 
95 
are non-rnagnetic, unplated, non-rusting and non-tarnishing. 
If given proper care they rernain constant for rnany years. 
Usually a case lined with soft fabric is furnished to protect 
the forks frorn nicks or scratches. Misuse of forks or careless 
handling, irnproper excitation will produce alterations in 
their qualities and characteristics. 
Alurninurn alloy forks are rnade of bar stock of various 
dirnensions. Basically a tuning fork is a bar of rnetal, pre-
senting two prongs blending into a cornrnon stern. When the 
fork is excited the prongs vibrate transversely and the stern 
longitudinally. The size and weight of the bar or fork de-
terrnines its frequency. 
When a fork vibrates the tone is ernitted frorn several 
surfaces of the prongs: frorn the external sides, the lateral 
sides, the edges where these sides rneet, and frorn the tips. 
The prongs vibrate with a wide arnplitude of lesser in-
tensity cornpared with the stern which vibrates with less 
arnplitude but greater intensity. The edges produce the 
least intensity, the tips generate a greater intensity, and the 
lateral and outer surfaces propagate still greater and about 
equal intensities. Early rneasurernents suggested that the in-
tensity produced by the outer surfaces of the prong rnay be 
slightly greater than that ernitted by the sides. 
These variations of intensities can readily be dernons-
trated. Hold the fork by the stern and excite it. Bring the 
prong close to the ear and present the several surfaces to be 
heard by air conduction. Holding the fork vertically, rotate 
it slowly: the loudness will vary appreciably. If an edge of 
a prong is held at an optirnurn angle in relation to the ear, 
very little sound will be heard. If the fork is then rotated 
only slightly the loudness will increase considerably. 
It follows that the rnanner of presentation of the forks is 
an irnportant factor, and when testing hearing the forks 
should always be presented uniforrnily and in a constant 

96 
TUNING FORKS AND BARS 
manner. The outer surface of a prong should be turned 
toward the auricle when testing for air conduction. 
Forks may be of two types, either of single vibrations or 
of double vibrations. It is necessary to distinguish between 
the two, as the difference between similar forks of single 
vibrations and double vibrations is a whole octave. 
The better sets of forks are, perhaps, the Hartman series 
of five forks ranging from 128 dv to 2048 dv, and the Edel-
man set of eight forks ranging from 16 dv to 4096 dv. Some 
otologists also include the two Bezold forks; the unweighted 
108 dv usually being used for the Weber and Schwabach 
tests, and the 435 dv for Rinne testing. 
The contemporary aluminum alloy forks are available in 
several sets: dass A 1, dass A 2 and A 2M, and dass A 3 
and A 3M. The Ietter M designates the medical sets of forks. 
The forks can be tuned to a choice of pitches: International, 
Concert, and Physical Scientific for research. When order-
ing forks it is important to state which tuning is preferred. 
C lass A 1. Matched set No. 1 consists of seven forks com-
prising the seven C octaves from 64 cps to 4096 cps. Matched 
set No. 2 consists of thirteen forks comprising the chromatic 
octaves about middle C, tuned to either International or 
Concert pitch. These forks are made of Y:!"xlY:!" bar stock. 
The stems are threaded and fitted permanently into hard 
rubber handles which prevents transmission of heat from the 
hand to the fork. 
Class A 2. Matched set No. 1 consists of seven forks com-
prising the seven C octaves from 64 cps to 4096 cps. Matched 
set No. 2 consists of thirteen forks comprising the chromatic 
octaves about middle C tuned to either International or 
Concert pitch. 
The stems of dass A 2M are appoximately three and one 
half inches long, about one inch Ionger than the same forks 
without the M designation. 

CLINICAL TESTING 
97 
Class A 3. Matched set No. 1 consists of seven forks com-
prising the seven C octaves from 64 cps to 4096 cps. They 
are made of %" x 1" bar stock. The M set has a stem about 
~ inch longer, making the stem about two inches in length. 
The forks are easily excited to large amplitudes and the 
following methods of excitation are recommended by the 
manufacturer: C-64 to C-256, strike the prong with a soft 
rubber hammer or on the heel of the hand. C-256 to C-1024, 
strike with a medium hard rubber hammer. C-1024 and 
above, strike with a hard rubber hammer or with a soft 
wooden mallet. 
Tuning bars-dass AB-are available for classroom in-
struction and demonstration, when a precision frequency 
source of long audible time and of large initial amplitude 
is desired. Bars can be obtained tuned to any frequency 
from 4000 cps (approximately 25" x 11/16") to 25000 cps 
(approximately 3" x 5/ 8") . The frequency is marked on the 
sleeve of each bar. 
Clinical Testing with Tuning Forks 
To test hearing clinically with tuning forks two desiderata 
need be fulfilled: qualitative measurement of hearing, and 
quantitative measurement. The qualitative requirement is 
met by the true fundamental frequency of a fork produced 
by a reliable manufacturer. 
One method of calibrating a fork quantitatively is to ex-
cite it to its maximum and, with a normal-hearing ear, Iisten 
to it until it can no Ionger be heard. The number of seconds 
elapsed until the decay (decreasing loudness) arrives at an 
inaudible point can be determined with a stopwatch. Sev-
eral runs with normal-hearing ears, both for air conduction 
and for bone conduction, will allow for quantitative cal-

98 
TUNING FORKS AND BARS 
ibrations m seconds. The number of seconds less which 
another ear hears the tone as compared to the "normal" 
calculations is a measure of the hearing loss. 
Another means of calibrating a fork quantitatively is to 
measure its maximum intensity with a sound Ievel meter 
and follow its rate of decay in time until it can no Ionger 
be heard by a normal-hearing ear. Since the rate of decay 
is fairly uniform, the rate per second of decrement may be 
estimated. * For example, if a fork's maximum intensity is 
100 decibels and it becomes inaudible to a normal-hearing 
ear, at a presumed threshold of zero decibel, in 100 seconds, 
then the average rate of decay may be considered to be one 
decibel per second. If this fork should be heard by another 
ear for only 40 seconds, the threshold of hearing for the 
ear at the frequency of the fork is 60 decibels. Thus, forks 
might be calibrated both for air conduction and for hone 
conduction. 
vVhen testing with forks certain considerations should be 
entertained. It is preferable to test the hearing under con-
trolled environmental conditions, which already have been 
described. A fork should always be excited the same way. 
Generally the lower-tuned forks should be stimulated with 
softer implements than the higher-tuned forks. Some uni-
formity of stimulation has been obtained with the use of a 
pendulum: a rubber weight is permitted to fall through a 
measured arc and strike the fork. The percussion center of 
a fork is about at the junction of the first and second thirds 
of the prong, and it is this zone which should receive the 
impact of the exciting blow. 
• The rate of decrement of forks varies directly with their frequencies. The 
rate of decrement of the lower frequencies is from 0.25 decibels to 1 decibel 
per second. The higher frequency fork's rate of decrement is from 2 to 4 
decibels per second. When a fork is used to test bone conduction, the rate 
of decrement is more rapid because it is damped when the shank is pressed 
against the head. 

CLINICAL TESTING 
99 
A fork should be excited to its maximum vibration. Over-
tones may be produced but these promptly become dissi-
pated as the fork settles down to its fundamental. The outer 
surface of the prong should be brought close to the auricle, 
and always to the same distance from the auricle. Care must 
be exercised that the fork does not touch the patient, as such 
contact will damp the fork. The patient is asked to report 
whenever he hears the tone, and when he does so, the fork 
is removed, then returned to the ear. This is repeated until 
the patient no Ionger hears the fork. 
The reason for removing the fork from the ear when it 
has been heard is to relieve the ear from continuous acou-
stic exposure to the stimulus, which will produce auditory 
fatigue. If the ear fatigues it will become insensitive to the 
minimal stimuli to which it might respond at threshold, and 
false, raised, thresholds will be recorded. This precaution 
also should be observed when hone conduction testing is 
performed. The stem of the fork should be placed against 
the mastoid process, then removed and replaced repeatedly 
until the sound is no Ionger heard. 
The use of tuning forks to determine the presence of 
monaural deafness of non-organic origin, as well as to vali-
date monaural organic deafness, has been described in Chap-
ter 7 in the discussion of the Stenger Test. 

9---------------------------
TINNITUS 
The most common symptom associated with impaired 
hearing is tinnitus; noises in the ears or in the head. Some 
patients are more distressed by these noises than by their 
hearing difficulties. Many patients complain primarily of 
head noises, and may have no handicapping acoustic im-
pairment. 
Tinnitus in the presence of serviceable hearing is en-
countered among individuals who demoostrate ~ discrete 
or focal hearing loss, such as is observed following exposure 
to gun fire. The high tone perceptive deafness of ptesby-
acusia may not be great enough to cause any significant im-
paired acoustic reception, but the associated tinnitus may 
prove most distressing. These are two examples among a 
host of others in which head noises may be the dominant 
symptom, and in which the acoustic spectral defect may be 
inconsequential. 
Patients often state that the loudness of the tinnitus is 
so great that it interferes with their ability to hear normal 
speech; or that the noises are loud enough to disturb ability 
to concentrate and work, and to interrupt sleep. 
If the loudness of the patient's tinnitus is · measured it 
often appears to be within a few decibels of the patient's 
threshold of hearing. 1f the patient's hearing loss is slight, 
100 

TINNITUS 
101 
the measured loudness of the tinnitus may not be great. If 
the hearing lass is profound, the "loudness" so measured 
may be marked. But the apparent loudness as experienced 
by the patient seems to be a relative thing. Same patients 
complain that the tinnitus is very loud and the measure-
ments reveal that the intensity in decibels is not lar~e. The 
measured intensities of other patients are significantly great, 
nevertheless they may not be unduly disturbed by what ap-
pears to be considerably loud, and apparently should be 
subjectively loud. The sensation of loudness of the tinnitus 
is a subjective psychological phenomenon. 
At times the tinnitus may be studied quantitatively and 
qualitatively. If a patient has monaural deafness and mon-
aural tinnitus it is possible to compare the tones of the 
audiometer introduced into the normal ear with the sounds 
which the patient experiences in the affected ear. The fre-
quencies of the audiometer are introduced into the normal 
ear one after the other until the patient states that one of 
the frequencies sounds similar to his subjective noises. Then 
with the attenuator the intensity of this frequency is altered 
until the patient thinks that the subjective noise and the 
audiometer tone seem equally loud. Presumably the findings 
are a measure of the patient's tinnitus. 
Binaural tinnitus may be more difficult to match. It is 
feasible to try to mask the tinnitus with an audiometric tone 
similar to the patient's subjective noises. The frequency may 
be identifiable, and possibly the loudness may also be 
matched. It also may be feasible to mask the tinnitus with 
the masking noise of the audiometer, and consider that the 
amount of masking just necessary to obliterate the tinnitus 
is a measure of the loudness of the tinnitus. Same patients 
have discovered for themselves that they are able to mask 
their tinnitus when they try to fall asleep by playing the 
radio softly next to their bed. Patients also notice that when 

102 
TINNITUS 
the ambient noise is sufficiently loud they no Ionger hear the 
head noises. Of course the ambient noise is usually in excess 
of 35 decibels. It has also been observed that the tinnitus 
may become inaudible when a hearing aid is worn, although 
this is not consistently so with all hearing aid wearers. 
Often tinnitus begins apparently spontaneously long after 
the deafness has been established. The duration of the tin-
nitus may be short, hours or a few days, or it may become 
firmly established. In other instances tinnitus of many years 
duration has subsided suddenly and has remairred inaudible 
for years, and apparently permanently. 
Healthy people with no otic or acoustic history of any 
kind experience sudden bursts of tinnitus, often high 
pitched, of momentary duration. Furthermore most people 
with no aural defects have experienced tinnitus when they 
are in a very quiet environment, where the ambient noise 
is considerably reduced. 
Comparative Study of Tinnitus 
Because these have been the experiences among normal 
people with normal ears, a study was undertaken to deter-
mine whether tinnitus can be observed among normals, and 
to compare their observations with the tinnitus described 
by patients with aural pathology and functional impairment. 
A sound-proof chamber was used. The ambient noise 
Ievel was probably between 15 and 18 decibels. Exact meas-
urements could not be made due to the limitations of the 
sound Ievel meters at hand. 
Eighty adults, apparently normally hearing males and 
females, from 18 to 60 years of age were included. The se-
lection was predicated on a denial of past or present aural 

COMPARATIVE STUDY OF TINNITUS 
103 
disease. They reported no deafness or tinnitus, and consid-
ered themselves in good health. They were representatives of 
a sedentary population, including physicians, dentists, teach-
ers, students, administrators, clerks and housewives. 
Upon entering the sound-proof room the subjects were 
instructed to make notes of sounds which might be detected. 
No suggestion was given that the source of so und might be 
within the subject himself. The time of observation was 
usually limited to five minutes or less. Written details of 
their Observations were obtained. Seventy-five subjects, 94 
per cent, experienced sound. From these reports it appears 
that tinnitus is present constantly but is masked by the 
ambient noise which ßoods our environment. This ambient 
noise level for ordinary quiet living conditions usually ex-
ceeds 35 decibels, and apparently is of sufficient intensity to 
mask physiological tinnitus which remains subaudible. 
The control group was composed of one-hundred hard-of-
hearing patients, consecutively admitted veterans of military 
service. Their histories, otorhinological examinations, and 
pure tone audiograms were obtained. A diagnosis of deafness 
and its type was recorded. Head noises, tinnitus, was a com-
TABLE I. Diagnosis of Deafness and Incidence of Tinnitus in 100 Patients. 
Number 
Tinnitus 
No 
Diagnosis 
of Patients Constant 
Jnconstant 
Tinnitus 
Conductive deafness without 
otosclerosis 
20 
3 
10 
7 
Otosclerosis (I case mixed 
deafness, 7 cases conductive 
deafness) 
8 
4 
4 
o• 
Perceptive deafness 
55 
21 
18 
16 
Mixed deafness 
8 
2 
5 
I 
Mixed deafness of one ear, 
perceptive deafness of other 
5 
3 
I 
I 
Diagnosis not available 
4 
2 
0 
2 
100 
35 
38 
27 
• In a !arger group of 83 otosclerotic patients in our clinic, 85 per cent 
had tinnitus and 15 per cent were free of it. 

104 
TINNITUS 
plaint of 73 per cent of these patients. The loss of hearing 
of each of these patients was of sufficient severity to warrant 
the recommendation and use of a hearing aid and a course 
of auditory rehabilitation. See Table 1. 
A total of 39 different sounds were described by both 
groups. Of these, 27 sounds were named in the impaired 
group, and 23 sounds in the normal group. While a majority 
in both groups reported hearing only one sound, a substan-
tial number of persons in each group distinguished two or 
more sounds. The sounds described as "ring," "hum" and 
"buzz" were enumerated most frequently in both groups, 
comprising about 50 per cent of the responses of each group. 
Eleven sounds recorded were identified in both groups. 
Sounds Recorded by Patients and Normal Group 
(Patients' totals listed first) : 
Falling water 
3- 4 
Ring 
32-11 
Roar 
5- 2 
Hum 
IO-I6 
Hiss 
3- 3 
Buzz 
I2-I3 
Airplane 
2- 1 
Whistle 
9- 3 
Zooming-whiziing 
I- 2 
lnsects, crickets 
2- 6 
Tap 
I- I 
Sounds Recorded by Normal Group Only: 
Steam 
4 
Rushing 
I 
Bell 
3 
Singing 
I 
Click 
3 
Musical so und 
I 
Foghorn 
2 
Machinery 
I 
Sea shell 
2 
Rumble 
I 
Heart beat 
2 
Hollow sound 
I 
Drone 
I 
Squeal 
I 
Truck 
1 
Echo 
1 
Sounds Recorded by Patients Only: 
Pulse 
7 
Surf 
1 
Thumping pulsation 
4 
Vibration 
1 
Squeak 
3 
Throbbing 
1 
Watch tick 
2 
Ruhhing cloth 
I 
Pressure 
2 
Rustling leaves 
1 
Tunnels 
2 
Stuffiness 
1 

CATEGORIES OF TINNITUS 
105 
Categories of Tinnitus 
As considered here, tinnitus aurium is a medical term 
describing sounds of physiological or pathological origin, 
which may or may not always be perceived in consciousness. 
Kerrison enumerated five general groups of sounds: (1) 
obstructive; (2) circulatory-vascular alterations; (3) laby-
rinthine-cochlear sounds; (4) neurotic-instability of the 
auditory nerve; (5) cerebral sounds-involvement of the 
auditory centers. 
Fowler has divided tinnitus into two categories: (1) vi-
bratory, mechanical, exogenus-factual sounds within the 
body, and (2) non-vibratory, biochemical endogenous-total 
absence of sound outside the body. 
Vibratory tinnitus is real sound of a physical source such 
as muscle activity, or vascular alteration. Non-vibratory tin-
nitus is nonfactual sound: an illusion of sound caused by an 
irritation of the auditory neural elements. The points of 
origin may be anywhere from the tympanic promontory, 
along the pathways to the cortex inclusive. 
Atkinson also has divided tinnitus into two categories; 
extrinsic and intrinsic, which appear to include the two 
types already mentioned. He considers intrinsic tinnitus as 
an auditory paresthesia, a paresthesia of the auditory nerve, 
of vascular origin and to be so treated. 
Wegel recorded: "Tinnitus is a pathologic symptom .. . 
I am under the impression that the presence of tinnitus .. . 
generally indicates an active or progressive lesion and that 
the cessation of it ... is an indication that the degeneration 
or atrophy of tissue has been arrested." But then he contin-
ued, "people entirely without tinnitus are extremely rare, 
if such cases exist at all." 
In 1941 Fowler wrote, "It has been found that the pres-
ence of tinnitus is always associated with more or less deaf-

106 
TINNITUS 
ness." In 1944 he altered this view, writing: "It may be, and 
often is, present in some form in persons who have no appar-
ent aural or other disease." 
Kopetzky stated that tinnitus is a symptom signifying dis-
turbed sensation, a symptom of aural disease. He continued 
that tinnitus may appear before symptomatic deafness. 
Lempert suggested on the basis of his observations asso-
ciated with middle ear surgery that "tonus impulses origin-
ating in the sensory fibers of the trigeminus, the sympathetic, 
or glossopharyngeal may enter the tympanic plexus, but 
normally arenot heard." In selected cases, he recommended 
tympanosympathectomy. 
Fowler further described tinnitus, of which the patient is 
consciously aware, as "audible," and tinnitus not ordinarily 
impinging on the consciousness as "subaudible." He found 
tinnitus in 86 per cent of 200 patients. He indicated that 
subaudible tinnitus must be sought for by examination. He 
also determined that the loudness of tinnitus was within 5 
to 10 decibels above threshold. Tinnitus may be measured 
for frequency, loudness and quality. It may be a single fre-
quency or multiple frequencies and difficulties may be en-
countered in its identification. The exact loudness may also 
be difficult to determine. Fowler described techniques for 
making such measurements. 
Audible tinnitus at times appears to interfere with hear-
ing. Patients often state that were it not for their head noises 
their hearing would be better, and that when the head noises 
are louder the deafness is more severe. lt does not necessarily 
follow that the tinnitus is always responsible for this. Pos-
sibly with increased deafness the head noises are less easily 
masked and so appear louder subjectively. Fowler has de-
scribed the "busy line" effect, whereby receptor cells and 
neural pathways already preoccupied by an intrinsic stimu-
lus are not receptive to an external stimulus. 

TINNITUS IN DISEASE 
107 
Tinnitus in Disease 
Some conditions in which audible tinnitus has been ob-
served are: 
(I) Otosclerosis. 
(2) Meniere's disease. 
(3) Lermoyez's syndrome. 
(4) Pressure or neuritis of the auditory apparatus; brain 
tumor, eighth nerve tumor, aneurysm. 
(5) Otitis media; acute, chronic, suppurative, nonsuppurative. 
(6) Otitis interna; acute, chronic. 
(7) Deafness; conductive, perceptive, mixed. 
(8) Normal hearing with discrete frequency defect. 
(9) Nasopharyngeal diseases; eustachian salpingitis, sinus1t1s, 
pharyngitis, mucosal hypertrophy, hyperplasia, tumor, infection 
of lymphoid tissue. 
(10) Dental pathology; malocclusion, malfunction of tempora-
mandibular joint, impaction, infection. 
(11) Myositis; cervical, pharyngeal, tympanic. 
(12) Intoxication-drug; quinine, alcohol, salicylates, caffeine, 
tobacco, antiluetic agents, Streptomycin, thyroid gland extract. 
(13) Intoxication-systemic; gastrointestinal, foci of infection. 
(14) Allergy. 
(15) Cardiovascular pathology; blood dyscrasias, anemia, hy-
pertension, hypotension, vascular anomalies, arteriosclerosis, 
cardiac diseases. 
(16) Metabolie dysfunction; thyroidism, water balance disturb-
ances. 
(17) Trauma; acoustic, acute. 
(18) Trauma; acoustic, chronic. 
(19) Systemic fatigue. 
(20) Momentary tinnitus, spontaneaus (idiopathic). 
(21) Impacted cerumen. 
(22) Cervical constriction. 
(23) Psychoses. 
(24) Otic herpes. 
(25) Bell's palsy. 
(26) Foreign body trauma to the ear. 

108 
TINNITUS 
(27) Head injury; eoneussion, posteoneussion syndrome. 
(28) Myringitis. 
(29) Hemorrhage; tympanum or myringa. 
Treatment of Tinnitus 
The ideal approach to the treatment of audible tinnitus 
would seem to be a therapeutic assault on the related etio-
logical factors. At present there is no sure way to accomplish 
this. Frequently the etiological agent no Ionger exists, the 
tinnitus, however, persists. Some of the contemporary meas-
ures are: 
Medical: 
(1) Medication; bromides, barbiturates, other sedatives, potas-
sium iodide, vitamins, benzyl cinnamate, antiallergic drugs, his-
tamine therapy, intravenous procaine. 
(2) Local therapy to disease proeesses. 
(3) Elimination of drugs and intoxicants. 
(4) Elimination of foci of infeetion. 
(5) Gorreetion of faulty gastrointestinal funetion. 
(6) Gorreetion of metabolie diseases. 
(7) Gontrol of diseases of the vaseular system and blood form-
ingorgans. 
(8) Dietary eontrol of ßuids, salt, and water balanee. 
(9) Dental rehabilitation. 
(10) Intratympanie medication. 
(11) Therapy direeted to eorreet nose and throat pathology, 
including roentgen and radium therapy. 
(12) Politzerization, inftation, massage. 
(13) Removal of eerumen. 
(14) Psyehotherapy. 
(15) Hearing aid. 
(16) Eleetrieal therapies, i.e., ultra violet, quartz lamps, gal-
vanism. 
Surgical: 
(1) Otologie; ossiculectomy, mastoidectomy, chorda tym-
pani resection, fenestration of the Iabyrinth, obliteration of 
the saccus endolymphaticus. 

TREATMENT OF TINNITUS 
109 
(2) Rhinologie. 
(3) Spinal tap. 
(4) Cranial surgery for tumor, vascular anomalies, section of 
eighth cranial nerve. Stellate ganglion block. 
(5) Splanchnectomy and similar technics for alleviation of 
h ypertension. 
lt would appear, then, that tinnitus will not be elimi-
nated by any treatment but at best can only become subaud-
ible. This, of course, would be welcomed both by the patient 
and the physician. 
Fowler has emphasized the value of explaining to the 
patient the nature of his tinnitus: that it is a symptom and 
not a disease, and that despite its annoying and distressing 
presence, it does not imply a threat to him. An understand-
ing of the symptom and a recognition of its relative signifi-
cance m some instances may reconcile the sufferer to his 
burden. 

10--------------------------
INF A.NTS A.ND CHILDREN 
The anamnesis of these little patients has already been 
mentioned in some detail in Chapter 4. One should explore 
the prenatal, parturient, neonatal and subsequent episodes 
in the life of the patient. The matemal history is included 
because of its intimate relationship to that of the fetus. 
The baby's development is studied to learn the nature of 
his physical and mental growth. Has the child attempted 
to sit, crawl, stand, walk at the appropriate ages; if he is 
old enough has toilet training been accomplished? What 
are the feeding habits, ability to dress himself; is his sleeping 
apparently normal or disturbed? What is his general be-
havior; active, Iethargie, or hyperactive? Are there temper 
tantrums or rocking or head banging? How does he com-
municate to make his demands known: by calling, by ges-
tures, or does he fail to make demands? 
Initial Observations 
During the early stages of the investigation it may be weil 
to permit the child freedom of movement about the office. 
If the child is old enough he should be given the opportun-
110 

INITIAL OBSERVATIONS 
111 
ity to explore the environs of the office if he wants to. Clues 
may be obtained by his behavior: how he relates to the over-
all situation, to the office personnel, to the toys which are 
offered to him, to those sounds about the office which may 
be different from those to which he is accustomed at home; 
whether he responds when the office telephone rings, or 
makes an effort to play with the phone or tries to answer it. 
A member of the office staff may manipulate several of the 
noise makers without being seen by the child. Does the child 
react to these noises and does he seek the source of their 
origin? 
Toys, jig-saw puzzles and books should be made available 
to the child. Does he demonstrate interest or indifference, is 
his interest sustained or is his attention span momentary, 
does he accept one toy to the exclusion of the others and 
persevere in playing with it? While he is occupied with 
the toys, the noise instruments can again be sounded, and 
observations can be made whether the child is at all respon-
sive to the acoustic stimuli. The otologist may play with the 
toys, possibly teaching the child to build a tower of blocks. 
Will the child attempt to imitate such suggestions or be in-
different? The otologist may begin to gain the child's friend-
ship and favor by such playing and may also formulate some 
idea of the child's mental scope and emotional function. 
During such play the manual dexterity is noted as well as 
the handedness. 
From these observations one may gain some idea as to how 
readily the child may be tested. A very Iethargie child may 
be unresponsive to the testing and a hypomanic child will 
not remain quiet long enough to be tested. Usually the 
patient rather than the physician will set the pace of the 
functional examination. 

112 
INF ANTS AND CHILOREN 
Diagnostic Considerations 
There are several broad diagnostic considerations to be 
distinguished: 
( 1) organic deafness 
(2) organic brain darnage 
(3) mental retardation 
( 4) psychiatric disturbances 
(5) a combination of organic deafness with any of these 
other defects. 
In a survey by Kastein and Fowler, 150 children and in-
fants were observed for acoustic function because of im-
paired, delayed or absent speech. Fifty per cent of these 
patients demonstrated some cerebral or psychological disease 
in which there was no deafness. One third of the patients 
demonstrated organic deafness and the remainder had a 
diagnosis of organic deafness with brain damage, or with 
mental retardation, or with emotional disturbance. It is ap-
parent that when a patient from this early age group is 
studied because of the failure of development of normal 
speech, there is as much chance that the etiology is some 
pathological process other than that of otic pathology with 
deafness. Furthermore, among these children who have deaf-
ness, a significant number will also demonstrate some other 
disease, of cerebral, intellectual or emotional etiology. 
The otologist, therefore, may elect to recommend that 
the child be studied neurologically and psychologically be-
fore any further testing of acoustic function. Some other 
process may be found and reveal whether the child does or 
does not appear to hear. The otologist will then be better 
prepared to determine in what manner he can proceed to 
study the acoustic function of the patient. 

METHODS AND SITUATIONS OF TESTING 
113 
Methods and ·Situations of Testing 
Various noise-producing instruments have been described 
by Utley. They range from low frequency tom-toms (60 cps) 
and tambourines to high frequency bells (6200 cps) . These 
instruments can be calibrated by the use of an oscillograph, 
beat frequency oscillator, and sound level meter. The fre-
quencies can be measured, and also the intensities at various 
distances. lf calibration equipment is not readily available, 
a tester who has normal hearing may be able to make a 
relatively rough estimate of the output by matehing the 
frequencies and the intensities with the frequencies of the 
audiometer. This is a much less exact method of measuring 
the sound production of the instruments, but still is of some 
value. If a child responds to the noise makers of the lower 
frequencies but not to those of the higher frequencies, an 
estimate of the width of the auditory spectrum may be ob-
tained. By varying the distance between the child and the 
instruments which he apparently hears, some quantitative 
estimates can also be approximated. 
Over a period of months it may be noted that a child's 
acuity of hearing appears to have increased. This may be 
accounted for by the learning experiences of the patient. 
With growth and increasing familiarity with sounds, he will 
heed and attend to sounds of lesser intensities than he had 
at an earlier age when he was less aware of the existence and 
importance of sound. 
If the patient can be made to understand that a game will 
be played, pure tone audiometry can be performed. The 
child is informed that he will Iisten to a telephone repre-
sented by the air conduction receiver; or that he is an "air-
plane pilot." Each time he hears a so und in the phone he 
should ring a bell, such as a cowbell, which has been offered 
him for this purpose. If the child understands the game he 

114 
INF ANTS AND CHILOREN 
may be most cooperative and reasonably exact with his 
responses. 
Another means of gaining the child's interest is to teach 
him to build a tower of blocks. He is taught that each time 
he hears the tone he is to place a toy block on top of another. 
He can then be taught to remove the blocks each time he 
hears a tone. In this manner pure tone audiometry may be 
accomplished at least for the range of the speech frequencies. 
It may also be possible to perform speech reception thresh-
old tests. Several toys (whose designations are spondaic words 
-see Chapter 11, Table 2) are placed before the child. 
Either with the phones or with the free field speaker, a live 
voice instructs the child; "pick up the toothbrush," "where 
is the airplane," "show me the baseball." This kind of test-
ing is effective in determining the presence of serviceable 
hearing, particularly if parents have been in doubt. It may 
also help to uncover the presence of unilateral hearing im-
pairment. 
The technique of psychogalvanic skin response audiometry 
has been described in Chapter 5. The electrodes of the gal-
vanometer may be affixed to the infants foot and the stimu-
lating electrodes to another extremity. The baby is held in 
the mother's lap and is kept gently preoccupied in the effort 
to have him remain quiet and relatively immobile. A pedi-
atric dose of a sedative may be orally administered about 
one hour before the tests are performed. The sedation usual-
ly does not interfere with the responses. The mother can 
hold the receiver close to the baby's ear during the test. 
Usually two members of the testing staff cooperate; one 
performs the test and operates the equipment and the other 
observes the child for random movements which stimulate 
the galvanometer producing spurious fluctuations of the 
needle. As with adults, some tests are performed with ease 

METHODS AND SITUATIONS OF TESTING 
115 
and reliable results are obtained; at other times no con-
clusions may be forthcoming. 
Children between the ages of two and five may prove 
more difficult to test with the galvanometer. Just as in all 
their other waking periods they move about continuously, 
and usually will not remain sufficiently inactive for success-
ful use of the test. If, however, the child is permitted to play 
with toys at a table, he may be passive enough to permit 
testing. 
Children with brain damage, such as those with cerebral 
palsy, should have hearing tests performed on them, as part 
of the physical examination. The more severely involved 
patients may be unable to manipulate the toys, but the noise 
makers or audiometer may be used effectively to learn if 
the patient responds to sounds. 
Let us turn to the otolaryngological examination. Many 
children may have had several examinations elsewhere and 
may have developed an antipathy to further examinations 
and to all that the white gown, head mirror and instruments 
mean to them. For this reason it is often better to postpone 
the performance of the physical examination until most of 
the functional studies have been accomplished, before the 
patient becomes too unruly to submit gracefully to them. 
Tests of the function of the stato-kinetic end organs 
should be included as a part of the physical examination. 
Usually Stimulation of the equilibratory labyrinth with cold 
water is an effective test. If the cold stimulation provokes 
a response there will be ocular nystagmus and the child may 
sway to one side, or if permitted to walk he may stagger. 
The direction of the nystagmus and the direction of the 
sway of the body, with normal functioning labyrinths, will 
be in accordance with known physiological observations. 
The labyrinths can also be stimulated by seating an adult, 

116 
INF ANTS AND CHILOREN 
usually a parent, in a Barany rotating chair, and then seating 
the patient on the parent's lap. Both are rotated, and the 
child is examined at the end of rotation. If the Iabyrinths 
are active, nystagmus is observed and the baby may fall to 
one side, in the direction of the slow component of the 
nystagmus. This test should be performed with some cir-
cumspection as the adult may be stimulated more than the 
patient. 
Unresponsive Iabyrinths are indicative of their nonfunc-
tion and highly suggestive that profund perceptive deafness 
also is present. A nonfunctioning Iabyrinth may also be ob-
served in very severe monaural perceptive deafness, at any 
age. With some evidence of appreciable loss of hearing in 
an infant, the lack of function of the equilibratory end or-
gans is a confirmation that these sensory structures have 
been extensively damaged. The presence of normal func-
tioning equilibratory end organs does not preclude the 
possibility that the inner ears are impaired acoustically. 
Nevertheless it is important to know and record whether 
the peripheral equilibratory system does function normally 
or not, and to know also if the patient has the additional 
handicap in the loss of these other very important sensory 
structures. 
Another step in the examination consists of roentgen 
studies of the tympanic and petrosal anatomy. X-ray exam-
inations can delineate the tympanum, semicircular canals, 
and cochlea. Occasionally some of these structures may not 
be identified by x-ray projections, which may suggest that 
the structures have failed to develop, additional confirm-
atory evidence of organic defect. 
Here as in all medicine the whole patient is viewed. Hav-
ing determined by the history, the physical examination, 
and the functional examinations that the infant is deaf, 
plans will be made so that his education, particularly acous-

METHODS AND SITUATIONS OF TESTING 
117 
tic training and speech training, will be begun promptly. 
It is important that maximum use be made of whatever 
residual hearing remains. The child must learn that he lives 
in a world of sound, and that sound is meaningful. The edu-
cational process is a lengthy one but can produce an adult 
able to communicate with his fellows and to lead a happy 
productive life. 

11-------------------------
SPEECH A.UDIOMETRY 
Aceurate assessment of the ability to hear and understand 
spoken material had its origins in the practical studies of 
workers in telephonic and wartime communications equip-
ment. Syllable, word and sentence lists were constructed for 
the purpose of evaluating the relative ability of communi-
cation systems to pass speech signals. It was then a logical 
development to adapt this speech test material for use in 
hearing measurement. That otologists had a need for testing 
hearing for speech is clearly evident in the long-standing 
use of the whispered and voice distance fraction test. 
Uncalibrated Live Voice 
The distance fraction test, while an expression of this 
need, is riddled with too many weaknesses to be considered 
a satisfactory testing tool. Since the test is almost never per-
formed in an adequately sound treated room, little reliance 
can be placed upon it because the inverse square law of 
sound pressure does not obtain. The intensity of the spoken 
words at the listener's head then is vaguely defined, de-
pending not only on the speaker but also on the reftections 
of sound from the walls, ceiling and ftoor. Aceurate measure-
ment is further vitiated by the wide ftuctuation in intensity 
118 

SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
119 
of a given speaker's voice, Iet alone the variations from one 
speaker to another. Other difficulties are introduced by the 
failure to use standardized material, Iack of masking in 
unilateral deafness, etc. Many an individual with perceptive 
deafness but with fairly intact hearing for the low frequen-
cies has been suspected of malingering because of his ability 
to understand some directions given at a certain distance, 
followed by failure to repeat all words spoken at a lesser 
distance. 
The pure tone audiometer possesses inherent quantitative 
advantages over the tuning fork and allows wider scope in 
testing. Speech audiometry likewise is quantitatively su-
perior to the distance fraction test and broadens the range 
of exploration. 
4 C Numbers Test 
A word might be said at this point concerning the West-
ern Electric phonograph audiometer which is widely used 
in school systems as a screening instrument. Developed in 
its original form almost thirty years ago, this audiometer is 
somewhat akin to modern speech audiometry as regards 
presentation of speech. The test items used are composed of 
the digits one, two, three, four, five, six and eight. An in-
dividual with loss of hearing for just the high frequencies, 
might recognize the vowel differences that would enable 
him to score sufficiently high to pass this screening test. 
Recent careful investigations have demonstrated the inade-
quacies of the Western Electric "fading numbers" test as a 
screening device. 
Speech Reception Threshold 
The pure tone audiometer uses average normal hearing 

120 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
as the reference level. The ratio, in decibels, between the 
measured threshold and the normal or zero line, is taken 
to be the hearing loss at a given frequency. A similar con-
cept obtains with regard to the speech reception threshold. 
If selected material is heard by the normal ear at zero de-
cibels, and by a defective ear at 40 decibels, then the defec-
tive ear has a 40 decibel loss of hearing for speech. 
A good deal of work has gone into the selection and prep-
aration of speech material for use in testing hearing. The 
pioneer work was clone at the Bell Telephone Laboratories. 
Major achievements were recorded during World War II 
studies at Harvard University's Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory, 
with succeeding refinements at the Central Institute for the 
Deaf. The loss of hearing for speech (speech reception 
threshold) is related to the loss of hearing for pure tones 
(pure tone threshold). Both tests seek to make a funda-
mental quantitative measurement. In selecting words, there-
fore, it was considered important that they be familiar in 
the language, in order to minimize the importance of the 
factors of intelligence and knowledge of vocabulary. 
It is of essential importance in speech threshold measure-
ment that the words used be alike in their difficulty of audi-
bility. Some types of words have much higher homogeneity 
of audibility than do others. It was found that the test cri-
teria were best met in words of the spondee stress pattern 
(two-syllable words equally accented). These have uni-
formly higher audibility than do monosyllables or unselec-
ted disyllabic words. When both of the syllables receive 
stress, there is greater ease of audition (more clues are pre-
sented) than in the case of monosyllabic words or two-syl-
lable words in which only one syllable is stressed. 
A number of testing benefits accrue by reason of the uni-
formity of audibility possessed by the eighty-four spondaic 
words which were chosen. It follows from what has been 

DISCRIMINATION TESTING 
121 
said that these words will be equally audible in a narrow 
range of intensity. In testing a hard of hearing patient, the 
level at which he hears correctly one word out of five pre-
sented should be relatively close to the level at which he 
understands four of the five words. This "steepness of 
function" makes for precision and speed in pinpointing the 
speech reception threshold. The homogeneity and ease of 
audibility of the spondees has resulted in their bearing a 
fairly close correlation to audibility of connected speech, 
and the latter represents the kind of conversational demands 
that make up the bulk of an individual's everyday auditory 
activity. 
The Harvard Spondaic Words were prepared at the Har-
vard University Psycho-Acoustic Labaratory in phonograph 
recordings in two arrangements. Auditory' Test No. 9 is re-
corded so that forty-two words are disposed in seven groups, 
each group containing six words. As the test record proceeds 
from group to group, there is a decrease of 4 decibels in the 
intensity level of each group of six words. Thus the final 
group of six words on each record is 24 decibels weaker than 
the first group on the record. In Auditory Test No. 14 seven-
ty spondees are recorded at a uniform intensity. 
Discrimination Testing 
Once threshold has been determined, valuable diagnostic 
information can then be obtained by speech tests at levels 
above threshold. Measurements at these supra-liminal levels 
are designed to explore how a defective ear operates when 
its hearing loss for speech is overridden by presenting ma-
terial at a sufficiently intense level. What is sought is a 
measure of how well the ear can discriminate. The normal 
ear, with a speech reception threshold of zero decibels, per-

122 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
forms in a certain manner at the 40 decibel Ievel. How does 
a defective ear with a speech reception threshold of 25 de-
cibels perform at the 65 decibel Ievel? An ear may deviate 
to the extent of an elevated threshold but with relative nor-
malcy above threshold, or it may be deviant for both thresh-
old and Ievels well above threshold. 
To test for this function, it was found best to construct 
other groups of ward lists. These are the phonetically bal-
anced or PB ward lists. They consist of familiar words of 
one syllable arranged in groupings of fifty words to a list. 
The intention is that each Iist be of comparable difficulty, 
and of equal phonetic structure. Aside from some practical 
compromises, the lists contain the elements or sounds spoken 
in the frequency of their occurrence in the language. The 
words were read to normal hearing subjects and those words 
which were at the extremes of easy and difficult audibility 
were eliminated. 
The product of the research at the Psycho-Acoustic Lab-
aratory was affered to clinical examiners of hearing and 
auditory impairment. Twenty PB lists, each containing fifty 
words, also were made available. This allowed for testing 
with lists which were constructed so that test score differ-
ences could be allotted to factors other than differences in 
the equality of the ward lists. 
Lists of the Central Institute for the Deaf 
Clinical experience in the years following World War II 
indicated that some of the Harvard test words, such as 
"mote" and "bon bon," are not as familiar as is desirable 
for test purposes. Accordingly, a project was established at 
the Central Institute for the Deaf (C.I.D.) St. Louis, Mis-

CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR THE DEAF LISTS 
123 
souri, with a view to correcting this difficulty. In addition, 
the PB 1ists were reconstructed in an effort to achieve better 
phonetic ba1ance. From the original Harvard tests and PB 
lists were derived C.I.D. Auditory Test W-1 and W-2 and 
four PB 1ists identified as C.I.D. Auditory Test W-22. • 
In addition to improvement of the test items, it was in-
tended that standardized disc recordings be made commer-
cially avai1able for clinica1 use. 
Spondaic W ords 
C.I.D. Auditory Test W-1 consists of thirty-six spondaic 
words (Table 2). Six lists, A, B, C, D, E, F were prepared 
with rearrangement of the word order. For each list the 
words were recorded at a constant intensity. Preceding each 
word is the carrier phrase, "Say the word." Recorded on 
each of the six records is a 1000 cps tone for calibrating 
purposes. Both the calibration tone and the carrier phrase 
are recorded at a Ievel 10 decibe1s above that of the test 
words. The point where a normal listeuer can understand 
two words out of ten, w where he can understand eight 
words out of ten, is encompassed within the narrow intensity 
range of approximately 8 decibels. This steepness of func-
tion makes for easy detection of threshold. 
C.I.D. Auditory Test W-2 consists of the thirty-six spon-
daic words of Test W-1 with lists A, B, C, D, E, F. In each 
list are twelve groups of three words, each group being suc-
cessively weaker by 3 decibels. The attenuation is such as to 
afford an average decrease of 1 decibel for each successive 
word. A 1000 cps ca1ibration tone is provided, and each 
• Reprinted here, by permission, from I. J. Hirsh: Development of 
material for speech audiometry. J. Speech & Hearing Disorders 17: 321-337, 
Copyright 1952; and The Measurements of Hearing. New York, McGraw-Hill 
Company, Inc., Copyright 1952. 

124 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
word is presented after the carrier phrase. The words at the 
start of each list are recorded at the same Ievel as the cali-
bration tone. The intensity of the carrier phrase decreases, 
from the ninth word on down, but remains 6 decibels above 
the test words. 
TABLE 2. Words Used for Auditory Tests W-1 and W-2 (Centra1 Institute 
for the Deaf, St. Louis, Missouri). • 
I. airplane 
2. armchair 
3. haseball 
4. birthday 
5. cowboy 
6. daybreak 
7. doormat 
8. drawbridge 
9. duckpond 
10. eardrum 
I I. fa rewell 
12. grandson 
13. greyhound 
I 4. hardware 
15. headlight 
16. horseshoe 
17. hotdog 
18. hothouse 
19. iceberg 
20. inkwell 
21. mousetrap 
22. mushroom 
23. northwest 
24. oatmeal 
25. padlock 
26. pancake 
27. playground 
28. railroad 
29. schoolboy 
30. sidewalk 
31. stairway 
32. sunset 
33. toothbrush 
34. whitewash 
35. woodwork 
36. workshop 
" These tests are now available on 12-inch phonograph records at either 
33;;3 or 78 rpm from Technisonic Laboratories, 1201 South Brentwood Blvd., 
Brentwood, Missouri. 
There is far less standardization of speech audiometry 
than there is of pure tone audiometry. The wide variations 
in test equipment and test environment make it essential 
that an examiner be careful in establishing his normal ref-
erence Ievel. Some !arger centers make their own disc or 
tape recordings for test purposes. More often, use is made 
of the C.I.D. records. We shall consider Auditory Test W-1. 
Since the words are recorded at a constant intensity, depar-
ture can be made from the fixed pattern required in the W-2 
test records of descending intensity. The W-1 test can thus 
be more exploratory and flexible. A threshold study may be 
lengthened or shortened, while the manner of presentation 
can be altered to suit the special demands which arise in 

CALIBRATION 
125 
testing the very young, the aged, the mentally retarded, and 
language-handicapped individuals. 
Phonetically Balanced Words 
C.I.D. Auditory Test W-22 contains four basic lists of 
50 words each (Table 3) . These one-syllable words are all 
familiar and the lists meet the criteria of phonetic balance, 
in that the distribution of speech sounds in them approx-
imates a similar distribution in general conversation. Each 
of the four lists has been prepared in six variations of the 
word order. The carrier phrase, "You will say", prefaces 
each word. A 1000 cps calibration tone is included on each 
disc and approximates the intensity of the carrier phrase ana, 
the test words. 
Calibration 
An essential beginning in accurate hearing measurement 
is to calibrate one's equipment so that the zero attenuator 
setting represents the normal threshold of hearing for speech 
in the context of the particular room, recording, and equip-
ment with which the patient is tested. Calibration should 
be done with ten or twelve young adults. Care should be 
exercised to use individuals who are shown by history and 
examination to have been free of otic disease, and who dem-
onstrate normal hearing for pure tones. With the attenuator 
dial set at zero, adjust the gain of the amplifier until the 
point is reached where 50 per cent of the W-1 words are 
correctly repeated. Then place the stylus on the calibration 
tone and note the V-U meter reading. This procedure is 
repeated for each of the normals, and the mean is then 
determined and noted for reference. Subsequent speech 
audiometry should include a calibration reference check 
prior to testing. 

TABLE 3. Alphabetical Lists of PB Words Used in Auditory Test W-22.• 
List I 
List 2 
List 3 
List 4 
I. ace 
I. ail 
I. add 
1. aid 
2. ache 
2. air 
2. aim 
2. all 
3. an 
3. and 
3. are 
3. am 
4. as 
4. been 
4. ate 
4. arm 
5. bathe 
5. by 
5. bill 
5. art 
6. bells 
6. cap 
6. book 
6. at 
7. carve 
7. cars 
7. camp 
7. bee 
8. chew 
8. ehest 
8. chair 
8. bread 
9. could 
9. die 
9. cute 
9. can 
IO. dad 
IO. does 
IO. do 
IO. chin 
ll. day 
II. dumb 
II. done 
II. clothes 
12. deaf 
12. ease 
12. dull 
12. cook 
13. earn 
lfl. eat 
13. ears 
13. darn 
14. east 
!4. eise 
14. end 
14. dolls 
15. feit 
l!i. flat 
15. farm 
15. dust 
16. give 
16. gave 
16. glove 
16. ear 
17. high 
17. ham 
17. band 
17. eyes 
18. bim 
18. hit 
18. bave 
18. few 
19. bunt 
19. hurt 
19. he 
19. go 
20. isle 
20. ice 
20. if 
20. hang 
21. it 
21. ill 
21. is 
21. his 
22. jam 
22. jaw 
22. jar 
22. in 
23. knees 
2fl. key 
23. king 
23. jump 
24. law 
24. knee 
24. knit 
24. 1eave 
25. low 
25. live 
25. lie 
25. men 
26. me 
26. move 
26. may 
26. my 
27. mew 
27. new 
27. nest 
27. near 
28. none 
28. now 
28. no 
28. net 
29. not 
29. oak 
29. oil 
29. nuts 
30. or 
30. odd 
30. Oll 
30. of 
31. ow1 
31. off 
31. out 
31. ought 
32. poor 
32. one 
32. owes 
32. our 
33. ran 
33. own 
33. pie 
33. pale 
34. see 
34. pew 
34. raw 
34. save 
35. she 
35. rooms 
35. say 
35. shoe 
36. skin 
36. send 
36. shove 
36. so 
37. stove 
37. show 
37. smooth 
37. stiff 
38. them 
38. smart 
38. start 
38. tea 
39. there 
39. star 
39. tan 
39. tin 
40. thing 
40. tcar 
40. ten 
40. tban 
41. toe 
41. tbat 
41. this 
41. they 
42. true 
42. tben 
42. three 
42. through 
43. twins 
43. tbin 
43. though 
43. toy 
44. up 
44. too 
44. tie 
44. wbere 
45. us 
45. tree 
45. use 
45. who 
46. wet 
46. way 
46. we 
46. why 
47. what 
47. well 
47. west 
47. will 
48. wire 
48. with 
48. wben 
48. wood 
49. yard 
49. young 
49. wool 
49. yes 
50. you 
50. your 
50. year 
50. yet 
• Technisonic Laboratories bave recorded these lists both at 33Vs rpm 
and 78 rpm. 

PROCEDURE 
127 
Proeedure 
The hearing loss for speech, or speech reception thresh-
old, can then be determined in a fairly easy manner in most 
cases. One can begin by estimating the threshold. This used 
to be done by averaging the pure tone lasses for the three 
"speech" frequencies (500, 1000 and 2000 cps) . A better 
estimate, particularly for an audiogram with a sloping con-
figuration, is to average the two speech frequencies showing 
the smallest lasses. The spondaic words are then presented at 
a level about 15 decibels above the estimate. The intensity 
is then reduced in 2, 3, or 5 decibel steps according to the 
examiner and the unit employed. Threshold is taken to be 
the lowest Ievel at which fifty per cent of the words are cor-
rectly repeated by the patient. Just as the number of test 
tone presentations in pure tone audiometry is arbitrarily 
decided, so the number of test words to be given at the 
various levels is determined by the individual examiner. 
Threshold exactitude is improved by increasing the number 
of test words presented, but this should be considered within 
the practical limits of clinical procedure. Experience will 
show that it is not necessary to present many words at supra-
liminal (above threshold) Ievels. One learns to attenuate 
so as to arrive at the final threshold in reasonably rapid time. 
lt is probably good practice to utilize six words at the con-
clusive threshold level. 
It is the usual practice to test the better ear first in speech 
audiometry as in pure tone testing. The need for masking 
is likewise similar. If there is a difference between the ears 
of 35 decibels or more in the pure tone frequencies of 500 
through 2000 cps, then the better ear should be masked 
when the poorer ear is being tested with the phones. The 
nature and amount of the masking noise to be used is still 
an indeterminate matter. Eighty-five decibels of white noise 

128 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
(re. 0.0002 dynes per square centimeter) can probab1y be 
used effectively. Of course, if the speech reception threshold 
is obtained in the free field then one is testing what is essen-
tially the hearing of the better ear. 
The discrimination score is measured with the W-22 word 
lists both by phones and in the free field. As stated earlier 
there are fifty words to a Iist. If all the words are correctly 
repeated the score is 100 per cent while fai1ure to under-
stand three words results in a loss of six per cent or a score 
of 94 per cent. The discrimination score reflects the nurober 
of words correctly heard. Discrimination loss is expressed as 
the percentage of PB words not correctly heard. If ten words 
are missed then the discrimination loss is 20 per cent. To 
avoid confusion, loss or score shou1d be carefully identified. 
To obtain the discrimination score the PB words are pre-
sented at a Ievel which is weil above threshold. What is 
desired is a measure of the ability of the ear to understand 
relatively difficu1t material when it is not limited by the 
dimensions of its hearing loss for speech. Discrimination 
testing generally follows the determination of the speech 
reception threshold for spondaic words. To obtain the max-
imum PB score the words should be delivered at least 40 
decibels above the speech reception threshold. If there is 
no tolerance difficulty, the test might be given at an even 
higher intensity Ievel. One complete Iist of 50 words must 
be used in order to obtain meaningful results. The dis-
crimination score is simply the nurober of words heard cor-
rectly multiplied by two. Extending the test w a second Iist 
of 50 words might result in a more accurate finding. 
If the speech audiometer has been calibrated with the W-1 
records it becomes necessary to consider that the W-1 cali-
bration tone is 10 decibels above the spondee test words, 
while the W-22 calibration tone is at about the same 1evel 
as the PB test words. After adjusting the W-22 calibration 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
129 
tone to the meter reference Ievel, raising the attenuator dial 
30 decibels above the speech reception threshold Ievel will 
yield the desired 40 decibel increase. Sometimes it is valu-
able to make a detailed exploration of discrimination in the 
manner of the articulation function. This can be done by 
obtaining PB scores at successively higher intensity Ievels 
(10, 20, 30, 40 decibels, etc.) above the spondaic word 
threshold. The discrimination score will improve as the in-
tensity is raised until it reaches its maximum. Then, de-
pending on the auditory lesion, as the intensity is raised 
above the PB maximum Ievel, the discrimination score will 
either maintain itself or become poorer. 
How an individual will react to a stated degree of hearing 
loss is of course highly unpredictable. One person may find 
a mild loss to be of catastrophic proportions; another may 
regard a far greater loss as scarcely handicapping. Determin-
ing a therapeutic or rehabilitative program on the basis of 
audiometric results is very risky unless considered in the 
broader context of the patient's feelings and his social and 
economic needs and aspirations. An identical loss might be 
more devastating to an individual who lived and worked in 
an area of sophisticated language demands than to another 
person whose environment encompassed limited language 
needs. The psychological implications of hearing defects can 
vary from realistic acceptance of a severe loss to exaggerating 
a negligible loss to the extent that it serves as an excuse for 
withdrawing from life's demands. 
Examples of Hearing Losses 
Figures 14 through 28 depict possible speech test findings 
for various audiometric contours. These are intended to be 
neither comprehensive nor definitive but are fairly repre· 

130 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
sentative. As stated ahove, the speech reception threshold 
can he predicted with fairly good accuracy hy averaging the 
two smallest pure tone Iosses for the frequencies 500, 1000 
and 2000 cps. 
At present, prediction of the discrimination score on the 
hasis of air and hone conduction thresholds is hest not at-
tempted. Individual variations in pathology, intelligence, 
desire to hear, ahility to synthesize, and many other factors 
make it essential that the discrimination score he ohtained 
hy presenting a standard Iist of 50 words in a good test en-
vironment. Even then the discrimination score will he partly 
dependent on such external factors as the physical dimen-
sions of the test equipment, whether the material is pre-
sented recorded or hy live voice, and the vocal apparatus 
of the speaker. 
Fig. 14 represents what is perhaps the most Straight-
forward type of deafness with regard to pure tone-speech 
test relationships. This is true not only of the speech recep-
tion score hut can even include the discrimination score. 
Other than for the external variations just mentioned one 
may reasonahly expect a good discrimination score with 
conductive deafness. 
Fig. 15 represents a mixed deafness, in which hone con-
duction thresholds are normal for 250 and 500 cps. The 
maximum discrimination score of 92 percent (identical with 
the notation of 8 per cent loss) indicates very little difficulty 
in understanding speech material which is presented at 
sufficiently high intensity Ievels. The mixed deafness pattern 
of Fig. 16, with near normal hone conduction at 250 cps, 
has resulted in a discrimination score of 76 per cent. In 
addition to the quantitative aspects of his hearing loss, as 
considered hy the extent of his departure from the normal 
threshold of hearing, this individual will encounter a mod-
erate amount of difficulty in understanding difficult speech 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
131 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
c 
[ -... 
10 
Ci> 
20 
_. 
...... 
.... 
,.. 
.... 
... 
IXl 
30 
u 
...... 
-40 
e. 
../ 1.. 
-
__. 
tn 
50 
tn 
0 
60 
_, 
!.!> 
70 
z 
80 
Cl! < 
90 
w 
::r.: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
<4000 
8000 
FR~QUENCY 
SP~~CH 
SPEECH 
DISC~IM !NATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
REC~PTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
1H~ESHOLD 
LOSS 
LOSS 
~ - 1000 
(db) 
NO ISE 
PB s 
(ob} 
(AMA) 
BINAUR.AL 
RIGHT 
40 
4 
40 
LEFT 
Fig. 14-Right conductive deafness. 

132 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
10 
~ -
c 
;;; 
20 
..J 
w 
a:l 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
(/) 
50 
(/) 
0 
60 
_, 
~ 
70 
( 
1\...-1 I)_ c 
I\ 
\. ·rs Atl 
... "' 
z 
80 
cx < 
90 
w :r: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCAIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
LEVEL (db) 
AVERAGE 
% 
THAESHOLD 
% 
LOSS 
LOSS 
NO ISE 
PB& 
LOSS 
·500-2000 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
32 
8 
38 
LEFT 
Fig. 15-Right mixed deafness. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
133 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
u; 
20 
_, 
w 
r-... -
... 
CO 
30 
ü 
r-... 
w 
.CO 
e. 
(/) 
50 
(/) 
0 
60 
_, 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
01! 
<( 
90 
w 
" " 
.... 
r"t 
lt " ... 
(~ 
"' 
:r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DJSCRJMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
THRESHOLD 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
LOSS 
NOISE 
PBs 
LOSS 
500·2000 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
60 
24 58 
LEFT 
Fig. 16-Right mixed deafness. 

134 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
material even though it is delivered at high intensities. The 
audiogram of Fig. 17, also considered in the mixed category, 
shows bone conduction better than air conduction for 250, 
500 and 1000 cps, with no bone conduction response for the 
maximum intensity of the audiometer at the higher fre-
quencies. The discrimination score of 38 per cent indicates 
that this person will have a great deal of difficulty un-
derstanding any but easy speech material, regardless of 
the intensity at which it is delivered. The sharply sloping 
configuration of the audiogram is undoubtedly of impor-
tance in depressing the discrimination score. In all three 
audiograms there is fairly consistent relationship between 
the speech reception threshold and the air conduction thresh-
old for the frequencies at 500, 1000, and 2000 cps. 
Fig. 18 represents the commonly observed notch at 4000 
cps. With hearing intact for the other frequencies the in-
dividual will encounter no difficulty in hearing or un-
derstanding normal speech. The same condition would 
probably obtain were the hearing defective at 8000 cps. in 
addition to 4000 cps. In Fig. 19 the perceptive lesion is seen 
at 2000, 4000 and 8000 cps, with hearing intact for frequen-
cies below 2000 cps. This individual will exhibit little diffi-
culty in responding to speech in our circumscribed :test 
situation. Even the loss illustrated in Fig. 20, with hearing 
normal only for 125, 250, and 500 cps, will result in only 
minor difficulty in the speech test situation. Figs. 19 and 20 
consider cases of perceptive deafness of a significant degree 
as measured by pure tone audiometry, but which appear 
tobe within normallimits when examined by our methods 
of speech audiometry. The explanation lies in the fact that 
hearing for speech is so closely related to pure tone hearing 
in the so-called speech frequencies of 500, 1000, and 2000 
cps, particularly in the best two of these three frequencies. 
Hearing lasses of the type described in Figs. 19 and 20 will 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
135 
-20 
-Hl 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
-
I.. 
10 
(i) 
20 
-' 
w 
lXI 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
(/1 
50 
(/1 
0 
60 
-' 
I!) 
70 
z 
80 
iii 
-
~ 
L. 
'U 
' 
l~ r" 
"" 
... 
~ li 
'( !>-. 
/ 
~ 
90 
w 
:I: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH 
DIS~RIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
lOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
o/a 
THRESHOLO 
LEVEL (db) 
o/a 
LOSS 
LOSS 
LOSS 
500·2000 
(db) 
NO ISE 
PBI 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
60 
62 
60 
LEFT 
Fig. 17-Right mixed deafness, predominantly perceptive. 

136 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
_, 
w 
lXI 
30 
u 
w 
<40 
e. 
~ 
<1>-'L. 
lj P"" --· 
( f\ 
-(~ 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
~ LI 
~' 
(I) 
50 
(I) 
0 
60 
_, 
1.!) 
70 
z 
80 
~ 
<( 
90 
w :r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCRIMINA Tl ON 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
THRESHOLD 
LOSS 
NO ISE 
PBs 
LOSS 
500-2000 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
0 
0 
2 
lEFT 
Fig. 18-Right perceptive deafness at 4000 cps. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
137 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
10 
(j) 
20 
~ 
w 
CD 
30 
u 
w 
.CO 
e. 
cn 
50 
cn 
".. 
".. 
".., 
""""( tr 
-r\ 
\ 
~ 
c ~ 
~ 
L. 
0 
60 
_, 
\!) 
70 
z 
80 
(~ 
cx 
<t 
90 
w :r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREOUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCAIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
LEVEL (db) 
AVERAGE " 
1HRESHOLD 
% 
LOIS 
LOSS 
NOISE 
PBI 
LOSS 
500·20GO 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
3 
6 
10 
LEFT 
Fig. 19-Right perceptive deafness, upper frequencies. 

138 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
...J 
w 
CD 
30 
u 
w 
40 
e. 
V> 
50 
V> 
C' ~ 
~ 
... 
~ 
... "' 
1: ' ~ 
... 
0 
60 
...J 
\!) 
70 
z 
80 
Cl! < 
90 
w :r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH 
DISCRIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
THRESHOLD 
LOSS 
lOSS 
500·2000 
(db) 
NO ISE 
PB s 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
14 
10 
18 
LEFT 
Fig. 20-Right perceptive deafness, involving the speech frequencies. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
139 
thus have near-normal speech reception thresholds. Clinical 
evidence further reveals that when the speech reception 
threshold is fairly close to normal (or not greater that ap-
proximately 20 decibels) the individual will obtain a good 
discrimination score when tested at his maximum intensity 
Ievel. By our usual speech tests these individuals appear to 
be within normal Iimits of hearing, yet it is observed that 
they frequently are handicapped when listening in a noisy 
environment, in rapidly shifting group conversation, and 
in other diffi.cul:t Iistening situations. 
Perceptive Iosses heretofore considered have been of the 
typical sloping configuration, with hearing for the low fe-
quencies much better than for the high frequencies. Figs. 
21, 22 and 23 demoostrate varying degrees of perceptive 
deafness in which the audiometric contour is relatively flat. 
Again there is fairly close interdependence between speech 
reception threshold and pure tone thresholds, although 
it appears that as the loss becomes increasingly severe, the 
speech threshold exceeds the pure tone threshold. The dis-
crimination score of 78 per cent in Fig. 21 is fairly high for 
a perceptive loss of this degree, and this individual appears 
to be operating at a high Ievel of acoustic effi.ciency within 
his limitations. Fig. 22 represents a severe perceptive loss 
which would be very handicapping. The loss portrayed 
in Fig. 23 is extremely severe both for speech reception and 
for discrimination. The individual poses a very difficult 
problern in rehabilitation and can expect minimum success, 
if any, in using a hearing aid. 
Figs. 24, 25, and 26 illustrate varying degrees of disability 
of the pattern usually seen in Meniere's disease. These 
individuals usually show reduced discrimination, recruit-
ment, and tolerance problems, all of which tend to place 
them in the less successful group of hearing aid users. 

140 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
u; 
20 
.... 
w 
10 
30 
u 
w 
.CO 
e. 
cn 
50 
cn 
0 
60 
.... 
-r-t' ~ 
r c ~ 
""" 
I~ 
""".,..,.. 
... 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
ii 
<( 
90 
w 
:I: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCRIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LO~S 
RECEPTION 
LEVEL (db) 
AVERAGE 
% 
IHRESHOlD 
% 
lOSS 
LOSS 
NO ISE 
LOSS 
500·2000 
(AMA) 
{db) 
PBs 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
42 
22 45 
LEFT 
Fig. 21-Right perceptive deafness, moderately severe. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
141 
-20 
-10 
A.VERA~ O 
HEARING 
10 
(i) 
20 
-' 
..... 
d) 
30 
ü 
LU 
oiO 
e. 
U) 
so 
U) 
0 
60 
-' 
" 
70 
z 
80 
0! 
oc( 
90 
w 
tt 
rt 
(.r--\ IJo-
V 
rt. 
.~ 
_L 
~ " 
(~ 
-
r".. 
~ 
:r 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREOU!:NCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCRIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
THRESHOLD 
LOS_S 
LOSS 
500-2000 
(db) 
NO ISE 
PBs 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
68 
42 
63 
LEFT 
Fig. 22-Right perceptive deafness, severe. 

142 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
...J 
w 
CO 
30 
u 
w 
-40 
e. 
c.n 
50 
c.n 
0 
60 
..... 
" 
70 
z 
80 
~ 
< 
90 
w :r 
100 
rr 
"' 
~ 
o, 
0: 
..... 
' 
" 
1 
a 
<D 
~ .1[).._ 
~ 
"' 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
41!60 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH 
OiSC~IMINATION 
lOSS 
PURE TONES 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
IHRESHOLD 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
lOSS 
LOSS 
LOSS 
S00-1000 
(AMA) 
ldb) 
NO ISE 
PB s 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
86 
66 
?8 
LEFT 
Fig. 23-Right perceptive deafness, very severe. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
143 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~O 
HEARING 
10 
Ci) 
20 
~ 
CO 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
Cl) 
50 
[, 
j.~ 
-
r ............... ./ 
\lr'L:'\ 
I. 
c' 
Cl) 
0 
60 
~ 
\!) 
70 
z 
80 
« 
<( 
90 
w 
:X: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH DISCRIMINATION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
LOSS 
THRESHOLD 
LOSS 
NOISE 
PBs 
LOSS 
500-WOO 
(AMA) 
(db) 
(db) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
30 
28 32 
LEFT 
Fig. 24-Right perceptive deafness; the clinical diagnosis is Meniere's 
syndrome. 

144 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
-20 
-10 
AVEI!A~ Q 
HEARING 
10 
(i; 
20 
-' 
w 
CO 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
(/) 
so 
a: 
,.., 
()-.....:{ ~ L 
J.( 1r c 
'-' -.......... 
(/) 
0 
60 
.... 
~ 
70 
z 
80 
ji 
< 
90 
w 
:I: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 8000 
FREQUENCV 
SPEECH 
SPEECH 
DISCR IMINA TION 
lOSS 
PURE TONES 
RECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEl (db) 
% 
LOSS 
THRESHOLD 
LOSS 
LOSS 
S00-1000 
(db) 
NOISE 
PB s 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
52 
44 45 
LEFT 
Fig. 25-Right perceptive deafness; the clinical diagnosis is Meniere's 
syndrome. 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
145 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
10 
Ui 
20 
_, 
.... 
m 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
cn 
50 
cn 
0 
60 
...... 
~ 
70 
ij:. . 
tt: 
()"""'" 
~ 
P-...lt 
rt 
""' 
::til I)..,. li 
.....<~ 
z 
80 
~ 
< 
90 
w 
I 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREOUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH OISCRIMINIITION 
LOSS 
PURE TONES 
RECCPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEl (db) 
% 
LOSS 
IHRESHOLD 
lOSS 
NO ISE 
LOSS 
~00 ·20CO 
(db) 
PB s 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
80 
86 62 
LEFT 
Fig. 26-Right perceptive deafness; the clinical diagnosis is Meniere's 
syndrome. 

146 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
Fig. 27 and 28 indicate perceptive deafness. Both, the 
right and left ears, are shown in these audiograms. In Fig. 27 
one notes a fairly consistent difference between the ears, and 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 10 
(j) 
20 
-' 
w 
m 
30 
ü 
w 
40 
e. 
(/) 
50 
(/) 
0 
60 
-' 
"' 
70 
z 
80 
ii 
~~~ 
~~. L~ 
i. .... 
':< \\ 
~ 
,... ~ 
- "'1l"'K. .Jr:",AJ 
" 
~ r-
< 
90 
... 
]: 
100 
125 
250 
soo 
, 000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEECH 
DISCRIMINATION 
lOSS 
PURE TONES 
~ECEPTION 
AVERAGE 
% 
LEVEL (db) 
% 
lOSS 
IHRESHOlD 
LOSS 
LOSS 
100·1000 
(diJ) 
NO ISE 
Pß s 
(db) 
(AMA) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
15 
16 
25 
LEFT 
22 
26 
33 
Fig. 27-Bilateral perceptive deafness; the differences between the two 
ears are maintained. 
this difference is maintained from the pure tone thresholds 
to the speech reception thresholds and finally in the dis-
crimination scores. The difference between the ears is 8 

EXAMPLES OF HEARING LOSSES 
147 
decibels for pure tones, 7 decibels for spondee threshold, 
and 10 per cent for PB discrimination. In Fig.28, however, 
the right ear has a 37 decibel loss for pure tones with a 28 
-20 
-10 
AVERA~Q 
HEARING 
10 
<n 
20 
_, 
UJ 
CO 
30 
ü 
UJ 
-40 
e. 
Vl 
50 
Vl 
0 
60 
_, 
1.!) 
70 
z 
80 
~ 
< 
90 
w 
r-
~ 
l\ 
-.,.;: a-a 
... ._. 
~ 
\\ 
\J ~ 
~ . • :0 ~ ~ ... 
..... \~[t I :II 
~ 
",-
-~ ~ 
"1~ 
:I: 
100 
125 
250 
500 
1 000 2000 
4000 
8000 
FREQUENCY 
SPEECH 
SPEKH OISCRIMINAIION 
PURE TONES 
LOSS 
RECEPTION 
LEVEL (db) 
AVUAC.E 
% 
IHRESHOLD 
% 
LOSS 
LOSS 
LOSS 
S00-2000 
(AMA) 
ldb) 
NO ISE 
PB s 
(dt>) 
BINAURAL 
RIGHT 
28 
32 
37 
LEFT 
36 
56 47 
Fig. 28-Bilateral perceptive deafness; the sr.eech reception thresholds 
are fairly similar but there is considerable dlfference in discrimination. 
decibelloss for speech. The left ear, with a pure tone loss of 
47 decibels has a 36 decibel speech threshold. The pattern of 
consistency vanishes when one observes the discrimination 

148 
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
scores which are 68 per cent for the right ear but only 44 
per cent for the left. This example indicates how difficult 
and unreliable it is to predict discrimination scores. These 
can be accurately obtained only as a result of performing 
the necessary tests. 
It has been mentioned earlier that discrimination scores 
will vary depending on where the test is given and the na-
ture of the particular list which is used. The C. I. D. Test 
W-22 recording has been found in clinical usage tobe easier, 
and therefore less discriminating than certain of the earlier 
PB recordings. Through repea:ted use in a clinical setting 
one can learn to evaluate relative PB scores as they relate to 
conductive, perceptive and mixed deafness. When speech 
audiometry equipment is well standardized and a good list 
is uniformly employed, discrimination scores of one clinic 
can be more meaningfully compared with those from an-
other. 

12--------------------------
HEARING AIDS 
For many centuries man has searched for means to over-
come hearing impairments. The ear trumpetwas one of the 
earliest devices fashioned to assist the hard of hearing. It has 
taken many forms in its basic attempt to collect sound waves 
from a large area and channel them into the external canal. 
Another early instrument was the speaking tube which is 
essentially a form of the ear trumpet but designed for direct 
conversation between two people. An individual with mild 
perceptive deafness even today might appreciate its lack of 
distortion and limited amplification. There were also early 
ingenious hone conduction devices usually consisting of a 
transmitting rod in contact with the teeth. 
The Carbon Hearing Aid 
The modern hearing aid has evolved largely from work in 
the fields of telephone and radio. The earliest electrical 
hearing aid contained a carbon microphone, battery, cord 
and magnetic receiver ( earphone). These were similar to 
the telephone in operation. The sound waves impinging on 
the carbon microphone caused pressure changes between the 
carbon granules resulting in variations in resistance to the 
flow of electrical current. The varying current flow, acting 
149 

150 
HEARING AIDS 
on the magnet of the rece1ver to strengthen and weaken 
its field, resulted in motion of an iron diaphragm placed 
near the magnet. The vibrating diaphragm produced sound 
waves in the air to complete the cycle begun by the sound 
waves which stimulated the carbon diaphragm of the micro-
phone. The small amount of gain developed in this system 
necessitated the introduction of a carbon amplifier which 
was essentially an additional carbon microphone and mag-
netic receiver in the circuit. The final product was an in-
strument of poor quality, relatively low gain, very limited 
frequency response, and with various inherent operating 
difficulties. 
The Vacuum Tube Hearing Aid 
Widespread acceptance and use of hearing aids followed 
the introduction and development of the vacuum tube in-
struments. \Vhile there have been variations, the basic de-
sign employed a crystal microphone, a vacuum tube ampli-
fier, an "A" and a "B" battery, and a magnetic receiver. 
The piezoelectric effect is the term used to describe the 
conversion of sound pressure vibrations in:to electrical volt-
ages in the action of the crystal microphone. Sound waves 
which strike the diaphragm of the microphone are trans-
mitted to the crystal which is mechanically distorted; This 
bending of the crystal results in the production of an elec-
trical charge which corresponds to the initiating sound waves. 
The "A" battery of the vacuum tube hearing aid serves 
to heat the tube's filament causing electrons to flow from it. 
The electrons are drawn to the plate which has a positive 
charge placed on it by the "B" battery. The current which 
had been generated at the microphone is passed to the grid 
of the tube. The alternating negative and positive charge on 

THE VACUUM TUBE HEARING AID 
151 
the grid acts to manage the electron flow from filament to 
plate and current flow is thereby controlled. 
While some hearing aids have used four, five and even 
six vacuum tubes, the usual circuit contains three tubes. 
Since the voltage produced in the crystal microphone is very 
small, various stages of amplification are provided. In many 
circuits the first two tubes serve as voltage amplifiers while 
the third tube assists in the power amplification needed to 
activate the receiver. An output transformet functions to 
achieve proper coupling between the final tube and the 
magnetic receiver. 
Batteries 
As previously stated the "A" battery current serves to 
heat the filament of the vacuum tube. A 1.5 volt battery is 
sufficient for this purpose. The earlier batteries, while called 
dry cells, actually have a moist mix or electrolyte sealed 
between the center carbon electrode and the outer zinc 
electrode. The more recent "B" batteries range from 15 to 
30 volts. Some hearing aids use 45 volts by employing two 
22.5 volt "B" batteries in series. The "B" battery itself 
consists of tiny 1.5 volt carbon-zinc cells connected in se-
ries to attain the desired voltage. The use of small cells 
keeps down the overall size of the "B" battery despite its 
higher voltage. 
The voltage of the carbon-zinc "A" battery shows a more 
or less steady decline with use. This is in cantrast to the more 
recently developed mercury type of "A" battery. Besides 
certain structural advantages the mercury cell operates in 
such a manner that the voltage is maintained at an efficient 
Ievel until it is nearly exhausted, at which time it drops off 
rather sharply. Apart from the Iack of warning this type of 
decline appears to be more advantageaus to a hearing aid 
user than the steadier voltage drop of the carbon-zinc cells. 

152 
HEARING AIDS 
Receivers 
Earlier vacuum-tube hearing aids employed air conduc-
tion receivers of the crystal type. Valtage from the hearing 
aid amplifier is delivered to the crystal. This results in a 
bending of the crystal, causing movement of an attached 
diaphragm. Because of crystal failures in extremes of heat 
and humidity, the later vacuum-tube aids use magnetic 
receivers. As described earlier, these depend on a varying 
currellt to produce a varying magnetic pull Oll a diaphragm, 
with resultallt motioll of the air in th,e form of sound waves. 
The magnetic receiver is alsb used as a bone conduction 
receiver. Here the diaphragm is attached to a case which is 
positiolled Oll the mastoid hone behind the ear. Movement 
of the diaphragm causes the case to vibrate against the mas-
toid bone thereby introducing sound waves into the skull. 
The usual method for securing good colltact between 
the bone conduction receiver alld the mastoid is to utilize 
a head band shaped to provide the llecessary tension. Bone 
conduction receivers are used now by only an occasional 
patient. 
Controls 
Every hearing aid has a volume control which regulates 
the gain of the instrument so that the user may hear sounds 
lauder or softer. This is usuRlly obtained by moving a con-
tact along a resistance to allow more or less of the signal to 
pass. 
Some hearing aids have provisions for altering the fre-
quency response so as to obtain a relative enhancement of 
the high or low frequency bands. The circuit includes com-
binations of condensors and resistors which may be selected 
by the wearer. Other aids require internal adjustments by 
the individual who · is fitting the instrument. Generally the 
wearer effects frequency response changes by means of an 

THE VACUUM TUBE HEARING AID 
153 
external tone control, while the internal controls are of 
the semi-permanent type not under the patient's command. 
In some aids variations are obtained by means of receivers 
which have their own frequency response characteristics and 
which can be selected to secure desired frequency tilts. In 
other instruments frequency response is varied by designing 
a series of models each with a circuit that differs from the 
others so as to afford a range of possible responses. 
Other Components: Cords, Ear-Molds, Garments 
Cords. The hearing aid case is made of plastic or metal. 
It is desirable that it be light in weight, sturdy, and produce 
a minimum amount of noise when rubbed against the cloth-
ing. From the amplifier housed in the case, the current is 
fed to the receiver by means of the connecting receiver cord. 
This cord consists of two wires each covered by plastic in-
sulating material. The terminals at each end of the paired 
wires fit into the jack of the hearing aid and of the receiver. 
The terminals vary in size and shape. Some terminals for 
some hearing aids are uniform, so that they can be inserted 
into the hearing aid jack or the receiver jack interchange-
ably. The design of jacks of other aids is such that each ter-
minal will fit into only one jack and sometimes in only one 
position. It is important that these "polarized" terminals 
be inserted exactly as the manufacturer has specified in 
order to avoid breakage of the terminals or jacks, and in 
order that the aid will operate properly. Usually, polarized 
terminals are found in hearing aids whose circuit design 
demands a certain relationship between the receiver and 
the audio system. 
Ear molds. Another item in the hearing aid assembly is 
the ear mold, or ear insert, for the air conduction receiver, 
Fig. 29. It is preferable that the insert be made prior to the 
hearing aid fitting. The standard insert is made of clear or 

154 
HEARING AIDS 
Fig. 29-Ear insert molds: left, standard type; right, invisible contour. 
The drawings were made from inserts supplied by J. J. Manning, 
New York City. 
tinted acrylic, fabricated from a plastic impression taken of 
the auricle and external auditory meatus. The adapter of 
the air conduction receiver snaps into a metal bushing 
of the insert, and is retained by a ring spring. A good seal 
between the receiver and insert and between the insert, the 
auricle, and meatus will eliminate acoustic feedback (squeal) 
which results when sound escapes from receiver and circles 
back to the microphone of the hearing aid. 
"Invisible" or "skeleton" type ear inserts have been de-
veloped and popularized in an attempt to make the wearing 
of a hearing aid appear to be less conspicuous. A transparent 
plastic tube extends from the ear insert to the hearing aid 
receiver which may then be secreted in the woman's hairdo 
or beneath the man's shirt collar. Since there is an attenua-
tion, particularly for the high frequencies, of sounds which 
traverse the plastic tube the use of this type of insert is not 
advisable for many individuals. 
A more recent development has been a soft plastic ear 

THE VACUUM TUBE HEARING AID 
155 
insert. An improved acoustic seal is claimed for this insert 
since it tends to adhere to the anatomical contour. In ad-
dition it reduces the possibility of traumatic injury to the 
ear. There has been a steady increase in the nurober of 
hearing~handicapped younger children who have been ad-
vised to wear hearing aids. Active youngsters wearing an air 
conduction receiver may suffer a blow against it and sustain 
a laceration of the auricle or canal from a rigid insert. The 
recent softer plastic insert may minimize this hazard and be 
preferable because of this, provided that it proves satisfac-
tory in other respects. 
Garments. Hearing aids are provided with clips by which 
they may be attached to a shirt packet or other appropriate 
articles of clothing. Many people prefer to have the instru-
ment out of sight and wear it under the clothing. This is 
accomplished by selecting one of several carriers or garments 
which are designed for the purpose, Fig. 30. The wearing of 
a present-day, small, light hearing aid need not be at all 
uncomfortable. A hearing aid which is covered by clothing 
operates at somewhat reduced efficiency, particularly for the 
high frequencies. In addition it is almost impossible to 
avoid the introduction of noise caused by clothing rub. 
Nonetheless, most wearers can successfully use a hearing aid 
in this manner. 
Performance Characteristics 
An individual with impaired hearing who turns to a 
hearing aid for amelioration of his difficulty does so with the 
hope that it will render speech more intelligible to him. 
Same people may be more concerned with hearing music, 
while to others the ability to hear certain sounds and noises 
may be essential to success in job performance. In a large 
measure the hearing aid user's satisfaction will rest in a 
compromise between his hopes and needs, the actual per· 

156 
HEARING AIDS 
Fig. !10--Garments designed to carry hearing aids, showing several of 
the styles manufactured by Hechler Brothers, Inc., Long Island City, 
New York. 

THE V ACUUM TUBE HEARING AID 
157 
formance and limitation of the hearing aid, and the nature 
of his deafness. 
Recent years have witnessed a lively interest in the manu-
facture of high-fidelity amplifying systems. A system of sound 
reproduction having a uniform frequency response and which 
also is linear with respect to intensity must of necessity 
be both bulky and cumbersome. Hearing aid performance 
does not even approximate that of high-fidelity audio ampli-
fying systems. While improvements in design will continue, 
it is quite reasonable to expect limitations and to accept 
compromises in a small wearable hearing aid. 
Frequency Range. The normal young adult can hear 
sounds within the approximate range of 20 cps to 20,000 cps. 
This range can be narrowed and still encompass the re-
quirements for a faithful reproduction of orchestral music. 
For understanding speech, the frequency range may be fur-
ther restricted since an audio system need not extend beyond 
200 cps to 6000 cps., in order to deliver excellent speech 
intelligibility. While there is considerable variation in the 
frequency range of the many different hearing aids now 
available and in use, few if any have a response in excess of 
100 cps to 6000 cps. These figures must be considered in 
terms of the amplification which is produced at the various 
frequencies. The effectiveness of the frequency range is 
dependent on there being sufficient amplification available 
so that the reproduced frequencies may be delivered at a 
useful level to the hearing aid wearer. 
Gain. The primary function of a hearing aid is amplifica-
tion of sound. An important measure of this characteristic 
is termed acoustic gain which is taken to be the difference in 
sound pressure between the output level at the receiver and 
the input level at the microphone. There is a wide span in 
the amount of gain provided by the various hearing aids, 
ranging from approximately 40 to 80 decibels for a 1000 

158 
HEARING AIDS 
cps signal. Depending on this measure, hearing aids are 
frequently spoken of as being in the "low-gain," "medium-
gain," or "high-gain" categories. 
vVhile the gain classifications are usually clinical estimates, 
the actual acoustic gain can be measured in the laboratory. 
This is clone by placing the hearing aid receiver on an 
artificial ear. This provides for coupling of the receiver to 
a 2cc. cavity which simulates the external auditory meatus 
with ear insert in place. A very sensitive microphone in the 
artificial ear, tagether with an associated amplifier network 
and meter, is used to measure the sound pressure generated 
at the receivcr of the hearing aid being examined. The 
acoustic gain can be determined by applying a sound pres-
sure of known value to the microphone of the hearing aid 
while the volume control is turned to maximum gain set-
ting. 
Frequency Response Curve. The frequency range and the 
acoustic gain of a hearing aid are related factors. Determin-
ing the acoustic gain at each frequency establishes the fre-
quency response characteristics of a hearing aid. When there 
is equal gain for each frequency an instrument is considered 
to have a "flat" frequency response. A "peaked" response 
characteristic obtains when the amplification at one or two 
frequencies markedly exceeds the others. Peaking, to a 
greater or lesser degree, is characteristic of hearing aid fre-
quency response curves. Generally the gain for the mid-
frequencies is greater than for the low and high frequency 
regions. The gain for a particular frequency should be at 
least 30 to 35 decibels if it is to contribute significantly to 
speech signal intelligibility. 
Maximum Power. Output. w·hile acoustic gain and maxi-
mum power output of a hearing aid are related to a user's 
needs, it should be recognized that they are two separate 
characteristics of an instrument. The gain of a hearing aid 

THE VACUUM TUBE HEARING AID 
159 
describes its ability to amplify sounds, while the maximum 
output Ievel is the ceiling beyond which the instrument will 
not deliver regardless of its gain rating. Maximum power 
output can be determined in the Iabaratory with the use of 
an artificial ear. It is measured in decibels (re. 0.0002 dynes 
per cm2) and is obtained by increasing the Ievel of sound 
into the microphone until no further increase in output 
from the receiver can be developed. Variations in the maxi-
mum power output among different makes and models of 
hearing aids range from approximately 110 to 140 decibels 
for a 1000 cps signal. This cut-off characteristic of a hearing 
aid is important in connection with the wearer's tolerance 
for loud sounds. 
Distortion. As has been indicated, considerations of size 
and wearability have resulted in compromises in hearing 
aid design. This has meant a considerable departure from 
high-fidelity characteristics. It is not necessary to have identi-
cal gain at each frequency since a normal ear cannot detect 
small deviations from "flat" amplification. When there is 
a considerable amount of unequal gain for the various fre-
quencies, the quality of reproduction is affected and is 
termed frequency distortion. Pronounced peaks in the fre-
quency response curve are undesirable since they impart a 
"tinny" quality, may mask adjacent frequencies, and ad-
versely affect tolerability. 
The maximum acoustic output of hearing aids is limited. 
When this limiting Ievel is reached, any further signal in-
crease results in "clipping" of the peaks of the sound pres-
sure. This overloading may interfere with the quality and 
intelligibility of reproduced speech. This characteristic is 
termed amplitude distortion and is more serious when the 
low frequencies are involved. As a result of the clipping new 
tones are produced which were not present in the original 
signal. These extraneous tones or harmonics constitute a 

160 
HEARING AIDS 
percentage of the total sound output which marks the ex-
tent of the amplitude or harmonic distortion. 
One advantage of peak clipping is that a maximum output 
ceiling is imposed on the hearing aid, acting to prevent the 
production of intensities which might be painful to the user. 
Compression amplification, another method used to limit 
output, has theoretical advantages over peak clipping. Modi-
fied forms of compression have been tried in hearing aids. 
While the results have been equivocal, the method offers 
promise for individuals who need considerable gain, yet 
have poor tolerance for loud sounds. 
Transistor Development 
The advent of the transistor has been widely heralded. 
This electronic device, which was first described in 1948, 
is considered to be of tremendous scientific and social im-
portance. Same of its potentialities have already been real-
ized while further advances seem assured. It is expected that 
transistor development will be most startling and fruitful 
when it is applied in areas in which certain inherent Iimita-
tions of the vacuum tube may be overcome. Vacuum tubes 
are relatively short-lived and require considerable power 
much of which is dissipated in the form of heat. The prob-
lern of heat becomes critical when !arge numbers of vacuum 
tubes must be used in a small area. Compared to the vacuum 
tube the transistor is more durable, has a much Ionger life, 
and is appreciably smaller. Of major importance is the tre-
mendous reduction in the transistor's power requirements 
and the elimination of the problems of high temperatures. 
Semi-Conductors. Electric current is considered to be a 
ßow of electrons. This can occur in the space of a vacuum 
tube or in solid matter. The transistor developed out of 

TRANSISTOR DEVELOPMENT 
161 
mastery of current flow in solids known as semi-conductors. 
Germanium, silicon, and galena crystals are examples of 
these materials whose properdes place them between the 
good conductors of current such as aluminum or copper, 
and the insulators or poor conductors of current such as 
glass or rubber. 
In the early days of radio an electrode in the form of a 
thin wire (cat's whisker) was placed in contact with the sur-
face of a crystalline semi-conductor. This was the crystal 
detector which acted to pass one half of each cycle of an 
alternating current thereby converting it into a direct cur-
rent. The crystal detector soon gave way to the vacuum tube 
which had the additional capability of amplification. 
Work in radar and ultrahigh-frequency transmission dur-
ing World War II revealed certain deficiencies in vacuum 
tube operation. Research was redirected to semi-conductors 
with particular attention to germanium. The result was the 
transistor, a crystalline semi-conductor able to amplify voltage 
and power. The concept of current flow as the movement 
of ftee electrons from one atom to another obtains for the 
transistor's germanium crystal. In addition, passage of cur-
rent in the crystal is further explained on the basis of the 
movement of "holes" which represent sites in the transistor's 
crystal structure from which normally present electrons have 
moved. 
Germanium Crystal Production 
While transistors can be made with other crystalline 
semi-conductors, germanium is the commonly used sub-
stance. In America it is obtained as a by-product of zinc 
smelting. Extreme care is given to the purification of the 
germanium when fabricated into ingot form. Since there is 
little conductivity in the pure crystalline form, impurities 
are then added in a highly controlled manner. N-type ger-

162 
HEARING AIDS 
manium is produced by the addition of impurities which 
impart an excess of electrons to the crystal. P-type german-
ium contains impurities which create a shortage of electrons 
or the existence of holes or positive charges which move in 
the direction opposite :to that of free electrons. Both types 
of germanium act as semi-conductors. 
Types of Transistors 
The point-contact transistor is made by placing two thin 
wires (cat's whiskers) in contact with a germanium crystal. 
These elec:trodes are termed emitter and collector while 
the area where contact is made is the third electrode or base. 
The junction transistor has been developed more recently. 
It contains layers of n-type and p-type germanium in either 
p-n-p or n-p-n assembly, with connections to :the layers acting 
as emitter, collector, and base. The p-n-p junction transistor 
is the type most frequently used in hearing aid amplification. 
Depending on which of the two types is used, the flow of 
either the holes or electrons is controlled by the input sig-
nal. In the p-n-p type the greater power of the collector 
circuit is controlled by an applied signal to the base-emitter 
circuit. 
Transistor Hearing Aids 
Since the transistor does not have a filament, an "A" bat-
tery to boil off electrons is .no Ionger necessary. A few small 
1.25 volt cells meet all the demands of hearing aid use. As 
a consequence, the transistor hearing aid can be made small-
er and less heavy than a comparable vacuum tube instru-
ment; and because of :the reduced need of replacing batteries 
it is much less expensive to operate. This is somewhat 
counterbalanced by the generally higher initial cost of the 
transistor type. 

TRANSISTOR HEARING AIDS 
163 
A 1.25 volt mercury battery is commonly used in transis-
tor hearing aids, while some others employ the carbon-zinc 
type. Depending on the particular instrument the number 
of cells used varies from one to five, or from 1.25 to 6.25 
volts. While most of the current models employ three tran-
sistors the range is from two to five. There has been im-
provement in the durability and the reliability of the junc-
tion transistors, which tagether with their Ionger life should 
be reßected in greater economy for the user. Another favor-
able aspect of transistors is their freedom from the ping-like 
noise of vacuum tube microphonics. 
The vacuum tube hearing aid is an instrument of high 
impedance, high voltage and low current. The transistor 
hearing aid is a device with low impedance, low valtage and 
relatively higher current. One result of these differences is 
that transistor instruments use magnetic microphones which 
are not as susceptible to the effects of extremes of tempera-
ture and humidity as the crystal microphones used in almost 
all vacuum tube hearing aids. Magnetic receivers are em-
ployed in both transistor and vacuum tube hearing aids. 
It is difficult to translate the performance characteristics 
of a hearing aid into a judgment as to whether its tone 
quality is pleasing or not, since such an estimate is subjec-
tive. Experience has indicated that a number of individuals 
who have used vacuum tube hearing aids have had difficulty 
in accommodating to the quality of the transistor type. Be-
ginning users of transistor aids have had no grcater difficulty 
in this regard than have beginning users of vacuum tube 
models. 
Transistor and Vacuum Tube Hearing Aids Compared 
Gain, maximum power output, frequency response, and 
degree of distortion are four of :the most important charac-

164 
HEARING AIDS 
teristics of hearing aids. With regard to the latter two there 
is probably little difference between transistor and vacuum 
tube hearing aids. On the other hand, the gain and max-
imum power output available in a vacuum tube instrument 
of a given size can now be built into a transistor hearing aid 
of significantly smaller size. One might then expect this 
smaller size to be utilized in an extension of gain and power 
output. That this has not happened is due primarily to the 
fact that vacuum tube hearing aids have already approached 
physical and psychophysical Iimits. These are approximately 
80 decibels of acoustic gain and maximum power output of 
140 decibels (re. 0.0002 dynes per cm2). To provide more 
than 80 decibels of gain would in all likelihood result in 
acooustic feedback (squeal) that could :not be controlled. The 
sound pressure Ievel of 140 decibels is close to the tolerance 
threshold for pain. 
This analysis would seem to indicate that the advantages 
of transistor hearing aids lie in the realm of convenience 
and economy rather than in performance. There is, how-
ever, at least one further important difference. The transis-
tor hearing aids are far more versatile and flexible, model 
for model, then their predecessors. Since a transistor hearing 
aid can be controlled over a wide range of voltage and cur-
rent without circuit changes, it has been possible to build 
instruments which allow for relatively wide alterations in 
gain and output. A single model can thus be used for dis-
parate cases of hearing loss. At the moment this appears to 
be an advantage that is more impor:tant to the manufacturer 
than to the wearer, since a person who needs less than the 
full power available in his instrument is probably carrying 
a larger hearing aid than his personal needs require. At the 
same time, the greater flexibility can be advantageous where 
unusual demands obtain, as in the need for high gain with 
somewhat reduced power output. 

HEARING AID SELECTION 
165 
It is well to bear in mind that vacuum tubes have been 
used and studied for a much Ionger time than have transis-
tors. The latter are but recently developed and have con-
siderable margin for change and improvement. The vacuum 
tube had to be "miniaturized" down to hearing aid size. 
The transistor appeared in its original form in a good size-
relationship to hearing aids and still speaks of promising 
things to come. 
Hearing Aid Seleetion 
There has been a good deal of discussion concerning the 
method of helping the hard of hearing patient select a hear-
ing aid which will furnish him optimum acoustic assistance. 
Same examiners consider the fitting process to be one of 
careful measurement while to others it is simply a matter of 
general guidance. Based on laboratory investigation and 
clinical experience there have emerged certain principles. 
What is given here is an outline of techniques and pro-
cedures which have proven to be of considerable value in 
hearing aid selection. The use of a form like that shown in 
Fig. 31 is helpful. 
Deciding Need ForA Hearing Aid 
Since the primary function of a hearing aid is amplifica-
tion of speech, i:ts use is reserved for individuals with re-
duced ability to hear speech. The use of a hearing aid gen-
erally is recommended when there is an average lass of at 
least 30 decibels in the 500-2000 cps audiometric range for 
the better ear. Equally important as the determination of 
this minimum level is the necessity for recognizing indi-
vidual differences. Same people with a lass of more than 30 
decibels can function adequately both in terms of their own 
needs and the demands of their social and vocational milieu. 
Others find a milder loss to be seriously handicapping. 

166 
HEARING AIDS 
HEARING AID SEI.EGriOII 
N~----------------------------------------Date~------
l'revious Aid 
Active Condition 
Hake 
Unaided 
Model 
Receiver 
Battll7 
!one 
Ear 
Gain 
Speech 
R 
L 
FF 
PB Score 
R 
L 
db level 
FF 
db level 
Noise-speech 
ratio 
Dynamic range V 
Vol1llll8 
Tolerance 
maximum 
Tolerance 
11omfort 
Opinion 
~ 
Selection .,__ _____________ _ 
CoDments 
Aid Issuad --------
Fig. 31-Check Iist for hearing aid evaluation. 

HEARING AID SELECTION 
167 
The "ideal" candidate for a hearing aid has a conductive 
impairment with a loss for pure :tones which is ftat at ap-
proximately 50 or 60 decibels. There is a wide range above 
and below this Ievel which will respond satisfactorily to the 
amplification furnished by a hearing aid. When the hearing 
loss, however, is in the region of 90 decibels, scant assistance 
only can be expected. Some individuals with such severe 
impairment find a hearing aid to be of value if for no other 
reason than that it furnishes an awareness of the presence of 
speech sounds. 
There are some patients whose hearing defects are not 
over-severe, when measured by the pure tone average for 
500-2000 cps, who experience great difficulty as hearing aid 
wearers. lf there exists a reduced tolerance for high intensity 
sounds together with a markedly poor ability to discriminate 
the sounds of speech, then the prognosis for successful hear-
ing aid use is poor. Instruction in lip reading is important 
for these individuals. A hearing aid, however, should not 
be ruled out without a careful investigation of its possi-
bilities. 
A larger group than the one just considered consists of 
patients who have normal hearing for the pure tones 
through 1000 cps followed by a sharp falling off in acuity 
for the successively higher frequencies. These individuals 
will generally have a normal or near normal speech recep-
tion threshold with relatively good discrimination when 
tested at appropriately high Ievels. The results of testing 
thus show a loss for pure tones with fairly intact hearing for 
speech. These patients will usually complain of trouble 
when trying to hear in a difficult situation, such as listening 
in a noisy environment or when trying to attend to the 
rapidly shifting conversation of a group. It is very unlikely 
that individuals of this kind would derive much benefit 
from wearing a hearing aid. The instrument would prob-

168 
HEARING AIDS 
ably compound their troubles in a difficult listening situa-
tion, while they do not need help when the listening is 
relatively uncomplicated and easy. 
Determining Ear To Be Used 
The recommendation to wear the hearing aid on the 
better ear is now much more frequently made than hereto-
fore. This is sound procedure particularly when there is 
severe bilateral loss. If the loss in the better ear is of a mild 
degree and the poorer ear is still within a usable range, 
then the latter can be selected; an example is the case of a 
35 decibelloss in one ear with a 50 decibel loss in the other. 
If the poorer ear were at 70 decibels then the aid should 
be worn on the better ear, which has the 35 decibel loss, to 
avoid the likelihood of having approximately equal binaural 
hearing but still of a handicapping nature. The poorer ear 
usually is not chosen if it has an average pure tone loss in 
the 500-2000 cps range which is greater than the correspond-
ing loss in the better ear by 25 or 30 decibels or more. 
Another consideration is to select the ear with the lesser 
pure tone air conduction slope in configuration, and one 
which has the better discrimination. 
Sensitivity 
The amount of amplification provided by a hearing aid 
is ,taken tobe a measure of its gain or sensitivity. The great-
er the degree of a patient's hearing loss the greater must be 
the gain of his hearing aid. The determination of an instru-
ment's performance in this regard follows the unaided 
speech audiometry and should be obtained in an acoustically 
adequate two-room testing suite. The hearing aid is attached 
to the hearing aid bafHe (See Chapter 3) immediately be-
hind and just above the patient's chair. The examiner can 
converse with the patient by using the microphone circuit 
of the hearing evaluator assembly. As occasion demands he 

HEARING AID SELECTION 
169 
will leave the control room to speak directly to the patient 
in the sound-treated room and to make the necessary ad-
justments in the volume and tone control setting of the 
hearing aid under trial. 
The sensitivity of a hearing aid generally is used to de-
termine minimum adequacy of a hearing aid. The examiner 
uses an ordinary or slightly reduced conversational Ievel 
while speaking to the patient who now has the hearing aid 
with the ear insert (preferably custom made) in place. The 
examiner alters the volume control setting seeking an ad-
justment which the patient considers to be comfortable for 
his present listening. The examiner then returns to his 
equipment and obtains the speech reception threshold. Un-
der these circumstances the patien:t's aided threshold is usual-
ly found to be approximately 35 decibels better than his 
corresponding unaided speech reception threshold. In pre-
senting the spondaic words used in this measurement, either 
monitored live voice or recorded material can be used. Gen-
erally the use of a tape reproducer or phono player will be 
found most advantageous. Where improvising is necessary, 
as in working with children, the use of monitored live voice 
is preferred. 
Testing for sensitivity is used by some examiners as a 
criterion in determining selection predicated on test score 
differences which may be established. When this is done it 
is necessary toset the volume control on the basis of a stand-
ard speech input. Recorded continuous speech is introduced, 
usually at a Ievel 40 decibels above normal threshold, and 
the volume control of the hearing aid is set for comfort. 
Differences in aided speech reception threshold are then 
noted as one proceeds from hearing aid to hearing aid. Dif-
ferences in sensitivity of 6 decibels or less are not considered 
to be significant. While it is expected that a hearing aid 
prove itself satisfactory by furnishing a sufficient amount 

170 
HEARING AIDS 
of amplification, it is open to question whether differences 
between hearing aids on this basis should be used as a factor 
in selection. Obtained differences in the aided speech re-
ception threshold are meaningful only if the patient can 
set the volume control of the various hearing aids with uni-
form accuracy at the time he is listening to the running 
speech. Not all patients can make consistent settings of the 
volume control on the basis of the loudness of perceived 
speech. 
Discrimination Score 
The unaided speech audiometry will have included a test 
for discrimination employing a list of 50 PB words pre-
sented at a level 40 decibels above the speech reception 
threshold. Using the additional PB lists, discrimination 
scores are obtained with the various hearing aids in place. 
Differences of less than 6 per cent (3 test words) are not 
considered significant. The criterion of discrimination is an 
important one in hearing aid selection and large differences 
between aids should be weighted accordingly. However, one 
should not expect the aided discrimination score to surpass 
the unaided score. Often the aided discrimination score will 
be poorer since the electroacoustic characteristics of a hear-
ing aid are far below the quality of the usual large hearing 
evaluator assembly used in obtaining the unaided per-
centage. 
Thus far the hearing aid performance has been assessed 
in the relative quiet of a sound-treated room. Were this 
testing clone in an ordinary noise environment the condi-
tions might be more realistic. However, outside the sound-
treated room the real life noise level is constantly shifting 
and controlled measurements from hearing aid to hearing 
aid become impossible. A way of meeting this problern is 
to introduce a measured noise in:to the sound-treated room. 

HEARING AID SELECTION 
171 
Calibrated white noise measured from normal hearing 
thrcshold is satisfactory for this purpose. The PB words are 
presented at a Ievel 40 decibels above the speech reception 
threshold with an accompanying background of white noise 
30 decibels above the speech reception threshold. The dis-
crimination score with noise 10 decibels below the Ievel of 
the speech signal is obtained unaided and with various hear-
ing aids which are being investigated. This test is usually 
more rigorous for those persans who have difficulty under-
standing the PB words in quiet. 
Tolerance and Dynamic Range 
These factors can be determined in related test sequences. 
Following the original setting of the volume control for the 
comfort Ievel the aided speech reception threshold was ob-
tained. The intensity of the speech signal is then increased. 
The intensity may be raised in 5 or 10 decibel steps until 
it is 50 decibels above normal threshold. From this point on 
the intensity is increased cautiously in 2 or 3 decibel incre-
ments until the patient reports intolerability or extreme 
discomfort. This test must be clone carefully since a new 
hearing aid user in particular may become very disconcerted 
when his tolerance Ievel is reached. Besides the tolerance 
measure, the test shows the dynamic range of intelligibility 
from low to high inpu't Ievels while the volume control is 
maintained at the comfort setting. 
The next step in this procedure is to adjust the volume 
control of the hearing aid to its maximum set'ting and repeat 
the tests as above thus determining the minimum intelligi-
bility and the maximum tolerability of which the instru-
ment and patient are capable. Tolerance thresholds can be 
determined using connected discourse or white noise. How-
ever by employing the spondaic words, it is easy to obtain 
the desired minimum threshold. In addition, as the intensity 

172 
HEARING AIDS 
is raised, one may note that with an occasional patient the 
words cease to be intelligible while remaining tolerable. 
In performing these tests it is not necessary to explore the 
dynamic or operating range below 10 decibels or above 85 
decibels re normal threshold. The upper limit will n01t be 
exceeded by a hearing aid at maximum gain setting while 
the lower Ievel is so soft that speech is almost certain to be 
masked by ambient noise in a.ll but controlled conditions. 
It is of course desirable to select a hearing aid with a wide 
dynamic range and one which gives the least tolerance 
difficulty. 
Quality 
Following the unaided speech audiometry the tests are 
performed completely with each hearing aid. The patient's 
estimate of 'the quality of the instrument is then obtained. 
The procedure is repeated with other hearing aids. In many 
cases, particularly those of moderate, uncomplicated, -con-
ductive deafness, significant differences in the test scores will 
not develop. The deciding factor may then be the pa1tient's 
subjective opinion of how each of the instruments sounds 
to him. A simple rating scale can be set up for judging and 
scoring the quality of each instrument, or the patient may 
merely indicate the order of preference for the various hear-
ing aids tested. A related item is whether any of the instru-
ments produce excessive amounts of internal noise. 
General Consideration. Among the characteristics which 
do not readily lend themselves to measurement, 1the factor 
of hearing aid size has ceased to be an important one. The 
use of transistors has led to instruments of considerably re-
duced size and weight. Since electroacoustic equipment is 
subject to breakdown, 1the availability of hearing aid repair 
service should be considered. Other things being equal, it 

HEARING AIDS COMPARED 
173 
is preferable to select a hearing aid for which adequate local 
repair facilities are obtainable by the patient. 
Hearing tests and a hearing aid fitting should always be 
preceded by adequate otological examination. Medical or 
surgical alleviation of hearing Iosses offers many patients an 
amelioration of their impairment with restoration of ser-
viceable hearing. lt is to be emphasized again that deafness 
is the functional impairment symptomaJtic of organic or 
psychological disease, or both. 
Another otological consideration concerns the meatal in-
sert. Only a physician can evaluate properly contraindica-
tions in the use of an ear mold because of some pathological, 
anatomical, or post-operaltive Iimitation. 
There is a tendency in some quarters to consider the need 
for a detailed hearing aid selection procedure as being lim-
ited to a small percentage of cases. This is predicated on the 
belief that most hard of hearing individuals can be bene-
fited equally by any of a fairly !arge number of good hearing 
aids. It is probably true that significant test differences will 
not appear in many of the "easy" cases. However, if an in-
dividual with a 40 decibel loss of a conductive nature ob-
tains a hearing aid with 80 decibel gain, then it becomes an 
example of an "easy" case that has been improperly fitted. 
Conversely, an individual with severe conductive impair-
ment may select a low gain insltrument if left to his own 
devices. This, too, illustrates how it is very possible for a 
Straightforward case to be poorly treated. A careful process 
of hearing aid selection or fitting should be performed in 
all instances of hearing loss of a very mild or severe de-
gree. Thorough fitting is required also whenever there are 
problems of reduced tolerance thresholds, difficulty in dis-
crimination, and in practically every instance of perceptive 
deafness. 
Hearing aids are imperfect instruments. They are not 

17 4 
HEARING AIDS 
adaptable to an exactness of fitting. They do not identify 
the direction from which sounds emanate. With satisfactory 
monaural amplification a patient experiences the problems 
of other people with monaural deafness. Hearing aids do 
not provide high-fideHty reproduction. It is well to advise 
patients of the limitations of hearing aids and to strive for 
their realistic acceptance of the handicaps of deafness and 
to accept the great potendals for improvement which electro-
acoustic amplification provides. Auditory rehabilitation of-
fers additional support in the medical care of the acoustically 
handicapped. 

13 ________________________ _ 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
Recognition is the identification of a person or thing al-
ready known. We recognize known persans not merely by 
their physical appearances, but by the way their voices sound 
to us. In many instances we use only the voice and speech 
patterns as a means of identification. For example, during 
a telephone conversation we frequently are able to recog-
nize the speaker by his manner of speaking before he ident-
ifies hirnself by name. The speaker may change his voice 
by al'tering the vocal musculature which prevents us from 
identifying him solely from his speech patterns. By pinching 
his nose with his fingers while speaking or by placing a hand-
kerchief over the telephone mouthpiece, the speaker changes 
his normal speech patterns so that recognition of the known 
voice becomes less likely. These changes are deliberate and 
voluntary. 
The following chapters will describe changes in voice and 
speech pat'terns which do not occur voluntarily. Same of 
these changes are symptomatic types of pathology of the 
vocal mechanism which generally will occur when there is 
a disruption of the normal pathways of air set into vibration 
and perceived as speech. 
The primary purposes of respiration are to permit the 
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide and lto eliminate 
175 

176 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
water. Speech is considered an overlaid function of recent 
acquisition. The source of vocal expression is the flow of 
air from the lungs, with only occasional exceptions (i.e. 
laryngectomy with esophageal speech). The lungs are situ-
ated in the thoracic cavity, the base of which is a horizontal 
partiltion, the diaphragm, and the sides of which are made 
by the ribs and intercostal muscles. The capacity of the 
thoracic cavity can be made larger or smaller and air can 
be sucked into or expressed from the lungs through the 
trachea and larynx by controlling the diaphragm, the inter-
costal muscles, and dther accessory respiratory muscles. Dur-
ing normal phonation air escapes from the lungs; the rate 
and regularity being controlled by these groups of muscles. 
A complex structure, tubular in shape, the larynx, is super-
imposed upon the proximal end of the trachea. 
The larynx contains a pair of muscular bands, the true 
vocal cords, and breath forced out through the rima glottis 
causes them to vibrate. The expired air, thrown into vibra-
tion by variations in the approximation of the tensed vocal 
cords, is divided into minute puffs which are expelled into 
the oral and nasal cavities and perceived as sound. The pitch 
of the voice can be modified by the many alterations of the 
vocal cords (length, thickness, and tension) . Modifications of 
voiced sounds (sounds produced by vibrations of the vocal 
cords) and unvoiced sounds (sounds produced without vibra-
tion of the cords) are affected by the tongue, soft palate, hard 
palate, lips, teeth, and the confining walls of 1the hypo-
pharynx, pharynx, oropharynx, nasopharynx and nose. The 
adjustable and flexible combinations formed by these rigid 
and soft parts and the breath stream produce speech. The 
chambers of the throat, mouth and nose affect the quality 
of the phonation. Tonal changes are produced particularly 
by the alterations of the cavities of the mouth and throat, 
the nasal cavity being of lesser importance as a resonator. 

VOCAL SOUNDS 
177 
Vocal Sounds 
Voice refers to the basic tone originating in the Iarynx. 
The vocal cords, tensed by muscular action and from the 
stream of air below, vibrate, driving the air into the cavities 
of the throat, mouth and nose. Here it is selectively ampli-
fied, modified and interrupted by the articulators, and 
emerges from the mouth as speech sounds. Voice is the 
carrier of what we hear, while speech is the agent of 
intelligibility. For example, voice can be compared with 
malten steel, and speech with 1he many different shapes into 
which this malten metal is processed. 
Vocal sounds have four basic or fundamental character-
istics: volume, pitch, quality and rate. 
Volume is a measure of the energy produced while speak-
ing. An increase or decrease in the amount of energy wil1 
result in similar changes of volume. Valurne is deemed ade-
quate when it has sufficient fullness or quality for achieving 
the demands made upon it by the audience situations and 
the type of material uttered. 
Pitch refers to the position of the voice an a musical scale 
and is related 11:0 the frequency of sound waves. The funda-
mental sou;nd is determined by the frequency of vibrations 
of the vocal cords. Pitch consists of two elements: Key, the 
average pitch from which a tone may rise and fall in com-
fort; inflection or intonation, the melody patterns produced 
as the voice rises and falls f:rom one pitch to another. Pitch 
is deemed adequate if it has appropriate speech melody; 
proper upward and downward shifts of voice essential to 
convey shades of meanings and purposes at a Ievel which is 
suitable to the speaker and to the material spoken. 
Quality of tone refers to the pitch and its means of reso-
nance. After a tone is initiated it is reinforced by the walls 
of the throat, mouth or nose. Quality is deemed acceptable 

178 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
when the flexible walls of the resonators respond promptly 
and correctly to the demands of the speaker so as to charac-
terize and color the various speech sounds. The reinforee-
rneut of tones produces proper shadings and harmony pat-
terns, essential in the production of appropriate sounds. 
These properly reinforced or resonated tones sound suit-
able to the listeuer and are clear enough to be heard above 
the ambient noise. 
Rate of speech refers to Jthe element of time. Rate is 
deemed acceptable when it adjusts itself to meet the de-
mands or mood of a particular listeuer or audience; when it 
is suitable in relative length of individual speech sounds 
and pauses; and when it has adequate speech rhythm for 
>the material. 
Speech Sounds 
Speech sounds, phonemes, are classified into three major 
groups, predicated on the manner in which the expired 
breath is conditioned by the organs of vocalization: (1) con-
sonants, vowels and diphthongs, (2) voiced or breath sounds 
and voiceless or breathless sounds, and (3) oral and nasal 
sounds. 
A consonant, voiced or . unvoiced, is a speech sound pro-
duced by the escaping air being constricted or impeded 
somewhere in the vocal passages resul1ting in a friction noise. 
A phoneme is considered to be a vowel when the voiced 
breath is produced with little or no obstruction. It receives 
its characteristics from the adjustments made in the size of 
the oral and pharyngeal cavi1ties and by the size of their 
apertures. 
Voiced or breath sounds are those speech sounds produced 
when the air has been set into vibration by the approxima-

SPEECH SOUNDS 
179 
tion of the vocal cords so that a murrnur is produced. 
Unvoiced or breathless sounds are produced when the air, 
escaping through the glottis, is not set into vibration but is 
impeded or adjusted in its outward passage so that a slight 
noise is produced. 
Oral sounds are those speech sounds phonated through 
the throat and mouth; nasal sounds are those sounds pro-
duced by directing ithe vibrated air through the nose. 
Consonants 
Consonants may be categorized into two principal groups: 
( 1) by the manner of formation, (2) by the site of articula-
tion and whether the air has been set into vibration or no 
impedance is set up until after the air stream passes through 
the glottis. 
Regarding the manner of formation, consonants can 
further be classified into four sub-groupings: plosives, fric-
atives or sibilants, nasals, and glides. 
Plosives or stops are so named because the breath is com-
pressed and then suddenly released or exploded (P, B, T, 
D, K, G). 
Fricatives occur when the manner of production results 
in a constriction of the air which is forced out producing 
a friction-like noise (F, V, TH, H, R). Certain high fre-
quency fricatives are classified separately as sibilants (S, Z, 
SH, CH, ZH, as in azure, J). 
There are three sounds in the English language which are 
classified as nasal sounds, so labeled because the air is reso-
nated in the nasal cavity (M, N, NG). 
The four sounds in the English language known as glides 
are the result of gliding movement of the tongue or the lips 
or both during their production (L, R, W, Y) . 
By site of articulation consonants can be classified as 
follows: 

180 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
I. Lip or bi-labial. Outgoing breath is impeded or 
stopped at the lips. (P-unvoiced plosive; B-voiced plosive; 
M-voiced nasal continuant, breath being emitted in a con-
tinuous stream; W-unvoiced frictionless continuant; WH-
unvoiced frictionless continuant.) 
2. Lip-teeth or labio-dental. Outgoing breath is impeded 
by the lower lip being brought up against the upper teeth. 
(F-unvoiced fricative continuant; V-voiced fricative con-
tinuant.) 
3. T ongue-teeth or lingua-dental. Outgoing breath is 
impeded by the tongue tip being placed against the upper 
teeth. The tongue may also be placed between the teeth 
and the air stream is allowed to flow gently over the tongue. 
(TH-unvoiced fricative continuant; TH-voiced fricative 
continuant.) 
4. Teeth-ridge or lingua-alveolar (gum ridge). Tip of the 
tongue approximates against the upper alveolar ridge. (T-
unvoiced stopped; D-voiced stopped; N-voiced nasal 
continuant; L-lateral continuant; S-unvoiced fricative 
continuant [sibilant]; Z-voiced fricative continuant [sibi-
lant]; R-voiced fricative continuant [semi-vowel]; SH-
unvoiced fricative continuant [sibilant]; ZH-voiced fric-
ative continuant [sibilant]; CH-voiced stopped fricative 
[sibilant]; J-voiced stopped fricative [sibilant].) 
5. Lingua-palatal. The front of tongue approximates 
against the hard palate. (Y -unvoiced fricative as in the 
ward "yes".) 
6. Soft palate or lingua-velar. The .back of tongue approx-
imates against the soft palate or velum. (K-unvoiced 
stopped; G-voiced stopped; NG-voiced nasal continuant.) 
7. Glottal. The glottis is narrowed so that the air passing 
through it causes friction, but not sufficient to produce voic-
ing. (H-unvoiced fricative continuant) . 

SPEECH SOUNDS 
Vowels 
181 
Vowels have two important characteristics: Resonance and 
absence of audible friction. Each vowel has its own special 
resonance. Once the vibrating air stream is emitted through 
the glottis it undergoes changes of resonance in the mouth 
or vowel chamber. It is the resonance of a certain part of 
the chamber only which gives any vowel sound the indi-
vidual quality which distinguished it from the other vowels. 
Vowels can be divided into groups according to the posi-
tion of the tongue during phonation. They are grouped as 
front vowels, middle vowels, and back vowels. The position 
of the lips, such as rounded, unrounded and widely open, 
unrounded and opened in a narrow slit-also characterize 
vowel production. Tensity or laxity causes a difference of 
the walls of lthe vocal passage thus further influencing vowel 
production. Length of vowel, (lang, half-long, and short) is 
another determinant of vowel production. 
Vowels are classified as follows: 
Front vowels. Long E as in the ward see (tense) ; short I 
as in the word it (lax); lang A as in the words day, they, 
April (tense) ; short E as in 1the word let (lax); intermediate 
Aas in the word ask (lax); short A as in the words airplane, 
dare (tense) . 
Middle vowels. Lang UR as in the word fur (tense); inid-
dle A as in the word about (lax) ; U as in the ward up (lax) . 
Back vowels. Long 00 as in the word moon (tense); short 
00 as in the ward foot (lax); long 0 as in the word no 
(tense); broad 0 as in the ward for (tense); short 0 as in 
the ward not (tense); lang A as in the word garden (lax). 
Diphthongs 
A diphthong is a compound sound consisting of the blend-
ing of two vowels so heard that there is no sonority between 

182 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
them. Diphthongs occurring in the English language are as 
follows: 
A combination of short E as in the word let and short I 
as in the word it forms the sounds of Aas in the word sane,, 
EY as in the word they, and AI as in the word wait. 
A combination of intermediate Aas in the word ask and 
short I as in the word it forms the sounds of I as in the 
word ice, AI as in the word aisle, EI as in the word sleight, 
Y as in the word style, and IE as in the word pie. 
A combination of long 0 as in the word open and the 
short 00 as in the word foot forms the sounds of OU as in 
the word bough, OW as in the word cow, and AU as in the 
word sauerkraut. 
A combination of the broad 0 (AW) as in the word saw 
and the short I as in the word it forms the sounds of OI as 
in the word oil and OY as in the word boy. 
A combination of the short I as in the word it and middle 
A as in the word about forms the sounds of EA as in the 
word idea, EE as in the word steer, IE as in the word bier, 
and the first E as in the word here. 
A combination of shol'it A as in the word air and middle 
A as in the word about forms the sounds of A as in the word 
fare, AI as in the word airplane, EA as in the word pear, EI 
as in the word heir, and the first E as in the word there. 
A combination of either short 0 as in the word not or 
short 00 as in lthe word foot and middle Aas in the word 
about forms the sounds of OA as in the word oar, 0 as in 
the word more, 00 as in the word fioor, and OU as in the 
word pour. 
A combination of broad 0 (A W) as in the word saw and 
middle A as in the word about forms the sounds of 00 as 
in the word boor, U as in the word sure, and OU as in the 
word tour. 

PATHOLOGY MANIFESTED IN VOICE AND SPEECH 
183 
In the produetion of speeeh and speeeh sounds, generally, 
little or no deviation from the norm oeeurs when there is no 
pathology of the voeal meehanism present. However, when 
some pathology of the meehanism responsible for the normal 
produetion of speeeh and speeeh sounds appears, an indi-
vidual demonstrating a malfunetion will manifes1t many 
voiee and speeeh ehanges associated with the area of dysfune-
tion. Voiee and speeeh ehanges whieh oeeur beeause of 
pathology frequently may be utilized as a means of differen-
tial diagnosis of the possible areas of the dysfunetion and 
provide clues to the nature and degree of malfunetion. 
Pathology Manifested in Voice and Speech 
Dysfunetion of the oral museulature and their resultant 
voiee and speeeh manifestations are as follows: 
Nasal Passages and N asophary.ngeal Pathologies 
(1) Obstmetion of the nasal passages, rhinolalia clausa 
anterior, frequently eauses nasality or hyper-nasality. Vowels 
and semi-vowels are nasalized wiith the nasal eonsonants M, 
N, NG muffied. Often this type of nasalization has been 
deseribed as a "nasal twang." Examples of this speeeh devia-
tion are associated with or seeondary to deviated septum, 
turbinal hypertrophy, and ehronie allergie rhinitis. 
(2) Obstmetion of the nasopharyngeal airway, rhinolalia 
clausa poSiterior, or negative nasality, frequently produees 
denasalization of the nasal sounds M, N, NG. A eommon or 
frequent example of these substitutions is noted or observed 
in individuals suffering an acute rhinitis, or an acute allergie 
rhinitis. Some examples of these aberrations are heard when 
the word my sounds like by, the ward no sounds like do, 
and the word sing sounds like sig. Conltributing eauses to 
this kind of speeeh are sinusitis, enlarged adenoids, rhinal 

184 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
polyps (anterior or posterior or both), rhinal foreign bodies 
(anterior or posterior or both), neoplasms (anterior or pos-
terior or both) and scar formation (depending on location). 
Pathology of the Oropharynx 
(1) Paralysis of the velum and cleft pala,te, rhinolalia 
aperta, frequently produces a speech pattern characterized 
by marked nasality and absences of the explosive character-
istics of K, G, T, D, P, F, V, S, Z, SH, CH. These sounds 
are seriously weakened. 
(2) Harelip or cleft lip may disturb only those sounds 
involving the upper lip such as P, B, M, U, W. When the 
upper teeth and gum ridges are also involved, Jthe sounds 
of voiced and unvoiced TH, F, V, S, Z are produced de-
fectively. 
(3) Abnormalities of the dentition, of the maxilla and 
of the mandible, frequently affect the proper articulation 
of many speech sounds. Some of these deviants are the S, 
Z, CH, J, TH, P, B, M, N sounds. 
Pathology of the Tongue 
Microglossia, macroglossia, paralysis of the tongue, and 
short or tight frenulum frequently will produce speech devi· 
ations ranging from overall defective articulation to broadly 
defective utterance of S, Z, SH, CH (lisping) and sound 
substitutions. 
Laryngeal Pathology 
(1) Congenital anomalies frequently produce a muffied, 
hoarse abnormal quality. 
(2) Paralysis, vocal abuse, chronic Iaryngitis, and nodules, 
and neoplasms frequently cause hoarseness, pitch breaking 
or even aphonia. 
(3) Laryngeal disease, pathology, or malfunction caused 
by thoracic, cervical, metabolic, infectious, systemic or 

ELEMENTS OF THE COMMUNICATIVE PROCESS 
185 
neurologic diseases as manifested by symptoms of impaired 
voice, dysphasia and, at times, dysphagia. 
Psychological Factars 
So-called hysterical aphonia-psychosomatic aphonia, split 
voice, adolescent voice of the adult, weak voice, etc. 
A knowledge of the voice and speech changes manifested 
by pathology of the vocal mechanism can be used in the 
examination of patients with voice or speech defects. Simi-
larly, this methodology can also be applied in the diagnosis 
of individuals alleging a lass of hearing. Speech is the motor 
manifestation of acoustic function. A lass of hearing will, 
therefore, manifest itself in many voice and speech 
deviations. 
Elements of the Communicative Process 
Speech is a communicative process and speech skilb are 
an outgrowth of speech itself. Speaking and hearing, two 
elements of the communicative process, are so closely re-
laJted that a serious impairment in either will frequently 
result in a breaking down of the entire process. Such dis-
ruption of communication will often produce extensive 
psychological and sociological results. 
Langnage in the infant is learned exclusively through 
hearing. Although the potential for speech is inborn, lan-
gnage itself is a learned process. When a loss of hearing 
occurs, an individual frequently develops poor speech habits 
and acquires speech mannerisms which deviaJte from the 
normal speech and voice patterns. The normal hearing ear 
is the director of phonation, and monitors vocalization and 
verbalization. A barrier to proper monitaring is raised by 
deafness; the type, severity and duration of the hearing im-

186 
VOICE AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
pairment will be reflected in voice and speech deviations 
that are trademarks of particular types of deafness. A trained 
listener can frequently judge the kind of deafness by voice 
and speech patterns of the individual so handicapped. 
Definitions 
In the field of speech and hearing, definitions of the terms 
hard of hearing, deaf and deafened are as follows: 
Hard of hearing or impaired hearing. An individual is 
hard of hearing when he has no less than 30 decibels loss 
nor more than 7 5 decibels loss of hearing in the better ear 
after the age at which voice and speech paltterns were ac-
quired through the normal channels of hearing. 
Deaf. An individual is deaf when he has sustained a com-
plete loss of hearing or the greater part of his hearing (70 
to 75 decibels) in the better hearing ear before the age at 
which voice and speech patterns were acquired ll:hrough the 
normal channels of hearing. 
Deafened. An individual is deafened when he has sus-
tained a complete loss of hearing or the greater part of his 
hearing (70 to 75 decibels) in the better hearing ear after 
the age at which the voice and speech patterns were acquired 
or established lthrough the normal channels of hearing; 

14 ________________________ __ 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN 
CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
Conductive, impedance deafness is an impairment of hear-
ing due to a defect of the transducing mechanism of the 
middle ear or a failure of the sound vibrations to be trans-
mitted to the cochlea normally. 
Volume 
Air-borne sounds heard by an individual with normal 
hearing enter 1the external auditory canal and impinge upon 
the tympanic membrane; the membrane vibrates; the os-
sicles respond to these vibrations transmitting them into the 
cochlea. These physical vibrations are transformed into 
electrical impulses; the responses of the cochlear micro-
phonics are transmitted by the eighth cranial nerve (audi-
tory nerve) ultimately to the appropriate cerebral cortical 
areas and are recognized as sound. 
Our environment is a relatively noisy one. An individual 
with normal hearing is constantly at1tuned to the changes 
of noise intensity about him. By adjusting the speech vol-
ume to the amounts of noise, we are able to achieve the 
proper volume alterations necessary to be heard above the 
ambien1t noise levels. Ruling out other influences of volume 
changes, the normal hearing person will adjust his volume 
satisfactorily. 
187 

188 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
Additionally, individuals with normal hearing hear their 
own voices by their own bone conduction. The normal hear-
ingindividual relies on this dual mechanism for monitoring 
the volume of his own speech: (1) normal air conduction 
conditioned by the ambient noise level, and (2) normal 
bone conduction relative 1t0 this. 
A person with bilateral conductive deafness suffers from 
alterations of his speech volume because to such a patient 
the ambient noise may be minimal or non-existent, and he 
feels as though he is listening in a quiet, subdued, cathedral-
like world. He will necessarily reduce his volume which he 
is monitoring by this artificially quiet environment. 
The weak volume is further influenced by the relatively 
increased bone conductivity, as the patient is more aware of 
hearing by his own bone conduction than the normal hear-
ing individual. In order to minimize his hearing of his own 
speech by his own bone conduction, he will make a further 
effort to reduce his volume. 
In summary, his monitoring ceiling has been lowered 
both by the apparen1t reduced ambient noise of his own 
making and also by his relatively increased bone conduction. 
Pitch 
Pitch deviation is another speech defect noted in conduc-
tive deafness. Pitch, not to be confused with volume, refers 
to the position of an individual's voice on a musical scale 
(frequency of vibrations-cycles per second). 
Anomalies of volume are described as being weak or ex-
cessive. Piltch deviations are described as being low, high 
and, possibly, monotonous. 
The incidence of low pitch (key) and monotonous pitch 
pattern is very frequent with conductive deafness. The pa-
tient will reduce the volume of his voice so that it sounds 
satisfactory to himself. Piltch key, which is directly correlated 

SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
189 
with a volume change, will he lowered. The result is an 
over-relaxation of the vocal cords thus altering the physical 
characteristics of the cords (length, tension, and thickness). 
A reduction of volume and a lowering of pitch manifeSits 
itself in a generallack of pitch variation resulting in monot-
onaus delivery of the speech. The speaker's lack of shifts, 
inflections and intonation give the listener the impression 
that the speaker is uninterested in what he has to say. Thus 
the listener, too, will often lose interest. 
Quality 
Quality as previously stated is pitch plus resonance. Musi-
cal instruments vary in quality due to the materials of· the 
resonator (wood or metal) and the size and shape of the 
mouthpiece, string or reed. By the use of a mute on the 
musical instrument its quality can he changed further. 
In the human "musical instrument" an alteration of the 
proper resonator will result in an aherration of phonation. 
With conductive deafness, the nasal sounds M, N, NG 
are suhdued in the oral cavity instead of heing reinforced in 
the nasal cavity, hecause of hone conduction already de-
scrihed. This speech deviation is termed denasal quality. 
Sounds resonated in the nasal cavity will appear to sound 
lauder to the speaker than those resonated in the mouth. 
The person with conductive deafness perceives his own 
hone-conducted phonations at greater intensity than those 
heard hy air conduction. Sounds which produce a greater 
intensity hecause of the greater amount of hone Stimulation, 
as do the nasal sounds, are incomparahly loud. Uncon-
sciously a nasopharyngeal seal is formed, preventing nasal 
sounds from entering the proper resonating cavity. These 
nasal sounds are now made as mouth sounds, resulting in 
a type of quality deviation frequently observed in individ-
uals suffering from an acute rhinitis or nasal block. The 

190 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
phoneme M sounds like B; N sounds like D; and NG sounds 
like G. 
Retracted quality is another speech deviation. For ex-
ample, a ventriloquist is able to produce speech without 
moving his articulators by retracting his phonations. Our 
attention is held by the animated puppet and we are dis-
tracted from watehing the ventriloquist himself. The speech 
sounds are made in the back of the throat and by "throwing 
his voice" he creates the illusion. 
Speech sounds produced in the mouth strike the hard 
palate, the alveolus and the maxillae, thus setting the skull 
into vibration. Because of monitaring of speech hearing by 
bone conduction, the speaker is guided by his subjectivity 
and attempts to reduce the bone conduction. He pulls back 
or holds back the tongue, preventing the hard palate from 
vibrating vigorously. The speech sounds roll off the tongue 
and escape through the lips, resulting in minimal phonatory 
movements. 
A rticulation 
Articulatory deviations are not as frequently apparent in 
the speech of persans with a conductive deafness, as in those 
with a perceptive lass of hearing. However, as moderate as 
these deviations are, they are recognizable as a deficiency. 
The self hearing by bone conduction is the dominant fac-
tor in the monitaring of volume, pitch and quality of speech. 
This normal avenue of hearing is responsible also for the 
moderation of gross speech deviations in conductive deafness. 
The phonemes of M, N, NG when resonated in the nasal 
cavity (see Quality) sound subjectively too loud and the 
speaker attempts to guide these nasals into a cavity where 
they will not be manifested as too loud. The nasals are 
channeled into the oral cavity where the phonemes B, D, 

SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
191 
G are substituted for the proper sounds. The sound of N 
may also be substituted for the NG sound. 
Because the voiced consonant sounds are heard lauder 
(apparently reinforced by bone conduction), unvoiced con-
sonants which produce little or no vibrations of the skull are 
substituted for their voiced cognates. This occurs particu-
larly when the voiced consonant is the final sound of a word 
rather than when it is in the initial or medial position of a 
word. For example, had becomes hat, hands (z) becomes 
hands (s). 
Weakening of consonants is another deviation associated 
with conductive deafness. The phonemes R and L when 
articulated correctly produce vigoraus vibrations of the hard 
palate giving ·the patient the sensation of increased loudness. 
The phoneme R is weakened considerably and is replaced 
by W or a W-like sound substitution. The phoneme L is 
retracted and becames W or a W-like sound. 
A diagnostic and therapeutic consideration for the preser-
vation of speech sounds in the speech pattern is the visibility 
of the sound form as molded by the visible speech forming 
organs, such as the lips, teeth and tongue. Sounds whose 
forms or movements are invisible to the eye usually are sub-
stituted by a similar more visible sound. If the deafness has 
existed for a long period of time and the speaker has had 
to depend on speech (lip) reading, the invisible phonemes 
K, G, NG (sounds made in the back of the mouth) will be 
replaced by the more visible phonemes T, D, N. For ex-
ample car becomes tarJ garage becomes darageJ and hearing 
becomes hearin. 
Deviations of vowels and diphthongs are not as marked in 
conductive deafness as in perceptive deafness. However, as 
the volume of speech is reduced by the person with con-
ductive impairment, there is also a reduotion in the range 

192 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS 
of mobility of the articulators. Reduced volume imposes 
lessened movements of these organs and the function of the 
articulators becomes depressed and inactive. The speech is 
characterized by mumbling, general lack of precise articula-
tion, dullness and flatness. 

15 ________________________ __ 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN 
PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
Perceptive deafness, nerve deafness, is the Iack of sensi-
tivity of the auditory mechanism in the cochlea; injury of 
the acoustic nerve, or its center in the brain. 
Hard of Hearing Patients 
Volume 
Individuals with perceptive deafness in whom both air and 
bone .thresholds are a horizontal curve over the range of fre-
quencies will demoostrate an excessive amount of volume 
when they speak. 
Let us assume that the cochlea is a harp-like organ. The 
strings on this harp vary in length, tension, and thickness. 
The resulting intensity of a particular string being plucked 
will depend on .the pressure of the pluck. A light pluck 
might produce an intensity of 40 decibels, a heavier pluck 
one of 60 decibels. If some of the strings were to become 
loosened, a light pluck would produce a similar frequency 
but would produce a decreased intensity. In order to pro-
duce the original amount of intensity on this loosened string, 
it would now be necessary to increase the power of the pluck. 
In perceptive deafness, volume or pressure power may be 
193 

194 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
compared with plucking power. The harp-like cochlea in 
the hearing mechanism has many loosened strings (frequency 
bands). Increase in volume or plucking power is necessary 
to allow the patient to hear his own volume at an acceptable 
level. Both exogenaus and endogenaus sounds are in need of 
reinforeerneut and this increase in volume is perceived as 
being of normal loudness. 
In some patients the volume may be weak. Many of them 
demonstrate audiograms which slope from normal thresholds 
for the low frequencies to marked Iosses from the middle 
speech frequencies to the high frequencies. A male patient, 
because the phonatory pitch frequency falls in the lower 
registers, will monitor his volume within the range of his 
normal acoustic frequencies and tend to avoid those other 
pitches and frequencies which appear in his impaired hearing 
range. The volume of the female's voice with this type of 
loss will not demonstrate a diminution because her voice 
generally does not include the lower pitches. However, the 
volume of the female voice may be reduced when there is 
no marked loss of hearing in the higher pitch range but a 
loss in frequencies considered low. 
Pitch 
Another deviation of the voice in perceptive deafness is 
a change in key and intonation. N umerous psychological 
factors influence pitch changes. Some of these factors are 
indifference, disgust, boredom, worry, anger, bitterness, anx-
iety, fatigue and preoccupation. The listeners must be espe-
cially careful when relying upon pitch as the means of 
diagnosing a particular type of hearing loss. When psycho-
logical factors can be discounted, perceptive deafness gen-
erally manifests itself in a lack of pitch variation, monotony 
of tone, and in some instances a raising of the pitch (key) . 
Lack of pitch variation, monotony, occurs because the 

SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
195 
speaker attempts to reproduce by his own speech, the quali-
ties of the speech of others and his own speech as they sound 
to him. He is unable to hear the constant fluctuating changes, 
both minimal and subtle, which characterize proper voice 
habits. Hearing only occasional emphatic shifts, inflections 
and intonations, he begins to omit the requisites of normal 
speech. When the deafness is severe and long standing, the 
loss of pitch control is so pronounced, that he tends to mis-
place the emphasis of his own speech thus producing ab-
normal meanings, colors and effects. 
An individual with a conductive deafness usually lowers 
the pitch (key) of his voice and also reduces the volume. 
In perceptive deafness the opposite occurs; there will be an 
increase in volume which automatically raises the pitch. 
These abnormal volume and pitch deviations may often 
mislead the listener. The high-pitch, strident, harsh, queru-
lous voice fails to convey to the listener the true feelings of 
the speaker. The perceptive hard of hearing individual is 
unable to introduce into his own speech the delicate nuances 
which the listening audience needs, whereby the attitudes, 
intents and emotions of the speaker are interpreted. Speech 
values such as irony, sarcasm, or humor are less readily 
produced by such patients. Hypertension of the vocal chords, 
the result of increased tonus, may cause pathology of the 
cords and a permanent malfunction. 
Perceptive deafness for high tones with relative normal 
hearing in the middle registers usually results in speech 
in a proper key or a lowered key. Persons so affected produce 
aberrations which are similar to the pitch pattern associated 
with a conductive loss of hearing. 
Quality 
The first noticeable change in the voice and speech pat-
tern of patients demonstrating a perceptive deafness occurs 

196 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
in abnormal quality of voice, most commonly nasality and 
stridency. These qualities are rather reliable guides for 
recognizing perceptive deafness speech patterns. 
As stated in the chapter on conductive deafness, the bony 
struoture of the skull is an excellent conductor of an individ-
ual's own speech sounds. The person with perceptive deaf-
ness appreciates the reinforcement of speech vibrations by 
the osseous structure. Speech sounds resonated in the nasal 
cavity are strengthened because of the large amount of hone 
enclosing that area. The proper reinforcement of the nasal 
phonemes M, N, NG does not appear too loud or disturbing 
to the patient, rather, he prefers this. Vowels, diphthongs, 
and consonants which are resonated in the mouth, an area 
enclosed by ßeshy walls, are not perceived by him as well 
as sounds normally resonated in the nasal cavity. In order to 
strengthen the weakly perceived sounds the patient tends 
to funnel all speech sounds into the nose by the non-<;losure 
of the nasopharyngeal seal. Thus, many of the oral sounds 
will filter into the nasal cavity to produce for him the de-
sirable reinforcement of these weakly perceived phonemes. 
The result is marked nasal quality. 
Nasality in perceptive deafness may vary from a limited to 
excessive amount (nasal twang) depending on the fre-
quencies of the oral sounds which are nasalized. 
If there is an increase in the pitch of the voice due to an 
increased tension of the vocal musculatures, the patient with 
perceptive deafness will demonstrate also a strident quality. 
Stridency is produced by a combination of increased vol-
ume, a raised key and nasal resonance. The resulting voice 
is harsh-sounding and shrill. Dissonant high overtones are 
also produced. The patient is unaware of the unpleasant 
quality because he, himself, cannot hear this nor his other 
speech changes. 
Retracted or throaty quality may be demonstrated by ·the 

SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
197 
perceptively hard of hearing patient. The hard quality of 
tone is generally produced by considerable constriction in the 
musdes of the throat. The retracted quality provides a more 
positive means of channeling normally produced mouth 
sounds into the nasal cavity with its osseous structure. The 
oral frontal sounds are reinforced in the nasal passage and 
appear normal to the patient. 
A rticulation 
Since we learn to speak by hearing and imitating what 
we hear, an individual with a lass of hearing will imitate 
speech as it sounds to him, heard through his defective sensory 
receptor. If abilateral perceptive loss of hearing occurs prior 
to speech maturation, articulation deviations will necessarily 
result. With long-standing perceptive deafness, the patient 
will gradually forget the normal articulation pattern and 
develop speech deteriorations. Should the lass of hearing 
increase with time, the articulation faults will necessarily 
become more pronounced and profound. 
The factors which influence the distortion, retention and 
imagery of speech sounds in perceptive deafness include: 
lass of hearing that is greater in the high frequency range 
than the low frequency range; inadequate visibility of some 
speech sounds; limitations of the bony structure of the skull 
to transmit sounds and aid in perception; weak phonetic 
power of certain speech sounds; the fact that the low fre-
quency speech sounds mask out high frequency sounds; high 
frequency components of tinnitus; the structure of the ear 
which may be such that it responds more efficiently and 
effectively to low frequency sounds than to high frequency 
sounds. 
The sibilant consonants S, SH, CH, J, ZH are either 
distorted, substituted one for another, or completely omitted 
in speech typical of perceptive deafness. These sounds have 

198 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
important high frequency components (3200-8000 cycles) . 
An appreciable loss of hearing in this range impairs the 
perception of these sounds and blocks their reproduction. 
These sibilants are affected by all the factors mentioned 
previously such as poor lip reading ability, hone conduction 
limitations, weak phonetic power, low sounds (vowels and 
consonants) masking out high frequency sounds, structural 
construction of the ear, and tinnitus. 
The fricatives F, V, TH (voiced and unvoiced) are devi-
ated and distorted by similar influences which affect the 
production of the sibilants previously discussed. The high 
frequency range and the low phonetic power of these speech 
sounds are particularly important factors in poor retention 
and production of these speech sounds. The F and voiceless 
TH sounds are the least powerful sounds in speech. 
The sounds of R and L are generally classified as semi-
vowel, vowel-like consonants. These sounds when articulated 
correctly are essentially invisible on the lips. They fall in 
the 2400 to 3000 cycle bands. Poor hone conductivity and 
high frequency sounds being masked out by the lows, usually 
give the perceptively deaf a distorted impression of these 
phonemes and produce defective reproductions. 
The sounds of K and G are also characterized by faulty 
production or distortion. These speech sounds are classified 
as back-of-the-mouth sounds and have a low lip-reading 
ratio. If the deafness is of long duration the individual, 
therefore, fails to see and camprehend the K and G pho-
nemes. Inevitably he will substitute in his own speech pro-
duction the more visible similar frontal sounds T and D. 
Vowel and diphthong distortion and confusion are another 
characteristic of speech in perceptive deafness. A flattening 
of the vowels occurs as the speaker attempts to go from 
weakly perceived consonants onto stronger perceived con-
sonants. In his haste he passes over these vowels and diph-

SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
199 
thongs and also increases the rate of his speech. Many vowels 
and diphthongs having a low visibility factor in terms of 
speech (lip) reading are difficult to interpret purely from 
their lip positions. 
Associated with the distorted production of the S sound, 
consonants dustered with the S phoneme will also be devi-
ated (ST, TS, SK, KS, PS, and others). The high frequency 
components of these clusters also are factors in their poor 
production. 
Speech Patterns of the Deafened 
The degree of speech deviations demonstrated by the 
deafened individual will depend upon the following factors: 
Age of onset. Did the loss occur in early childhood or 
in proximity to the age of speech maturation or did it oc-
cur after the cerebral speech patterns were well established? 
Duration of the deafness. How long has the hearing loss 
existed? Individual differences. Some persans will suffer 
deterioration of speech and voice patterns more rapidly and 
more severely than others. Previous training. W ere there 
any attempts to preserve or correct the speech deviations? 
This deafness results in a rapid deterioration of voice and 
articulation, and in many instances there is a loss of speech 
intelligibility. Unrelated sounds such as audible breathing 
and grunts precede and succeed the phonation of words and 
phrases. The voice is retracted and lacks proper resonance. 
Valurne is uncontrolled and often is loud. The excessive 
volume induces a strident quaHty. The pitch pattern is 
completely deviated and Iacks normal shifts, inflections and 
intonations. The speech pattern is staccato and dull with 
an increase in rate. There is a general tendency to hurry 
over the vowels and clip short vowels and consonants. 

200 
SPEECH DEVIATIONS IN PERCEPTIVE DEAFNESS 
Speech Patterns of the Deaf 
Since this profound hearing loss develops prior to the 
patient's learning to speak, he is unable to produce sounds 
that he has never heard. He has no speech imagery or pat-
tern to monitor. He has never heard humans engaged in 
conversation. Even after special schooling the newly learned 
speech patterns rarely approach the normal. 

16·-------------------------
AUDITDRY REHABILITATION 
The goals of auditory rehabilitation are (1) to correct the 
motor and sensory communicative modalities, (2) to de-
velop and utilize auditory, visual, and kinesthetic clues to 
attain maximum function, and (3) to teach the patient to 
learn to live with his handicap and overcome the effects of 
his disability. 
Auditory rehabilitation includes both medical and surgi-
cal treatment and non-medical educational services. The 
individual's otorhinological structures are restored to as 
healthy and normal a state as possible. Many persons having 
a loss of hearing may never achieve normal hearing. Many, 
however, can be rehabilitated to resume their participation 
in adequate communication. The learning process can best 
be accomplished where there is trained staff and equipment 
to service, diagnose and treat hearing losses. This is the 
function of an auditory rehabilitation service. 
Programs of auditory rehabilitation are designed to help 
individuals overcome the disorders of communication subse-
quent to impaired hearing and speech. Since these disorders 
often produce adverse changes in the attitudes of the pa-
tient .toward society and of his fellow man toward him, the 
program seeks to furnish the patient the "tools" of com-
munication. Its purpose is to help him understand the prob-
201 

202 
AUDITORY REHABIUTATION 
lems caused by his disability, to emphasize positive values, 
and to make use of his residual communication abilities. 
The functions of a rehabilitation unit are to diagnose, to 
determine whether amplification is beneficial, to select the 
proper hearing aid, and to promote rehabilitative treatment. 
This type of treatment recognizes individual differences and 
limitations among the learners-. Differences of intelligence 
and motivation, age, educational growth, vocational interests, 
environment, degrees of deafness, duration of the deafness, 
and the effect of the disability upon the individual are 
important considerations. 
Obtaining a hearing aid for patients, training them in 
its use, and meeting their other communicative needs pre-
sents a formidable total audiological problem. In order to 
meet the needs these problems present, rehabilitation in-
cludes the following services: 
A udiological Evaluation 
(1) Otological history and examination. 
(2) Hearing tests, including pure tone audiometry, speech 
audiometry, tests for psychogenic and simulated deafness, 
tolerance thresholds, and the ability to discriminate speech 
in the presence of noise. 
(3) Psychological investigation when indicated. 
(4) Speech and voice analysis including a permanent 
disc recording. 
(5) Analysis of speech (lip) reading ability and audi-
tory proficiency. 
A uditory Rehabilitation 
(1) Hearing aid selection. 
(2) Fabrication of ear inserts. 
(3) Instruction programs in speech (lip) reading (ele-

SPEECH (LIP) READING 
203 
mentary and advanced), speech and voice correc.tion, speech 
conservation, and auditory training. 
(4) Orientation lectures on medical, psychological and 
vocational aspects of deafness. 
(5) Individual and group psychological orientation and 
therapy as indicated. 
Earlier chapters have presented the manifold investiga-
tions of persons with the symptom of impaired hearing. 
We are now prepared to enter an affirmative program of 
rehabilitation. 
Speech (Lip) Reading 
Speech (lip) reading is a method of understanding a 
speaker's verbalization by watehing and interpreting the 
movements of his mouth, the expression in his eyes and his 
face, and his gestures. These visual clues must be supple-
mented by psychological clues of anticipation and synthesis. 
Speech reading can provide assistance to those who have 
a sufficient loss of hearing regardless of the degree of the 
loss. The limitations of the hearing aid deny the user com-
plete hearing under all conditions necessary for hearing and 
discriminating conversational speech. The frequency spec-
trum of many aids fails to include the highest speech fre-
quencies effectively. Patients with perceptive deafness, with 
or without recruitment, and with discrimination losses do 
not receive the maximum potential improvement which an 
aid can yield. The gaps left by the hearing aid must be 
supplemented and filled in by visual clues. Effectiveness of 
a hearing aid is roughly inversely proportional to the kind 
and severity of the deafness. The most severely acoustically 
impaired patients can expect the least amount of acoustic 
Serviceability from a hearing aid. 

204 
AUDITORY REHABILITATION 
In some instances, speech reading serves the purpose of 
reinforcing the perception of speech while in other cases, 
as with the deaf and the deafened, speech reading is the 
only means of achieving an understanding even when speech 
is amplified by means of a hearing aid. 
The teaching of speech (lip) reading can be accomplished 
both on an individual basis or as group therapy. These ap-
proaches are utilized according to the indications. A speech 
reading program should include a basic elementary speech 
reading course and an advanced speech reading course. 
Basic or fundamental speech reading is designed to teach 
the acoustically handicapped individual to interpret speech 
without fully hearing it or, if necessary, without hearing it 
at all. The elementary course introduces speech sounds 
which are identified as either vowels or consonants, with 
each category defined and its purpose in connected speech 
explained. Further, the means of recognizing each is dem-
onstrated and taught. For example, beginning with the con-
sonants P, B, M, these sounds are made by the lips and 
revealed by the closure of the lips. Each of these phonemes 
is demonstrated in isolation so as to make the patient aware 
of how comparatively easily they can be seen and read. How-
ever, it is also demonstrated that these sound forms are 
identical visually. The phonemes P, B, M as in the words 
pay, bay, and may, cannot be identified by their visual clues 
and therefore must be distinguished by context. 
Consonants are grouped homophonously and their pro-
duction and revelation are demonstrated. Each group is 
further presented first in words, then in phrases and sen-
tences, and finally used in Ionger passages. Each lesson is 
built about a basic unit of thought thus providing contin-
uity and greater use of synthesis and association of ideas. 
Discussions evolving about current events, occupations, 
food, hobbies, television and movies, and newspaper stories 

AUDITORY TRAINING 
205 
are utilized. As the patient's speech reading ability increases, 
more material of greater complexity and abstraction is in-
troduced. 
Advanced speech reading is designed to develop speech 
reading ability of conversational efficiency. Practice material 
should provide for interpreting the speech of several indi-
viduals in rapid succession. Short plays, both with and 
without background sounds, intensive individual drill on 
vocabulary pertaining to the patient's vocational needs, and 
miscellaneous directed conversation are utilized. 
Auditory Training 
Auditory training teaches an individual to utilize his 
residual hearing more effectively. The effects of proper work 
done in auditory training are far-reaching. The aim is to 
improve the synthesizing ability of the patient, to train him 
to become an alert and discriminating listeuer with his hear-
ing aid, to teach him to separate speech sounds so that they 
will become intelligible rather than a mass of jumbled noise, 
to develop tolerance for loud sounds, and to interpret speech 
in a noisy environment. 
An auditory training program designed for many types 
of hearing losses is composed as follows: 
( 1) An explanation of the hearing aid fitting procedure 
with sample test material is presented to familiarize the 
patient with stimuli similar to those encountered during 
the fitting of the hearing aid. 
(2) Discussions of the advantages and limitations of the 
hearing aid. Maximum and minimum benefits are explained. 
(3) Discussion of the development of the electronic hear-
ing aid. Care of the hearing aid, batteries and parts, gar-

206 
AUDITORY REHABILITATION 
ments, and reasons for occasional malfunotion of the hearing 
aid. 
(4) Identification of gross sounds and classification (en-
joyment, environmental, and responses) with particular 
attention to the importance of synthesis. 
(5) Explanation of the audiogram-types of deafness and 
kinds of audiometric curves. Explanation of each patient's 
audiogram-relationship of speech sounds and their position 
on the frequency spectrum. 
(6) Speech discrimination word list, practice-lists of 
short words containing identical vowels but different final 
or initial consonants. 
(7) Listening practice, explanation of types of listening 
situations. 
Easy listening. One voice, easy rate, clear diction, and 
subdued background music. 
Medium listening. Voice with choral background, words 
running together, and regionalism. 
Difficult listening. Fast rate, unexpected words, uncom-
mon words and ideas, foreign accent, group singing or 
group speaking, unfamiliar ideas. 
(8) Listening against a background of irrelevant noise. 
This is done with and without lip reading (depending upon 
severity and kind of deafness). 
(9) Developing tolerance for loud sounds. 
(10) Localization of source of sound or speech. 
(11) Telephone technique, use of telephone with hear-
ing aid and use of amplified telephones. 
Another group consists of those adults whose deafness 
originated in childhood, and who have never been given any 
formal training in hearing, speaking and speech reading. 
These patients should be affered the opportunity of rehabil-

AUDITORY REHABILITATION 
207 
itation, although the prognosis may not be as bright as with 
young children whose learning potential is enormous. Never-
theless, with long-term training these patients can learn to 
speak better and to lip read. 
With the profound lasses that these patients demonstrate, 
and presumably with the failure of adequate cerebral ward 
imagery, amplification usually will not contribute to their 
adequate hearing and discriminating of speech. However, 
with amplification these patients can learn to recognize gross 
environmental sounds and recognize the human voice. These 
are large rewards in terms of the great deficit in acoustical 
intelligibility. 
Hearing Aid Check List for Patients 
(1) Ear Insert 
a. Keep free of wax. 
b. How to clean. 
(2) Receiver 
a. When defective, results in weak and tinny reception. 
b. Considerations of feedback. 
(3) Cords 
a. Awareness of polarity. 
b. N on-reversibility end for end. 
c. Intermittent operation when broken. 
(4) Transmitter 
a. Care in handling. 
b. Do not get wet. 
c. Avoid extreme heat. Do not leave in closed car on hot day. 
(5) Ratteries 
a. Corrosion of battery terminal. 
b. Cleaning contacts in the aid. 
c. Proper tension at contact points. 
d. Know the end point voltage. 
e. Possibility of reversing battery when placing in aid. 

208 
AUDITORY REHABILITATION 
Speech Conservation and Correction 
Speech correction therapy in an auditory rehabilitation 
program is a program of therapy to correct and alleviate 
speech deviations. These deviations will disrupt either the 
entire speech pattern or particular areas. Speech defects de-
pend upon many factors. These are the age of the patient, 
age of the onset of the hearing loss, type of deafness, and 
severity of the loss. 
The following sample speech correction programs can be 
adapted to meet the individual speech needs subsequent to 
a loss of hearing: 
(I) Thorough diagnosis of the voice and speech patterns 
of the patient by use of a formal speech examination. Pre-
pared test sentences to help in the diagnosis of all deviated 
consonants, vowels, and diphthongs should be used. Devia-
tions of volume, pitch, rate and voice quality should also 
be carefully noted. 
(2) A recording of the patient's voice is made, eliciting 
conversational material for the recording either by outline 
or interview technique. The recording is then played back 
and the patient's speech and voice deviations are pointed 
out and demonstrated to him. 
(3) Before any corrective work is begun, the physiology 
of the breathing and speech mechanism is explained. 
(4) Speech conservation. This part of the program is de-
signed as insurance against future deterioration of .the voice 
and speech pattern. The relationship between a loss of hear-
ing and its effect upon the normal speech pattern is dis-
cussed in order to acquaint the patient with all the probable 
reasons for these changes. 
(5) Volume deviations are corrected and the patient's 

SPEECH CONSERV A TION AND CORRECTION 
209 
voice is corrected to the appropriate level through the use 
of skits and plays, decibel meter and tape recordings. 
(6) After volume control is learned, correction of faulty 
pitch pattern (key-inflection-intonation) is begun by the use 
of the piano, tuning forks and tape recorder. 
(7) Voice quality deviations are discussed and demon-
strated and corrective work is begun. 
(8) Corrective work is clone on speech rate problems as 
they arise. The patient is made aware of this deviation and 
practice drills are introduced. 
(9) Final correction problern is one of specific consonant, 
vowel and diphthong deviations. Use is made of the multi-
sensory approach including auditory stimulation, visual, 
motor-kinesthetic and tactile sensitivity. Drill of the faulty 
sound or sounds in isolation, initial, medial and final sounds 
in words, and in "loaded sentences" is clone. 
(10) At the conclusion of the speech program, a final 
recording is made. The original and final recordings are 
played for comparison. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Chapters 1-10 
Accepted Apparatus. Council on Physical Medicine and Rehabi-
litation, J.A.M.A. 1953. 
A Guide for Conservation of Hearing in Industry. 
American Academy of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology. 
Subcommittee on Noise in Industry of the Committee on 
Conservation of Hearing. Los Angeles. 
American Standard Acoustical Terminology, Z24.1 New York, 
American Standards Association, lnc. (ASA). 1951 
Atkinson, l\1.: Tinnitus aurium, some considerations concerning 
its origin and treatment. A.M.A. Arch. Otolarygn. 45:68, 
1948. 
Bergman, l\1.: The audiology clinic: A manual for planning a 
clinic for the rehabi1itation of the acoustically handicapped. 
Acta oto-laryng., Supp. 89. 1950. 
Bordley, J. E., and Hardy, W. G.: A study in objective audio-
metry with the use of a psychoga1vanometric response. Ann. 
Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 58: 751-760, 1949. 
Denes, P., and Naunton, R. E.: The clinical detection of audi-
tory recruitment. J. Laryng. & Oto. 64: 375-398, 1950. 
Dix, M. R., and Hallpike, C. S.: Peep show-new technique for 
pure tone audiometry in young chi1dren. Brit M.J. 2: 719-
723, 1947. 
Dix, M. R., Hallpike, C. S., and Hood, J. D.: Observations upon 
the loudness and recruitment phenomenon, with special 
reference to the differential diagnosis of disorders of the 
internal ear and VIII nerve. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. 61: 516-
526, 1948. 
211 

212 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Doerßer, L. G., and Stewart K.: MaHngering and psychogenic 
deafness. J. Speech Disorders 11: 181-186, 1946. 
Eby, L. G., and Williams, H. L.: Recruitment of loudness in the 
differential diagnosis of end-organ and nerve fiber deafness. 
Laryngoscope 61: 400-414, 1951. 
Fletcher, H., and Munson, W. A.: Loudness, its definition, mea-
surement and calculation. Jour. Acoust. Soc. Amer. 5: 82-
108, 1933. 
Fowler, E. P.: Tests of hearing. In Medicine of the Ear. Fowler, 
E. P., Jr., Ed. New York, Thomas Nelson & Sons, 1939. 
---: Tinnitus aurium in the light of recent research. Ann. 
Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 50:139, 1943. 
---: The control of head noises, their illusion of loudness 
and timbre. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 37: 391, 1943. 
---: Tinnitus in normal and diseased ears. A.M.A. Arch. 
Otolaryng. 39: 498, 1944. 
---: Nonvibratory tinnitus, factors underlying subaudible 
and audible irritations. Transact. Am. Laryng., Rhin. & 
Otol. Society, 1947. 
----: Emotional factors in tinnitus. Laryngoscope 58: 145-154, 
1948. 
Fowler, E. P., Jr.: Medical aspects of hearing loss. In Hearing 
and deafness. H. David Ed. pp. 67-100. New York, Rinehart, 
1947. 
Harris, J. D.: An historical and critical review of loudness re-
cruitment. New London, Conn: Naval Medica1 Research 
Laboratory, Report No. 200, Vol. XI, 1952. 
---: Normalhearing and its relation to audiometry. Laryngo-
scope, 64: 928-956, 1954. 
Heller, M. F.: Audiology. New York Med. 7: 16-17, 34-37, 1951. 
---, and Bergman, M.: Tinnitus aurium in normal hearing 
persons. Ann. Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 61: 78-83, 1953. 
---, and Lindenberg, P.: The private practice of auditory 
rehabilitation. Ann. Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 63:130, 1954. 
--, and --: Evaluation of deafness of non-organic origin. 
A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 58: 575-581, 1953. 
Hirsh, I. J.: The measurements of hearing. New York, McGraw-
Hill, 1952. 
---, Palva, T., and Goodman, A.: Difference limen and re-

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
213 
cruitment. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 60: 525-540, 1954. 
Hudgins, C. V., Hawkins, J. E., and Karlin, J. E.: The develop-
ment of recorded auditory tests for measuring hearing Iosses 
for speech. Laryngoscope 57: 57-89, 1947. 
---, and Ross, D. A.: The measurement of hearing. Volta 
Review, 49: No. 3, 1947. 
Jerger, J. F.: A difference limen recruitment test and its diagnos-
tic significance. Laryngoscope, 62: 1316-1332, 1952. 
---: Difference limen difference test. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 
57: 490-500, 1953. 
Kastein, S., and Fowler, E. P. Jr.: Differential diagnosis of com-
munication disorders in children referred for hearing dis-
orders. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 60: 468-477, 1954. 
Kerrison, P. D.: Disease of the ear, p. 130. Philadelphia, J. P. 
Lippincott, 1930. 
Kopetzky, S. J.: Deafness, tinnitus, and vertigo, p. 153. New 
York, Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1948. 
Lempert, J.: Tympano-sympathectomy, a surgical technic for the 
relief of tinnitus. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 43:199, 1946. 
Lüscher, E., and Zwislocki, S.: A simple method for indirect 
monaural determination of the recruitment phenomenon, 
difference limen in intensity in different types of deafness. 
Acta oto-Iarygn., Supp. 78: 156-168, 1949. 
Michels, M. W., and Randt, C. T.: Galvanic skin response in a 
differential diagnosis of deafness. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 
45: 302-311, 1947. 
Priest, R. E.: Tests for unilateral deafness. A.M.A. Arch. 
Otolaryn. 42: 138-143, 1945. 
Reger, S. N.: Differences in loudness response of the normal and 
hard of hearing at intensity Ievels slightly above threshold. 
Ann. Otol., Rhin. & Laryng. 45: 1029-1039, 1936. 
Report on the Relations of Hearing Loss to N oise Exposure. 
Z24-X-2. New York, American Standards Association, Inc. 
(ASA), 1954. 
Saltzman, M.: Clinical audiology. New York, Grune & Stratton, 
1949. 
Sonnenschein, R.: The nose, throat and ears and their diseases. 
Jackson, C. and Coates, G. M., Ed. pp. 472-491. Philadel-
phia, W. B. Saunders, 1930. 

214 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Stevens, S. S., and Davis, H.: Hearing. New York, John Wiley 
and Sons, 194 7. 
Utley, J.: Suggestive procedures for determining auditory 
acuity in very young acoustically handicapped children. Eye, 
Ear, Nose & Throat Monthly, 28: 590-595, 1949. 
Wegel, R. L.: A study of tinnitus. A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 
14:158, 1931. 
Chapters 11-12 
Albrite, J. P.: The development and application of a soft ear 
mold, A.M.A. Arch. Otolaryng. 61: 235-236, 1955. 
---, and Glorig, A.: Modified soft ear insert, A.M.A. Arch. 
Otolaryng. 61: 328-330, 1955. 
Carhart, R.: Selection of hearing aids. Arch. Otolaryng. 44: 1-18, 
1946. 
---: Tests for selection of hearing aids. Laryngoscope 56: 
780-794, 1947. 
----: Hearing aid selection by university clinics. J. Speech & 
Hearing Disorders 15: 106-113, 1950. 
---: Speech audiometry in clinical evaluation. Acta oto-
laryng. 41: 18-42, 1952. 
---, and Thompson, E.: The fitting of hearing aids. Tr. Am. 
Acad. Ophth. 51: 354-361, 1947. 
Corliss, E. L. R.: Hearing aids. Washington, D. C., U. S. National 
Bureau of Standards, Circular 534, 1953. 
Davis, H.: Hearing Aids. Hearing and deafness. pp. 161-210. 
New York, Rinehart, 1947. 
---: The articu1ation area and the social adequacy index 
for hearing. Laryngoscope 58: 761-778, 1948. 
---, et al: The selection of hearing aids. Laryngoscope 56: 
85-115, 135-163, 1946. 
---, et al.: Hearing aids; An experimental study of design 
objectives. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1947. 
Egan, J. P.": Articulation testing methods. Laryngoscope 58: 955-
991, 1948. 
F1etcher, H.: A method of calculating hearing 1oss for speech 
from an audiogram. Acta oto-laryng., Supp. 90: 26-37, 1950. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
215 
Harris, J. D.: Some suggestions for speech reception testing. 
Arch. Otolaryng. 50: 388-405, 1949. 
Hirsh, I. J., et al: Development of materials for speech audio-
metry. J. Speech and Hearing Disorders 17: 321-337, 1952. 
Hudgins, C. V., et al.: The development of recorded auditory 
tests for measuring hearing loss for speech. Laryngoscope 
57: 57-89, 1947. 
Jeffers, J.: Quality judgment with respect to hearing aid selec-
tion. Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia University. 1955. 
Johnson, K. 0., and Newby, H. A.: Experimental study of the 
efficiency of two group hearing tests. Arch. Otolaryng. 60: 
702-710, 1954. 
Liden, G.: Speech Audiometry. Acta oto-laryng. Supp. 114: 1-145, 
1954. 
----, and Fant, G.: Swedish word material for speech audio-
metry and articulation tests. Acta oto-laryng., Suppl. 116: 
189-204, 1954. 
Nicho1s, R. H., Jr.: Physical characteristics of hearing aids. La-
ryngoscope, 57: 31-40, 1947. 
Palva, T.: Finnish speech audiometry. Acta oto-laryng., Suppl. 
101: 1-128, 1952. 
Silverman, S. R.: Use of speech tests for evaluation of clinica1 
procedures. Arch. Otolaryng. 51: 786-797, 1950. 
Silverman, S. R., and Taylor, G.: The choice and use of hearing 
aids. Hearing and Deafness, pp. 211-254. Ed. by H. Davis. 
N ew Y ork, Rinehart, 194 7. 
Watson, L. A., and Tolan, T.: The modern hearing aid. Hearing 
tests and hearing instruments, pp. 268-347. Baltimore, 
Williams & Wilkins, 1949. 
Chapters 13-16 
Anderson, V.: Training the speaking voice. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1942. 
Ansberry, M.: Rehabilitation of the deaf and hard of hearing, 
pp. 29-32. Washington, D. C., Federa1 Security Agency, Of-
fice of Vocational Rehabilitation, 1950. 
Avery, E., Dorsey, J., and Sickles, V.: First principles of speech 
training. New York, D. Appleton, Century, 1930. 

216 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Berry, M., and Eisenson, J.: The defective in speech. New York, 
Crofts, 1945. 
Brentano, L.: Ways to better hearing. New York, Franklin 
Watts, 1946. 
Carhart, R.: Hearing deficiencies and speech problems. J. Speech 
Disorders, 8: 247-254, 1943. 
Davis, H.: Hearing and deafness. New York, Rinehart, 1947. 
Ewing, I., and Ewing, A.: The handicap of deafness. New York, 
Longmans, Green, 1946. 
Fletcher, H.: Speech and hearing. New York, Van Nostrand, 
1929. 
Jackson, C., and Jackson, C. L.: Diseases of the nose, throat and 
ear, p. 513, Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders, 1946. 
Newhart, H.: Hearing deficiencies in relation to speech defects. 
Laryngoscope 48: 129-136, 1938. 
Pauls, M., Haskins, H., and Hardy, W. G.: Hearing and speech 
rehabilitation; speech reading, auditory rehabilitation and 
speech correction in re-education program. U. S. Nav. Med. 
Bull. (Supp.): 232-248, 1948. 
Penn, J.: Hearing defects as factors influencing voice and speech 
patterns. Thesis, New York University, 1952. 
Raubicheck, L.: How to teach good speech in the elementary 
schools. New York, Noble and Noble, 1937. 
Van Riper, C.: Speech correction. New York, Prentice-Hall, 1937. 
Watson, L., and Tolan, T.: Hearing tests and hearing instru-
ments. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1949. 
West, R., Kennedy, L., Carr, A., and Backus, 0.: The rehabilita-
tion of speech. New York, Rarper & Bros., 1947. 

INDEX 
A 
Ambient noise, 1, 4, 5, 172, 186, 187 
American Schoo1s for the Deaf 
Certifications, 8 
American Speech and Hearing As-
sociation (A.S.H.A.) 
Certifications, 7-8 
Amplifier 
carbon, 150 
vacuum-tube, 17, 21, 22, 29 
Aphonia, hysterica1 or psychosomatic, 
185 
Articu1ation 
deviations of, 
in conductive deafness, 190-192 
in perceptive deafness, 197-198 
site of, of consonants, 179-180 
Astereophonia, 33-34, 86 
Atkinson, M., 105 
Attenuator, 17-18 
Audible friction 
absence of, in vowels, 181 
in consonants, 179-180 
Audiogram 
air conduction, 58, 87 
hone conduction, 58 
in non-organic deafness, 87, 89 
pure tone 
examples, 59-61 
and relation to speech tests, 131-
147 
standard symbo1s, 55-58 
See also Audiometers; Audiometry 
Audiologie supplies, 29-30 
Audiologie testing equipment 
list of, 29-30 
See also Testing equipment 
Audiology centers, 6-13 
functions of, 6-7 
minimum equipment in, 10-11 
patient evaluation at, 12 
personnel of, 7-9, 12 
physical facilities of, 9-10 
services of, 7, 11-13 
Standards for, 6 
Audiometers, 14-18, 20, 24 
clinical, 11, 15, 79 
discrete frequency, 15-16 
internal design of, 17 
pure tone, 11, 14, 29, 119, 120 
single channel, 18, 67, 72 
sweep frequency, 15-16, 53 
two-channel, 10, 11, 14, 18, 67, 72 
Western Electric, 119 
See also Audiogram; Audiometry 
Audiometry 
calibration, 17, 21, 55, 125-129 
for children, 113-117 
peep show, 2, 24-26, 64 
psychogalvanic skin test, 114-115 
conditioning in, 62-64 
pure tone, 2, 11, 14, 45-64, 92-93, 
113 
air conduction, 47-48 
217 

218 
Audiometry-continued 
bone conduction, 50-51 
equipment for, 54-55 
masking in, 48-50, 51 
peep show, 64 
psychoga1vanic skin response, 2, 
60-64, 93, ll4-ll5 
recording of findings, 55-58 
speech, IIS-148 
procedure of, 127-129 
Stenger test, 18, 91-92 
techniques in non-organic deafness, 
88 
See also Audiogram; Audiometers 
Audiometry equipment 
audiometers, 14-18, 20 
masking apparatus, 18-19, 29 
peep show, 24-26, 29 
psychoga1vanic skin response ap-
paratus, 23-24, 29 
speech reception apparatus, 19-22 
talk-back unit, 22, 29 
Auditory rehabilitation_ See Rehabil-
itation 
Auditory tests. See Hearing tests 
Auditory training, 9, 28, 202-203, 
205-207 
aim of, 28, 205 
program of, 28, 205-207 
Back vowe1s, 181 
Baffles 
B 
bass reftex type, 20 
for free field speakers, 3 
for hearing aids, 22-23, 30 
infinite type, 20 
portable type, 3 
Barany alarm apparatus. See Mask-
ing instruments 
Batteries, 30, 207 
A and B, 150-151, 162-163 
carbon-zinc vs. mercury, 151 
voltage of, 151, 163 
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 120 
Binaural alternate-loudness balance. 
See Recruitment tests 
Breath sounds, 178-179 
Breathless sounds, 179 
INDEX 
c 
Central 
Institute 
for 
the 
Deaf 
(C.I.D.), 120, 122 
Chronic Iaryngitis, voice defects of, 
184 
C.I.D. See Central Institute for the 
Deaf 
C1eft lip, speech invo1vements of, 184 
Communicative process, elements of 
the, 185-186 
Conditioning in testing, 62-64 
Conductive deafness 
articu1ation deviations in, 190-191 
definition of, 187 
pitch deviations in, 188-189 
quality deviations in, 189-190 
speech deviations in, 187-192 
volume deviations in, 188 
Congenita1 anomalies, voice defects 
of, 184 
Congenita1 deafness, 42, 187-192 
Consonants, 178-180, 191, 197-198 
articu1ation of, 179-180 
definition of, 178 
deviations of, 197-198 
fricatives, 179-180, 184, 197-198 
glides, 179-180 
nasa1s, 179, 183, 190 
p1osives, 179-180, 184 
site of articu1ation of, 179-180 
substitutions of, 190-191 
Cords, hearing aid, 23, 153, 207 
Current flow 
in transistors, 160-162 
in vacuum tubes, 150-151 
D 
Deaf 
definition of, 186 
speech patterns of the, 200 
Deafened 
definition of, 186 
speech patterns of, 199 
Deafness 
binaural, 33, 86 

INDEX 
Deafness-continued 
in children, 40-43, 110-117 
initia1 observation, 110 
testing method, 26-27, 113-117 
cochlear, 65 
combined, See Deafness, mixed 
conductive, 33, 60, 187-192 
absence of recruitment, 65, 70-71 
speech deviations in, 187-192 
congenital, 42, 187-192 
denial of, 82 
feigned, 38, 82 
familia1, 36 
of infancy, 41-43 
causative factors, 41-43 
inherited, 42 
middle ear, See Deafness, conduc-
tive 
mixed, 60 
monaural, 33-34, 39, 49, 86 
shadow curve, 49 
nerve, 58, 66 
non-organic, 47, 81-92 
patient's behavior, 82, 83 
use of hearing aid, 84 
occupational, 38 
parental, 32 
perceptive 
causative factors for, 42, 65 
definition of, 193 
and recruitment, 65-80 
speech deviations in, 193-200 
psychogenic, 38, 47 
simulated, 38, 81-93 
hearing tests, 87-93 
Stenger test, 90-92 
time of onset, 36 
unconscious motivations, 81 
See 
also 
Deafness, 
psychogenic; 
Deafness, simulated 
Decibel, definition, 16 
Denasa1 quality of speech, 189-190 
Dentit~on, abnormalities of, involv-
mg speech, 184 
Diagnosis 
conductive deafness, 60 
mixed deafness, 60 
pcrceptive deafness, 58 
Dlfference limen (DL) , 78-80 
for frequency, 80 
for intensity, 78-80 
219 
Difference limen difference test, 80 
Diphthongs 
articulation of, 181-182, 191 
deviations of, 191-192 
distortion of, 198-199 
Discrimination 1oss, 76-77, 128 
Discrimination score, 20, 128-129, 170-
171 
examp1es of, 130-148 
Discrimination of speech, 19 
Discrimination tests, 121 
C.I.D. li5ts, 123, 125 
Harvard University lists, 121-123 
in hearing-aid se1ection, 170-171 
procedure for, 128-129 
Distance fraction test, 118 
Doerfler, L. G., 89 
E 
Earpieces, 27-28, 30, 153-155, 169, 207 
materials for, 27-28, 154 
Electrical potentials of skin, 62 
Equilibration test, 115 
Equipment 
basic units, 14 
care of, 54-55 
for earpiece molding, 27 
for free field testing, 14, 20 
for psychoga1vanic skin response 
test, 23-24 
room, 4-5 
See also Audiology centers; Audio-
met:r 
equipment; 
Testing 
eqmpment 
Examinadon 
equilibration tests, 44, 115-116 
otorhinolaryngological, 87, 115-116 
F 
Fatigue, auditory, 52, 99 
Fowler, E. P., 66, 105, 106, 109, 112 
Frenulum, short or tight, 184 
J<'requency, in audiometers, 15, 16, 17-
18, 52-53 
Fricatives, 179-180, 184 
articu1ation of, 179 
deviations of, 198 
Front vowels, 181 

220 
G 
Galvanic skin 
response 
test. 
See 
Psychogalvanic skin response 
test 
Galvanometer, 14, 24, 30, 63-64, 93, 
115 
Gelle test, 94 
"Germanium, 161-162 
Glides, 179-180 
Glottal consonants, articulation of, 
180 
H 
Hallucination, auditory, 38, 46 
Hard of Hearing, definition of, 186 
Harelip. See Cleft lip 
Harvard University 
Psycho-acoustic Laboratory, 120 
word tests of, 120-123 
Head noises. See Tinnitus 
Hearing aids, 149-174, 205-207 
amplitude distortion, 159-160 
batteries, 30, 150-151, 162-163, 207 
components of, 149-155, 160-163, 
207 
construction of, 153-155 
controls of, 152-153 
cords,23, 153,207 
development of, 149-153 
earpieces, 27-28, 30, 153-155, 207 
fitting of, 2, 173, 205 
frequency distortion of, 159, 163 
frequency 
response 
of, 
152-153, 
157-158, 163 
limitations of, 203 
maximum power output of, 158-
160, 163-164 
performance characteristics of, 155· 
160, 163 
prescription of, 77, 165, 167-168, 
173-174 
receivers, 23, 27, 150, 151, 152-153, 
163, 207 
selection of, 165-174, 202 
sensitivity of, 168-169 
table model, 11 
tolerance range of, 171 
INDEX 
transistor, 162-165. See also Tran-
sistors 
transmitters, 207 
vacuum-tube, 150-160, 163-165 
comparison with transistor, 164-
165 
volume, 152-153, 157-159, 169-170, 
171-172 
Hearing centers. See Audiology cen-
ters 
Hearing defects, 31-34 
evaluation of, 34-43, 81-87 
in children, 41-43, 110-117 
Hearing 1oss 
conductive type, 130-131 
examp1es of, 129-148 
individual reaction to, 129, 165 
Meniere's syndrome, 139, 143-145 
mixed type, 130-134 
perceptive type, 134-148 
Hearing, residual, 117 
Hearing tests 
binaural 
alternate-1oudness 
bal-
ance, 66-71, 74-75, 77 
for children, 24-26, 113-117 
difference 1imen difference, 80 
distance fraction, 118 
equilibration, 115 
Gelle, 94 
lateralization, 51 
Lombard, 89-90 
for malingerers, 87-93 
monaural loudness contours, 66. 
72-75 
peep show, 2. 14, 24-26 
psychogalvanic skin response, 2, 
23-24, 60-64, 114-115 
pure tone, 2, 4, 46-64 
recruitment, 16, 65-80 
Rinne, 94, 96 
Schwabach, 94, 96 
speech discrimination, 128, 170-17 I 
speech reception, 19-21, 89-92, 118-
148 
speech-to-noise ratio, 89 
Stenger, 18, 90-92, 94, 99 
tuning fork, 90-91, 97-99 
Weber, 94, 96 
Hirsh, lra J., 79, 83 

INDEX 
I 
Impaired hearing, definition of, 186 
Inductorium, 24 
J 
Jerger, J. F., 80 
K 
Kastein, S., 112 
Kerrison, P. D., 105 
Kopetzky, S. J., 106 
L 
Larynx, 176, 184 
pathology of, 184 
Lateralization, 51 
of frequencies, 51 
in perceptive deafness, 51 
in conductive deafness, 51 
Lempert, J., 106 
Lermoyez' syndrome, 107 
Lingua-palatal consonants, 
tion of, 180 
articula-
Lip consonants, articulation of, 180 
Lip reading. See Speech reading 
Lip·teeth consonants, articulation of, 
180 
Live-voice testing, 20-22, 118 
Lombard test, 89-90 
Loudness,' 
See 
Binaural-alternate 
loudness 
balance; 
Monaural 
loudness contours 
Ievels, 74-75 
M 
Macroglossia, speech defects associa-
ted with, 184 
Malingering. See Simulated deafness 
Masking 
in bilateral deafness, 50 
indiscriminate, 50 
insufficient, 50 
over-masking, 50 
in pure tone audiometry, 48-51 
purpose of, 18, 48-49 
range of intensities, 49-50 
saw tooth noise, 19, 49 
in simulated deafness, 90 
in speech audiometry, 127-128 
transmission of test tone, 48 
Masking apparatus, 18-19, 49 
Masking noise 
in Lombard test, 89-90 
saw tooth, 19, 49 
white, 19, 49, 127-128, 171 
221 
Masking technique. See Masking 
Meniere's syndrome, 107, 139 
Microglossia, speech defects associa-
ted with, 184 
Microphone, 20 
for live voice, 21 
for talk-back unit, 22 
Middle vowels, 181 
Mixed deafness, 60 
Monaural deafness, 33-34, 39, 49, H6 
Monaural loudness contours. See Re-
cruitment tests 
Monitoring, 20 
of live voice, 21, 22 
N 
Nasal passages, pathologies of, 183 
Nasal quality of speech, 196 
Nasal sounds, 179, 183, 190 
definition of, 179 
Nasals, articulation of, 179 
Nasopharynx, pathology of, 183-184 
Neoplasms, 184 
Nerve, acoustic. See Nerve, auditory 
Nerve, auditory, 187, 193 
Nerve deafness, 58, 66 
Nerve, eighth. See Nerve, auditory 

222 
New 
York 
City, 
Department of 
Health, standards for audio-
logy centers, 6-13 
Nodules, voice defects of, 184 
Noise, I 
instruments generating, 26, 27, ll3 
frequency range, 26, ll3 
masking, l, 19, 48-50 
See also Noise Ievel 
Noise attenuating materials, 2-4, 23 
Noise Ievel 
ambient, I, 4, 5, 172, 186, 187 
in testing area, I, 4 
0 
Oral musculature, dysfunction of, 
183-185 
Oral sounds, definition of, 179 
Oropharynx, pathology of, 184 
p 
Pathology 
of cochlea, 66 
of infants, 42 
organic, 42-43 
psychological, 42-43 
of Iarynx, 184-185 
of nasal passages, 183 
of nasopharynx, 183-184 
of oropharynx, 184 
of tongue, 184 
PB words. See Phonetically balanced 
words 
Peep show test, 2, 24-26, 64 
conditioning in, 64 
equipment, 24-26, 64 
free field speaker, 25 
receiver, 25 
P ercep ti v e deafness 
articulation deviations in, 197-199 
definition of, 193 
pitch deviations in, 194-195 
quality deviations in, 195-196 
speech deviations in, 193-200 
volume deviations in, 193-194 
Phonemes. See Speech sounds 
Phonetically balanced (PB) words, 
20, 122-123, 125-148, 170-171 
definition, 122 
See also Word lists 
Piezoelectric effect, 150 
INDEX 
Pitch, 176, 177, 188-189, 194-195 
deviations of, 188-189 
elements of, 177 
loudness of, 188-189 
monotony of, 188-189, 194-195 
normal production of, 188 
P1osive sounds, 179-180, 184 
Priest, R. E., 82 
Psychoga1vanic skin response test, 2, 
23-24, 60-64, ll4-ll5 
equipment, 23-24, 30, 62-64 
Psychogenic deafness, 38, 47 
Q 
Quality 
of hearing aids, 163, 172 
of speech, 177-178, 189-190, 195-197 
denasal, 189-190 
nasal, 196 
retracted, 190, 196-197 
strident, 196 
R 
Rate of speech, 178, 199, 209 
definition, 178 
Receivers 
air conduction, 15, 17, 25, 27, 54· 
55, 67 
in hearing aids, 23, 27, 150-151, 
152-153, 163, 207 
for peep show, 25 
for talk-back unit, 22 
Recruitment, 65-80 
absence of, in conductive deafness, 
65, 70-71 
absence of, in perceptive deafness, 
65,69 
amplitude modulator, 79 
clinical applications, 76-77 
complete, 66-67 
definition, 65 
diagnostic significance, 66 
diiTerence limen, 78-80 
discrirnination loss, 76-77 
hearing aid problems, 76 

INDEX 
Recruitment-continued 
incomplete, 69-70 
in monaural deafness, 66-70 
over-recruitment, 67-68 
selection of tests, 7 4 
subjective factors, 77-78 
Recruitment tests 
binaural 
altemate-loudness 
bal-
ance, 66-71, 74-75, 77 
monaural loudness contours, 66, 
72-75 
Reger, S. N., 66 
Rehabilitation, 12, 28, 44, 174, 201-
209 
audiological evaluation of patient, 
202 
auditory training, 28, 205-207 
See also Hearing aids 
223 
Speakers 
for dis tance, 20 
for free field testing, 3, 19, 20, 22 
for peep show, 25 
for talk-back unit, 22 
magnetic, 21 
size of, 20 
Speaking tube, 149 
Speech 
characteristics of, 177-178 
nature of, 177, 185-186 
pitch of, 177, 188, 190, 194-195, 
196, 199 
production of, 175-186 
quality of, 177-178, 189-190, 195-
197, 209 
rate of, 178, 199, 209 
volume of, 177, 188-195, 199, 208-
209 
Resonance in vowels, 181 
Retracted quality, of speech, 
196-197 
190, Speech audiometry, 119-148 
Rhinal foreign bodies, 184 
Rhinal polyps, 184 
Rhinitis, 183 
Rhinolalia, speech involvements of, 
183, 184 
Rinne test, 94, 96 
s 
Saw tooth noise. See Masking noise 
Scar formation, 184 
Schwabach test, 94, 96 
Sedation, when testing children, 114 
Semi-conductors. See Transistors 
Septum, deviated, 183 
Shadow curve, 49 
Sibilant consonants, distortion and 
substitution of, 197-198 
Simulated deafness, 38, 81-93 
Sinusitis, 183 
Skull, impedance of, 49 
Soft palate consonants, articulation 
of, 180 
Sound 
adventitious, 18 
refiected, 3 
Speech conservation, program of, 208-
209 
Speech correction, 44, 208-209 
Speech defects, 32, 183-200 
causes of, 183-185 
in conductive deafness, 187-192 
definitions of, 186 
due to pathology, 183-186 
patterns of the deaf, 200 
patterns of the deafened, 199 
in perceptive deafness, 193-200 
Speech discrimination score, 20, 128-
129, 170-171 
examples of, 130-148 
Speech patterns 
of the deaf, 200 
of the deafened, 199 
Speech reading, 44, 167, 202-205, 206-
207 
explanation of, 203-204 
teaching of, 205-206 
Speech reception tests, 19-21, 89-92, 
118-148 
equipment, 19-23 
Speech sounds, 178-182,204,209 
consonants, 178-180, 190-191, 196, 
197-198,199,204,209 

224 
Speech sounds-continued 
diphthongs, 181-182, 191, 196, 198-
199, 209 
vowels, 178, 181, 183, 191, 196, 
198-199, 209 
Speechsound classification, 178-182 
Speech-to-noise ratio test, 89 
Spondaic words, 120 
C.I.D. test, 123-125 
Harvard University test, 120-121 
See also Word lists 
Stenger test 
audiometry, 91-92 
for simulated deafness, 90-92, 94, 
99 
with tuning forks, 90-91, 94 
Stevens, S. S., 73 
Stewart, K., 89 
Strident quality, of speech, 196 
T 
Talk-back unit, 22 
Tape recorder for speech, 20 
Teeth-ridge consonants, articulation 
of, 180 
Testing 
of adu1ts, 46-64, 67-73, 78-80 
of children, 47, 62, 64 
Testing areas 
audio1ogy centers, 6-13 
physician's office, 1-5 
Testing equipment, 2, 4, 10-ll, 14-
30, 54-55 
calibration of, 125 
Test rooms 
acoustic properties of, 1-5, 9-ll, 20, 
22, 23 
equipment, 4-5, 10-ll 
sound treated, 2-4, 10, 55 
Tests. See Hearingtests 
Thresho1d 
air conduction, 58-59, 61 
bone conduction, 58-59, 61 
interference by tinnitus, 53 
measurement of, 19, 26, 52-53, 127-
128 
speech reception, 114, ll9-121 
equipment calibration foi:, 125 
INDEX 
in hearing aid se1ection, 169 
predictions of, 127, 130 
testing of, 127-128 
Tinnitus, 100-109 
audib1e, 100-101, 106-108 
categories of, 105-106 
in disease, 103, 107-108 
effects on hearing, 100-104 
1oudness of, 100-101 
qualitative investigation of, 101 
quantitative investigation of, 101 
sound variations, 104 
sub-audib1e, 101, 106 
treatment of, 108-109 
To1erance range of hearing aids, 171-
172 
Tongue, patho1ogy of, 184 
speech invo1vements of, 184 
Tongue-teeth consonants, articu1ation 
of, 180 
Transistors 
deve1opment of, 161 
comparison with vacuum 
tube, 
164-165 
construction of, 160-162 
types of, 162 
See also Hearing aids 
Transistor hearing aid, See Hearing 
aids 
Turbina1 hypertrophy, 183 
Tuning bars, 97 
Tuning forks, 29, 94-99, ll9 
a1uminum alloy, 94-97 
calibration of, 97-98 
characteristics, 94-95 
in clinica1 tests, 97-99 
in Gelle tes t, 94 
in Rinne test, 94, 96 
in Schwabach test, 94, 96 
stee1, 94 
in Stenger test, 90-91, 94, 99 
types of, 96 
in Weber test, 94, 96 
u 
Unvoiced sounds, 179 
Ut1ey, J., 113 

INDEX 
V 
Vacuum-tube hearing aid. See Hear-
ingaids 
Vocal abuse, voice defects of, 184 
Voice 
fundamentals of, 177 
production of, 177 
Voiced sounds, 178-179 
Volume 
definition of, 177 
deviation of, 189 
normal perception of, 187 
normal production of, 187, 188 
See also Attenuator 
Volume unit meter. See V-U meter 
Vowels, 178, 181, 191 
articulation of, 180-182 
characteristics of, 181 
classification of, 181 
definition of, 178 
deviations of, 191-192 
distortion of, 198-199 
groups of, 181 
V-U meter, 20, 21-22 
w 
Warbling, definition of, 52-53 
Weber test, 94, 96 
Wegel, R. L., 105 
Western Electric 
numbers test, ll9 
phonograph audiometer, ll9 
White noise. See Masking noise 
Window, one-way vision, 2, 4 
Word Iists, 
225 
phonetically balanced (PB), 122, 
123-148 
spondaic words, 120, 121, 122, 123-
148, 169, 171 

