
Futurescapes

General Editors:
Robert Burden (University of Teesside)
Stephan Kohl (Universität Würzburg)
Editorial Board: 
Christine Berberich 
Christoph Ehland 
Catrin Gersdorf 
Jan Hewitt 
Ralph Pordzik 
Chris Thurgar-Dawson 
Merle Tönnies 
Spatial Practices
An Interdisciplinary Series in 
Cultural History,
Geography and
Literature
9

Amsterdam - New York, NY 2009
Edited by 
Ralph Pordzik
Futurescapes
Space in Utopian and Science 
Fiction Discourses

Cover photo: “Westbourne drain - London” 
~martino~ MMG Zegwaard
www.mmgzegwaard.nl
Cover design: Pier Post
The paper on which this book is printed meets the requirements of “ISO 
9706:1994, Information and documentation - Paper for documents - 
Requirements for permanence”.
ISSN: 1871-689X
ISBN: 978-90-420-2602-5
E-book ISBN: 978-90-420-2603-2
©Editions Rodopi B.V., Amsterdam - New York, NY 2009
Printed in the Netherlands

 
 
 
 
The Spatial Practices Series 
 
 
The series Spatial Practices belongs to the topographical turn in 
cultural studies and aims to publish new work in the study of spaces 
and places which have been appropriated for cultural meanings: 
symbolic landscapes and urban places which have specific cultural 
meanings that construct, maintain, and circulate myths of a unified na-
tional or regional culture and their histories, or whose visible ironies 
deconstruct those myths. Taking up the lessons of the new cultural 
geography, papers are invited which attempt to build bridges between 
the disciplines of cultural history, literary and cultural studies, and 
geography. 
Spatial Practices aims to promote a new interdisciplinary kind 
of cultural history drawing on constructivist approaches to questions 
of culture and identity that insist that cultural “realities” are the effect 
of discourses, but also that cultural objects and their histories and 
geographies are read as texts, with formal and generic rules, tropes 
and topographies. 
 
Robert Burden 
Stephan Kohl 


CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Notes on Contributors 
11 
13 
1 Ralph Pordzik  
Introduction: The Overlaid Spaces of Utopia 
 
17 
Chapter I 
Constructing Borders, Defining Limits:  
The Ideal Space of Utopia Revisited 
 
2 Gabriela Schmidt 
The Translation of Paradise: Thomas More’s Utopia and 
the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
 
 
25 
3 Hans Ulrich Seeber 
Utopia, Nation-Building, and the Dissolution of the 
Nation-State Around 1900 
 
 
53 
4 Richard Nate 
Discoveries of the Future: Herbert G. Wells and the 
Eugenic Utopia  
 
 
79 
5 Ralph Pordzik 
Persistence of Obedience: Theological Space and Ritual 
Conversion in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
 
 
111 

 
 
Chapter II 
Homely Spaces, Intimate Borders –  
Utopias to Live in 
 
 
 
6 Nicole Pohl 
‘And is not every Manor a Little Common Wealth?’ 
Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House  
 
 
131 
7 Christoph Ehland 
The Watchdogs of Eden: Chesterton and Buchan Look at 
the Present of the Future 
 
 
171 
8 Elizabeth Leane 
The Land that Time Forgot: Fictions of Antarctic 
Temporality 
 
 
199 
9 Dunja M. Mohr 
“The Tower of Babble”? The Role and Function of Fictive 
Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction  
 
 
225 
Chapter III 
Worlds Beyond Worlds – The Limits of  
Geographical and Perceptual Space 
 
 
 
10 Martina Mittag 
Rethinking Deterritorialization: Utopian and Apocalyptic 
Space in Recent American Fiction 
 
 
251 
11 Doreen Hartmann 
Space Construction as Cultural Practice: Reading William 
Gibson’s Neuromancer with Respect to Postmodern 
Concepts of Space 
 
 
 
275 
12 Saskia Schabio 
Peripheral Cosmopolitans: Caribbeanness 
as Transnational Utopia? 
 
 
301 

 
13 Antonis Balasopoulos 
“Utopian and Cynical Elements”: Chaplin, Cinema, and 
Weimar Critical Theory 
 
 
327 
Index 
359 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
Despite the fact that it is the name of only one editor that appears on 
its cover, this volume is the result of the efforts of many people, all of 
whom have contributed to its creation. The initial idea was received in 
the context of a discussion among colleagues arguing that within the 
current paradigm of space and spatial research, the area of utopian and 
science fiction has been sadly neglected. To actually bring together a 
group of inspired and like-minded scholars in one bound volume was 
made possible by Robert Burden and Stephan Kohl who kindly of-
fered to publish the collection in their Spatial Practices book series. I 
am also grateful to all the authors who agreed to contribute to this 
volume and, in doing so, allowed me to realize a project that I had 
long felt needed to be put in print. 
There are several other people, aside from the series editors and 
the authors of the particular essays, whose efforts need to be acknowl-
edged. Of vital importance in the making of this book was the assis-
tance of Elke Demant, whose work on every technical aspect, from the 
minutest detail to its larger conception of layout, has been a condition 
of its existence at all. Florian Niedlich steered the manuscript through 
its various stages with patience, criticism and care and helped remedy 
the variety of technical and organizational mishaps that came with my 
editorial tasks. Officially, he has been my ‘assistant’ on the project; in 
fact, he has been my co-editor. 
 
Würzburg, January 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
   R.P. 


 
 
 
 
Notes on Contributors 
 
 
ANTONIS BALASOPOULOS teaches English Studies at the University of 
Cyprus, Nicosia. Recent publications include a special issue of 
Gramma: Journal of Theory and Criticism entitled Histories 
and Trajectories (ed., 2005) and Conformism, Non-Conformism 
and Anti-Conformism in the Culture of the United States (ed., 
2008). 
 
CHRISTOPH EHLAND teaches English Literature and Cultural Studies 
at the University of Paderborn. Publications include Picaresque 
Perspectives – Exiled Identities: A Structural and Methodologi-
cal Analysis of the Picaresque as a Literary Archetype in the 
Works of James Leslie Mitchell (2003). He has edited Thinking 
Northern: Textures of Identity in the North of England (2007) 
and co-edited, with Robert Fajen, Das Paradigma des Pika-
resken / The Paradigm of the Picaresque (2007). 
 
DOREEN HARTMANN teaches Media Aesthetics at the University of 
Paderborn and currently works on a dissertation on the art of 
demos (computer-generated real-time animations). Her publica-
tions include “Wenn Elefanten träumen, bewegt sich was. Über 
neue Möglichkeiten im computeranimierten Film”, in Andreas 
Becker et al. (eds.), Medien – Diskurse – Deutungen (2007). 
 
ELIZABETH LEANE is a Senior Lecturer of English in the Faculty of 
Arts at the University of Tasmania. Recent publications include 
Reading Popular Physics: Disciplinary Skirmishes and Textual 
Strategies (2007). She has also co-edited a special issue of The 
Journal of the History of Culture in Australia entitled “Futures 
Exchange” (2004). 
 
MARTINA MITTAG has taught English and American Literature at the 
universities of Giessen, Siegen, Saarbrücken, Irvine (CA) and 

Futurescapes               
14
Brandeis (MA). Recent publications include Nationale Identi-
tätsbestrebungen und antispanische Polemik im englischen 
Pamphlet 1558–1639 (1993) and Gendered Spaces. Wandel des 
‘Weiblichen’ im Diskurs der frühen Neuzeit (2002). 
 
DUNJA M. MOHR teaches English Literature at Erfurt University. Re-
cent publications include Worlds Apart? Dualism and Trans-
gression in Contemporary Female Dystopias (2005) and Em-
bracing the Other: Addressing Xenophobia in the New Litera-
tures in English (ed., 2008). 
 
RICHARD NATE holds a chair of English Literature at the University of 
Ingolstadt-Eichstätt. Publications include Wissenschaft und Li-
teratur im England der frühen Neuzeit (2001) and Amerikani-
sche Träume. Die Kultur der Vereinigten Staaten in der Zeit des 
New Deal (2003). 
 
NICOLE POHL is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Arts and Humani-
ties at Oxford Brookes University. Publications include Women, 
Space and Utopia, 1600–1800 (2006); she has co-edited Gender 
and Utopia in the Eighteenth Century: Essays in English and 
French Utopian Writing (2007). 
 
RALPH PORDZIK teaches English Literature and Cultural Studies at the 
University of Würzburg. Recent Publications include The Won-
der of Travel: Fiction, Tourism and the Social Construction of 
the Nostalgic (2005) and Begehrte Texte. Literaturwissenschaft 
als Poetik des Unbewussten (2007). 
 
SASKIA SCHABIO is assistant professor at Stuttgart University. She has 
written her doctoral thesis on Mary Wroth and Shakespeare 
and published articles on Montaigne and the 18th century cul-
ture of sensibility. Co-edited books include Beyond the Black 
Atlantic: Relocating Modernization and Technology (2006) and 
Postcolonial (Dis)Affections (2007). 
 
GABRIELA SCHMIDT teaches English Literature at the University of 
Munich. She has recently completed her PhD-thesis about hu-
manist conceptions of language and linguistic plurality in the 

Notes on Contributors 
15
works of Thomas More and is currently working on a project 
about translation and literary culture in the Elizabethan Period. 
She has co-edited a volume of essays entitled Representing Re-
ligious Pluralization in Early Modern Europe (2007). 
 
HANS ULRICH SEEBER used to teach English Literature at the Univer-
sity of Stuttgart. Recent publications include Die Selbstkritik 
der Utopie in der angloamerikanischen Literatur (2003) and 
Mobilität und Moderne. Studien zur englischen Literatur des 
19. und 20. Jahrhunderts (2007). 


 
 
 
 
Introduction: The Overlaid Spaces of Utopia 
 
Ralph Pordzik 
 
 
Recent decades have seen a growing awareness of the significant role 
played by space not only within the interpretation of literature but 
within all aspects of our social and cultural experience of the world.1 
General recognition of the contribution to be made by issues related to 
space in deepening our understanding of society and culture has led to 
a proliferation of books and essays, many of which do not merely 
attest to changes in the critical assessment of space but also to changes 
in the very nature and experience of space itself; the effects of trans-
formation in the areas of information technologies and the new media, 
e.g., the impact upon individuals and the globalised societies they live 
in, cannot be overstated. At the level of literary and cultural analysis, 
understanding spatial practices appears to be an increasingly urgent 
prerequisite for any attempt at understanding the production of cul-
tural artefacts at all. 
This volume intends to put to the test some of the theories de-
veloped and applied in recent years, asking in how far and to what 
effect the constitutive and active potential of space and spatiality has 
been realised as a fruitful method or tool of examining literature and 
culture. The testing-ground is that of utopian writing and thinking 
which is currently enjoying a significant renaissance in the human 
sciences, in English and in Cultural Studies. The number of critical 
accounts of utopian thought and practice in “post-western”2 literature 
and culture has increased substantially in recent years, comprising 
                                                      
1  
See, among others, Burden and Kohl (eds.) 2006, Ehland (ed.) 2007, Lefebvre 
2004, Massey 2005, Sack 1990, Soja 1989, Thacker 2003, Tuan 1977, and 
Urry 1995. 
2  
The phrase is Tom Moylan’s who must be considered as one of the finest 
theorists in the field of contemporary Utopian studies at the moment; see 
Moylan 2002: 268 and Moylan 2004. 

Ralph Pordzik 
18
studies of feminist prospects of utopianism3 as well as monographs on 
utopian fiction produced in the so-called ‘new’ or postcolonial English 
literatures, including Ireland.4 Especially in Great Britain which looks 
back upon a most influential tradition of utopian imagination (cf. 
Kendrick 2004: 5, 28ff) the mode has been given new impetus through 
a number of writings attempting to transform standardised views of 
utopian and dystopian forms of aesthetic representation. The renewed 
interest in a pattern of thought that has always advocated the quest for 
the best possible way of life indicates that the notion of utopian 
change, prematurely denounced as a relic of modernity and its fatal 
commitment to a radically different society, is still very appealing to 
many writers and critics and constantly encourages them to test the re-
lational and transformational potential ascribed to it. 
The articles collected in this volume intend to ‘map out’ on uto-
pian and science-fiction discourses some of the new and revisionist 
models of spatial analysis applied in Literary and Cultural Studies in 
recent years. Their overall aim is not only to inspect the various forms 
of analysis inherent in current concepts of spatiality but also to expose 
utopian writing as a locus of literary innovation where writers in the 
past as well as in the present have experimented with different spatial 
metaphors in order to explore the experience of power, progress and 
modernity. In generic terms, utopia as a mode of imaginatively shap-
ing the vision of an ideal society or form of life is a “spatial practice” 
(De Certeau 1984: 115) specifically designed to serve a universal pur-
pose: it depicts future or alternative societies and imaginary land-
scapes or invented worlds that construct, sustain and circulate the idea 
of a culturally and politically unified – or, for that matter, fragmented 
– community of individuals. In the case of anti-utopias or dystopias, 
we may argue that their ironical or sceptical attitude challenges or 
even deconstructs the plausibility and feasibility of these ideal spaces. 
Where formerly many fictions employed a narrative mode of 
representational realism based on causal relations and a logically or-
dered succession of events in order to convey a future compatible with 
their readers’ conception of history and identity, much recent utopian 
and speculative or science fiction writing offers a view of alternative 
                                                      
3  
See, among others, Donawerth and Kolmerten (eds.) 1994 and Sargisson 
1996. 
4  
See, e.g., Ketterer 1992, Pordzik 2001a/b, Sargent 1996, and Wicht 2000. 

Introduction 
19
spatialities in which fragmentation, discontinuity, and ambiguity de-
termine the course of action and in which the striving of the readers to 
make sense of what they are given to understand is constantly under-
mined by the introduction of new perspectives and points of reference 
that cannot be integrated into a conclusive whole (cf. Broderick 1995). 
It is especially since the 1970s with their celebration of a whole new 
range of “spatial utopias” that the ongoing transformation of individ-
ual relations and social institutions has increasingly been projected 
onto “the vision of place and landscape, including the human body” 
(Jameson 1991: 160). The new spatial utopias are marked by their 
creation of a narrative fabric of relations between various discourses, 
narratives, and points of view sustained by a seemingly unending 
process of differentiation and re-adjustment in the text and the genre 
itself. With respect to more recent developments in the genre, utopian 
thinking and the critical examination of space are thus linked by their 
notable function as discursive arenas in which to explore the rich and 
topical questions of identity, regionality and cultural belonging. 
The same applies to neighbouring fields of academic discourse 
in which the new methodology is increasingly brought to bear on ar-
eas of experience and perception less frequently submitted to spatial 
readings, such as the history of eugenics (R. Nate) and utopian dis-
courses in film (A. Balasopoulos) and theology (R. Pordzik). Here, the 
close study of different ways of living in/with space or of employing 
space in terms of mediating fresh perceptions offers insights into a 
wide variety of approaches, geographies and specific cultural phe-
nomena. All of them occur within and are mediated by space; all play 
a constitutive role in forming the places, the land-, data-, media- or 
ethnoscapes we inhabit (cf. Appadurai 2000). They all involve a tex-
tual element, however, as many of the essays collected here show; 
their subjects therefore include the homogenization of space in the 
translation of utopian concepts and genres (G. Schmidt), the radical 
dissolution of narrative space into non-space as employed in cyber-
punk fiction (D. Hartmann), and the exploration of the mutuality of 
utopian and cartographic space (geographic maps and their historical 
or imaginative influence on utopian writing; E. Leane) or the relation 
of ideological and rural space, respectively (N. Pohl). 
On the historical and socio-political plane, some essays exam-
ine the spatial relationship between politically entrenched societies 
and their alternative or ‘othered’ political possibilities (C. Ehland, M. 

Ralph Pordzik 
20
Mittag), the historicity of utopian space and spatiality with respect to 
those historical periods when utopian discourse was transformed by 
new discoveries and explorations (H. U. Seeber), or the de-hierarchi-
zation of homogeneous cultural space, e.g. in the context of postcolo-
nial and post-western literatures (S. Schabio). A final rewarding object 
of analysis is the construction and cultural function of artificial lan-
guages and identities in literary utopias and dystopias (D. Mohr). 
The essays collected in this volume thus testify to the growing 
interest in debates dealing with the many spaces of utopia. Their ma-
jor aim is to open classical analysis of utopian discourses to new lines 
of inquiry and thus to side-step the established generic binary of uto-
pia, anti-utopia and dystopia (or science fiction). As such, the volume 
proposes to think of utopia not so much in terms of fictional texts 
about change and transformation but in terms of a cultural process 
through which social, spatial and subjective identities are formed. 
Utopias can and will be read as semiotic systems implying a distinct 
spatial and temporal dimension; their formative strategies (extrapola-
tion, imaginary projection, spatial juxtaposition, etc.) are linked with a 
large variety of generic structures and narrative typologies such as the 
pastoral, the exotic, the sublime and the picturesque. 
Futurescapes sets out to absorb recent constructivist approaches 
to questions of culture and identity into a prospective, multiply affili-
ated theoretical panorama that would ask not just what utopia ‘is’ or 
means but what it actually does, how it works as a cultural and spatial 
practice. Not least, its contributions try to show that utopia as literary 
form and medium fulfils a double function with respect to ideology: 
some utopias naturalize a cultural and social construction (that of the 
‘good life’, the radically improved welfare state, the Christian para-
dise, the counter-society, etc.), representing an artificial world as if it 
were given or even politically inevitable, and they also make that rep-
resentation operational by ‘interpellating’ their readers in some deter-
minate relation to their ‘givenness’ as sites of political and individual 
intervention and improvement. Some of the difficult terms of this 
ideological constellation are argued out in the essays put together here 
in conjunction with the spatially inspired terminology needed to eluci-
date issues of geopolitical, architectural or anti-colonial resistance to a 
united sense of place as proposed in the globalised world of techno-
logical postmodernity. 

Introduction 
21
Utopian discourse, as envisaged in this volume, is thus not 
merely a body of work to be interpreted in a historical context but a 
set of cultural and economic practices that makes history in both the 
real and represented alternative environment, playing a central role in 
the formation of public selves figured by imagined communal, global-
local or scientific identities. Bringing into focus these manifold, over-
laid spaces of the utopian, the essays explore as well as define the 
various ways in which, in western cultures, utopian views and genres 
have circulated as media of exchange and homogenization, as sites of 
cultural and linguistic appropriation and as foci for the spatial for-
mation of national and regional identities in different periods, areas 
and cultures. 

Ralph Pordzik 
22
Works Cited 
 
Appadurai, Arjun (2000). Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. 
Minneapolis and London: U of Minnesota P. 
Broderick, Damien (1995). Reading by Starlight: Postmodern Science Fiction. Lon-
don and New York: Routledge. 
Burden, Robert and Stephan Kohl (eds.) (2006). Landscape and Englishness. Amster-
dam and New York: Rodopi. 
De Certeau, Michel (1980/1984). The Practice of Everyday Life (tr. Steven F. 
Rendall). Berkeley and London: U of California P. 
Donawerth, Jane L. and Carol A. Kolmerten (eds.) (1994). Utopian and Science Fic-
tion by Women: Worlds of Difference. Syracuse: Syracuse UP. 
Ehland, Christoph (ed.) (2007). Thinking Northern: Textures of Identity in the North 
of England. Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi. 
Jameson, Fredric (1991). “Utopianism after the End of Utopia”, in: Postmodernism, 
or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London and New York: Verso, 
154-80. 
Kendrick, Christopher (2004). Utopia, Carnival, and Commonwealth in Renaissance 
England. Toronto: U of Toronto P. 
Ketterer, David (1992). Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy. Bloomington and 
Indianapolis: Indiana UP. 
Lefebvre, Henri (1974/1991). The Production of Space (tr. Donald Nicholson-Smith). 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Massey, Doreen B. (2005). For Space. London: Sage. 
Moylan, Tom (2002). “Utopia, Postcolonialism and Postmodernism”, in: Science 
Fiction Studies 19.2: 265-71. 
— (2004). Scraps of the Untainted Sky: Science Fiction, Utopia, Dystopia. Boulder: 
Westview. 
Pordzik, Ralph (2001a). The Quest for Postcolonial Utopia: A Comparative Introduc-
tion to the Utopian Novel in the New English Literatures. New York: Peter 
Lang. 
— (2001b). “A Postcolonial View of Ireland and the Irish Conflict in Anglo-Irish 
Utopian Literature since the Nineteenth Century”, in: Irish Studies Review 9.3: 
331-46. 
Sack, Robert (1990). Conceptions of Space in Social Thought. London: Macmillan. 
Sargent, L. Tower (1996). “New Zealand Utopian Literature: An Annotated Biblio-
graphy”, in: Occasional Paper 97.1. Wellington: Stout Research Centre. 
Sargisson, Lucy (1996). Contemporary Feminist Utopianism. London: Routledge. 
Soja, Edward W. (1989/1997). Postmodern Geography: The Reassertion of Space in 
Critical Social Theory. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Thacker, Andrew (2003). Moving through Modernity: Space and Geography in Mod-
ernism. Manchester: Manchester UP. 
Tuan, Yi-Fu (1977). Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience. London: Ar-
nold. 
Urry, John (1995). Consuming Places. London and New York: Routledge. 
Wicht, Wolfgang (2000). Utopianism in James Joyce’s Ulysses (Anglistische For-
schungen 278). Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
CONSTRUCTING BORDERS,  
DEFINING LIMITS: THE IDEAL 
SPACE OF UTOPIA REVISITED 
 


 
 
 
 
 
The Translation of Paradise: Thomas More’s Utopia 
and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
 
Gabriela Schmidt 
 
 
Abstract: This essay is an attempt to interlink the origins of utopian literature with the 
history of humanist translation. It conceives of translatio – in the broad linguistic, 
spatial and cultural sense for which the term was used during the 16th century – as a 
crucial structural principle and interpretive key to Thomas More’s Utopia, the found-
ing text of the genre. From the very first pages of its 1516 principal edition, More’s 
enigmatic dialogue is steeped in problems of translation, which are symbolically an-
ticipated in the imaginary Utopian alphabet and quatrain with which his text begins. 
Whether in the mythical origins of his model New World commonwealth, in its deal-
ings with other nations, or in the envisioned transmittance of its moral and cultural ac-
complishments to early modern Europe, translation in Utopia is always simulta-
neously present as an ideal and as an illusion. By emphasising the fallacies inherent in 
the humanist dream of a perfect translatio between Classical antiquity and the present, 
More to some extent reconceives of translation as a dialogue in which both sides ac-
tively influence and profit from each other. This kind of productive openness is con-
stitutive for the entire hermeneutical framework of More’s book, as its reader – faced 
with the impossibility of simple ‘translation’ – is forced to engage with the text in a 
creative process of adaptation and exchange. 
 
Key names and concepts: cultural transfer – discourse of the New World – humanism 
– Thomas More – translation – utopian poetics 
 
 
This is the merging place of Utopia, a neutral place, an island 
 between two kingdoms, two states, the two halves of the world [...]. 
Louis Marin, “Frontiers of Utopia”1 
 
Though most modern editions would have it otherwise, Thomas 
More’s Utopia begins with a translation. The very first lines of the 
1516 Louvain editio princeps, only preceded by a woodcut illustration 
and a curious array of exotic-looking characters entitled “Vtopiensium 
Alphabetum”, together form a little poem “in the Utopian vernacular”, 
                                                      
1  
Marin 1993: 411. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
26
accompanied by a European transcription and followed by a “literal 
translation of the above lines” into Latin (fig. 1).2 Although responsi-
bility for the Utopian alphabet and quatrain is explicitly claimed by 
Peter Giles in one of the prefatory letters (cf. More 1965: 23), the 
question of who actually wrote these two little texts remains con-
tested. In fact, the paratexts of Utopia are replete with similarly un-
supported claims to autopsy, authorship or editorship, providing the 
reader with a whole network of potential leads for interpretation, all of 
which are far from undisputed within the book as a whole. Ultimately, 
we can never be quite sure whether such information is meant to be 
taken at face value or whether it is rather part of More’s intricate strat-
egy of pluralizing and obscuring his authorship. Nevertheless, we may 
safely assume with J. D. M. Derrett that, if the alphabet appeared both 
in the 1516 and in the more costly 1518 edition, More must at least 
have given it his approval and probably had a hand in it himself.3 It 
thus seems consistent to treat the little text and its translation as an in-
tegral part of More’s literary hide-and-seek game, in which he con-
stantly challenges his readers’ critical judgement, simultaneously 
questioning and reaffirming the credibility of his own text. 
The easily discernible morphological parallels between the two 
versions of the poem – Latin and Utopian – make clear to what an as-
tonishing degree it is indeed meant to represent a ‘literal’ translation. 
From the exact correspondence between the two sets of characters in 
the alphabet through the striking similarities in morphology and case 
(e.g. ‘gymno-sophaon’ – ‘philo-sophia’; ‘chama’/insula’ – ‘chamaan’/ 
‘insulam’) even to the very word order, the two languages seem to 
harmonize so perfectly that translating the poem from one to the other 
appears at first glance no more difficult than merely transcribing it. 
Does this brief exercise in humanist philology then epitomize the ideal 
of a perfectly harmonious coexistence, even commutability between 
Latin and the vernacular, and thus, ultimately, the hope for a consen- 
                                                      
2  
Unless indicated otherwise, my English translations from Utopia follow the 
version given in the Yale edition. 
3  
Derrett (1966) leaves the question of whether the alphabet was really com-
posed by Giles, whether More and Giles cooperated on it or whether it was 
More’s own work, basically open to discussion. However, he concludes by 
considering the last possibility as the most likely. 

Fig. 1
1516)
Thomas
1. “Utopian Al
); Wolfenbüttel
s More’s Utopia
lphabet”, from 
, Herzog-Augu
a and the Poetic
the principal e
ust-Bibliothek, P
cs of Cultural E
edition of More
P 351.4° Helms
Exchange 
e’s Utopia (Lo
st. (3). 
27
 
ouvain, 

Gabriela Schmidt 
28
sus, for an unhampered communication between languages and cul-
tures, which is, according to Lawrence Venuti, the implicit “utopian 
dimension” (2000: 485) behind any translation? 
So it seems. Looking beneath the surface, however, one quickly 
discovers hidden discrepancies. Precisely so as to not impair the word 
order, a metrical form originally resembling dactylic hexameters has 
of necessity been converted into Latin prose, thus depriving the poem 
of one of its most vital characteristics: verse.4 This leads to further 
questions: why does the most popular of Classical metres, used by 
both Homer and Vergil, appear in an unknown, exotic vernacular, 
whereas the Latin text presents itself in plain prose? Should it not have 
been vice versa? This strange order of things ostensibly undermines 
the archetypal status traditionally accorded Classical antiquity and 
makes a clear hierarchal relation between the original and its transla-
tion at least questionable. What is more, a number of strikingly artifi-
cial formulations, like ‘non insulam’ instead of ‘paeninsulam’, cause 
the Latin version to resemble a makeshift reading aid, comparable to 
medieval interlinear versions of the Bible, rather than a genuine trans-
lation. One has the impression that More’s little poem exemplifies a 
practice which Gerda Haßler has called ‘transcoding’ – the illustration 
of the properties of one linguistic system by formally reproducing 
them in another – rather than ‘translating’ proper, which must be 
based on both form and meaning. While for the former activity an arti-
ficially produced coincidence in structures may be sufficient, the latter 
requires an acknowledgement of linguistic difference, of the peculiar 
semantic and pragmatic qualities of the target language (cf. Haßler 
2002: 158-63). 
In spite of the striking outward similarities between the two 
versions of More’s Utopian poem, which caused some critics to read it 
as a kind of cryptographic code,5 the opening verses of Utopia are thus 
something very different from a perfect translation. They open up a 
gap between verba and res, a gap which not only exposes the illusory 
nature of the humanist ideal of perfect translatio studii, an uninter-
                                                      
4  
On the metre and its problems, cf. the commentary in More 1965: 585. 
5  
Quite some ink has been spilt over attempts to deduce a precise grammatical 
structure and etymological genealogy for More’s imaginary “Utopian ver-
nacular” from this ‘interlingual exchange’ (cf. the commentary in More 1965: 
277f, as well as Vossius 1689 and Pons 1930). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
29
rupted communication of Classical learning and literature across the 
cultural and historical divide into the present, but also of More’s Uto-
pian enterprise itself: the reform of early modern society by ‘trans-
lating’ a set of ideal values and institutions into an imaginary New 
World society, whence they can be transferred back again into the 
European context. The brief utopia of perfect translatability with 
which the first edition of Utopia begins serves as a fitting prologue to 
the paradoxical journey into nowhere that the reader is about to under-
take, and also as an implicit poetics for the new literary ‘genre’ 
More’s text was to inspire. Translation (in the more broadly cultural 
sense that governs early modern as well as most recent applications of 
the term) is, as I shall argue, not only a crucial key to the understand-
ing of More’s multilayered and enigmatic work but also defines and 
illustrates the way in which all utopian literature seeks to construct 
and re-construct history. 
 
 
1. Transfer or Transformation? – The Paradoxical  
Nature of Early Modern Translation 
 
The word ‘translation’ by no means indicated a purely linguistic pro-
cess in early modern usage. A comparison of contemporary dictionar-
ies makes this more than evident.6 Taking over almost the entire spec-
trum of meaning inherent in the Latin word translatio (as it had been 
charted earlier by Thomas Elyot and Thomas Thomas), John Florio 
gives the following significations for ‘traslatione’ in his 1598 Worlde 
of Wordes: “a translation, or transposition, a transporting or carying 
ouer, a transferring or remoouing from one to another. Also the vsing 
of a worde in signification, lesse proper” (Florio 1598: 429). Charac-
teristically, transposition “from one language to another” (Elyot 1538: 
sig. Ddv) is the only one of Elyot’s definitions which Florio carefully 
seems to have avoided. Similarly, Randle Cotgrave privileges the spa-
tial connotations of the word in his French-English dictionary of 1611, 
giving “[t]he Translation of Saint Martin; a holy-day (kept in some 
places) the fourth of Julie” as his only example (Cotgrave 1611: sig. 
Iiii2r). Still more disconcerting to modern ears are the explanations 
                                                      
6  
The following survey is based on a search in the database Lexicons of Early 
Modern English, ed. by Ian Lancashire (University of Toronto Press). 
[http://leme.library.utoronto.ca]. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
30
provided in Richard Tomlinson’s English translation of Jean de Re-
nou’s Dispensatorium medicum and Edward Phillips’ New World of 
English Words. ‘Translation’ is there defined as “the removal of an 
humor or disease from one part of the body to another” (Renou 1657: 
sig. N2v) and as “a changing from one [...] place to another [...] when a 
light Planet separateth from a more weighty one, and presently appli-
eth to one more heavy” (Phillips 1658: sig. Pp3v).7 Whereas most of 
these definitions, however specialized, seem to imply that the object 
of transposition remains essentially the same during the process, some 
early modern applications of the word indicate the very opposite, 
imagining translation as a practice of alteration and change (cf. Caw-
dry 1604: sig. F2v). Such is implied, for instance, by Peter Quince’s 
earnestly concerned, though somewhat comic exclamation “Bless 
thee, Bottom, bless thee. Thou art translated” in Shakespeare’s A Mid-
summer Night’s Dream (3.1.105, Shakespeare 1997: 833). It is pre-
cisely these two seemingly irreconcilable semantic perspectives of the 
term – the notion of static transposition on the one hand, and of dy-
namic transformation on the other – which endow the early modern 
understanding of translatio with its characteristic duplicity. 
As has recently been shown, renovatio (or ‘renascence’), the 
leading metaphor of Italian humanist cultural thinking, necessarily had 
to be reconceived as translatio when humanism crossed the Alps (cf. 
Robert 2002: 92ff). It is therefore hardly surprising that translation 
soon became one of the most popular means of gaining access to Clas-
sical literature in England. What was at stake for Northern European 
humanists was not primarily the revival of a ‘glorious past’ that had 
been concealed by centuries of obscurantism, but the transposition of 
Classical culture into their own national tradition, thereby enriching 
and ennobling this tradition, until it finally surpassed antiquity itself. 
Even where not explicitly acknowledged, this pervasive ideal of com-
petitive emulation, which is the central theme of contemporary de-
bates about literary imitation,8 contains the notion of transformative 
                                                      
7  
However, Phillips is also the only one to explicitly include our more familiar 
understanding of ‘translation’ as “a turning out of one language into another” 
(Phillips 1658: sig. Pp3v). 
8  
Most famous among them was Erasmus’ dialogue Ciceronianus (1528), 
which has been claimed to be largely based on an earlier debate between 
Thomas More and the French scholar Germain de Brie (cf. Daniel Kinney’s 
introduction in More 1984: 589). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
31
adaptation and change – a fact which perhaps becomes most evident 
in the startling liberties that a great number of early modern translators 
took with their originals, and in the predominant metaphors (such as 
re-dressing, currency exchange, or even conquest) employed by many 
of them in order to justify their own methods (cf. Morini 2006: 35-61). 
Nevertheless, the equally important humanist principle of re-
turning to the original source texts of Classical antiquity (‘ad fontes’) 
caused a number of leading translators and theorists, among them 
Leonardo Bruni, to imagine translation as something quite different 
from creative appropriation. For them, a perfect translation resembled 
the building of a bridge across the cultural, linguistic and historical di-
vide in an effort to gain access to the pure essence of the originals 
themselves, a bridge that had to be as seamless as possible, transfer-
ring not only the sense but also the verbal, phrasal and idiomatic 
qualities of the author’s style and, where possible, even its word order 
and prose rhythm (cf. Bruni 1996: 160ff). Thus in a letter to his patron 
Humphrey of Gloucester Bruni is able to assert, quite naturally, about 
his own translation of Aristotle’s Ethics: “[D]o not doubt you are 
reading Aristotle when you read this” (Bruni 1987: 156). And a few 
years later he states, with equal clarity: “Alteration is the translator’s 
sin” (207). As is the case with most humanist programmatic theory, 
Bruni’s far-reaching methodological claims are not entirely without a 
polemical edge. They are explicitly directed against the thirteenth-
century scholar and bishop Robert Grosseteste, whose previous blun-
dering version of Aristotle’s work Bruni pretends to emend. This 
competitive approach to philological translation as “an act of physical 
retrieval” (Norton 1981: 177) – a retrieval concentrating above all 
upon matters of style, now considered as crucial to the integrity of 
meaning – was shared by a great number of early modern humanist 
translators, not least among them Erasmus in his influential ‘emenda-
tion’ of the Vulgate. 
However, the words and images which Bruni employs to de-
scribe the translator’s task, such as the faithful re-production of a 
painting (ad exemplum picturae aliam picturam pingere) by means of 
the two significant activities transformare and exprimere (cf. Bruni 
1996: 160), make clear how much even this concept of ‘restorative’ 
translation owes to its seeming opposite: creative emulation. Even as 
humanists became increasingly aware of the historical word’s trans-
formative power, which turned style and expression into important 

Gabriela Schmidt 
32
ends in themselves, they also began to realize that the assumption of 
such a close interconnection between form and meaning was not with-
out risks in translation. Re-phrasing an author in their own language, 
even if it was a language carefully moulded after the models of Cicero 
and Vergil, always implied, instead of an unimpaired return ‘ad fon-
tes’, an act of displacement (cf. Copeland 1991: 223), of rewriting, of 
transformation. And this eventually made it doubtful whether the 
much sought-after ideal of an ‘authentic’ transfer of meaning, a “flight 
of essence” (Norton 1981: 202) from Classical literature to the pre-
sent, was possible at all. 
Thomas More’s fictitious translation at the beginning of Utopia 
graphically captures this characteristic dilemma of humanist theory. 
Through its deceptive structural coincidence, which on closer analysis 
quickly proves a fake, the poem embodies Bruni’s quest for an exact 
reproduction of the original in all its features, as well as the illusory 
nature of such an enterprise. While perfect transfer turns out to be im-
possible, translation is at least partly reconceived as a reciprocal pro-
cess of transformation, leaving its mark on both the product of transfer 
and the language that receives it. Instead of measuring the degree of 
structural and semantic coincidence between an archetypal ‘original’ 
and a derivative ‘translation’ (more or less based on the traditional di-
chotomy of ‘literal’ versus ‘free’), More’s linguistic trompe l’oeil thus 
points to a feature of the translation process which Homi Bhabha once 
called the insurmountable “foreignness of languages”, the “nucleus of 
the untranslatable that goes beyond the transparency of subject mat-
ter” and causes a ‘given’ content to be transformed, alienated and es-
tranged through the act of translation (1990: 314f).9 It is this ‘foreign-
ness’ that becomes traceable in More’s curiously artificial Latin prose, 
which clumsily seeks to reproduce a Utopian original whose real es-
sence eludes transmittance. 
However, More’s quatrain not only embodies and problem-
atizes the humanist ideal of perfect interlingual transfer, it also widens 
                                                      
9  
Similarly, Lawrence Venuti stresses the transformative impact of translation 
and exposes the utopian character of perfect communication: “Translation 
never communicates in an untroubled fashion because the translator negotiates 
linguistic and cultural differences of the foreign text by reducing them and 
supplying another set of differences [...] drawn from the receiving text and 
culture. [...] The foreign text, then, is not so much communicated as inscribed 
with domestic intelligibilities and interests.” (2000: 468) 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
33
the perspective towards a more comprehensive vision of ‘translation’ 
and takes into account the spatial and cultural connotations implicit in 
early modern translatio.10 In it, the entire history of Utopia is imag-
ined as a complex chain of mutually intertwined instances of cultural 
transfer. By turning the former peninsula into an island (l. 1) and 
changing its name from ‘Abraxa’ to ‘Utopia’ (cf. More 1965: 112), 
King Utopos transforms its culture and society into what it is for the 
reader: an ideal ‘expression’ of Plato’s philosophical city (ll. 2-3), thus 
translating into the ‘reality’ of a recently discovered New World what 
was once only a literary expression of philosophical ideas in Greek.11 
In spite of its newly achieved isolation, this New World, which Gil-
laume Budé in his prefatory letter to the 1517 edition identifies as 
“undoubtedly [...] one of the Fortunate Isles” (More 1965: 12), does 
not keep its cultural and philosophical accomplishments exclusively to 
itself but claims instead an openness to cultural exchange that initiates 
an entire series of mutual translations and re-translations: “Ungrudg-
ingly do I share my benefits with others; undemurringly do I adopt 
whatever is better from others” (l. 4). It is, finally, precisely this kind 
of openness to innovation and growth through translation that Budé 
seeks to confer on More’s European readers when he speaks of the 
book as a kind of “nursery of correct and useful institutions from 
which every man may introduce and adapt transplanted customs 
[translatitios mores] to his own city” (More 1965: 14). 
All these varieties of Utopian translation – the island’s transla-
tional origin and its relation to Greek culture, its ongoing interactions 
with the surrounding peoples, and its alleged status as an ideal arche-
type for the translation of social and political values into Europe – are 
                                                      
10  
Marina Leslie thus reads More’s Utopian quatrain as a commentary “on the 
linguistic, literary and sociohistorical processes of translation as humanist 
method and subject”, as well as “an important meditation on the problems of 
cultural translation and transmission” in general (Leslie 1998: 58, 69). This in 
turn emphasizes the insoluble knot between languages and cultures which is 
so crucial to modern translation studies that some critics even speak of a “cul-
tural turn” within the discipline (cf. von Flotow 2001: 13). 
11  
Cf. also the fictional “Hexastichon Anemolij poetae” which immediately fol-
lows the Utopian quatrain in the 1516 edition. There, Utopia is said to be su-
perior to Plato’s City: “[W]hat he [i.e. Plato] has delineated in words I alone 
have exhibited in men and resources and laws of surpassing excellence.” The 
result is another ‘translation’ of the island: “Deservedly ought I to be called by 
the name of Eutopia.” (More 1965: 20) 

Gabriela Schmidt 
34
presented by More as far from smooth and unproblematic. Through 
their loose ends and contradictory results they effectively participate 
in and recur to the rifts and fissures inherent in humanist translatio as 
well as in any other translation. They expose the futility of the transla-
tor’s paradoxical endeavour to bring about a comprehensive (and one-
sided) transfer from source to target culture, a transfer which cannot 
but affect both sides through a mutual dynamics of transformation and 
exchange. 
 
 
2. Measuring the Distance to Nowhere:  
The Paradoxical Origins of Utopian Culture 
 
According to More’s cosmopolitan narrator Raphael Hythloday, the 
origins of Utopian society reach far back into prehistoric times: 
“[T]here were cities among them before there were [even] men among 
us” (More 1965: 107). This astonishing age of the island and its cul-
ture is brought forth by Hythloday as an argument against the slightly 
incredulous objection of his interlocutor Peter Giles that there could 
hardly be found a better-ordered people in the new world than in the 
old, since in the latter, commonwealths were undoubtedly far richer in 
experience, knowledge and discoveries. Hythloday’s response, “[a]s 
for the antiquity of commonwealths, [...] you could give a sounder 
opinion if you had read the historical accounts of that world”, not only 
successfully counters Giles’ claim about Europe’s supposed advantage 
in experience and technical know-how, it also provides Utopia’s be-
ginnings with the aura of an uncontested archetypal condition, from 
which all the best traditions and institutions of human culture took 
their origin. No wonder that this original condition creates the impres-
sion of radical novelty in the eyes of a corrupt ‘old world’ whose 
agents, as Hythloday has declared a few pages earlier, stubbornly de-
fend their own faults on the grounds that “Our forefathers were happy 
with that sort of thing, and would to heaven we had their wisdom” 
(More 1965: 59). 
Hythloday’s paradoxical argument about an ancient new world 
exactly mirrors the common humanist strategy of reassessing tradi-
tional notions of ‘old’ and ‘new’, ‘ancient’ and ‘modern’, by present-
ing the authors of Classical antiquity and patristic theology as the truly 
‘new’ paradigm with sufficient potential for social and cultural re-

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
35
form, whereas the ‘modern’ methods of Neo-Scholasticism, current 
within contemporary academia, were denounced as hopelessly futile 
and outdated. Thomas More repeatedly and directly voices this theme 
in his epistolary defences of Erasmian theology, which were written 
about the same time as Utopia and which are indirectly connected to 
that most famous of humanist satires, the Epistolae obscurorum vir-
orum.12 The rationale behind this strategy was, of course, nothing 
other than a defence of the humanists’ own methods against the wide-
spread objection of ‘newfangledness’ and to assert their superiority by 
investing them with the authority of a long-standing tradition. What 
appears to be new, is in fact nothing less than the rediscovery of an 
uncorrupted, exemplary past that must be unearthed from the rubble of 
more recent degenerations. Utopia in Hythloday’s account represents 
exactly this recently rediscovered ‘new’ world, which on closer in-
spection turns out to be older than anything else within the familiar 
universe of the known one. Accordingly, a journey to this land for the 
reader is by no means a journey into the unknown, but in fact a return 
to the unspoilt sources of humanity (‘ad fontes’), to its cultural, social 
and linguistic origins which have to be translated back into the pres-
ent, in order to rejuvenate and restore it. This paradox is succinctly 
expressed by another member of More’s circle of humanist friends, 
Cornelius de Schrijver (Grapheus), in a dedicatory poem to the 1517 
edition, in which he asks the reader: “Do you want to see new marvels 
now that a new world has been discovered not long ago? Do you want 
to learn ways of living different in nature from our own? Do you want 
to know the sources of the virtues? Do you want to uncover the orig-
inal causes of the world’s evils [...]?” (More 1965: 31; my emphasis) 
                                                      
12  
One of More’s Erasmian defences, the “Letter to Maarten van Dorp” (1515), 
was written at the height of the controversy between ‘grammarians’ and ‘theo-
logians’ at the University of Louvain, which had originally been triggered at 
Cologne by the publication of Reuchlin’s Augenspiegel and of which the Epis-
tolae were also an offshoot. In this letter, More repeatedly contrasts the ‘mod-
ern’ neo-scholastic methods at Louvain and elsewhere with those of the ‘old’, 
venerable theologians, i.e. the Fathers of the Church and the apostles. In his 
1520 “Letter to a Monk”, he ironically cites one of his opponent’s arguments 
against Erasmus’ ‘newfangled’ Latin style – “older is better” – only in order 
to beat him afterwards with his own weapons (cf. More 1986: 222). On the 
paradoxical revaluation of ‘old’ and ‘new’ in early modern historical thinking, 
cf. Müller 1991 and von Leyden 1958. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
36
Nevertheless, the straightforward presentation of Utopia’s his-
tory as going back in a direct line to an original, paradisiacal Golden 
Age is complicated within the text by several other competing theories 
about the origins of Utopian culture. Immediately after his claim about 
the island’s great age and unsurpassable experience, Hythloday goes 
on to narrate a certain episode from its chronicles: 
 
[T]welve hundred years ago a ship driven by a tempest was wrecked 
on the island of Utopia. Some Romans and Egyptians were cast on 
shore and remained on the island without ever leaving it. Now mark 
what good advantage their industry took of this one opportunity. The 
Roman empire possessed no art capable of any use which they did not 
either learn from the shipwrecked strangers or discover for themselves 
after receiving the hints for investigation – so great a gain was it to 
them that on a single occasion some persons were carried to their 
shores from ours. (More 1965: 109) 
 
Here, the static attitude rehearsed above (as perfection necessarily ex-
cludes change for the better) is suddenly complemented by its very 
opposite: the notion of development and progress. The new situation 
Utopian society finds itself in after the arrival of the strangers is better 
and preferable to the one before.13 What is more, the very agents of 
this progress are not the allegedly superior Utopians themselves, but 
messengers from a younger and less experienced ‘old’ world, more 
precisely, the Roman empire (the Egyptians do not seem to have left 
any impact), and that (if we think through Hythloday’s clue of “twelve 
hundred years ago”) during the 4th century AD, when it was already in 
a state of decline. In this event, the ‘archetype’ Utopia itself takes on 
the role of a receiving culture, translating, imitating and emulating 
foreign customs and, through them, enriching its own store of cultural 
skills and knowledge. Yet, since every act of translation ultimately re-
sults from a latent defect within the target culture (cf. Venuti 2000: 
469), how can this idea accord with Hythloday’s bold vision of an 
age-old, prototypical society, living in a continual state of paradisiacal 
perfection, which he offered to his listeners only a few lines before? 
To complicate the picture of Utopia’s history offered by the text 
even further, a third myth of origin, which was already alluded to in 
More’s initial Utopian quatrain, comes into play at the beginning of 
                                                      
13  
This has led André Prévost to think of progress as the foremost characteristic 
of Utopian society (cf. Margolin 1989: 315). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
37
Book II. It postulates, instead of an uninterrupted tradition, a radical 
break. King Utopos’ decision to sever the Utopian island from its 
neighbouring mainland and his changing the country’s name from 
‘Abraxa’ to ‘Utopia’ constitutes just as much an act of translation as 
one of authorship. According to Hythloday, it was Utopos “who 
brought the rude and rustic people to such a perfection of culture and 
humanity as makes them now superior to almost all other mortals” 
(More 1965: 113). If they are now superior, they cannot have been so 
before – and the original Golden Age is thus quickly transformed into 
one of primeval primitivism. What Utopos does is not so much to re-
cover a lost exemplary culture from oblivion as conquer a part of the 
world hitherto unknown “at his very first landing” (cf. 113), fix his 
own name to it and ‘civilize’ it according to his own ideas.14 The 
analogy between his behaviour as a conqueror and the colonialist atti-
tude of the early modern discoverers of America is quite obvious.15 
Yet, it has also been noted that the mystical connotations associated 
with the original name ‘Abraxa[s]’ (whose letters, when read accord-
ing to the Greek number system, make up 365 and were thus em-
ployed by the Gnostic Basilides to denote the 365th or highest sphere 
of heaven)16 greatly problematize Utopos’ conquering act (cf. Herman 
1999: 119f). By giving the island its new name ‘U-topia’ or ‘No-
place’, he not only civilizes it, but effectively wipes it off the map, 
turning the country from Paradise into Nowhere. He thus not only as-
sumes the role of the great heroic civilizers and lawgivers, like Lycur-
gus, Orpheus or Hercules, who were worshipped in Classical as well 
as humanist myths about the origins of culture, but also that of the bib-
lical Serpent, whose persuasion causes the first humans to fall from 
their original state of innocence and forever closes to them the door 
that leads back into Eden (cf. Herman 1999: 119f). Whether the trans-
lation of ‘Abraxa’ into ‘Utopia’ is interpreted (with Hythloday) as a 
decisive quantum leap from primitivism to culture, or as a tragic fall 
from grace, resulting in a less than sufficient replica of a once paradi-
siacal original, is left for the reader to decide. 
                                                      
14  
For example, Hythloday mentions later that Utopos made detailed plans con-
cerning the entire layout of Utopian cities (cf. More 1965: 121). 
15  
What is particularly remarkable is the fact that Utopos, just like the early 
colonizers, takes possession of the conquered land by a re-defining speech act, 
overwriting the island’s name with his own (cf. Herman 1999: 118f). 
16  
Cf. the commentary in More 1965: 386 and 585, as well as Drucker 1995: 84. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
38
Since the origins of Utopian society are presented to us by the 
narrator Hythloday in so paradoxical a fashion, we can never be quite 
sure about the internal hierarchy of the historical translation processes 
that accompany them. Just like in More’s initial quatrain, whose ex-
otic Utopian hexameters are transformed into a curiously foreign-
sounding Latin prose, we never know where to locate the archetypal 
‘original’ and the derivative ‘recipient’. Instead, both sides of these 
processes of cultural transfer – be they Abraxa and Utopia or Utopia 
and Classical Antiquity – reflect upon each other in an undecided 
‘contest’ over precedence in age and cultural excellence. 
 
 
3. Blessing or Curse? – The Utopians and Cultural Exchange 
 
Utopos not only changes the island’s name but also, crucially, its lan-
guage. Whereas the original language of the natives resembled strange 
oriental tongues like Persian, the new idiom which Utopos introduces 
bears distinct etymological traces of Classical Greek.17 This seems to 
be the reason why the Utopians are able to master Greek effortlessly 
within “less than three years” after Hythloday’s arrival, a fact which 
makes him speculate about the possible Greek origins of their race (cf. 
More 1965: 181). As a consequence, one modern critic has concluded 
that the real “point zero” in human history, the pre-Babylonian “nos-
talgia of non-difference” More envisions as an ideal, is Classical 
Greece, not a nebulous mythical Golden Age (Bony 1977: 11, my 
translations). This reading would turn More’s text once more into a 
fairly straightforward defence of humanist translatio studii: Utopia, 
the true inheritor and transmitter of all that is best in Greek culture, 
would function as a shining example for the ‘mistranslation’, Europe, 
whose relation to the ‘original’ has been disfigured almost beyond 
recognition. Such an interpretation seems to be entirely consistent 
with those among the paratexts which (like More’s initial Utopian 
quatrain) draw attention to Utopia’s role as a (re)incarnation of Plato’s 
Republic. 
                                                      
17  
On the two stages of the Utopian language (‘ancient’ versus ‘newer’), cf. 
More 1965: 123. Some of the forms directly juxtaposed by Hythloday are 
‘phylarch’ versus ‘syphogrant’, ‘protophylarch’ versus ‘tranibor’ and ‘Ade-
mus’ versus ‘Barzanes’ (133). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
39
Reading the figure of Utopos as “a Greek lawgiver who crossed 
the Atlantic” (Cave 1991: 221) would, moreover, clearly privilege the 
advantages of Utopia’s openness to historical development and change 
through cultural transfer over its isolated bliss. It would make the is-
land, as Alfred Cave puts it, “the product of a historic confrontation 
between primitive people and a civilizing conqueror” rather than “the 
benign outgrowth of an unspoilt paradise” (221). Cave thus interprets 
Utopia as “a metaphor for both the absence of civilization and the 
promise of a new beginning”, opposed to both the decadence of 
Europe and the primitive lawlessness of the natives in early modern 
accounts of the New World. “The primitive condition of Abraxa of-
fered Utopus the lawgiver a singular opportunity to create a new or-
der, rational and humane, untrammeled by the weight of ancient er-
rors.” (229) The uncultured original condition of the natives is in 
Cave’s view not an idyllic source of inspiration but a potential threat 
to be overcome.18 – Can Utopia thus be read as a blueprint for a ‘hu-
mane’ variety of early modern colonization, providing an essentially 
cultureless New World with the blessings of a perfect Platonic form of 
civilization, which in turn may be translated back from thence into a 
degenerated Europe? The text has certainly sometimes been inter-
preted in this sense, not only by modern critics but also by some of 
More’s own contemporaries.19 
However, the results of the Utopians’ conquest of this fortunate 
part of the world are by no means exclusively positive. Not only Uto-
pos’ role as a usurper of what was once known as ‘Paradise’ (Abraxa), 
converting it into an isolated ‘Nowhere’, arouses certain doubts about 
such a straightforwardly optimistic reading of Utopian cultural ex-
                                                      
18  
Thus Utopos’ conquest had been facilitated from the very beginning by the 
natives’ constant quarrelling among each other on religious grounds, which is 
why he once and for all puts an end to such dissensions by introducing reli-
gious pluralism (cf. More 1965: 219-21). 
19  
Jeffrey Knapp (1992: 18-36) reads Utopia as “perhaps the first Tudor attempt 
to elaborate a theory of colonization” and an effort “to turn England’s classi-
cal nowhereness into a way of seeing England and America as destined for 
each other”. Knapp also considers the possibility that More’s fictional new 
world inspired More’s brother-in-law, John Rastell, “to seek a real one”, at-
tempting a colonial expedition by himself (21). For an account of other early 
modern readers like Vasco de Quiroga who tried to realize More’s fictional 
commonwealth in the new world, often in deliberate opposition to actual co-
lonial practice, which they considered inhumane, see Arciniegas 1986: 65-71. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
40
change. While it would probably be an exaggeration to affirm with Pe-
ter C. Herman (1999: 110) that More was deliberately anticipating 
post-colonialist criticism, his text certainly contains a number of un-
settling elements that disturb and challenge the positive image of cul-
tural export underlying both the humanist ideal of translatio studii and 
early modern colonialist ambitions. Although these may not always be 
as obvious as their affirmative counterparts, they can undoubtedly be 
detected by a reader who is sensitive to the subtle ironies underlying a 
good number of the descriptions of Utopian institutions and customs 
offered by Hythloday. Even the consequences of Hythloday’s own at-
tempts at imitating the benign Utopos and endowing his New World 
acquaintances with the blessings of European culture are sometimes 
rather dubious. The members of one tribe, whom he has taught the use 
of the compass, soon afterwards become so dangerously over-confi-
dent in their navigations that Hythloday is forced to hesitatingly admit 
that what he thought would be a great benefit to them “may, through 
their imprudence, cause them great mischief” (More 1965: 53). And 
the art of printing which the Utopians eagerly pick up from their 
European guests (More 1965: 183) is soon employed by them not only 
for the reproduction of good literature at home but also, quite dishon-
estly, to manipulate their enemies in foreign wars. When setting up 
printed placards on enemy territory, which offer head money for the 
apprehension and assassination of chief officials, they deliberately 
sow suspicion and undermine their opponents’ morale. Although 
Hythloday praises this method because it avoids unnecessary blood-
shed, he also has to admit that “bidding for and purchasing an enemy 
[...] is elsewhere condemned as the cruel deed of a degenerate nature” 
(More 1965: 205). Can this kind of behaviour be the fruit of the Uto-
pians’ celebrated aptness “in the invention of the arts which promote 
the advantage and convenience of life” (More 1965: 183) and their 
propensity to “adopt whatever is better from others” (More 1965: 18)? 
Read in this way “against the grain” (cf. Herman 1999: 110), 
More’s text soon becomes something quite different from a human-
ist’s plea for the projection of an idealized form of Classical civiliza-
tion onto an uncivilized New World, which is nevertheless capable of 
learning from its conquerors in an exemplary way. What Utopos 
achieves for his new kingdom in the first place, is not openness to-
wards progress through translation, but isolation and seclusion, sym-
bolized within the text not only by the island’s nearly inaccessible 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
41
situation but also by the key metaphor of the garden. “There is nothing 
which their founder seems to have cared so much for as these gar-
dens”, Hythloday remarks at the beginning of his account (More 1965: 
121), and Utopos must have had his reasons. Through its refreshing 
atmosphere, a garden produces the illusion of opening up the closed 
urban environment to immediate contact with nature, whereas in fact 
it brings nature under control, enclosing it within a limited space and 
excluding everything which might threaten its isolated harmony.20 
Similarly, the Utopians, in spite of their ostensible openness towards 
learning from other cultures, pay great attention to what they receive 
and what they reject. In their trade relations to foreign nations they 
prefer to carry their goods out of the country themselves, instead of 
having them fetched by foreign messengers. Hythloday’s comment 
that “[b]y this policy they get more information about foreign nations 
and do not forget by disuse their skill in navigation” (More 1965: 185) 
tells only half the story. It neglects to mention that through this prac-
tice, the Utopians keep the influx of information under control, having 
it conveyed only by select go-betweens and avoiding any unchecked 
contact of their own people with strangers. In Utopia, “frontiers are 
considered to be a protective device, and the Utopians keep entire con-
trol on them” (Hatzenberger 2003: 121). 
There is one episode in the book, in which direct intercultural 
communication between Utopians and non-Utopians nevertheless oc-
curs – and splendidly fails. I am referring to Hythloday’s famous an-
ecdote about the reception of the Anemolian ambassadors in the capi-
tal Amaurotum. At first glance, the only purpose of his “choice tale” 
(More 1965: 153) seems to be a demonstration of Utopia’s moral su-
periority over all other – especially all European – countries. Being 
unfamiliar with Utopian manners and customs, the Anemolians follow 
the common habit of appearing at the meeting with their distinguished 
hosts in the most refined garments available. To their great dismay, 
however, their apparel produces exactly the opposite effect to the one 
they had intended. Rather than “dazzl[ing] the eyes of the poor Utopi-
ans” (153), the proud magnates are ridiculed by the common people, 
who bow instead to their lowest servants. What they did not know, of 
                                                      
20  
Antoine Hatzenberger, too, considers Utopian gardens as a means of closure 
and “a rejection of everything that could arrive from outside the frontiers” 
(2003: 120). 

Gabriela Schmidt 
42
course, was that the value system of the Utopians differed radically 
from all others, since they considered gold and ‘valuables’ as base, 
whereas earthenware and plain clothes were regarded as most pre-
cious. The Utopians, on the other hand, were for the most part com-
pletely insensitive to the possibility that there might exist elsewhere 
cultural standards different from their own, which is why the only ex-
planation they have for the Anemolians’ strange behaviour is folly. 
Thus far, this amazing instance of intercultural miscommunica-
tion21 can still be seen (and the narrator seems to intend it this way) as 
an indication of the Utopians’ childlike innocence, so completely un-
touched by the monster Pride, which is identified by Hythloday at the 
end of his account as “the chief and progenitor of all plagues” (More 
1965: 243). However, the immediate context in which he places the 
episode makes his story appear in a rather different light. The particu-
lar reason which Hythloday adduces for the Utopians’ eccentric use of 
gold deserves to be quoted in full. He proceeds from the observation 
that they keep a vast treasure for military reasons and goes on to ex-
plain: 
 
If in Utopia these metals were kept locked up in a tower, it might be 
suspected that the governor and the senate – for such is the foolish 
imagination of the common folk – were deceiving the people by the 
scheme and they themselves were deriving some benefit therefrom. 
[...] To avoid these dangers, they have devised a means which [...] is 
extremely unlike our own [...] and therefore incredible except to those 
who have experience of it. [...] [B]y every means in their power they 
make gold and silver a mark of ill fame. (More 1965: 151-53) 
 
Viewed against this background, the Utopians’ peculiar hierarchy of 
values seems to be no other than the result of a deliberate, manipulat-
ive distortion by a knowing elite (can it be the descendants of Utopos 
and his conquerors or is it just the leading intellectuals?), who thereby 
prevent the common people from aspiring to a treasure which the rul-
ers wish to reserve for their own ends. This is further confirmed by the 
fact that only members of this privileged elite seem to be allowed to 
maintain direct contact with other cultures. Accordingly, the Anemoli-
                                                      
21  
To Hythloday, the whole episode is a revelation of the incisive impact of cul-
tural difference: “What opposite ideas and feelings are created by customs so 
different from those of other people came home to me never more clearly than 
in the case of the Anemolian ambassadors” (More 1965: 153). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
43
ans’ disparate behaviour does indeed make sense to a few, namely 
only those “who for a good reason had visited foreign countries” 
(More 1965: 153). In this sense, the Anemolian episode may be taken 
as evidence for J. H. Hexter’s pre-Foucauldian hypothesis that More’s 
‘best state of the commonwealth’, like Machiavelli’s near contempo-
rary Il Principe, subtly manipulates what Hexter calls “the fabric of 
imperatives” by radically altering the value of a few key social con-
cepts (cf. Hexter 1964: 959f).22 The isolated uniqueness and close 
control over its intercultural relations which the Utopian common-
wealth achieves through this calculated manipulation of values ap-
pears to be primarily an instrument of power, not only for a ruling 
elite over its own subjects but also for the entire island over its sur-
rounding neighbours. “[T]he relationship of Utopia with its outside is 
not symmetrical”, Antoine Hatzenberger (2003: 121) concludes in his 
analysis of the island’s dealings with other cultures. While it is sig-
nificant that the Utopians do maintain some communication with other 
nations on a carefully selected basis, more often than not they use 
these contacts to force on others their own moral superiority: “the 
conditions of this communication are defined unilaterally by the Uto-
pians, on their own grounds” (121). 
It is precisely this skilful exploitation of cultural differences for 
the sake of personal profit that Stephen Greenblatt also sees as a key 
feature of the Europeans’ first dealings with the New World: “[T]he 
discourse of the New World celebrates the power not only to survive 
through improvisation but to profit hugely from the adroit manipula-
tion of alien signs” (Greenblatt 1991: 98). This is especially true 
where economic contacts are concerned:  
 
The concept of relative economic value – the notion that a glass bead 
or hawk’s bell would be a precious rarity in the New World – is alien 
to most Europeans; they think that the savages simply do not under-
stand the natural worth of things and hence can be tricked into ex-
                                                      
22  
This manipulation, however, is not as uncontested within More’s text as is 
Machiavelli’s redefinition of stato and virtù within The Prince. At the very 
end of the book, it is More’s author-like first person narrator himself who 
voices a distinct scepticism against the Utopians’ depreciation of money and 
valuables, which in his view “utterly overthrows all [...] nobility, magnifi-
cence, splendour, and majesty” (More 1965: 245). It is thus precisely the se-
mantic ambiguity in which these concepts are continually held throughout the 
dialogue that provokes the reader to rethink his own judgment about them. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
44
changing treasure for trifles, full signs for empty signs. (Greenblatt 
1991: 110) 
 
Is this not exactly the way the erstwhile conquerors of Abraxa treat 
their own subjects, exchanging earthenware for gold, trash for treas-
ures?23 Yet, Hythloday’s anecdote, his graphic depiction of the 
Anemolian ambassadors’ ridiculous naiveté, can also be read vice 
versa, namely as a subtle ironization of the Europeans’ own way of 
thinking. It is they (the Europeans) who, like the Anemolians, do not 
understand the true value of things, whereas the Utopians have learnt 
from their more humane conquerors to distinguish between true worth 
and false appearance, as they do between genuine and counterfeit 
pleasure (cf. More 1965: 167). In the first reading, the Utopians mirror 
the European’s exploitative practice, in the second, they provide a 
radical counter-image to it. 
What makes neither of these two perspectives on Utopian inter-
cultural relations – the ‘colonial’ and the ‘postcolonial’ one – fully 
convincing, is the doubtful suspension in which the reader’s attitude 
towards Utopian culture is retained throughout almost the entire text. 
More’s Utopian society is neither a primeval exotic Golden-Age cul-
ture nor a derivative European projection, but both: it continually os-
cillates between the status of a defective recipient improving itself 
through translational import, and a perfect archetype, which not only 
has no need of translation, but is only altered for the worse by it. 
Through this curious suspension of judgement, More’s text effectively 
participates in an ambivalence which is traceable in most early mod-
ern encounters with the New World. Both Vespucci and Columbus, 
the first of whom served as an explicit pretext for More’s “Truly 
Golden Handbook”, described their experience of New World cultures 
as an ambiguous mixture of wonder and fear. On the one hand, Amer-
ica was imagined as an unspoilt paradise, where people “live after the 
maner of the golden age” (Richard Hakluyt, quoted in Greenblatt 
1991: 94), on the other, the primitive natives were considered a clear 
threat, of which alleged cannibalism was only one expression. In the 
first case, the experience of otherness generated the desire to receive 
                                                      
23  
A parallel between the Utopians’ attitude towards their neighbours and that of 
the European conquerors towards native Americans has also been noted by 
Peter C. Herman in the context of Utopian colonial practice (cf. Herman 1999: 
121f and More 1965: 137). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
45
from the other’s bounty, in the second case, it produced the ambition 
to export one’s own civilizing model.  
Thus native institutions and customs were often interpreted by 
the Europeans in their own terms (like ‘king’ and ‘servants’), a trans-
lational optimism which went at times as far as to assume that the lan-
guage barrier was not a cultural barrier at all, but could easily be over-
come by signs and gestures.24 It is precisely such optimism that seems 
to govern Hythloday’s outlook on the New World from the very mo-
ment he has been left there by Vespucci. After he manages to ingrati-
ate himself with the natives and their ruler (princeps) through signs, 
he is taken on a journey, during which he soon discovers “very popu-
lous commonwealths with excellent institutions” (More 1965: 53). 
Whereas the peoples around the equator are “no less savage and harm-
ful than [...] beasts” and have flat-bottomed ships with papyrus sails, 
the further Hythloday moves away from the equinox, the more civi-
lized people become: some have “ships with pointed keels and canvas 
sails, in fact, like our own in all respects” (53; my emphasis). As a 
logical continuation of the growing familiarity Hythloday observes, 
the final destination of his journey and culmination of all his discover-
ies – Utopia – would thus have to be imagined by the reader as an ex-
act (though idealized) equivalent to Europe, even England, in all its 
particularities.25 
Nevertheless, the experience of miscommunication and insur-
mountable foreignness, which was equally common in early modern 
travelogues, is just as traceable in Hythloday’s account. Utopia is both 
a rewriting of the Other as a version of the Self (cf. Herman 1999: 
122) and at the same time a symbol for the inescapably foreign – a 
metaphor of perfect translatability and of the untranslatable. Referring 
back to the utopian nature of the ideal of perfect communicability im-
plicit in humanist translatio, it is precisely this inherent paradox that 
conditions the hermeneutic framework of the entire text, and that of all 
utopian literature to come. 
                                                      
24  
Greenblatt quotes the Spanish discoverer Cabeza de Vaca who states that the 
natives “always understood us, and we them. We questioned them, and re-
ceived their answers by signs, just as if they spoke our language and we 
theirs.” (1991: 95) 
25  
On the seemingly close parallels between Britain and Utopia, cf. Morgan-
Russell 2002. 

Gabriela Schmidt 
46
4. Utopia and Europe: The Translational Structure  
of Utopian Literature 
 
Hythloday’s Utopian travel report is not delivered by him without a 
cause. It is his answer to a number of very concrete historical prob-
lems within English society, which have gradually been exposed by 
himself, Peter Giles and the fictional persona ‘Morus’ throughout the 
preceding dialogue in Book I. This ‘response character’ to historical 
reality (Voßkamp), which was to govern the entire tradition of similar 
fictional ‘commonwealths’ after More, has been pointed out by some 
more recent critics as the leading characteristic of utopian literature.26 
“One simply cannot think utopia without measuring it against history” 
(1998: 5), Marina Leslie states in her incisive study of More’s Utopia, 
Bacon’s New Atlantis and Cavendish’s Blazing World. This holds es-
pecially true for early modern utopias, which, in contrast to their later 
companion texts, usually situate the particular counter-image they 
produce as separated from its historical point of reference by a dis-
tance in space rather than in time. Instead of an imagined future de-
velopment, early modern utopian texts thus present their readers with 
what Amy Boesky has described as a “speaking-picture” (1996: 15), a 
displaced counter-image to a simultaneously existing social reality. 
Spatial dislocation in this model generates essentially the same repre-
sentational effects as a mirror or a metaphor: it makes “more sharply 
visible the outlines of one’s own domain” (10). “Mirror” is precisely 
the image which John Desmarais of Cassel uses to describe More’s 
treatise in one of the prefatory letters to Peter Giles: “Whatever per-
tains to the good constitution of a commonwealth may be seen in it as 
in a mirror [velut in speculo].” (More 1965: 27) Since the functioning 
principle of the mirror is essentially one of double translation – a 
given reality is displaced onto a reflecting surface and thence trans-
ferred back again to the observer’s eye – the conclusion which Des-
marais’ fellow humanist Guillaume Budé draws from More’s text is 
only logical: all its readers have to do is to appropriate and retranslate 
the customs they have discovered on their journey to More’s exem-
plary New World commonwealth back from thence into their own city 
                                                      
26  
Cf. e.g. Voßkamp 1990 and Leslie 1998. 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
47
(“unde translatitios mores in suam quisque ciuitatem importent & ac-
commodent”, More 1965: 14).27 
Yet this journey is certainly not as easy as it appears at first 
glance. For the utopian mirror is something other than a faithful re-
flecting glass. Although its effect is always based upon some sort of 
referential relationship with history, its leading principle is first and 
foremost one of negation (cf. Voßkamp 1990: 274f). It is, in the words 
of Michel Foucault, “a placeless place” that makes my own standpoint 
look “at once absolutely real [...] and absolutely unreal, since in order 
to be perceived it has to pass through this virtual point which is over 
there” (1986: 24). To transfer back features from the ‘No-place’ Uto-
pia into the reality of Europe, this ‘Nowhere’ needs in the first place to 
be located and defined. Yet More’s Utopia is, in a way, neither here 
nor there. It is, as Louis Marin has famously called it, a “neutral” 
place (1984: 7), vacillating “between the antipodal positions of his-
torical impossibility and historical imminence” (Leslie 1998: 5).28 The 
resulting paradox between an earnest desire on the reader’s part for 
the possibility of intellectual traffic between Utopia and Europe (cf. 
Leslie 1998: 9) and the continual frustration of this desire, which is a 
key interpretative crux of More’s dialogue incessantly voiced 
throughout the accompanying paratexts, can be best understood as a 
further reference to the inherent ambiguities of humanist translatio, 
which underlies the whole text as a structural pattern. 
The textual reasons why the translation between Utopia and 
Europe/England becomes thus problematic are twofold: first, the is-
land’s notorious geographical elusiveness, its curious interim position 
between fact and fiction, calls its status as a translational archetype 
into doubt; secondly, the dialogue’s internal suspension of judgment 
and the dubious nature of certain Utopian characteristics make it diffi-
cult to decide which features should be taken over and which rejected, 
or even emended vice versa by European example. Budé himself, who 
was the first to postulate a direct translatio of Utopian customs into 
                                                      
27  
John Busleyden, in his letter to More, proposes a very similar kind of ‘literal’ 
translation: European commonwealths, he says, may easily avoid all calam-
ities and disasters, “provided that they organize themselves exactly on the one 
pattern of the Utopian commonwealth and do not depart from it, as they say, 
by a hair’s breadth” (More 1965: 37). 
28  
Very similar are the conclusions of Elizabeth McCutcheon’s seminal article 
about the role of litotes in Utopia (McCutcheon 1977). 

Gabriela Schmidt 
48
Europe, is also the first to directly mention the island’s doubtful status 
as an ‘original’. He calls it “Udepotia” – ‘Never-never-land’. Twice he 
emphasizes Utopia’s constructionist nature, its dependence on the 
mere authority of a narrator’s report: “if we are to believe the story” – 
“[i]f we are to believe Hythlodaeus” (More 1965: 11).29 After thus 
measuring the island’s existence against the credibility of its reporter, 
Budé then starts to systematically debunk this credibility by deferring 
it from one possible authority to the other: 
 
On the one hand, Hythlodaeus is the one who has built their city for 
the Utopians [...]. On the other hand, beyond question it is More who 
has adorned the island and its holy institutions by his style and elo-
quence, who has embellished the very city of the Hagnopolitans 
[Budé’s nickname for the Utopian citizens] according to precept and 
rule [...]. It was the testimony of Peter Giles of Antwerp which caused 
me to have full faith in More [...]. I have never known More in person 
[...] but I love him on account of his sworn friendship with the illustri-
ous Erasmus [...]. (More 1965: 13-15; my emphasis) 
 
Peter Giles, who, like Desmarais (More 1965: 29), initiates a similar 
chain of tradition, inconclusively comparing the faithfulness of 
More’s and Hythloday’s respective contributions to the transmittance 
of facts about the island, refers any readers who may still have doubts 
about the credibility of the whole tale back to Hythloday himself (cf. 
More 1965: 23). The narrator’s whereabouts, however, cannot be eas-
ily traced: “There are various reports circulating about the man. Some 
say that he died during his travel. Others declare that, after his return 
to his native land [...] because he was moved by his longing for Uto-
pia, he made his way back again to that country.” (More 1965: 25) 
Here, the chain of narrative authorities literally ends in ‘Nowhere’. 
The second translational problem between Utopia and Europe, 
the doubtful moral value of some Utopian institutions, is already im-
plicitly present in the semantic ambiguity of Budé’s request to confer 
“translatitios mores” from the new onto the old world. Thomas Tho-
mas gives for the Latin ‘translatitius’ not only the more obvious signi-
fication of “Transferred or transposed, taken from other”, but also “of 
no great weight, not excellent, nothing curious or exquisite” (1584: 
                                                      
29  
Budé’s device has provided the title for a famous article by Richard S. Syl-
vester on the multiperspectivity of More’s work: ‘Si Hythlodaeo Credimus’ 
(Sylvester 1977). 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
49
sig. Ooo2v). More himself openly addresses this problem, to which he 
claims to have been alerted by a particularly ‘perceptive’ reader, in his 
afterword to Peter Giles, appended to the 1517 edition. He replies to 
the critic’s objection that nothing could be more natural than that there 
be some flaw in his ‘perfect commonwealth’: “Why should he be so 
minded as if there were nothing absurd elsewhere in the world or as if 
any of all the philosophers had ever ordered the commonwealth, the 
ruler, or even the private home without instituting some feature that 
had better be changed?” (More 1965: 249) Therewith, More once and 
for all proves any attempts at seamless translatio to be futile: the more 
‘true’ an original is, the more flawed it must of necessity be. If not 
even the philosophers of Classical antiquity were capable of produc-
ing a blameless archetype requiring no further improvement, what 
purpose can there be in trying to convey every single feature of Clas-
sical culture into a present which would be much better advised to 
open itself up to a fruitful mutual dialogue? It is exactly such a crea-
tive dialogue that More seems to have envisioned between his readers 
and his text, rather than only the one-sided transmittance of a given 
model. According to More’s most prominent biographer, Utopia is 
thus “not [...] a blueprint but a touchstone against which we try vari-
ous ideas [...]. It helps us see what we are without telling us in detail 
what we are destined to be.” It becomes part of an unending chain of 
mutual translations, “crossing and uncrossing with past and present in 
the unending debate about human nature and the best possible society” 
(Marius 1995: 11). 

Gabriela Schmidt 
50
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Bruni, Leonardo (1987). “Letters on the Politics of Aristotle” (tr. Gordon Griffiths), 
in: Gordon Griffiths, James Hankins and David Thompson (eds.). The Hu-
manism of Leonardo Bruni: Selected Texts (Medieval and Renaissance Texts 
and Studies 46). Binghamton, NY: Center for Medieval and Early Renais-
sance Studies, 154-70. 
— (1996). De interpretatione recta. Sulla Perfetta Traduzione, in: Paolo Viti (ed.). 
Opere Letterarie e Politiche di Leonardo Bruni. Turin: Unione Tipografico-
Editrice Torinese, 146-93. 
Cawdry, Robert (1604). A table alphabeticall conteyning and teaching the true writ-
ing, and vnderstanding of hard vsuall English wordes, borrowed from the He-
brew, Greeke, Latine, or French, &c. London: Weauer. 
Cotgrave, Randle (1611). A dictionarie of the French and English tongues. London: 
Islip. 
Elyot, Thomas (1938). The Dictionary of syr Thomas Eliot knyght. London: Berthelet. 
Florio, John (1598). A vvorlde of wordes [...]. London: Blount. 
More, Thomas (1965). Utopia (ed. Edward Surtz and J. H. Hexter) (The Complete 
Works of St. Thomas More 4). New Haven, CT: Yale UP. 
— (1984). Latin Poems (ed. Clarence H. Miller et al.) (The Complete Works of St. 
Thomas More 3.2). New Haven, CT: Yale UP. 
— (1986). In Defense of Humanism. Letter to Martin Dorp. Letter to the University of 
Oxford. Letter to Edward Lee. Letter to a Monk. With a New Text and Trans-
lation of Historia Richardi Tertii (ed. Daniel Kinney) (The Complete Works 
of St. Thomas More 15). New Haven, CT: Yale UP. 
Phillips, Edward (1658). The new world of English words [...]. London: Brooke. 
Renou, Jean de (1657). A medicinal dispensatory [...] (tr. Richard Tomlinson). Lon-
don: Sawbridge. 
Shakespeare, William (1997). The Norton Shakespeare (ed. Stephen Greenblatt et al.). 
New York, NY: Norton. 
Thomas, Thomas (1587). Dictionarium linguae Latinae et Anglicanae. London: 
Boyle. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Arciniegas, Germán (1986). America in Europe: A History of the New World in Re-
verse (tr. Gabriela Arciniegas and R.V. Arana). San Diego, CA: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich. 
Bhabha, Homi K. (1990). “DissemiNation: Time, Narrative, and the Margins of the 
Modern Nation”, in: Homi K. Bhabha (ed.). Nation and Narration. London: 
Routledge, 291-322. 
Boesky, Amy (1996). Founding Fictions: Utopias in Early Modern England. Athens, 
GA: U of Georgia P. 

Thomas More’s Utopia and the Poetics of Cultural Exchange 
51
Bony, Alain (1977). “Fabula, Tabula: L’Utopie de More et l’image du monde”, in: 
Études Anglaises 30.1: 1-19. 
Cave, Alfred A. (1991). “Thomas More and the New World”, in: Albion 23.2: 209-29. 
Copeland, Rita (1991). Rhetoric, Hermeneutics, and Translation in the Middle Ages: 
Academic Traditions and Vernacular Texts (Cambridge Studies in Medieval 
Literature). Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Derrett, J. D. M. (1966). “The Utopian Alphabet”, in: Moreana 12: 61-66. 
Drucker, Johanna (1995). The Alphabetic Labyrinth: The Letters in History and Ima-
gination. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Flotow, Luise von (2001). “Translation in the Politics of Culture”, in: Renate Blu-
menfeld-Kosinski, Luise von Flotow and Daniel Russell (eds.). The Politics of 
Translation in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Ottawa: U of Ottawa P, 
9-15. 
Foucault, Michel (1986). “Of Other Spaces” (tr. Jay Miskowiec), in: Diacritics 16.1: 
22-27. 
Greenblatt, Stephen (1991). Marvelous Possessions: The Wonder of the New World. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Haßler, Gerda (2001). “Übersetzung als Sprachkontakt: Grenzen und Folgen einer 
interkulturellen Praxis”, in: Gerda Haßler (ed.). Sprachkontakt und Sprach-
vergleich. Münster: Nodus, 153-71. 
Hatzenberger, Antoine (2003). “Islands and Empire: Beyond the Shores of Utopia”, 
in: Angelaki: Journal of the Theoretical Humanities 8.1: 119-28. 
Herman, Peter C. (1999). “Who’s That in the Mirror? Thomas More’s Utopia and the 
Problematic of the New World”, in: Peter C. Herman (ed.). Opening the Bor-
ders: Inclusivity in Early Modern Studies. Newark, DE: U of Delaware P, 
109-32. 
Hexter, J. H. (1964). “The Loom of Language and the Fabric of Imperatives: The 
Case of Il Principe and Utopia”, in: The American Historical Review 69.4: 
945-68. 
Knapp, Jeffrey (1992). An Empire Nowhere: England, America, and Literature from 
Utopia to The Tempest. Berkeley, CA: U of California P. 
Leslie, Marina (1998). Renaissance Utopias and the Problem of History. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell UP. 
Leyden, W. von (1958). “Antiquity and Authority: A Paradox in the Renaissance 
Theory of History”, in: Journal of the History of Ideas 19.4: 473-92. 
Margolin, Jean-Claude (1989). “Sur l’insularité d’Utopia: Entre l’érudition et la 
rêverie”, in: Clare M. Murphy, Henri Gibaud and Mario A. di Cesare (eds.). 
Miscellanea Moreana: Essays for Germain Marc’hadour. Binghamton, NY: 
Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies, 303-21. 
Marin, Louis (1984). Utopics: Spatial Play (tr. R. A. Vollrath). Atlantic Highlands, 
NJ: Humanities Press. 
— (1993). “Frontiers of Utopia: Past and Present”, in: Critical Inquiry 19.4: 397-420. 
Marius, Richard (1995). “Utopia as Mirror for a Life and Times”, in: Early Modern 
Literary Studies: Conference Material. [http://www.humanities.ualberta.ca/ 
emls/iemls/conf/texts/marius.html]. 
McCutcheon, Elizabeth (1977). “Denying the Contrary: More’s Use of Litotes in the 
Utopia”, in: Richard S. Sylvester and Germain Marc’hadour (eds.). Essential 

Gabriela Schmidt 
52
Articles for the Study of Thomas More. Hamden, CT: Archon: 263-74 and 
623-25 (notes). 
Morgan-Russell, Simon (2002). “St. Thomas More’s Utopia and the Description of 
Britain”, in: Cahiers Elisabéthains 61: 1-11. 
Morini, Massimiliano (2006). Tudor Translation in Theory and Practice. Aldershot: 
Ashgate. 
Müller, Jan-Dirk. (1991). “‘Alt’ und ‘neu’ in der Epochenerfahrung um 1500”, in: 
Walter Haug and Burghart Wachinger (eds.). Traditionswandel und Traditi-
onsverhalten: Ansätze zur kulturgeschichtlichen Periodisierung in frühneu-
hochdeutschen Texten (Fortuna vitrea 5). Tübingen: Niemeyer, 121-44. 
Norton, Glyn P. (1981). “Humanist Foundations of Translation Theory (1400-1450): 
A Study in the Dynamics of Word”, in: Canadian Review of Comparative Lit-
erature 8.2: 173-203. 
Pons, Émile (1930). “Les Langues Imaginaires dans le Voyage Utopique. Un Pré-
curseur: Thomas Morus”, in: Revue de Littérature Comparée 10.4: 589-607. 
Robert, Jörg (2002). “Carmina pieridum nulli celebrata priorum: Zur Inszenierung 
von Epochenwende im Werk des Conrad Celtis”, in: Beiträge zur Geschichte 
der deutschen Sprache und Literatur 124.1: 92-121. 
Sylvester, Richard S. (1977). “‘Si Hythlodaeo Credimus’: Vision and Revision in 
Thomas More’s Utopia”, in: Richard S. Sylvester and Germain Marc’hadour 
(eds.). Essential Articles for the Study of Thomas More. Hamden, CT: Archon, 
290-301 and 630-31 (notes). 
Venuti, Lawrence (2000). “Translation, Community, Utopia”, in: Lawrence Venuti 
(ed.). The Translation Studies Reader. London: Routledge. 468-88. 
Vossius, Gerardus Ioannes (1689). “De Utopia Mori ac paradoxis in illa vocabulis 
agit”, in: Opera omnia. Vol. 4. Amsterdam: Blaeu, 340-41. 
Voßkamp, Wilhelm (1990). “Utopie als Antwort auf Geschichte: Zur Typologie lite-
rarischer Utopien in der Neuzeit”, in: Hartmut Eggert, Ulrich Profitlich and 
Klaus R. Scherpe (eds.). Geschichte als Literatur: Formen und Grenzen der 
Repräsentation von Vergangenheit. Stuttgart: Metzler, 273-83. 

 
 
 
 
Utopia, Nation-Building, and the Dissolution of the  
Nation-State Around 1900 
 
Hans Ulrich Seeber 
 
 
Abstract: The classical utopias of the Renaissance mirror and anticipate the emer-
gence of the nation-state. However, globalization, which makes possible these uto-
pias, also undermines the very notion of the nation-state. Around 1900 globalization 
and empire-building transform utopia into a world-state which is either a triumph of 
functional and technological rationality and modernity (Wells, A Modern Utopia) or 
the result of a culture-conflict (Benson, Lord of the World). A third type envisages a 
dependent pastoral utopia which resembles a forgotten colony (Whiteing, The Island). 
 
Key names and concepts: Robert Hugh Benson – Peter Carey – civitas Dei – cos-
mopolitanism – globalization – heterotopia – Augustine of Hippo – meta-utopia – 
modernization – spatial utopia – Martin Waldseemüller – H. G. Wells – Richard 
Whiteing 
 
 
The genesis and the rise of narrative utopias in the Renaissance coin-
cide with the rise of European colonialism and the global spread of 
European culture and power. Early globalization and the rational and 
imaginative construction of highly homogeneous communities resem-
bling and, indeed, anticipating closed nation-states are apparently 
related to each other. These inventions are given a credible fictional 
existence (vraisemblance) in the yet unexplored parts of the world. 
Unlimited expansion and mobility are unleashed by strictly closed and 
separate socio-political units. Given this situation, my paper attempts 
to answer two questions. What are the reasons for and the aesthetic 
implications of this striking correlation of events in the history of fic-
tion? How does this constellation change around 1900 when, due to an 
accelerated process of modernization, nation-building was more than 
ever transformed into empire-building and the creation of trans-
national networks in the spheres of politics, economics and culture? 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
54
1. Globalization, Nation-Building and the Emergence of  
Narrative Utopias in the Renaissance 
 
The expansionism of European monarchies (Spain, Portugal, England, 
and France) in the sixteenth century was motivated by political, reli-
gious and economic motives. Seizing territories overseas which had 
been made possible by improved navigation technologies increased 
the political weight of monarchs who were constantly engaged in 
power struggles with each other. The riches and resources of the over-
seas territories ensured tremendous economic and military advantages. 
This is why Columbus sailed to the West in the expectation to find 
gold for the Spanish monarch, and this is why nation-building and 
empire-building were inseparable. Furthermore, this expansionism 
made possible the spreading of Christianity which was threatened by 
the rise of Islam. Cordoning off Islam was, therefore, an important 
topic on the European agenda since the fall of Constantinople. Mon-
archs and later national governments were, in other words, the politi-
cal agents of European modernization which eventually transformed 
the whole globe. 
But it was precisely this new European activism in all fields, 
politics, trade, religion, philosophy, and science, which also led to a 
critical evaluation of the social and political order which was the basis 
of all these enterprises. Explicitly or implicitly, the structure, ideology 
and interactions of the new monarchies emerging at the end of the 
Middle Ages came under scrutiny either from a realistic (Machiavelli) 
or a critical utopian (More) point of view. The latter, which was also a 
moral one, required a new stance and a new perspective which was 
provided by the narrative utopia. The narrative and philosophical ex-
periment of the new literary utopias needed a global context for vari-
ous reasons: 
(a) The world had become the playground for the political and 
economic activities of monarchs and nations. 
(b) So far, alternatives to existing conditions and the above ac-
tivities had been offered by the Church. Monasteries and the vision of 
a heavenly Jerusalem provided a metaphysical perspective on existing 
political and social spaces and practices which allowed seeing their 
defective and morally reprehensible nature. Now, in the age of discov-
eries, the invention of secular cultural alternatives was encouraged 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
55
both by ancient models (Plato) and the experience of other cultures. 
The world appeared to be a repository of cultural alternatives shedding 
a critical light on European conditions (social inequality, militarism, 
poverty, legal arrangements). Cultural contacts induced cultural crea-
tivity particularly with respect to the crucial question of how com-
monwealths ought to be ordered and governed. 
(c) Narrative utopias fulfilled this function by devising fictional 
models which were both more efficient and more just than the politi-
cal realities of Europe they meant to overcome. They envisioned im-
proved national communities which did not yet exist. In this way they 
accompanied and gave direction to the process of modernization 
which needed the framework of the nation-state. The founding act of 
the communities was their separation from the rest of the world. King 
Utopus turned a peninsula into the island of utopia. Justice and effi-
ciency reflect two different types of thinking, i.e. ethics and political 
philosophy or sociology. But they do not rule out each other. Ulti-
mately, a just society will be more stable and therefore more efficient 
than an unjust one, unless culture is turned into nature (by genetic 
manipulation, for example), as Huxley suggests in Brave New World. 
(d) For these imaginary communities to become mimetically 
and aesthetically plausible it was necessary to give them a location on 
the map. This was no problem as long as maps of the globe such as the 
one created by Waldseemüller in his Introductio Cosmographiae 
(1507) referred to large territories as terra incognita. Postmodern spa-
tial utopias such as Peter Carey’s The Unusual Life of Tristan Smith 
(1995) sidestep the issue by relying on a tacit contract with a reader 
whose sophisticated fictional awareness does not take offence with an 
author who fictionally redraws existing maps of the earth for satiric 
purposes or creates a purely imaginative geographical fiction with no 
reference to cultural geography. In the first case signals are given to 
enable the reader to decode the reference to geographical and histori-
cal reality. Carey’s postcolonial heterotopia refers to the USA (Voor-
stand) and either Australia or New Zealand (Efica) respectively, but 
the parallels are not too precise, because the fictional geography’s 
function is really to provide a vivid model or type of a perverse rela-
tionship between centre and periphery: 
 
My name is Tristan Smith. I was born in Chemin Rouge in Efica – 
which is to say as much to you as if I declared I was from the moon. 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
56
And yet if you are going to make much sense of me, you have 
to know a little of my country, a country so unimportant that you are 
already confusing the name with Ithaca or Africa, a name so unmemo-
rable it could only have been born of a committee, although it re-
mains, nonetheless, the home of nearly three million of the earth’s 
people, and they, like you, have no small opinion of themselves, have 
artists and poets who are pleased to criticize its shortcomings and 
celebrate its charms, who return home to the eighteen little islands be-
tween the tropic of Capricorn and the 30th parallel, convinced that 
their windswept coastline is the most beautiful on earth. Like 98 per 
cent of the planet’s population, we Eficans may be justly accused of 
being provincial, parochial, and these qualities are sometimes magni-
fied by your habit of hearing ‘Ithaca’ when we say ‘Efica’. 
If I say ‘Voorstand’ to you, that is a different story entirely. 
You are a citizen of Voorstand. You hold the red passport with the 
phases of the moon embossed in gold. You stand with your hand over 
your heart when the Great Song is played, you daily watch the images 
of your armies in the vids and zines. (Carey 1995: 5) 
 
(e) There is a profound ambivalence concerning the national and the 
transnational dimension of the Renaissance utopias. While they no 
doubt mirror and promote the emergence of the modern nation-state, 
as Phillip Wegner (2002) has pointed out, and the dismissal of feudal 
and monarchic traditions, they also, as models, lay claim to having 
universal significance. They do not support the Romantic notion of 
cultural relativity and the right of each nation to unfold its own iden-
tity. They are, rather like the democracy of the United States, models 
and norms expecting world-wide imitation. This normativity explains 
why Raphael Hythloday, who is really a Cosmopolitan Stoicist phi-
losopher and global traveller, can recommend the ideal national order 
of the island of utopia. He represents a position which has been called 
national universalism (Coulmas 1990: 102). 
In the process of modernization normativity disappears, but the 
fact of economic globalization makes national structures increasingly 
superfluous. World-wide modernization undermines the very national 
structures it created and unleashes cultural, religious and ideological 
differences which the nation-state more or less successfully tamed by 
its appeals to national unity, identity and sovereignty. This taming of 
religious difference by the national authority can already be observed 
in More’s utopia because violence, also in the sense of heated reli-
gious arguments, is strictly forbidden. Utopian thought and narrative 
utopias of the turn of the century (1900) reflect and interpret this de-

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
57
velopment with remarkable clarity. In Whiteing’s The Island (1899) 
the secluded island, unlike More’s utopia, cannot escape the destruc-
tive impact of the world. Wells’ A Modern Utopia (1905) represents a 
functional world-state, which is not only one utopia among possible 
other ones, but also potentially the battleground of conflicting world-
views and cultures. Wells, Huxley and the fathers of the United Na-
tions believed that only a global order could guarantee economic and 
political stability, because, on the one hand, relations between nation-
states are potentially destructive, and, on the other, the weakening of 
the nation-state leaves us, both in reality and in fiction, with a global 
space full of conflicts between cultures, economic interests (multi-
national corporations), value systems and regions. In Benson’s 
dystopic tale of the future Lord of the World (1907), the cosmopolitan 
and socialist movement operates on a world-wide scale and eventually 
overcomes its fiercest opponent, Catholicism. Social conflict is re-
placed by cultural and ideological antagonism. 
 
 
2. Globalization, Nation, and Utopia at the Turn of the Century 
2.1. The Dissolution of the Nation-State: 
Whiteing’s The Island (1899) 
 
Richard Whiteing’s The Island or An Adventure of a Person of Qual-
ity was originally published in 1888. A second edition, revised and 
expanded, from which I quote, came out in 1899. Whiteing’s satiric 
utopian romance is not well-known. I therefore begin with a survey of 
its content and structure.1 
The narrator and protagonist of the story, a sophisticated and 
disillusioned gentleman, is catapulted out of his familiar cultural 
space. In a sort of epiphany experienced on the steps of the London 
stock exchange, his vision of society is suddenly transformed from a 
‘normal’ to a distorted satiric one. No longer able to endure the alien-
ation of a greedy society and its victims, he retreats first to a country 
house, then to Paris. However, the decadent Parisian culture he en-
counters at parties and soirées, where the Decadent School, the Sym-
bolist School, the Devil worshippers and Nietzsche’s disciples meet, 
                                                      
1  
For a brief analysis of the text, see Hans Ulrich Seeber in Griem and Seeber 
2003. 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
58
to say nothing of international anarchists (whom he meets in Italy), 
only deepens his problems: “My soirée of nations was but an evening 
party for the Dying, after all” (Whiteing 1899: 45). He flees to Genoa 
where an Italian skipper agrees to accept him as a passenger on a ship 
bound for the Pacific and eventually for a voyage around the globe. 
However, the Englishman is left alone on a tiny island in the Pacific 
because the captain thinks he drowned when he attempted, with no 
one else accompanying him, to visit the island in order to find fresh 
fruit. 
What the Englishman finds on the island is a pious and inno-
cent, pastoral community governed by an Ancient, which does not 
know the rules of a competitive liberal market economy. Their princi-
ples are sharing and giving rather than grabbing. He falls in love with 
a beautiful young woman called Victoria who cannot reciprocate his 
feelings because she is promised to another young Englishman, Curly, 
who visited the place with his crew three years earlier. The ensuing 
emotional complications fill much of the book. Evidently love and sex 
with partners coming from the outside world are potentially disruptive 
for the island community. Victoria persuades the visitor to tell her and 
the ignorant islanders the truth about England, which for them func-
tions, by way of dramatic irony, as a cultural model, a fiction which 
stabilizes, in the Nietzschean sense of the term. After the visitor’s 
report she realizes that a union between them is out of the question. 
The pain of separation is inevitable. Eventually discovered by his wife 
and his friends, the protagonist returns to a world which he despises. 
For the narrator, the pathological acceleration of life outside the con-
fines of the tiny Pacific island is the result of greed: 
 
The greed makes the hurry, and the wasteful idle hurry spoils the life. 
The grim set of our jaws, the thinly veiled hardness of our eyes, even 
at the sacred hour of rest and relaxation! Verily, we are but huge river-
pike in black and white! (Whiteing 1899: 177) 
 
With the exception of the love story, which is totally absent from 
More’s Utopia, the satiric message, the geography and the opposition 
of contrasting cultural spaces of Whiteing’s tale are all reminiscent of 
the classical model; so is the convention of using a first person narra-
tor. The cultural other embodied in the geographical other of the Pa-
cific island represents an ethical challenge to European and world-
wide modernity. Similarly, the global traveller has become thoroughly 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
59
disenchanted with his own society. However, his ‘conversion’ is an 
intellectual experience, an utter change of focus, which is confirmed 
and given direction by the island experience, not triggered by it. Fur-
thermore, in the global network of economic and political activities 
borders have lost their former significance. Whereas the classical uto-
pian space was autonomous both in a geographical and a cultural 
sense, the tiny community of Pitcairn is virtually dependent on its 
communication with England in particular. Textiles and technologies 
are usually imported from England, and complicated legal problems 
are left for prominent English visitors to solve. The geographical and 
cultural position of the islanders on the geographic and metaphoric 
map (utopia is after all a map for a better world) is, therefore, curi-
ously ambivalent. It is located somewhere between a utopian model 
arousing pastoral nostalgia and contempt for the ways of civilization 
on the one hand and an insignificant colonial/postcolonial periphery or 
retreat which depends on the centre on the other. Rather than being a 
fictional ‘nowhere’ somewhere outside history, Whiteing’s island is 
presented as a chance leftover of the history of modernization and 
colonialism. It is the product of a successful mutiny and a successful 
religious conversion. English sailors, disposing of their unpopular 
captain, settled, long undetected, on a tiny, hitherto allegedly un-
known pacific island (“Lat. 25° 4’ S.; long. 130° 8’ W.”, Whiteing 
1899: 1) to mix with the natives. Self-destructive sexual libertinism 
which led to murder and near-extinction of the hybrid community was 
eventually overcome by a turn towards religion. In political and eco-
nomic terms, the island community appears to be vulnerable and frag-
ile, really at the mercy of the powerful world surrounding it. In ethical 
terms, however, it manages to retain its authority through the person 
of Victoria in particular. Because of the ethical and aesthetic values 
she embodies and because of her conscious act of renunciation she 
keeps open the possibility of a cultural alternative to the sad realities 
of Queen Victoria’s England. After all, it is Victoria whose example 
teaches the visitor a new lifestyle reminiscent of socialism, although 
the word is, no doubt deliberately, avoided. With her help, the English 
visitor gets his life in “focus”. 
The text is entertaining, it invites emotional identification as a 
romance should, but its primary function is cognitive and critical. The 
chief vehicles of social and cultural criticism are caricatures – a mad 
American entrepreneur proposes to utilize animal energy (“think of 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
60
the waste of power in a cage of apes”, 257), “the pedigree of a poor 
stupid” (ch. XXI) is the history of the “Swarts of Norfolk” (195) who 
are loyally and stupidly serving as soldiers for the cause of British 
imperialism throughout the centuries – and representations of geo-
graphical and cultural spaces. Thus urban social and cultural space is 
heavily semanticized – as the epitome of the failures of modernity. At 
the very beginning of the novel the narrator juxtaposes his present 
pastoral situation on the island with remembered urban spaces and 
activities: 
 
OUT OF FOCUS 
Lat. 25° 4’ S.; long. 130° 8’ W.: August 18 
Rest, peace, the sounds of a summer noon, and the murmur of waves. 
The calm of a peak in the Pacific thirteen thousand miles away from 
the dome of St. Paul’s, and completely out of sight of it, if only by 
reason of the curvature. 
I hardly know how I came here. When last I took stock of my-
self, I was standing on the steps of the Royal Exchange, on another 
summer afternoon, and looking down. I was busy as usual. I am play-
ing with my little pocket-agenda now (perhaps the last I shall ever 
buy) as I lie here on the broad of my back, and I turn to the entry for 
that day: ‘8, Gallop Row; 9.30, letters, coffee; 10.30, article for Quar-
terly; 12.30, City (I wanted Staples to put something on Turks, and 
thought I had better be on the spot); lunch; 2.30 to bedtime, horse sale, 
chrysanthemums, calls, club, early dinner, address Working Men’s 
Constitutional Association – “Social Harmonies,” dance at Mrs. G’s, 
club again, D’Annunzio, bed.’ (1f) 
 
The geographical and cultural contrast suggested here could not be 
more profound. Surrounded by pastoral sights and enjoying pastoral 
rest on a mountain of a secluded island in the Pacific, the narrator 
recalls his busy life in London. The entries of his “pocket-agenda” 
indicate a hurried movement from one urban locality to the other (of-
fice, City, club, horse sale, etc.). Modern time-management, as mir-
rored in the “pocket-agenda”, documents the harassment of modern 
man. Significantly, the gentleman is, just like other members of the 
stock market (“The Exchange I had just left, with its groups of mil-
lionaires gossiping Bagdad and the Irawaddy, Chicago and the Cape”, 
2), involved in the world-wide activities of the Royal Exchange. Eco-
nomic transactions are totally globalized and society has become an 
international one. 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
61
The profusion of characters and professions he views from the 
“steps of the Royal Exchange”, as sketched in the following two 
pages, is confusing, but he manages to control and order the confusion 
by subsuming it under the metaphor of “machinery”: “What a wonder 
of parts and whole! What a bit of machinery!” (4) Syntactically, the 
fast succession of sketches unconnected by conjunctions creates the 
impression of speed and kinetic energy. But then the narrator’s vision 
changes entirely. Assailed by a “sort of intense vertigo” (4), he sud-
denly sees the men and women below him, clerks, businessmen, bro-
kers, clergymen, etc., scratching themselves as if they were a horde of 
apes: “and when an entire civilization begins to do that, it is a serious 
thing” (6). Traditionally, the panoramic view is meant to provide a 
first survey of an unknown territory; it is often a colonial gaze fol-
lowed by actual conquest. In the age of tourism it also serves the aes-
thetic pleasure of the tourist as it does, in a sense, when the narrator 
admires the beauty of the island in many passages: 
 
The whole island lay before me, from sea to sea, quivering with life in 
the morning sun. [...] All this beauty of nature and homely sweetness 
of ordered life, lying to the north of the dividing ridge, had been hid-
den from me in my rude landing-place, even the cultivated valleys be-
ing shut out by a transverse section of the rock. (65f) 
 
There is a suggestion of eroticism in this descriptive passage (“lay 
before me”, “quivering life”) which would be quite apt in colonial 
discourse because it might hint at rape. Here it simply reinforces the 
theme of desire and love. 
In Whiteing the colonial gaze is also transformed into a satiric 
view of society which produces a shock of recognition. This satiric 
mode is reminiscent of Swift. The photographic metaphor “out of 
focus” relates this technique to a new medium of representing natural, 
social and cultural space. When the focal distance is not correct the 
photographer gets a blurred picture. What is at stake in life is the need 
to find the right distance, to find and adopt a point of view which al-
lows one to see life in the right perspective. The narrator’s flight from 
London to the islanders is a frantic attempt to regain the right focus on 
life. The Parisian “Light of the Age” (19) is not capable of providing 
the desired “Focus”, i.e. “the guidance of life” (19). Unlike the Pari-
sian experience, the narrator’s stay on the island proves to be pro-
foundly healing since Victoria, “a great artist in being” (175), teaches 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
62
him by being an unobtrusive example a new view of life which over-
comes the traumatic modernity of the Exchange steps: 
 
That picture of the old life troubled me so, that grand composition of 
the Exchange steps. It would not come right. Here is one whose mere 
presence brings everything into its place. Now I see where I was 
wrong; now could I go among the rushing, blurred figures of some of 
my sitters, and ask them, for the love of God, and, still more, for the 
love of man, to keep still. I could say to them, and above all to myself, 
as at her bidding, ‘Piano! piano! we are perishing of overstrain. Why 
this frantic scraping for useless currency? How much peace comes out 
of it, how much of fineness of life?’ (176) 
 
The way of life one adopts is a cultural choice, just as the artist is free 
to choose a role, a style, a subject matter. For Whiteing, the satirist, 
the aesthetic view of life thus contains a utopian possibility. It does 
not necessarily entail decadence. 
Again and again Whiteing’s first person narrator evokes the 
beauty, the peace and the tranquillity of the island’s landscape and 
society only to eventually contrast it with comprehensive views of the 
world his traveller has come from. Since England and the world are 
frequently the theme of the conversations and since the islanders wish 
to learn from the English example they admire without really knowing 
it, we get a mix of satirically effective dramatic irony, ironic encomia 
and also, after Victoria’s request to learn the truth, realistic and satiric 
accounts of what is going on. What emerges is the familiar picture of 
the results of liberal self-help and imperialist aspirations: class divi-
sions, the rat race, luxury and poverty, British imperialism. The paral-
lel between “Old England and Old Rome” is explicitly drawn with the 
help of a panoramic view of the world: 
 
England, my friends, you are to understand, is in the position of Old 
Rome after conquest. She is sitting down to enjoy the world she has 
won. She feels good: after dinner, the lion would not hurt a fly. She 
suffers lassitude of digestion, especially in governing circles. Yet 
somehow, the duties of empire are still carried on. [...] Take a bird’s-
eye view of our hemisphere, and you would see its main roads of earth 
and ocean speckled with the foam or dust that marks the movements 
of her legions. ‘Tis a pretty sight! (232f) 
 
Telegraphy in a sense destroys space and time. It makes possible the 
simultaneous presence of every corner and culture of the globe par-

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
63
ticularly in the media. Instant world communication has become a 
reality. Finally, therefore (ch. XXVI), a grotesque view of the mad 
world from outer space and, by way of montage, a cacophony of 
newspaper reports from all over the world pass judgment on things as 
they are outside the island: 
 
The Captain’s bundle of newspapers lay on a chair, and I took them up 
to read myself to sleep. 
I might as well have taken coffee as an opiate. As I turned 
these fatal leaves, life in all its littleness seemed to beat in upon me, 
with a suffocating rush, from every quarter of the globe. I was in the 
fever-struck crowd once more, after my spiritual quarantine of 
months. It was as a coming to consciousness after chloroform: my 
brain throbbed, every pulsation was pain. I darted from column to col-
umn, from page to page. I had lost the art of selection: one thing was 
as another thing, and each impression was a shock. Once again, I rea-
lised Europe and America, Asia and Africa, but only masses in a 
whirl. The Ball itself, with all its continents, seemed to have suddenly 
whizzed my way, as I lay dreaming on a cloud of space. Every particle 
was in movement, as well as the mass; it was a huge rolling cheese, 
putrid with unwholesome being – a low-bred world, not a world at all, 
a mere glorified back-court, with all its cheatings, thefts, lies, cruel-
ties, small cares, and small ambitions, multiplied into themselves, and 
into one another, to make a whole. The finer things alone seemed 
without an entry, as though, in a business reckoning, such trifles 
would not count. 
I did not know how to read it. Picking and choosing was im-
possible; I took it as it came. ‘Brigandage in the public Thorough-
fares;’ ‘Foreign Paupers blocking the City Streets;’ ‘Outrages on Eng-
lish Fishermen;’ ‘Parliament – two Members suspended;’ ‘Afghani-
stan – Five hundred killed;’ ‘Moonlighting in Ireland; a Policeman’s 
Head beaten to Pulp;’ (264f) 
 
Newspapers relying on instant telegraphic communication trigger in 
the narrator an imaginative, almost nihilistic view of the world from 
above becoming reality with the beginning of space travel half a cen-
tury later. Interestingly though, nostalgia returned with space travel 
since it quickly became clear from an ecological point of view that the 
earth is ravishingly beautiful and unique. Furthermore, nations are 
clearly no longer important in the narrator’s view of the globe and its 
inhabitants. 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
64
2.2. The World-State Replaces the Nation-State:  
Wells’ A Modern Utopia (1905) 
 
Globalization in the name of modernization and the author’s critical 
evaluation of this process are clearly the two main factors shaping 
Whiteing’s version of utopia. As we move from Whiteing to Wells’ A 
Modern Utopia (1905), published only a few years later, it is clear that 
a modern utopia can no longer envision a nation-state. The modern 
utopia is conceived as a world-state. 
Why Wells embraced the idea of a world-state so whole-
heartedly and made the propagation of this idea the business of his life 
comes out crystal-clear in his seminal sociological study Anticipations 
(1902), a “sincerely intended forecast of the way things will probably 
go” (Wells 1999: 1) in the twentieth century. This exercise in social 
speculation is for Wells a legitimate project since present technical, 
social, economic and cultural trends can be analysed with a consider-
able degree of accuracy. Improved world-wide transport and commu-
nication have an enormous impact on the economy and the social 
structures of nation-states which lose their autonomy in the process. 
Inherited codes of belief and behaviour, as for example religious 
creeds, increasingly lose their hold on people and become matters of 
personal choice in larger social and political structures which ensure 
stability and peace. For Wells, a world-state is the logical goal of a 
development which leads to almost unlimited mobility and dynamism. 
It is the only chance to overcome and control, under the guidance of a 
functional elite of experts (whom he calls Samurai in A Modern Uto-
pia), what he calls “the present social chaos” (76). He describes the 
emergence of a “larger synthesis” (138) as follows: 
 
We have seen that the essential process arising out of the growth of 
science and mechanism, and more particularly out of the still develop-
ing new facilities of locomotion and communication science has af-
forded, is the deliquescence of the social organisation of the past, and 
the synthesis of ampler and still ampler and more complicated and still 
more complicated social unities. The suggestion is powerful, the con-
clusion is hard to resist, that, through whatever disorders of danger 
and conflict, whatever centuries of misunderstandings and bloodshed, 
men may still have to pass, this process nevertheless aims finally and 
will attain to the establishment of one world-state at peace within it-
self. In the economic sense, indeed, a world-state is already estab-

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
65
lished. Even to-day we buy and sell in the same markets [...] There is 
no real autonomy any more in the world [...]. (138) 
 
For Wells, modernization changes the very concept of utopia. Shed-
ding its Swiftian heritage, it becomes a tool of flexible sociological 
analysis and speculation. Although it is still important to construct an 
ideal model, its construction must benefit from the changing insights 
and inventions of modern science and technology. Divorced from the 
insights of science, of sociology and historical analysis, utopian think-
ing loses its utility and relevance. Utopian thinking may influence an 
historical trend; it is never a substitute for it. Unlike Whiteing, Wells 
therefore analyses globalization as an irreversible historical trend 
which has to be taken into account by utopian thinking if it wishes to 
contribute to our orientation. Maps and plans are iconic signs of what 
is and what is to be. They refer to geographical, architectural and so-
cial spaces. What Wells offers in A Modern Utopia is both a map of 
(economic, social, technological) cultural reality as it exists around 
1900 and a plan – for Wells a synonym of the word utopia (“our plan 
for the World State”, Wells 1967: 332) – for its reconstruction. The 
book is an effort at educating mankind and offering it necessary orien-
tation. In Wells the borderlines between sociology, futurology and 
utopian discourse become blurred. 
Because of his preference for scientific and technological solu-
tions Wells does not even consider the possibility of a religious utopia 
and pokes fun at nature worshippers who recommend a return to the 
simple life. Instead he envisages a complex global civilization which 
fundamentally deviates from the societies of the utopian tradition. 
Constantly reflecting upon and criticising the shortcomings of classi-
cal utopias, Wells creates a meta-utopia which is a new start in uto-
pian thinking and in the history of the genre. He proposes a multi-
ethnic global community of individuals which is subject to constant 
change. By introducing into utopian thinking historicity, freedom and 
individualism, the key concepts of nineteenth-century culture, Wells 
overcomes the frightening or at least boring uniformity and static 
quality of traditional utopias. Homogeneity in the old sense is aban-
doned, but the shared ideal of a global modern civilization, i.e. a wel-
fare state mixing capitalist and socialist elements, provides a new uni-
fying framework which is expected to overcome national, racial and 
cultural differences. His Kantian concept of synthesis veers toward the 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
66
postcolonial notion of hybridity: “The modern utopia is to be, before 
all things, synthetic” (212). For him, alternatives to this solution such 
as straightforward imperialism or a weak liberalism unable to prevent 
chaos are, for ethical and intellectual reasons, unsound and unaccept-
able: 
 
If you are not prepared to regard a world-wide synthesis of all cultures 
and polities and races into one World State as the desirable end upon 
which all civilising efforts converge, what do you regard as the desir-
able end? Synthesis, one may remark in passing, does not necessarily 
mean fusion, nor does it mean uniformity. (344) 
 
Since national isolation is no longer possible, the globe and even gal-
axies turn into appropriate arenas for modern utopianism. A planet in 
space somewhere “beyond Sirius” (12), but otherwise a perfect simu-
lacrum of the earth and its people, is the site of Wells’ new order: 
 
No less than a planet will serve the purpose of a modern Utopia. Time 
was when a mountain valley or an island seemed to promise sufficient 
isolation for a polity to maintain itself intact from outward force; the 
Republic of Plato stood armed ready for defensive war, and the New 
Atlantis and the Utopia of More in theory, like China and Japan 
through many centuries of effectual practice, held themselves isolated 
from intruders. [...] But the whole trend of modern thought is against 
the permanence of any such enclosures. We are acutely aware now-
adays that, however subtly contrived a State may be, outside your 
boundary lines the epidemic, the breeding barbarian or the economic 
power, will gather its strength to overcome you. The swift march of 
invention is all for the invader. Now, perhaps you might still guard a 
rocky coast or a narrow pass; but what of that near-tomorrow when 
the flying machine soars overhead, free to descend at this point or 
that? A state powerful enough to keep isolated under modern condi-
tions would be powerful enough to rule the world, would be, indeed, if 
not actively ruling, yet passively acquiescent in all other human or-
ganisations, and so responsible for them altogether. World-state, 
therefore, it must be. (11f) 
 
For the literary representation of this new world Wells invents a new 
medium, a combination of academic, sociological exposition, spoken 
by the “Voice”, and narrative scenes providing glimpses of utopian 
life and conversations between the fictional, pro-utopian author (first 
person) and an anti-utopian botanist: “I am aiming throughout at a sort 
of shot-silk texture between philosophical discussion on the one hand 
and imaginative narrative on the other.” (xxxii) This mixture is appar-

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
67
ently inspired by the recently invented media of the film (“moving 
pictures”, 2) and the gramophone or “phonograph” (239). This new 
communicative situation is illustrated by spatial analogies: The reader 
of Wells’ text is supposed to be sitting in a lecture hall or theatre lis-
tening to the voice of the created author, but he is also given the role 
of someone watching movies: 
 
Occasionally the picture goes out altogether, the Voice argues and ar-
gues, and the footlights return, and then you find yourself listening 
again to the rather too plump little man at his table laboriously enunci-
ating propositions, upon whom the curtain rises now. (4) 
 
In the passage about the site of the world-state quoted above it is ob-
viously the ‘Voice’ we listen to. What is important from a formal 
point of view is the fact that the Voice’s propositions, i.e. its discur-
sive reasoning, enable him to generalize, i.e. talk about global space 
and global order as such. Both the mixture of media and the reflexive 
stance of the meta-utopian discourse prevent the illusion-making of 
classical utopian fiction and capture the intellect of the reader more 
than his desire to be entertained in a hypnotic manner. Large parts of 
A Modern Utopia resemble a lively academic essay. But there are also 
passages where Wells seeks to render “impressions”, i.e. subjective 
perceptions of utopian life, as one would expect in a novel proper. 
During their journey to London in a fast train the botanist and the au-
thor get snapshots (“the leap of a camera shutter”) of utopian life and 
landscape: 
 
The botanist touches my arm and nods towards a pretty lead-paned 
window, through which we see a village sleeping under cloudy 
moonlight go flashing by. Then a skylit lake, and then a string of 
swaying lights, gone with the leap of a camera shutter. 
Two hundred miles an hour! (240) 
 
The last sentence is clearly meant as free indirect speech registering 
the author’s admiring thoughts. Even so, a complete immersion of the 
reader into the new world of triumphant modernism is made impossi-
ble by, for example, the use of the future tense. The architectural and 
social space of the new London is evoked thus (I quote at length from 
the introduction of Mark Hillegas): 
 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
68
Utopian architecture is the architecture of a machine age, and we get 
vivid glimpses of it with the various inns at which the visitors stay and 
with the buildings of utopian London. The inns, constructed in plain 
quadrangle fashion, have rooms marked by clean functionalism: elec-
trical heating for floors, walls, and even mattresses; sealed windows 
(with fresh air pumped in) so that there are no draughts; neither car-
pets, curtains, nor sharp corners to gather dust; furniture and decora-
tions of “succinct simplicity.” One can easily imagine how Wells, un-
able to forget the clutter and uncleanliness, the ugliness and inconven-
ience of his childhood home in Victorian Bromley, would have loved 
these inns. More astonishing as change are the buildings of utopian 
London, intended as a contrast with those of our world’s London. 
New London is a city designed by the artist-engineer who 
builds, with thought and steel, structures higher than stone or brick 
can yield, having completely discarded the past, having discarded “the 
squat temple boxes of the Greek, the buxom curvatures of Rome.” 
With its towering skyscrapers, its moving ways, its domes of glass, it 
is a forecast of the line of modern architecture which ultimately traces 
its origins, as Le Corbusier tells us, to the Crystal Palace (a building 
Wells would have seen often in its new location at South Kensington): 
They will have flung great arches and domes of glass above 
the wider spaces of the town, the slender beauty of the perfect metal-
work far overhead will be softened to a fairy-like unsubstantiality by 
the mild London air... The gay and swiftly moving platforms of the 
public ways will go past on either hand, carrying sporadic groups of 
people, and very speedily we shall find ourselves in a sort of central 
space, rich with palms and flowering bushes and statuary. We shall 
look along an avenue of trees, down a wide gorge between the cliffs of 
crowded hotels, the hotels are still glowing with internal lights, to 
where the shining morning river steams dawnlit out to sea. (xxii-xxiii) 
 
Clearly Wells’ imagination is obsessed by visions of the technological 
sublime. The spaces of the future must be clean and shining, func-
tional and huge, efficient and bright, full of light which really symbol-
izes the victory of the technological mind, of what Horkheimer might 
have identified as instrumental rationality. Elements of the utopian 
garden city are integrated into this imaginary space. 
 
We are standing above the ground in the loggia into which our apart-
ments open, and I point across the soft haze of the public gardens to a 
tall white mass of University buildings that rises with a free and fear-
less gesture, to lift saluting pinnacles against the clear evening sky. 
“Don’t you think that rather more beautiful than – say – our National 
Gallery?” 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
69
He looks at it critically. “There’s a lot of metal in it,” he ob-
jects. “What?” (251) 
 
The white “University buildings” suggesting a “free and fearless ges-
ture” are transformed from objective architectural facts into symbols 
of modernity’s Promethean and Faustian nature. Reminiscent of the 
tower of Babel, their “pinnacles” greet and maybe challenge the sky 
with striking self-confidence. The spatial and anthropomorphic meta-
phors reveal the mythic implications and dimensions of what on the 
surface appears to be a rational discourse. The passage reads like a 
somewhat laboured plea for the redemptive power of modern knowl-
edge and the beauty of functional architecture. 
The strengths and the weaknesses of Wells’ mixture of forecast 
and constructive utopia are not difficult to spot. In many ways he an-
ticipates the agenda of today’s modernity: education, knowledge, con-
stant technological innovation, efficiency, social security, and global-
ization. Even the central databases for purposes of control in A Mod-
ern Utopia have assumed a new (and potentially sinister) significance. 
However, Wells’ preoccupation with functional technocratic solutions 
prevents him from seeing cultures as shaping forces which are not 
simply neutralized by an appeal to efficiency and abstract “synthesis”. 
Samurai may be able to master the complexities of modern society 
better than elected members of Parliament, but giving them power 
would mean to ignore important aspects of political modernization. 
Division of power and human rights are somehow filtered out by 
Wells. The pursuit of these ideals and values may not increase effi-
ciency, but it is a cultural imperative of enlightened societies. From 
today’s vantage point it is also clear that Wells underrates the poten-
tial for conflict the issues of religion and ecology contain. Wells 
seems to be unable, despite his talk about clean air in “Utopian Lon-
don” (313), to perceive that the earth is an endangered space because 
of the very forces unleashed by modern science and technology. Ap-
parently he is not aware of the fact that electricity, the use of which he 
recommends (314), is not a clean energy insomuch as its production 
requires coal. In Wells’ defence one must concede that the dangers 
CO² poses for the climate of the world were not yet known at his time. 
Ultimately, Wells’ vision is in many ways still valid, although a 
world state does not promise much efficiency; but the present clash of 
civilizations is a burning issue Wells did not foresee with sufficient 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
70
clarity. It is an issue which seriously puts in doubt the very plausibility 
of Wells’ “plan” unless rationalization proves to be, as Wells seems to 
assume and as one must hope for in view of the dangers of bellicose 
fundamentalisms, the prevailing force of history. His ruling caste of 
Samurai draws strength and discipline from a relation with “a tran-
scendental and mystical God” (302) whom they approach in solitary, 
dangerous places of the earth. Since, in the vein of the Protestant tradi-
tion, Wells completely individualizes this relationship with God and 
seems to identify it with a sort of work ethic, he does not envision the 
persistent power of religious traditions,  practices and institutions such 
as Islam, Christianity or Hinduism. The fate of these versions and 
structures of religion is not even mentioned. They somehow disappear 
in the reflections of the author. What he does mention is that “Utopia 
[...] will have its temples and its priests” (300), “but the samurai are 
forbidden the religion of dramatically lit altars, organ music, and in-
cense” (301). The “cardinal belief” of the Utopians “that man, on the 
whole, is good” (300) is certainly incompatible with basic Christian 
doctrines.  Religion, one must conclude, is a somewhat hazy affair in 
Wells’ discourse and does not play a major role in his rational design 
of a new world. 
 
 
2.3. The World as the Site of Global Cultural Conflict:  
Robert Hugh Benson’s Lord of the World (1907) 
 
As one moves from Wells to Benson’s Lord of the World (1907) the 
picture changes dramatically. Although he, too, transcends national 
limitations, his vision of future global developments focuses on a con-
flict between the party of secular progress, represented and led by 
Julian Felsenburgh, and the Catholic Church. According to Wells 
none of the world’s religions would have a real say in the shaping of 
the future. From his point of view Benson’s novel is a rearguard battle 
of Catholic propaganda. Benson, the Catholic apologist, would not 
have denied this. The didactic purpose of his sensational cautionary 
tale, an apocalyptic novel of the future, is precisely, by depicting the 
violent end of Catholicism at the hands of humanitarian progressiv-
ism, to make readers aware of the dangers inherent in the kind of secu-
lar utopianism embodied by Wells and others. But Benson’s basic 
insight that the struggle for world dominance will be and already is 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
71
fought by camps representing not only different political and eco-
nomic interests but also different cultures and religions is perceptive. 
For him humanism, progressivism and cosmopolitanism are not sim-
ply secular cultural forces and ideologies but also a form of religion. 
In fact, the coexistence of rationalism and charisma, science and the 
fetish, enlightened secularism and religion, is, as recent theories of 
culture have pointed out (cf. Böhme 2006), a hallmark of modernity. 
The novel has been summarized as follows: 
 
Prefaced by the narration of historical events and apocalyptic prophe-
cies, Benson’s novel highlights either the point of view of Father 
Franklin, the champion of Catholicism, or of politician Oliver Brand, 
the spokesman of socialist Humanitarianism. The twenty-first cen-
tury’s religious controversy has led the world on the verge of palinge-
nesis: Brand’s party is prevailing owing to Felsenburgh’s, a charis-
matic American whose policy of globalization aims to reunite the tri-
partite world into Universal Brotherhood. Oliver and Mabel Brand 
forbid Father Franklin to assist Old Mrs Brand, who has secretly 
summoned him to her deathbed, and consent to her euthanasia. After 
being appointed Head of the three world departments, Felsenburgh 
demands the conversion of the Catholics and the extermination of the 
supernaturalists: thus Rome, the seat of the newly founded Order of 
Christ Crucified, is wiped out by an aerial attack. Suicide through 
euthanasia is Mabel Brand’s reaction to the genocide. 
Franklin’s papal election in Jerusalem revives primitive Chris-
tianity: his secluded pontificate in the Holy Land guides the Order 
throughout the world. Finally, the violent extinction of the last Catho-
lic ecclesiastical community on a Sunday morning in Nazareth signals 
the Day of Judgment and the Second Coming of Christ. (Fortunati and 
Trousson 2000: 365) 
 
The world of the future is characterized by a conflict between devout, 
orthodox Catholicism, which is daily weakened by members losing 
their faith, and a strong wave of “Humanity-Religion” (Benson 1907: 
172), i.e. communism and cosmopolitanism. In many ways the goals 
and values of the religion of humanity and of Catholicism are the 
same. Human beings should love each other and become brothers in a 
world-wide community. However, the priorities of values and alle-
giances differ profoundly. Whereas humanism elevates human beings 
to the position of God, Catholicism believes that humans are in need 
of a being “above” them. The term “Supernatural” (173) expresses an 
abstract meaning with the help of an implicit spatial metaphor. The 
implied spatial metaphor expressing spiritual values and planes of 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
72
existence is, however, perverted by dragging God “down” (or elevat-
ing man) and by thus obliterating the distinction between him and 
mankind. The secular movement of humanism which triumphs be-
cause of Felsenburgh’s charismatic leadership is interpreted by Ben-
son as a substitute religion. For him, religious feelings and needs do 
not simply disappear, but reassert themselves in a new guise. Conse-
quently, Felsenburgh is adored like a saviour whose appearance and 
rhetoric fascinate the believers. His “advent” (book I) in London re-
sembles that of Christ. In other words, secularization seems to derive 
its strength and appeal from a not eradicable human craving for reli-
gious symbols and ideas. The old faith is destroyed in the name of a 
new one which is denied a legitimacy of its own. Although Benson 
manages to portray the mentality of the supporters of the new faith 
convincingly, particularly in the dialogues between Oliver and Mabel 
Brand, his ultimate verdict on it could hardly be harsher. By practising 
euthanasia even against the will of the victim and by destroying the 
last strongholds of Catholicism with military might the propagandist 
Benson apparently wishes to disclose and to denounce the hidden 
violence of the scientific and humanist world-view. Since cultures are 
essentially made up of different interpretations of the world and dif-
ferent value-systems, the clash in Benson’s dystopian novel between 
the, broadly speaking, socialist movement and Catholicism resembles 
the war of cultures diagnosed by contemporary critics of culture 
(Huntington and others). Percy Franklin’s belief in the Catholic Faith 
as the revelation of ultimate truth is a form of fundamentalism which 
the text illustrates with a spatial metaphor (“as the bones of the uni-
verse”). It seems to confirm the anti-modernist position of Pope Pius 
X: 
 
There was the Catholic Faith, more certain to him than the existence 
of himself: it was true and alive. He might be damned, but God 
reigned. He might go mad, but Jesus Christ was Incarnate Deity, prov-
ing Himself so by death and Resurrection, and John his Vicar. These 
things were as the bones of the Universe – facts beyond doubting – if 
they were not true, nothing anywhere was anything but a dream. (173) 
 
Yet there is a painful contradiction between spiritual and political 
significance. The utter defeat of Catholicism is at hand and is trans-
lated into the spatial metaphors of the sandcastle and the coming tide: 
 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
73
The world indeed had risen like a giant over the horizons of Rome, 
and the holy city was no better now than a sandcastle before a tide. So 
much he grasped. As to how ruin would come, in what form and from 
what direction, he neither knew nor cared. Only he knew now that it 
would come. (172) 
 
The water and the tide of modernity will eventually dispose of the 
rock of Christianity. From a poststructuralist view this demise is fore-
shadowed by the inappropriate use of the comparison “bones”. After 
all, bones are far less durable than granite. 
The use of spatial metaphors and descriptions of space in liter-
ary fictions for the expression and communication of meaning has 
been analysed by theoreticians of semiotics (Lotman and others). As 
we shall see, a reflexive use of representations of space can also be 
observed in Benson’s novel of the future. First of all Benson redraws 
the political map of the globe. The priest Templeton explains the new 
map in the “Prologue”: 
 
“Have you a Comparative Atlas, sir?” he asked. The old man pointed 
to the shelf. 
“There,” he said. 
Percy looked at the sheets a minute or two in silence, spread-
ing them on his knees. 
“It is all much simpler, certainly,” he murmured, glancing first 
at the old complicated colouring of the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, and then at the three great washes of the twenty-first. 
He moved his finger along Asia. The words EASTERN 
EMPIRE ran across the pale yellow, from the Ural mountains on the 
left to the Behring straits on the right, curling round in giant letters 
through India, Australia, and New Zealand. He glanced at the red; it 
was considerably smaller, but still important enough, considering that 
it covered not only Europe proper, but all Russia up to the Ural Moun-
tains, and Africa to the south. The blue-labelled AMERICAN 
REPUBLIC swept over the whole of that continent, and disappeared 
right round to the left of the Western Hemisphere in a shower of blue 
sparks on the white sea. [...] 
“Briefly,” he said, “there are three forces – Catholicism, Hu-
manitarianism, and the Eastern religions. About the third I cannot 
prophesy, though I think the Sufis will be victorious. (8f) 
 
According to Benson’s history of the future, imperialist concentration 
will produce a tripartite world which corresponds to three dominant 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
74
religious (cultural) formations. What the American Felsenburgh does 
is to unite the World in the name of socialist Humanitarianism. In 
Benson’s scenario of the future the merging of nations into mankind 
can only be accomplished by overcoming the fortresses of traditional 
Western (Catholicism) and Eastern religion (“those damned religions 
of theirs...”, 25). Although modernity in the sense of technological 
achievements is of crucial importance in all three Empires (Eastern 
Empire, Europe, America), cultural differences, i.e. different world-
views and value-systems, are apparently considered to be more impor-
tant. The solution eventually achieved follows the model of imperialist 
thinking. The question of a global economy is largely ignored. 
To provide both imaginative participation and rational explana-
tion Benson combines dialogues with frequent panoramic views. Po-
litical and religious discussions involving Brand, his independent and 
finally rebellious wife, Percy, the Pope and others in a sense concep-
tualize and historicize the social and religious spaces experienced by 
Percy and Brand in particular. The information discussed in these 
dialogues has usually been communicated by modern media such as 
the telegraph, the newspaper or the telephone which transform the 
world into a global media event. There are, of course, traditional let-
ters and reports, too. Benson frequently conveys his message by con-
trasting panoramic views of profane and sacred urban spaces. Oliver 
Brand takes a look at London: 
 
He stood a moment or two at the door after his wife had gone, drink-
ing in reassurance from that glorious vision of solid sense that spread 
itself before his eyes: the endless house-roofs; the high glass vaults of 
the public baths and gymnasiums; the pinnacled schools where Citi-
zenship was taught each morning; the spider-like cranes and scaffold-
ings that rose here and there [...] this vast hive of men and women 
who had learnt at least the primary lesson of the gospel that there was 
no God but man, no priest but the politician, no prophet but the 
schoolmaster. (32) 
 
The vision is nearly Wellsian. London’s architecture is tangible, visi-
ble evidence of the victory of modernity. Aircraft (“volor”), fast 
trains, telephones and telegraphs ensure efficient world communica-
tion. The spirit of the place Percy experiences in Rome before its de-
struction is quite different: 
 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
75
A heavy bell beat faintly from far away, and the drowsy city turned to 
murmur its good-night to the Mother of God. From a thousand towers 
came the tiny melody, floating across the great air spaces, in a thou-
sand accents, the solemn bass of St. Peter’s, the mellow tenor of the 
Lateran, the rough cry from some old slum church, the peevish tinkle 
of convents and chapels – all softened and made mystical in this grave 
evening air – it was the wedding of delicate sound and clear light. 
Above, the liquid orange sky; beneath, this sweet, subdued ecstasy of 
bells. 
“Alma Redemptoris Mater,” whispered Percy, his eyes wet 
with tears. (226) 
 
What this passage suggests is not modernist triumphalism but a vision 
of spiritual peace. The various churches of Rome are transformed into 
parts of an orchestra whose music moves Percy to tears. 
It is also Percy who offers the appropriate interpretation (“the 
significance of all that he saw”, 164) of such contrasting urban im-
ages: 
 
The two Cities of Augustine lay for him to choose. The one was that 
of a world self-originated, self-organised and self-sufficient, inter-
preted by such men as Marx and Hervé, socialists, materialists, and, in 
the end, hedonists, summed up at last in Felsenburgh. The other lay 
displayed in the sight he saw before him, telling of a Creator and of a 
creation, of a Divine purpose, a redemption, and a world transcendent 
and eternal from which all sprang and to which all moved. One of the 
two, John and Julian, was the Vicar, and the other the Ape, of God … 
(168) 
 
The different spaces represent Augustine’s Christian reading of his-
tory as a conflict between the evil, secular world-state, inspired by 
self-love, and God’s state (civitas Dei), inspired by the love of God. 
The “devil” Felsenburgh, i.e. the lord of the world of the title, bor-
rows, as ape, spatial religious practices to create and maintain his 
charismatic rule. Just like God’s vicar on earth he presents himself to 
awed masses on an elevated chair – a spatial practice, which stresses 
the importance of distance (cf. 111). 
The three utopian/dystopian scenarios analysed in this paper all 
dismantle the classical tradition of the utopian nation-state and its 
literary presentation. The space of Whiteing’s The Island (1899), 
which is a blend of romance, satire and pastoral utopia presented by a 
first person narrator who is far more sophisticated than those of the 

Hans Ulrich Seeber 
76
utopian tradition, functions as a temporary pastoral retreat from the 
pressures and the alienation experienced in the world of modern civi-
lization. Since it lacks political autonomy its status reminds one of a 
near-forgotten colony on the periphery. In fact, Pitcairn can be located 
on the map as one of Britain’s overseas territories even today. How-
ever, this tiny exotic space and its hybrid community offer an ethical 
and cultural challenge to the rest of the world. To produce the illusion 
of a comprehensive global view Whiteing makes use of panorama and 
montage. Wells’ A Modern Utopia (1905) is an ambitious, meta-
utopian exercise in creating order for a chaotic world, where global-
ization and modernization have constantly reduced the importance of 
the nation-state. His scientism, inspired by sociology and biology, 
implies a critical “metaism” which favours functional solutions (ex-
perts as leaders), respect for history and individuality and a method of 
presentation doing away with the traditional patterns of the genre’s 
ironic realism. In a sense he, therefore, attempts a combination of 
gramophone and film, of academic lecture (the “Voice”) and dramatic 
scenes. Benson’s piece of Catholic propaganda, Lord of the World 
(1907), may have been conceived as an answer to Wells since it radi-
cally rejects the possibility of salvation without the intervention of 
God. For him, the world is riddled with cultural conflicts which ulti-
mately reflect and enact Augustine’s model of a secular world fighting 
the civitas Dei. Formally, Benson uses the familiar devices of realism 
such as dialogic scenes and multiple points of view, often in combina-
tion with panoramic views. Panorama is needed because he wishes to 
create the effect of a comprehensive picture of cultural division and 
global developments. 

Utopia, Nation-Building and the Dissolution of the Nation-State 
77
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Benson, Robert Hugh (1907). Lord of the World. London: Pitman. 
Carey, Peter (1994/1995). The Unusual Life of Tristan Smith. London: Faber and 
Faber. 
Wells, Herbert George (1902/1999). Anticipations of the Reaction of Mechanical and 
Scientific Progress Upon Human Life and Thought. New York: Dover. 
— (1905/1967). A Modern Utopia. Lincoln and London: U of Nebraska P. 
Whiteing, Richard (1899). The Island, or, An Adventure of a Person of Quality. Lon-
don: Grant Richards. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Böhme, Hartmut (2006). Fetischismus und Kultur: Eine andere Theorie der Moderne. 
Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt. 
Coulmas, Peter (1990). Weltbürger: Geschichte einer Menschheitssehnsucht. Reinbek 
bei Hamburg: Rowohlt. 
Fortunati, Vita and Raymond Trousson (eds.) (2000). Dictionary of Literary Utopias. 
Paris: Honoré Champion. 
Griem, Julika and Hans Ulrich Seeber (eds.) (2003). Raum- und Zeitreisen: Studien 
zur Literatur und Kultur des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts. Tübingen: Niemeyer. 
Herbermann, Charles G. (ed.) (1907). The Cosmographiae Introductio of Martin 
Waldseemüller in Facsimile, Followed by the Four Voyages of Amerigo Ves-
pucci, with their Translation into English; to which are added Wald-
seemüller’s Two World Maps of 1507. New York: The United States Catholic 
Historical Society. 
Saage, Richard (2003). Utopische Profile. Band IV: Widersprüche und Synthesen des 
20. Jahrhunderts. Münster: LIT. 
Tomczyk, Anna (2007). Katholischer Diskurs im Zeitalter der Moderne: Englische 
Schriftsteller des “Catholic Revival” von 1890-1940. Frankfurt a. M.: Peter 
Lang. 
Wegner, Phillip E. (2002). Imaginary Communities: Utopia, the Nation and the Spa-
tial History of Modernity. Berkeley: U of California P. 


 
 
 
 
Discoveries of the Future: Herbert G. Wells  
and the Eugenic Utopia 
 
Richard Nate 
 
 
Abstract: When the process of geographical expansion came to a halt at the end of the 
nineteenth century, the preferred settings of literary utopias also changed. Inspired by 
Darwin’s theory of evolution, H. G. Wells set out to ‘discover’ the future in his fic-
tional and non-fictional writings and speculated on the biological development of the 
human race. Beginning with his Anticipations of 1901, a strong interest in Francis 
Galton’s programme of eugenics is also traceable in his works. Wells’ attitude to this 
programme, however, remained ambivalent. While he was highly sceptical about the 
feasibility of any positive eugenic measures, such as breeding schemes, he did not re-
ject negative ones, such as sterilisation programmes for the ‘unfit’. In this essay, par-
ticular attention is paid to two of Wells’ writings: the semi-fictional essay A Modern 
Utopia (1905) and the purely fictional narrative Men Like Gods (1923). While in the 
former the author is careful not to suggest any extreme eugenic measures, the latter 
includes his most radical vision of a society shaped by eugenic policies. This vision, 
however, is clearly qualified by the fact that it appears only within a fictional frame-
work. When viewed as a whole, Wells’ writings gradually reveal his growing scepti-
cism towards eugenics, culminating in his downright rejection of the idea at the end of 
his life when the issue of human rights had become his central concern. 
 
Key names and concepts: British imperialism – concepts of race – counter selection – 
degeneration – euthanasia – positive and negative eugenics – science fiction – social 
Darwinism – sterilization programmes 
 
 
When Herbert G. Wells gave a lecture entitled The Discovery of the 
Future to the Royal Institution in 1902, he may have been aware of 
the fact that he was using a metaphor. Since the Renaissance period, 
‘discoveries’ had been geographical or scientific ones. Although they 
were closely linked to the idea of progress and thus also carried tem-
poral connotations, the future itself was not regarded as an object of 
discovery. It was something that had to be awaited. In order to under-
stand Wells’ use of the term, it is helpful to remember that throughout 
his life he considered himself not only a writer of science fiction but 

Richard Nate 
80
also a promoter of scientific theories. As a young man he had studied 
at the Normal School of Science under Thomas Henry Huxley, who 
was known as a fervent promoter of Darwin’s theory of evolution 
(Smith 1986: 10f, 51). Wells’ scientific enthusiasm was so distinct 
that it may be compared to that of Francis Bacon and the early Fel-
lows of the Royal Society, who in the seventeenth century had made 
scientific discoveries their main concern (Nate 2001). 
In the early days of science, geographical discoveries had 
played a decisive role. Spurred on by the rapid growth of natural 
knowledge, which had become possible through contacts with the 
New World, geographical explorations and scientific progress seemed 
to be almost inseparable. An early illustration of this view can be 
found in the frontispiece to Francis Bacon’s Instauratio Magna 
(1620), which shows merchant ships sailing through the “Pillars of 
Hercules”, a metaphorical image of the straits of Gibraltar. Bacon’s 
emblem carried a double meaning. Not only did the sailing ships bring 
home goods and information from hitherto unknown territories, but, in 
leaving the Mediterranean, they also metaphorically transcended the 
intellectual boundaries of the ancient world as they had been defined 
by Plato and Aristotle. 
The geographical discoveries of the early modern period had 
found a literary echo right from the beginning. It is no accident that 
the utopian genre, which had started with Plato’s Republic in the fifth 
century B.C., witnessed a revival only a few years after Columbus’ 
discovery of the New World. In Thomas More’s Utopia (1516), which 
gave the genre its name, this connection is reflected in the fictitious 
narrator Raphael Hythloday, who discloses himself as a longstanding 
companion of Amerigo Vespucci. The New World experience also in-
spired the imagination of later writers, who would set their ideal 
communities on remote islands, prominent examples being Johann 
Valentin Andreae’s Christianopolis (1619), Tommaso Campanella’s 
City of the Sun (1623) and Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis (1627). The 
extent to which the literary imagination was stimulated by the geo-
graphical discoveries of the day is discernible in Daniel Defoe’s Rob-
inson Crusoe (1719) and Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels (1726). 
While Crusoes’s encounter with the exotic reality is presented as a 
process which leads from initial personal despair to a successful colo-
nisation, Gulliver’s tales of societies inhabited by dwarfs, giants, mad 
scientists and speaking horses also have their roots in the Age of Dis-

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
81
covery, even if they do not glorify the scientific spirit but satirically 
reflect on the utopian visions by which it was accompanied. 
When Wells spoke of ‘discoveries’ in 1902, however, the age of 
exploration was over. European expansion, which had been triggered 
off by the discoveries of explorers such as Christopher Columbus, 
Vasco Da Gama and Amerigo Vespucci, had come to a halt in the 
second half of the nineteenth century. In a world that had been ex-
plored and mapped almost to the last few square miles, few opportuni-
ties for transgressing geographical boundaries remained. At the very 
time the British Empire saw its largest geographical extension and was 
glorified as the territory ‘in which the sun never set’, the first distur-
bances were also felt. The year 1857 brought the Indian Mutiny, and 
the Boer Wars of 1888 and 1899 revealed the limits of empire (Pallua 
2006: 50). A complementary development took place on the North 
American continent, where the frontier, which had inspired the idea of 
a ‘manifest destiny’, was declared closed in 1890. Equally, the Afri-
can ‘heart of darkness’, which a character called Marlow set out to 
explore in Joseph Conrad’s narrative of the same name, had become a 
thing of the past when the book appeared in 1899. Despite the gloomy 
atmosphere which characterises the narrative, the book almost had a 
nostalgic ring since the ‘blank spaces’ on the map that fascinated the 
young Marlow had long since ceased to exist (Conrad 1995). When 
the ‘scramble for Africa’ was over, competition between the imperial 
powers of Europe grew fiercer. The world was speedily heading for 
the first global conflict: the catastrophic First World War. 
If the geographical expansion of former ages had been reflected 
in contemporary literature, so was its crisis in the nineteenth century. 
While some authors would still use remote islands for envisaging al-
ternative social realities, others opted for more exotic realms. Narra-
tives such as Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s The Coming Race (1871) or 
Jules Verne’s De la terre à la lune (1882) make it obvious that, as far 
as the literary imagination was concerned, the earth’s surface was no 
longer sufficient. Although utopian islands did not disappear com-
pletely, the settings increasingly included hitherto neglected spheres 
like the centre of the earth or distant galaxies. 

Richard Nate 
82
As spatial categories became problematic, time offered itself as 
a possible setting.1 Darwin’s evolutionary theory worked as a catalyst 
in this respect, since it had generated a new understanding of history, 
which offered new perspectives not only on the past but also on the 
future (Schnackertz 1992: 96ff). Wells’ narrative The Time Machine 
(1895) is of particular importance in this respect, since it was one of 
the first literary works which used Darwin’s theory for an imaginary 
speculation on the future of humanity and provided the model for a 
number of works to follow. Although these would differ in their con-
clusions about the future of man, they had two things in common. 
They all sprang from a feeling that the age of expansion was over, and 
they considered the theory of evolution to be a point of no return. 
 
 
1. Social Darwinism and the Future of Mankind 
 
In The Time Machine, the geographical explorer of earlier ages has 
turned into an explorer of the future. While spatial categories no 
longer play any significant role, the fourth dimension which the “time 
traveller” discovers is still viewed as a realm in which man can move 
just as he would do in space. Accordingly, his “time machine” is de-
scribed as a vehicle, aptly equipped with a lever for manipulating the 
travel speed. Conceived in temporal terms, the time traveller’s journey 
is a long one, covering a time span of almost one million years; con-
ceived in spatial terms, however, the distance travelled is negligible, 
restricted to the confines of his laboratory. Because the time machine 
has been moved during his sojourn in the future, the traveller discov-
ers that he returns a few meters away from where he started a week 
before. 
The future reality in which the time traveller finds himself re-
sembles a utopia only at surface level. The peaceful tribe of the Eloi, 
whose simple life at first sight reminds him of a pastoral paradise, are 
in fact held as cattle by an underground species, the Morlocks. As he 
is eventually able to deduce, by the year 802,701 humanity has devel-
oped into two distinct species, one feeding on the other. What gives 
the story a satirical quality is the fact that the two species still bear 
                                                      
1 
For an early typological description of possible imaginary worlds, see Pfister 
and Lindner 1982. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
83
some traces of their evolutionary heritage. While the childlike Eloi 
turn out to be the descendants of a degenerate British aristocracy, the 
Morlocks are the offspring of the former Victorian proletariat. Increas-
ingly obliged to work beneath the surface of the earth, they have been 
forced to adapt gradually to underground conditions and remind the 
narrator of lemurs. In accordance with contemporary social Darwin-
ism, the time traveller’s explanation of the future reality is marked by 
a conflation of social and biological categories. Within the course of 
the evolutionary process, he argues, socially defined classes have ul-
timately changed into biologically defined species. 
The satirical function of Wells’ narrative is not as clear as it 
may appear at first sight. On the one hand, the inverted power struc-
tures of the former ruling class and the former proletariat reveal an 
ironic twist, which seems to be in perfect accordance with Wells’ so-
cialist orientation. When viewed in this light, the evolutionary process 
sketched in the narrative enables the oppressed proletariat to take a 
late revenge on their former oppressors. Viewed against the back-
ground of late Victorianism, however, the Morlocks also bear traces of 
what contemporaries would have described as the ‘people of the 
abyss’. In the second half of the nineteenth century, these had often 
been described as a distinct group of people with racially inferior 
qualities. As social Darwinists argued, modern society with its public 
health system had made possible a so-called ‘counter selection’, which 
allowed for the propagation of ‘inferior types’ who would have per-
ished under ‘natural’ conditions. As the ‘people of the abyss’ pro-
duced more offspring than the upper classes, fears spread that they 
could ultimately overrule the civilised societies. Seen in this light, the 
Morlocks not only represent a fantastic species of the future but they 
also reflect a threat that many of Wells’ contemporaries perceived as 
real. 
Wells’ The War of the Worlds, which appeared in 1898, was 
even more radical in playing upon contemporary feelings of uncer-
tainty. Apart from being a fictional narrative that gave an account of a 
Martian invasion, it also represented a satirical inversion of the tales 
of exploration that the age of geographical expansion had produced. 
That Wells chose the city of London, the administrative centre of the 
British Empire, as a possible Martian ‘plantation’ was hardly acciden-
tal. Being confronted with a war of extermination from outer space, 
the Europeans are suddenly forced to give up their role as the makers 

Richard Nate 
84
of history and turn into the mere objects of a military operation they 
are unable to control. Wells’ narrator never tires of pointing to the fact 
that in the eyes of the Martians human beings do not appear as indi-
viduals at all; they rather resemble the infusoria a scientist may watch 
under a microscope. This perspective is already highlighted in the first 
sentences of the narrative: 
 
No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth century 
that this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligences 
greater than man’s and yet as mortal as his own; that as men busied 
themselves about their various concerns they were scrutinised and 
studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might 
scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of 
water. (Wells 1993: 5) 
 
Although the Martian invasion is depicted as a brutal enterprise and 
would undoubtedly have created feelings of aversion among contem-
porary readers, the narrator is keen on drawing a parallel between the 
Martian conquest and the process of Empire building. The provocative 
character of his narrative becomes obvious when he calls upon his 
readers to show some understanding of the Martians’ behaviour. By 
pointing to the indigenous population of Tasmania, who had perished 
only a few years before as a result of the British settlement, the narra-
tor maintains that the Martians do not differ very much from the hu-
mans they are planning to eliminate. Posing as a true social Darwinist, 
he explains: 
 
The intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant 
struggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the belief of 
the minds upon Mars [...]. Before we judge them too harshly we must 
remember what ruthless and utter destruction our own species has 
wrought, not only upon animals, such as the vanished bison and the 
dodo, but upon its own inferior races. The Tasmanians, in spite of 
their human likeness, were entirely swept out of existence in a war of 
extermination waged by European immigrants, in the space of fifty 
years. Are we such apostles of mercy as to complain if the Martians 
warred in the same spirit? (Wells 1993: 6f) 
 
By drawing comparisons which contemporary readers would have 
found hard to swallow, the book satirically commented on the com-
placency of contemporary Europeans who would still fancy them-
selves as belonging to a ‘superior race’. Although the term ‘survival of 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
85
the fittest’ was usually employed to underline the alleged superiority 
of the European population, Wells’ story indicated that it was more 
like a Delphic phrase. As Darwin had demonstrated, what counted as 
‘fit’ could not be determined in advance but depended upon circum-
stances. The War of the Worlds created a feeling of uncertainty among 
readers, especially at a time when England’s military supremacy was 
being increasingly challenged by other European powers such as 
France, Germany, and Russia (Farrall 1985: 50f). Wells’ narrative 
symbolically reflected the fact that at the turn of the century the feel-
ing of supremacy which had inspired the imperial politics of the nine-
teenth century slowly gave way to a feeling of losing control. 
While narratives like The Time Machine and The War of the 
Worlds offered bleak visions of the future, Wells’ Anticipations of 
1901 marked the first of many attempts to provide solutions for the 
problems which the end of the period of geographical expansion had 
brought about. Written at the beginning of a new century, the essays 
were concerned with the future of traffic and commerce in a world 
that had turned into a relatively small place. Regarding the communi-
cation systems of the year 2000, for instance, Wells’ forecasts prove 
farsighted. He predicted that as a result of new systems of locomotion, 
a global idiom would exist side by side with the several native lan-
guages. This global idiom, he maintained, would probably be English. 
More controversial, however, were Wells’ views on the future 
society. He predicted a world state, which, in allusion to Plato’s an-
cient model, he called the “New Republic”. In outlining this society, 
Wells adhered to the logic of social Darwinism. He envisaged an 
“ethical reconstruction” that would dispense with the sentimental “be-
lief in human equality”, which was considered to be a residual burden 
from the eighteenth century (Wells 1924: 249f). In alliance with con-
temporary social Darwinists, Wells maintained that the existence of 
‘inferior’ and ‘superior’ people could not be denied. As the former 
posed a threat to the “civilising fabric”, the author concluded: “To 
give them equality is to sink to their level, to protect and cherish them 
is to be swamped in their fecundity” (Wells 1924: 250f). 
When Wells wrote about the coming world state, he was eager 
to point out that it would not be characterised by “blissful stagnation”. 
Far from being a “millennial paradise”, the New Republic would take 

Richard Nate 
86
to heart the lesson that life consisted of a universal struggle for exis-
tence and shape its social policy accordingly: 
 
[...] the ethical system which will dominate the world-state, will be 
shaped primarily to favour the procreation of what is fine and efficient 
and beautiful in humanity – beautiful and strong bodies, clear and 
powerful minds, and a growing body of knowledge – and to check the 
procreation of base and servile types, of fear-driven and cowardly 
souls, of all that is mean and ugly and bestial in the souls, bodies, or 
habits of men. To do the latter is to do the former; the two things are 
inseparable. (Wells 1924: 256f) 
 
Resembling his own narrator of The War of the Worlds, Wells showed 
little mercy for the victims of the cosmic struggle for survival. As Na-
ture’s method of dealing with the “multitude of contemptible and silly 
creatures” was to weed them out, the leaders of the New Republic 
would also show “little pity and less benevolence” towards them. Of 
the several ways of dealing with inferior types, “inflicting death” was 
regarded as the most efficient.2 
Although Wells did not mention the writings of Francis Galton 
in this context, he expressed an attitude often heard among contempo-
rary eugenicists. As will be demonstrated below, the “euthanasia of 
the weak and sensual” that he suggested in the last chapter of his An-
ticipations could be read, in fact, as a very radical version of what was 
commonly referred to as ‘negative eugenics’. In alliance with the ‘sci-
entific’ spirit of the age, such measures were regarded as ‘hard but 
necessary’, while opposing views would be dismissed as ‘old fash-
ioned’ or ‘sentimental’.3 As opposed to his later writings, in which he 
would set man’s policies against the “blind” and “cruel” workings of 
nature, Wells at this point obviously thought that measures to prevent 
the ‘unfit’ from reproducing were in perfect accordance with the cos-
mic process of natural selection. 
                                                      
2 
Wells’ remarks actually appear quite ruthless: “People who cannot live hap-
pily and freely in the world without spoiling the lives of others are better out 
of it. That is a current sentiment even to-day, but the men of the New Repub-
lic will have the courage of their opinions.” (1924: 260) 
3 
This attitude was widespread among social Darwinists; as late as 1917, Madi-
son Grant in his book The Passing of the Great Race would write about “a 
sentimental belief in the sanctity of human life”; see Grant 1924: 49. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
87
In an intellectual climate which favoured heredity above the en-
vironment as the shaping force of man’s identity, human inequality 
was regarded as a natural law. In the never-ending ‘struggle for exis-
tence’, organisms which evinced a lack of efficiency were counted as 
‘inferior’ and appeared as ultimately doomed. The social Darwinists 
of the late nineteenth century would apply this verdict to individuals 
as well as to entire communities (Farrall 1985: 306). It is within this 
theoretical framework that the following sentences of Anticipations 
must be read: 
 
And for the rest – those swarms of black and brown and yellow people 
who do not come into the new needs of efficiency? Well, the world is 
a world, not a charitable institution, and I take it they will have to go. 
The whole tenor and meaning of the world, as I see it, is that they 
have to go. So far as they fail to develop sane, vigorous, and distinc-
tive personalities for the great world of the future, it is their portion to 
die out and disappear. (Wells 1924: 274) 
 
That these remarks have caused some irritation among critics is hardly 
surprising.4 If there is little doubt, however, that Wells’ words were 
ill-chosen, it would be wrong to detect in them a racist attitude like 
that to be found among so many of his contemporaries.5 The opposite 
is true. In nearly all of his writings, Wells criticised or even con-
demned the racial theories of his time. In A Modern Utopia (1905), he 
ridiculed the racial views of contemporary anthropologists and in The 
Open Conspiracy of 1928, he stated that the alleged differences be-
tween the races were nothing but “phantoms of the imagination” 
(Wells 1928: 90). On the other hand, it must be admitted that his ideas 
on the “New Republic” show a conflation of biological and social 
categories which was typical of social Darwinism. The law of nature 
was as simple as it was merciless. Cultures which failed to pass the 
‘test of efficiency’ forfeited their right to exist. As will be shown, 
Wells would soon distance himself from such reasoning. 
In The Discovery of the Future of 1902, Wells explained the 
theoretical groundwork on which his Anticipations rested. The title 
was revealing because it once again reflected the general shift from 
the spatial to the temporal categories which marked the intellectual 
                                                      
4 
For a summary of contemporary criticisms, see Partington 2003a: 53ff. 
5 
See Mosse 1978 for a detailed account of the history of European racism. 

Richard Nate 
88
climate of the turn of the century. In what would soon become known 
as ‘futurology’, Wells insisted that predictions concerning the future 
of mankind should be extrapolated systematically from present obser-
vations. He distinguished between two principal forms of thought. 
One, which was retrospective and dogmatic, focused on the past; the 
other, constructive and pragmatic, concentrated on the future: 
 
The first of these two types of mind [...] interprets the things of the 
present, and gives value to this and denies it to that, entirely with rela-
tion to the past. The latter type of mind [...] interprets the things of the 
present and gives value to this or that, entirely in relation to things de-
signed or foreseen. While from that former point of view our life is 
simply to reap the consequences of the past, from this our life is to 
prepare the future. (Wells 1989: 19) 
 
The two ways of thinking were themselves identified with certain pe-
riods of time. While the retrospective view had been preferred in the 
past, prospective thinking was a thing of the future. Wells left little 
doubt as to where his own sympathies lay. The retrospective orienta-
tion, he argued, had stood in the way of human progress long enough. 
By suggesting a scientific investigation of the future that should 
be devoted not only to the social but also to the biological future of 
mankind, Wells continued to think within an evolutionary framework. 
In comparison to his earlier science fiction, however, some differences 
can be observed. While The Time Machine had depicted a future soci-
ety marked by biological retrogression, his lecture of 1902 sounded 
far more optimistic. Compared to his earlier visions, the conclusion of 
his lecture had an almost euphoric ring. Wells dreamed not only of 
‘new’ but also of ‘higher’ forms of life, which would characterise the 
future of the earth. He ended his lecture by explaining: 
 
We are in the beginning of the greatest change that humanity has ever 
undergone. [...] If we are to look, we can foresee growing knowledge, 
growing order, and presently a deliberate improvement of the blood 
and character of the race. [...] We are creatures of the twilight. [...] All 
this world is heavy with the promise of greater things, and a day will 
come, one day in the unending succession of days, when beings, be-
ings who are now latent in our thoughts and hidden in our loins, shall 
stand upon this earth as one stands upon a footstool, and shall laugh 
and reach out their hands amid the stars (Wells 1989: 35f) 
 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
89
If the content of his visions had changed, his method had not. What 
had formed a central argument in The Time Machine, namely the fact 
that the human species did not represent a timeless quality but merely 
a passing step in the evolutionary process, now became the object of 
Wells’ theoretical speculations. Mankind, he continued to stress, rep-
resented no more than a transitional stage; accordingly, the future held 
organisms in store which would sooner or later evolve in the evolu-
tionary process, even if they were as yet unknown. 
From a present-day perspective, Wells’ prophetic statement in 
The Discovery of the Future is difficult to assess. At the turn of the 
century, ideas of the ‘new man’ were widespread and appeared in dif-
ferent intellectual contexts. Visions of the “superman”, which Frie-
drich Nietzsche had expressed in his Thus Spake Zarathustra (1883-
1892), were not primarily biologically inspired, but they nevertheless 
proved to be compatible with the contemporary social interpretations 
of the theory of evolution.6 To avoid reading too much into Wells’ lec-
ture, it is important to bear in mind that its author was not concerned 
with man’s abilities to manipulate the evolutionary process; he merely 
called for a deeper sensitivity towards the dynamic forces in the his-
tory of life. In the following years, however, Wells would make his 
opinions on the possibility of preparing for the ‘future of mankind’ 
more explicit. In the utopian schemes he outlined after the turn of the 
century, these ideas formed an important ingredient. As the Wellsian 
‘world state’ reveals many points of contact with contemporary dis-
cussions on eugenics, these will now briefly be considered. 
 
 
2. Eugenic Utopias 
 
It is hardly accidental that the emergence of eugenics in Britain coin-
cides with the general reorientation from spatial to temporal categories 
outlined above. Once geographical expansions were no longer possi-
ble, eugenics seemed to offer yet another path to progress. It would 
certainly be wrong to view eugenics merely as a biological concept 
and to ignore its close ties to British Imperialism (Farrall 1985). 
Charles Darwin’s cousin, Francis Galton, who was the founder of the 
concept of eugenics, left little doubt that his ideas should also provide 
                                                      
6 
On Nietzsche and Darwin, see Ottmann 1987: 265ff. 

Richard Nate 
90
a tool for strengthening the power of the nation in the ever-increasing 
competition between nations and races (Galton 1904: 3). 
Galton outlined his ideas in a number of writings, among them 
Hereditary Genius (1869) and Enquiries into Human Faculties and Its 
Development (1883). As an old man he gave a lecture at the Univer-
sity of London, in which he summarised his theory. At its core, he 
stated, eugenics was concerned with improving the biological qualities 
of the human race. He was careful to point out that ‘improvement’ in 
this case was not to be confused with the goals of humanism. What 
made a person morally good or bad depended on the given situation 
and was not considered relevant for scientific analysis (Galton 1904: 
1). On the other hand, it was generally agreed that physical strength 
was preferable to a weak constitution. Among those qualities which 
deserved cultivation, Galton numbered “health, energy, ability, manli-
ness and courteous disposition” (Galton 1904: 2). If scientists concen-
trated on these qualities, he insisted, this would result in a stronger na-
tion better equipped to fulfil its imperial duties and to meet the chal-
lenges of the new century. 
The utopian quality of Galton’s eugenics is illustrated by the 
fact that he also formulated his ideas in two fictional narratives which 
were modelled on the traditional utopian pattern.7 Although these texts 
remained fragments, they reveal much about the author’s social ideals. 
“Kantsaywhere”, the first of the two, gives a report of an examination 
the first person narrator has to undergo in the “College of Kantsay-
where”, a eugenic institution devoted to classifying and evaluating the 
biological qualities of the inhabitants. The college owes its existence 
to the will of a “Mr. Neverwas”, in which a donation is linked up with 
a call for eugenic measures. The will can also be read as an open re-
jection of the Christian concept of charity: 
 
He laid down the principle with much emphasis, that none of the in-
come of his property was to be spent on the support of the naturally 
feeble. It was intended, on the contrary, to help those who were strong 
by nature to multiply and to be well nourished. (Galton 2001a: 192) 
 
Given the utopian quality of the text, it goes without saying that the 
goals of the state are shared unanimously by all the citizens who are 
                                                      
7 
The two texts are “Kantsaywhere” and “The Donoghues of Dunno Weir”; for 
a critical edition, see Galton 2001a and 2001b. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
91
“extremely proud and jealous” of “the goodness of their stock”. When 
it comes to pedigrees, the utopians prove to be experts. Instead of de-
voting themselves to “petty gossip”, as the citizens of ordinary coun-
tries would do, their favourite topics in polite conversations are “fam-
ily histories and the prospects of the coming generation” (Galton 
2001a: 207). As they are driven by a strong collective ambition, their 
ultimate objective is the creation of a society whose members will 
have surpassed all the biological shortcomings of present humanity.8 
Given that the ‘race’ is regarded as more important than the in-
dividual, it is interesting to see how the utopian society will deal with 
its ‘failures’. The state, we are told, will try to make their lot “as 
pleasant as possible”, provided that they live in celibacy and agree to 
work hard for the “common good”. For this purpose, special labour 
camps have been designed (Galton 2001a: 195). It must be said, how-
ever, that the text is not fully consistent in this respect. In another pas-
sage, we are informed that those who fail to pass the “Poll Examina-
tion in Eugenics” are considered a threat to the community and are 
persuaded to emigrate. If they give their consent never to return, the 
state will pay for the cost of their deportation (Galton 2001a: 201). For 
those ‘unfit’ individuals who decide to stay, propagation is strictly 
prohibited since it is viewed as “a crime to the state”. Several degrees 
of punishment await possible offenders, ranging from “social disap-
probation” to excommunication by “boycott, deportation, and life-
long segregation” (Galton 2001a: 202). 
The entrance examination at the College of Kantsaywhere con-
sists of ‘anthropometric’, ‘aesthetic’, ‘medical’, and ‘ancestral’ inves-
tigations. Since the narrator acts as Galton’s mouthpiece, it is hardly 
surprising that he passes the test. Even if he does not live up to the 
highest utopian standards, he turns in a “very fair performance” in his 
examination. At the very moment the narrator is ranked as “fit”, the 
utopians change their behaviour towards him and begin to treat him 
like a fellow citizen (Galton 2001a: 206). Needless to say, Galton’s 
eugenic community is a class society in which one class has the right 
to exclude the other from all benefits. 
In his theoretical writings, Galton would concentrate on ‘posi-
tive eugenics’, i.e. measures to improve the human stock by carefully 
                                                      
8 
“They look confidently forward to a coming time when Kantsaywhere shall 
have evolved a superior race of men.” (Galton 2001a: 195). 

Richard Nate 
92
selecting highly talented individuals from distinguished families and 
encouraging them to propagate. Like many of his contemporaries he 
felt disturbed by the ongoing decline in the birth rate of the upper 
classes and viewed his programme as a means to oppose the so-called 
‘counter selection’ which had been brought about by the unrestricted 
reproduction of so-called ‘inferior types’. As the discussion of his 
utopian text has already shown, however, it is almost impossible to 
draw a clear line between positive and negative eugenics. The two 
should rather be regarded as two sides of the same coin.9 Negative 
eugenics began with the idea of improving the stock, not by encourag-
ing the ‘superior’ to propagate, but by preventing the propagation of 
the so-called ‘inferior types’. In its mildest form, it demanded legisla-
tion which would exclude people with hereditary diseases from marry-
ing; more drastic measures included sterilisation programmes for the 
‘unfit’, either on a voluntary or on a compulsory basis. At the begin-
ning of the century, negative eugenic measures were legalised in sev-
eral U.S. states. The first of these laws was passed in Indiana in 1907; 
by the 1930s more than thirty other states had followed.10 
The popularity that eugenics enjoyed at the end of the nine-
teenth century can only be understood against the cultural background 
in which it flourished. Although a direct connection is hardly trace-
able, the concept of positive eugenics corresponded to Friedrich 
Nietzsche’s ideas of a “new aristocracy” and of the “superman” – 
ideas which were widely received also in Britain, among others by the 
                                                      
9 
On the distinction between ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ eugenics from a contem-
porary point of view, see Saleeby 1910: 2ff. 
10 
For a history of American eugenics, cf. Carlson 2001. While no eugenicist at 
the turn of the century would have called for a mass murder of ‘undesirable’ 
elements, the experience of the twentieth century shows that it only took a to-
talitarian regime to make this possible. The ‘eugenic’ programme of Nazi 
Germany began with the Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Off-
spring of June 1933, which led to the sterilisation of approximately 400,000 
persons, and ended with the organised murder of at least 100,000 children and 
adults in the “T 4” programme between 1939 and 1941. Within the framework 
of the racist ideology of the Nazis, even the Holocaust was conceived as the 
carrying out of eugenic measures. On the history of eugenics in Germany, see 
Weindling 1989 and Weingart et al. 1992; on its connections to the Holocaust, 
see Klee 2004: 373ff. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
93
playwright George Bernard Shaw.11 These ideas again were compati-
ble with the concept of heroism that had been formulated earlier in the 
century by Thomas Carlyle. In Hero Worship (1841), the Victorian 
writer had glorified the ‘great men who shaped history’; in Past and 
Present (1843), he had presented the virtues of the medieval knight as 
a panacea for the social unrest of the nineteenth century. 
Negative eugenics also corresponded to the spirit of the times. 
At the turn of the century, fears of cultural and physical decline were 
widespread. Max Nordau’s voluminous book Degeneration (1892), in 
which the author criticised modernist art forms as decadent and com-
pared them to other forms of physical or mental degeneracy, was 
translated into English in 1895 and was widely received.12 Other au-
thors complained that the high proliferation of the lower classes would 
eventually undermine the good breeding stock of the leading nations 
in Europe. As contemporary debates in the United States demon-
strated, this could ultimately lead to fears that the peoples of non-
European countries could be enticed to interbreed with their former 
masters, ‘ruin’ their racial stock and finally overrun the European na-
tions.13 
The way in which Francis Galton’s ideas were received among 
British intellectuals is illustrated by the immediate responses to his 
lecture of 1904.14 Participants in the discussion included, among oth-
ers, Karl Pearson, director of the Eugenics Laboratory, biologist Wal-
ter F. R. Weldon, writer Benjamin Kidd, playwright George Bernard 
Shaw, and, last but not least, Herbert G. Wells. The contributions 
                                                      
11 
See also Carey 1992 on this point; for the British reception of Nietzsche and 
its connection to eugenics, cf. Stone 2002: 62ff. 
12 
The book had first appeared in Germany under the title Entartung and was 
dedicated to Cesare Lombroso, who had investigated inherited forms of 
criminal behaviour. Nordau was a Hungarian German of Jewish descent. His 
real name was Südfeld (meaning ‘southern field’), which he changed into 
Nordau (‘northern meadow’). It is highly ironic that Nordau, who would later 
become a leader of the Zionist movement along with Theodor Herzl, unwit-
tingly helped to lay the basis for the Nazi propaganda against ‘degenerate art’ 
in the 1930s. 
13 
These views were expressed most radically in Madison Grant’s book The 
Passing of the Great Race, which first appeared in 1917; see Grant 1924. In 
Imperial Germany fears of this kind were particularly widespread; cf. Gross 
2000: 145ff. 
14 
See the printed text of this discussion in Galton 1904: 6ff. 

Richard Nate 
94
show a variety of views. While Pearson praised his protégé’s pro-
gramme, others pointed out that the laws of inheritance had not been 
investigated sufficiently enough to take any concrete measures. Ben-
jamin Kidd even went so far as to warn against the creation of ‘lethal 
chambers for the ‘unfit’, thus anticipating the Nazi atrocities of the 
early 1940s.15 A highly provocative comment came from George Ber-
nard Shaw, who argued that Galton’s “eugenic religion” (Shaw in 
Galton 1904: 21) could indeed be a means to save the present civilisa-
tion from degeneration and decay, but that it could succeed only if 
people dispensed with their traditional morals and were ready to cou-
ple with any mate coming from a good stock.16 Even if Shaw’s views 
did not contradict the logic which lay behind eugenics, they were so 
radical that they would have been rejected by almost all contemporary 
eugenicists, above all Galton himself. 
As regards Wells’ contribution to the discussion, it illustrates 
the changes his views had undergone since the publication of Antici-
pations. He now criticised Galton’s programme for not taking into ac-
count the importance of the environment. The fact that the offspring of 
highly talented persons often proved to be extraordinarily intelligent 
was not only due to hereditary factors but could also be explained by 
the social privileges that members of this class generally enjoyed: 
 
The fact that the sons and nephews of a distinguished judge or great 
scientific man are themselves eminent judges or successful scientific 
men may after all, be far more due to a special knowledge of the 
channels of professional advancement than to any distinctive family 
gift. I must confess that much of Dr. Galton’s classical work in this di-
rection seems to me to be premature (Wells in Galton 1904: 10). 
 
Wells also questioned the idea that criminals should be classified 
among the ‘unfit’. Since some crimes required a high degree of intel-
ligence, he argued, criminals could often be found among the “gifted” 
ones. It was therefore hardly determinable, which births could be re-
garded as “superior” at all (Wells in Galton 1904: 11). As far as nega-
tive eugenic measures were concerned, however, Wells was less scep-
                                                      
15 
See Galton 1904: 13. 
16 
“What we need is freedom for people who have never seen each other before, 
and never intend to see one another again, to produce children under certain 
definite public conditions, without loss of honor.” (Shaw in Galton 1904: 22). 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
95
tical. Although he did not call them ‘eugenic’, because he reserved 
this term for the positive measures suggested by Galton, he still re-
garded the “sterilization of failures” as an indirect means to “improve 
the human stock” (Wells in Galton 1904: 11). 
In Mankind in the Making (1903), Wells had already expressed 
his views in greater detail. Here, he declared that he did not reject the 
idea of a selective breeding of human beings altogether. It was the 
‘quality of births’, after all, which would decide the future of the na-
tion. He expressed his doubts, however, that the scientific knowledge 
of the age was as yet sufficient to take any concrete measures. He con-
fessed that he still believed that a manipulation of births was “the only 
and permanent way of mending the ills of the world”, since “in that 
way man has risen from the beasts, and in that way men will rise to be 
over-men” (Wells 2005: 23); at present, however, it was by no means 
clear, which human traits were hereditary and which were not. In ad-
dition, positive attributes such as ‘health’, ‘beauty’, or ‘ability’, which 
were regularly cited by eugenicists, were ill-defined and only seem-
ingly objective. He concluded that for many generations it would not 
be possible to take any selective breeding measures except “in the 
most marginal and tentative manner” (Wells 2005: 22f). 
In order to understand Wells’ viewpoint, it is helpful to look at 
the writings of his teacher T. H. Huxley.17 Although Huxley is gener-
ally known as a fervent defender of the theory of evolution, it would 
be wrong to characterise him as a social Darwinist. In his Evolution 
and Ethics (1894), Huxley had rejected the claim that the ‘struggle for 
survival’ should be applied to the sphere of human relationships with-
out any modification. In the course of evolution, he argued, man had 
protested against the merciless process of natural selection and had re-
placed it by ethical principles. It was man’s conscience that had finally 
revolted against nature’s indifference. In this way, man had emanci-
pated himself from the “cosmic process” (Huxley 1894: 59). 
Evolution and Ethics was written in opposition to a vulgarisa-
tion of the evolutionary theory as it appeared in the writings of con-
temporary social Darwinists. If these dubious followers of Darwin had 
been consistent in their approach, Huxley argued, they would also 
have rejected the use of medicines since these were also intended to 
                                                      
17 
On Huxley’s impact on Wells’ thought, see Partington 2003a: 27ff. 

Richard Nate 
96
prolong the lives of those organisms that would otherwise perish 
(Huxley 1894: 36). He suggested that those who did not hesitate to 
call others ‘unfit’ should rather take a look at themselves in order to 
check if they did not, by chance, become the victims of their own rea-
soning: 
 
I sometimes wonder whether people, who talk so freely about extirpat-
ing the unfit, ever dispassionately consider their own history. Surely, 
one must be very ‘fit’, indeed, not to know of an occasion, or perhaps 
two, in one’s life, when it would have been only too easy to qualify 
for a place among the ‘unfit’. (Huxley 1894: 39) 
 
Huxley’s argument that man’s knowledge was not sufficient to say 
with certainty who should be counted as ‘fit’ and who not, could eas-
ily be applied to Galton’s eugenics. Thus, it is not unlikely that it was 
from here that Wells’ criticism of Galton’s ideas sprang. 
 
 
3. “No Less Than a Planet”: From A Modern Utopia (1905) 
to Men Like Gods (1923) 
 
At the beginning of the new century, Wells published a number of 
writings in which he explored the future of mankind according to the 
method he had suggested in The Discovery of the Future. Two of 
these will be considered here. While his A Modern Utopia of 1905 
was a semi-fictional text, halfway between a political essay and a fic-
tional narrative, Men Like Gods (1923) presented an advanced society 
in a purely fictional form. Although they were written with an interval 
of nearly two decades between them, they both evince close links to 
the eugenics discussions of the early twentieth century. 
In his A Modern Utopia, Wells dispensed with the pessimism of 
his earlier science fiction and envisioned a world state marked by so-
cial and technological progress. A first person narrator, simply called 
“the voice”, acts as the author’s mouthpiece. It is obvious that the 
book was also written in reaction to the end of the process of geo-
graphical expansion. Since Wells was well aware of the fact that the 
traditional utopian island had become obsolete, his vision comprised 
the entire globe. The “voice” explained: 
 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
97
No less than a planet will serve the purpose of a modern Utopia. Time 
was when a mountain valley or an island seemed to promise sufficient 
isolation for a polity to maintain itself intact from outward force […]. 
World State, therefore, it must be. (Wells 1994: 8f) 
 
While the local setting had become less important, temporal aspects 
moved to the foreground. Wells argued that only that utopia deserved 
the epithet ‘modern’ which took into account the change of perspec-
tive brought about by the theory of evolution. If the traditional utopias 
had been static ones in that they presented ideal worlds which would 
never change, the “modern utopia” was to be “kinetic”. This meant 
that it was to accept the never-ending process of evolution and the in-
herent mutability of all things: 
 
The Utopia of a modern dreamer must needs differ in one fundamental 
aspect from the Nowheres and Utopias men planned before Darwin 
quickened the thought of the world. Those were all perfect and static 
States, a balance of happiness won forever against the forces of unrest 
and disorder that inhere in things. [...] Change and development were 
dammed back by invincible dams forever. But the Modern Utopia 
must be not static but kinetic, must shape not as a permanent state but 
as a hopeful stage leading to a long ascent of stages. (Wells 1994: 5) 
 
Thus, the Wellsian utopia is distinguished from its predecessors by its 
inherent dynamism. The utopian vision no longer comprises social 
harmony with a timeless quality, but it tries to take into account the 
transitory character of all phenomena. While the ideal societies of the 
past had sprung from a desire to overcome the process of history once 
and for all, the “modern utopia” was to take the dynamics of history as 
its starting point. The “voice” explained that this also included the in-
sight that the struggle for existence could never be evaded completely. 
As permanent conflict was considered a natural law, a utopia like the 
one presented in William Morris’ News from Nowhere (1891) which 
presupposed that the whole race was “wise, tolerant, noble, perfect” 
was rejected (Wells 1994: 6). 
Seen from a contemporary perspective, A Modern Utopia pre-
sents itself as a highly ambivalent text. While it appears truly ‘mod-
ern’ in its deconstruction of ethnic prejudices, it also suggests methods 
of ‘social surgery’ that present-day readers would hardly find accept-
able. As regards the former, A Modern Utopia is explicit in its rejec-
tion of contemporary race anthropology. In a chapter entitled “Race in 

Richard Nate 
98
Utopia”, the narrator illustrates how fatal the maintaining of such 
prejudices could prove for the future of mankind. Reading them with 
the wisdom of hindsight, his warnings against the negative conse-
quences of race prejudices appear highly prophetic. It is predicted that 
 
these new race prejudices become daily more formidable. They are 
shaping policies and modifying laws, and they will certainly be re-
sponsible for a large proportion of the wars, hardships, and cruelties 
the immediate future holds in store for our earth. (Wells 1994: 194) 
 
The narrator criticises contemporary writers who misinterpreted the 
theory of evolution. While attempting to present their views as “scien-
tific”, they were in fact contributing to the spreading of a “race ma-
nia”, the political functions of which were all too obvious. Working 
along the “lines of the popular” logic, the narrator argues, these “theo-
ries” were misused to justify massacres of indigenous peoples “as a 
painful but necessary part of the civilising process of the world” 
(Wells 1994: 195). 
While contemporary race theories are thus rejected, eugenic 
measures are not entirely discarded. In a chapter entitled “Failure in a 
Modern Utopia”, the narrator asks what a utopian state would do with 
those individuals who proved deficient or maladjusted. Among these 
he lists “congenital invalids”, “idiots and madmen”, “drunkards and 
men of vicious mind”, “cruel and furtive souls”, “stupid people” as 
well as “lumpish, unteachable and unimaginative people” (Wells 
1994: 81). Following T. H. Huxley, Wells’ narrator distinguishes be-
tween the ‘way of Nature’ and the rules of society. As to the former, 
‘failures’ could expect but little mercy as they were usually “killed”, 
“crushed” or “starved” (Wells 1994: 81); with regards to the latter, 
there existed possibilities to mitigate the natural process. 
As the utopian state was supposed to be governed by ethical 
principles, it shunned the ‘survival of the fittest’ that social Darwinists 
regarded as a natural law. Man, according to Wells, represented the 
“unnatural animal, the rebel child of nature”, who would “turn himself 
against the harsh and fitful hand that reared him” (Wells 1994: 81). 
Accordingly, a utopian state could not simply kill physically and intel-
lectually weaker individuals but would make sure that such individu-
als were prevented from being born, i.e. by practising negative eugen-
ics. “No longer will it be that failures must suffer and perish lest their 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
99
breed increase”, the narrator explains, “but the breed of failure must 
not increase, lest they suffer and perish, and the race with them” 
(Wells 1994: 81). 
When it comes to defining the group of individuals intended for 
such measures, however, the narrator is not very explicit. In a chapter 
which deals with the so-called “Samurai”, a group of people that 
forms the political elite, the narrator offers a fourfold classification of 
citizens (Wells 1994: 156ff). While the “poietic” and “kinetic” classes 
form the backbone of the utopian society, the “dull” and the “base” 
are defined exclusively by negative traits. The former group comprises 
the so-called “imbeciles” or “feeble-minded”, the latter includes 
criminals. Although candidates for negative eugenic measures would 
most likely come from the latter two groups, the narrator maintains 
that these are not defined by heredity and he is also eager to stress that 
his classification is merely provisional. A Modern Utopia thus reveals 
how cautious Wells had become in suggesting any measures that 
could violate humanitarian principles. 
Even if the social programme of A Modern Utopia is moderate 
when compared to that of the Anticipations, some elements of nega-
tive eugenics are still retained. While the essay of 1901 had taken it 
for granted that in an ideal society ‘inferior’ people would be killed by 
opiates, the utopian narrator of 1905 shies away from such a solution. 
“There would be no killing, no lethal chambers”, he states and ex-
plains that the world state would see to it that criminals were secluded 
from society. Obviously modelled on the penal colonies of the British 
Empire, notorious criminals, drunkards and drug addicts are sent to 
some remote islands where they can no longer disturb the social har-
mony of the utopian society. While the state presents itself as rather 
humane in rejecting the death penalty for murderers, however, it 
shows no mercy towards another group of human beings. As “de-
formed and monstrous and evilly diseased births” are not considered 
worthy of their lives, the utopian state is expected to kill them imme-
diately after their being born (Wells 1994: 84). 
If Wells began to distance himself more and more from the 
eugenic ideas he had expressed in his Anticipations, it would be some 
years before he rejected socio-biological views altogether. In his novel 
Men Like Gods (1923), these views are still apparent. When he char-
acterised his novel as a “matured” utopia, he referred to the evolution-

Richard Nate 
100
ary state of his utopian citizens rather than to the aesthetic quality of 
the narrative. If the society presented in A Modern Utopia was run by 
an intellectual and moral elite called the “Samurai”, who were ex-
pected to rule over all other citizens, in Men Like Gods, all citizens 
have turned into “Samurai” (Wells 1927: ix). What constitutes the 
utopian world state in this latter novel is the biological advancement 
of its inhabitants rather than any advanced social policy. 
As is typical of most utopian narratives, the plot is kept fairly 
simple. While the protagonist, Mr Barnstaple, is driving to his office, 
he is suddenly drawn into a parallel universe where he finds himself 
together with a group of other terrestrials. It turns out that the inhab-
itants of another reality have been experimenting with space leaps. Al-
though Barnstaple is overwhelmed by the beauty of the utopians and 
the peaceful character of their way of living, his companions do not 
share his enthusiasm at all. When the terrestrials unwittingly cause an 
epidemic among the utopians and are put in quarantine, they start a 
rebellion under the leadership of the social Darwinist Mr Catskill. Be-
cause of their advanced technology, the utopians are able to subdue 
the insurgents. Barnstaple, who has not taken part in the rebellion, 
stays with the utopians long enough to become acquainted with their 
way of life. In the end, however, this does not save him from being 
forced to return to his own reality. 
At first glance, the utopian world of Men Like Gods seems to 
share the very qualities of the pastoral utopia Wells had rejected in his 
A Modern Utopia. Barnstaple learns that there are no destructive 
weeds or animals; predatory animals still exist but they have lost their 
aggressive behaviour towards men. As it soon turns out, however, this 
paradisiacal state is not a natural one but is the result of a long process 
of skilful manipulation. Everything considered undesirable has been 
eliminated by the utopians, from weeds and insects to bacteria and 
germs of all sorts. The narrator summarises: 
 
So soon as the new state of affairs was securely established in Utopia 
and the educational state working, the attention of the Utopian com-
munity had been given to the long-cherished idea of a systematic ex-
termination of tiresome and mischievous species. [...] Many internal 
and external parasites of man and animals had [...] been got rid of 
completely. And further, there had been a great cleansing of the world 
from noxious insects, from weeds and vermin and hostile beasts. The 
mosquito had gone, the house-fly, the blow-fly, and indeed a great 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
101
multitude of flies had gone; they had been driven out of life by cam-
paigns involving an immense effort and extending over many genera-
tions. (Wells 1927: 92f) 
 
Thus, it turns out that the utopian world is not a pastoral paradise at 
all. Only the negative side effects of modern technology have been 
successfully overcome. Aeroplanes are still in use but they do not 
make any noise. Equally, the utopians only superficially resemble 
Rousseau’s children of nature. Although they usually wear no clothes, 
they enjoy everything an advanced civilisation has to offer. The narra-
tor is eager to point out that they are experts in savoir vivre, serving 
their guest with exquisite teas, chicken, ham, pastry, Gruyère cheese 
and a light white wine (Wells 1927: 44). The social life of the utopians 
is described as peaceful. Delinquents, should any appear at all, are 
‘cured’ instead of being punished. An official government does not 
exist; together with private property it was abolished long ago (Wells 
1927: 62). A central bureau of information, however, guarantees that 
every step of a utopian citizen is carefully scrutinised (Wells 1927: 
271f). 
If the utopian world of Men Like Gods appears more exotic 
when compared to the one presented in A Modern Utopia, so do its in-
habitants. As they have developed a telepathic communication device, 
verbal communication has become superfluous. It soon dawns on Mr 
Barnstaple that the utopian citizens represent the product of a long-
standing eugenic programme. Nearly every utopian child, he learns, is 
born healthy. Those who fall short of the expected standard are al-
lowed to live, but are prevented from producing any offspring: 
 
If the individual is indolent there is no great loss, there is plenty for all 
in Utopia, but then it will find no lovers, nor will it ever bear children, 
because no one in Utopia loves those who have neither energy nor dis-
tinction. There is much pride of the mate in Utopian love. (Wells 
1927: 79) 
 
In accordance with Wells’ preference for negative eugenics, the uto-
pian world is described as the outcome of an artificial selection that 
has been going on for centuries. The “dull” and the “base” characters, 
which had still been of some concern to the administrators of the 
“modern utopia”, have vanished altogether. It turns out that the uto-
pian world of Men Like Gods still resembles the one Wells had de-

Richard Nate 
102
picted in 1905, but this one is far more advanced. Since the utopians 
possess the necessary genetic knowledge, their eugenics programme 
proves successful. As the narrator makes clear, their biological status 
is the outcome of conscious artificial selection: 
 
For centuries now Utopian science has been able to discriminate 
among births, and nearly every Utopian alive would have ranked as an 
energetic creative spirit in former days. There are few dull and no 
really defective people in Utopia; the idle strains, the people of lethar-
gic dispositions or weak imaginations, have mostly died out; the mel-
ancholic type has taken its dismissal and gone; spiteful and malignant 
characters are disappearing. The vast majority of Utopians are active, 
sanguine, inventive, receptive and good-tempered. (Wells 1927: 80) 
 
A late echo of Huxley’s distinction between the cosmic and the ethical 
process can be found in the antagonism that exists between Catskill 
and the utopians. To Catskill, the social Darwinist, the latter are living 
in a state of degeneration. When they fall ill because of the germs the 
terrestrials have imported, he feels that this supports his creed of a 
merciless struggle for survival. In a dispute between him and the uto-
pian Urthred, the different attitudes become visible. While Catskill 
clings to his concept of the survival of the fittest, Urthred proves to be 
a true Huxleyan when he questions nature’s wisdom. As he points out, 
it is not the task of the utopians to live naturally, but rather to work 
against nature’s blind indifference: 
 
These Earthlings do not yet dare to see what our Mother Nature is. [...] 
They do not see that except for our eyes and wills, she is purposeless 
and blind. She is not awful, she is horrible. She takes no heed to our 
standards, nor to any standards of excellence. She made us by acci-
dent; all her children are bastards – undesired; she will cherish or ex-
pose them, pet or starve or torment without rhyme or reason. She does 
not heed, she does not care. (Wells 1927: 107) 
 
This does not mean, of course, that biological criteria would not play 
any significant role in the utopian society. It is rather that in their at-
tempts to overcome nature’s indifference the utopians have put their 
social planning on a biological basis. As far as their population policy 
is concerned, they do not regard the human world to be any different 
from the animal world. After completing the cultivation of their flora 
and fauna, they have, in a smooth transition, begun to work on their 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
103
own species. It is in this context that the narrator explicitly mentions 
the idea of eugenics: 
 
And now man was weeding and cultivating his own strain... The Uto-
pians told of eugenic beginnings, of a new and surer decision in the 
choice of parents, of an increasing certainty in the science of heredity; 
and as Mr. Barnstaple contrasted the firm clear beauty of face and 
limb that every Utopian displayed with the carelessly assembled fea-
tures and bodily disproportions of his earthly associates, he realised 
that already, but with three thousand years or so of advantage, these 
Utopians were passing beyond man towards a nobler humanity. (Wells 
1927: 95) 
 
Although the exact eugenic measures of the utopians are never made 
plain in the narrative, there can be no mistake that they include both 
positive and negative ones. While Barnstaple finds himself surrounded 
by physically attractive creatures, he notes that “idiots, inferior types 
and cripples” have long since disappeared from the face of the utopian 
world (Wells 1927: 80). 
Interestingly, it is a thirteen year old boy called “Crystal” who 
informs Barnstaple how, in a long and systematic process of extinc-
tion, the utopians have wiped out everything that appeared to them 
nasty and inferior. Within the context of the narrative, the boy is obvi-
ously introduced to demonstrate that the utopians have finally been 
able to overcome seemingly obsolete virtues such as compassion or 
pity. While these are unmasked as mere selfishness in disguise, the 
utopians prefer to worship a vitality principle that reminds the reader 
of Friedrich Nietzsche’s philosophical views or of Henri Bergson’s 
élan vital: 
 
In a world of fear, weakness, infection, darkness and confusion, pity, 
the act of charity, the alms and the refuge, the deed of stark devotion, 
might show indeed like sweet and gracious presences; but in this 
world of health and brave enterprises, pity betrayed itself a vicious de-
sire. Crystal, Utopian youth, was as hard as his name. (Wells 1927: 
289) 
 
Crystal, who is as young as he is unsentimental, is most explicit when 
it comes to the process of biological cleansing that has been accom-
plished. “There had been a certain deliberate elimination of ugly, ma-
lignant, narrow, stupid and gloomy types during the past dozen centu-

Richard Nate 
104
ries or so [...]”, he reports to Barnstaple without flinching (Wells 
1927: 264). 
In the light of what has been said, it seems consistent that the 
utopians also show little compassion for Barnstaple’s dilemma. Al-
though he admires the utopians, he has to recognise that he does not fit 
into their world. With their crystal-clear reasoning, the utopians are 
able to ‘prove’ to him that it is better for him to leave. Resembling 
Jonathan Swift’s miserable protagonist, who was forced to leave be-
hind his beloved horses in Gulliver’s Travels (1726), Wells’ protago-
nist also finds himself ostracised from the land of his dreams. Caught 
in the logical web of his own making, he has to accept that the utopian 
world offers no place for an inferior type like him (Wells 1927: 296). 
Despite such disappointments, the narrator is still careful to 
point out that the utopians are not in any way cruel to their human 
counterparts. In view of the utopians’ method of dealing with ‘harmful 
species’, the more sensitive reader may feel a little disturbed, of 
course, to hear that they compare the earthlings to rats and parasites,18 
but the plot of the novel is arranged in such a way that the humans are 
always the ones to blame. Because of their inherited stupidity, their 
quarrels and religious beliefs, Barnstaple is told, humans represent a 
continuous danger of infection to the utopian society. To be saved 
from being wiped out completely, it is recommended that they take 
their leave and henceforth avoid any contact with the higher civilisa-
tion. 
Men Like Gods reveals that in 1923 Wells had not yet aban-
doned his hopes for the biological improvement of the human race. 
Viewed against the background of his other utopian writings, Men 
Like Gods may even be said to contain the author’s most explicit 
eugenic vision. Not only has his utopian society taken to heart George 
Bernard Shaw’s call to abandon all middle-class concepts of matri-
mony, but it also enjoys the fruits of a long-standing process of artifi-
cial selection that extends to plants, animals and humans alike. At the 
same time, however, the eugenic programme of Men Like Gods is 
qualified by the fact that it is presented within a purely fictional 
framework. While Anticipations had taken the form of the straight-
forward essay, A Modern Utopia was designed as a semi-fictional 
                                                      
18 
Cf. for instance Uthred’s remark: “It is true; there is something fierce and rat-
like and dangerous about Earthly men.” (Wells 1927: 111) 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
105
work or, as Wells’ explained, a “shot-silk texture between philosophi-
cal discussion on the one hand and imaginative narrative on the 
other”.19 If the semi-fictional text A Modern Utopia had already been 
much more cautious in its suggestions of eugenic measures, Men Like 
Gods cannot in any way be regarded as a political programme. It was 
written at a time when the author’s confidence in biology as a means 
of social improvement had already started to crumble.20 Viewed in this 
light, it marks the turning point rather than the peak of Wells’ 
thoughts regarding eugenics. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Men Like Gods was the last work in which Wells considered eugenics 
within a utopian context. If eugenic ideas are still traceable in his writ-
ings of the 1920s and 1930s, they do not betray any utopian quality. In 
The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind of 1932, he would reject 
positive eugenics altogether, even if he still held that negative eugenic 
measures might in some cases prove useful. In accordance with the 
contemporary legislation of several U.S. states, these included the 
sterilization of criminals and persons suffering from hereditable dis-
eases (Wells 1932: 677ff). Similar views were expressed in The Sci-
ence of Life (1930), a work which Wells wrote in collaboration with 
Julian Huxley and G. P. Wells. Eugenics was regarded as ‘impractica-
ble’ because the knowledge of the hereditary process was still insuffi-
cient. This did not mean, however, that scientific knowledge could not 
advance in time. When some distant future of the human race is 
brought into view, the text shows an enthusiasm which still resembles 
Wells’ euphoric visions of The Discovery of the Future: 
 
There may come a time when the species will have a definite repro-
ductive policy, and will be working directly for the emergence and se-
lection of certain recessives and the elimination of this or that domi-
nant. [...] Once the eugenic phase is reached, humanity may increase 
very rapidly in skill, mental power and general vigour. (Wells et al. 
1930: 879) 
 
                                                      
19 
This is the description Wells used in a later preface (1925: x). 
20 
Cf. Partington 2003b on Wells’ later eugenic views. 

Richard Nate 
106
However, some qualifications are in place here. First, it is not clear 
whether these passages were written by H. G. Wells himself or if they 
merely reflect the eugenic beliefs of one of his co-writers;21 second, it 
has to be noted that these passages do not suggest any concrete 
eugenic programme but merely state the possibility that man might be 
able to create a feasible programme in the distant future. It appears 
that statements such as these demonstrate the crisis of eugenics rather 
than its success. As eugenics ceased to be considered as a valid 
method of social improvement, it was deferred to a remote future real-
ity. Thus, it had more in common with science fiction than with real 
science. 
As Wells’ faith in the biological improvement of mankind 
dwindled, he increasingly placed his hopes in pedagogical efforts 
(Partington 2003b: 77ff). Such a shift is clearly traceable in The Open 
Conspiracy (1928). In this work, Wells would still emphasise man’s 
power to work against the struggle for existence. Written in the wake 
of the Great War, the “Open Conspiracy” was meant to represent an 
“awakening of mankind from a nightmare of the struggle for existence 
and the inevitability of war” (Wells 1928: 152). The means to over-
come nature’s indifference, however, were no longer believed to be 
eugenics but the development of adequate “educational machinery” 
(Wells 1928: 138). Wells suggested special schools which should be 
designed as “laboratories”. If their pupils were still regarded as a “so-
cial élite”, they were not distinguished by any hereditary qualities 
(Wells 1928: 140). The “new humanity” that Wells now envisaged 
was characterised by its intellectual rather than its physical maturity. 
“Its thoughts”, the author stated, “will be to our thoughts as the 
thoughts of a man to the troubled mental experimenting of a child” 
(Wells 1928: 152). 
In summary, it can be said that if Wells never fully subscribed 
to the eugenic programme promoted by Galton and others, he never-
theless toyed with the idea for a certain period of time. Looking at his 
futurology from a present-day perspective, it becomes clear that the 
pioneering element of his work was not his Darwinian outlook but his 
belief that the various forms of nineteenth century nationalism had to 
                                                      
21 
Julian Huxley would suggest eugenic measures, albeit on a voluntary basis, as 
late as 1953; cf. Huxley 1953: 151. On the question of Wells’ authorship, cf. 
also Partington 2003b: 80. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
107
be replaced by a principle of supranational responsibility in order to 
ensure that the end of the process of geographical expansion would 
not result in a global disaster. In the years following World War One, 
Wells became known as a promoter of world peace. Having been an 
early critic of the Treaty of Versailles, which in his opinion had not 
been fair to the defeated powers, he spoke on The Common Sense of 
World Peace before the German Reichstag in 1929. By 1940, when 
European democracies were on the retreat and totalitarianism on the 
rise, the one-time author of the “New Republic” had turned into a de-
fender of human rights. Although his book The New World Order was 
not concerned with eugenics, it is interesting to note that he now re-
jected even negative eugenic methods. Wells explicitly demanded that 
“no man shall be subjected to any sort of mutilation or sterilisation ex-
cept with his own deliberate consent, freely given” (Wells 1940: 143). 
In his doctoral dissertation of 1944, he went so far as to denounce Gal-
ton’s ideas as “fascist” (Partington 2003b: 79), thus comparing the ‘fa-
ther of eugenics’ with Britain’s enemies, who in the spring of that year 
had started the so-called ‘final solution’, in which the ‘lethal chamber’ 
would play a crucial role.22 With his human rights campaign, Wells 
left no doubts about his humanitarian outlook. It has been argued that 
the catalogue of human rights which he promoted in the 1940s may 
even have inspired the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights 
of 1948 (Hamano 2001). While it would not be amiss to view the 
United Nations and its various organisations as a final realisation of 
the principle of global responsibility that Wells had advocated for so 
long, it is also clear that the roots of the United Nations are not to be 
found in the eugenic utopianism of the early twentieth century, but 
rather in the traumatic experiences which attempts to put such ideas 
into practice had caused. 
                                                      
22 
The “Wannsee conference”, whose participants planned the murder of 11 mil-
lion European Jews, was held in Berlin in January 1942. The gas chambers, 
which were put into operation in the spring of that year, were modelled on 
those used in the euthanasia programme “T 4” and thus had their roots in an 
extreme version of negative eugenics. 

Richard Nate 
108
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Conrad, Joseph (1995). Heart of Darkness with The Congo Diary (ed. Robert 
Hampson). Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Galton, Francis (1904). “Eugenics: Its Definition, Scope, and Aims”, in: Journal of 
Sociology 10: 1-25. 
— (2001a). “The Eugenic College of Kantsaywhere”, in: Utopian Studies 12: 191-
209. 
— (2001b). “The Donoghues of Dunno Weir”, in: Utopian Studies 12: 210-33. 
Grant, Madison (1924). The Passing of the Great Race or, the Racial Basis of Euro-
pean History. London: Bell. 
Huxley, Julian (1953). Evolution in Action. London: Chatto & Windus. 
Huxley, Thomas Henry (1894). Evolution and Ethics and Other Essays. London: 
Macmillan and Co; rpt. Hildesheim and New York: Olms. 
Nordau, Max (1895). Degeneration. New York: Appleton. 
Saleeby, C. W. (1910). “The Progress of Eugenics”, in: Supplement to the New Age 7: 
2-4. 
Wells, Herbert G. (1924). Anticipations and Other Papers. London: Fisher Unwin. 
— (1925). “Preface to Volume IX”, in: A Modern Utopia and Other Discussions. 
London: Fisher Unwin, ix-xi. 
— (1927). Men Like Gods and The Dream. London: Fisher Unwin. 
— (1928). The Open Conspiracy: Blue Prints for a World Revolution. London: Gol-
lancz. 
— (1932). The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind. London: Heinemann. 
— (1940). The New World Order. London: Secker & Warburg. 
— (1989). The Discovery of the Future with The Common-Sense of World Peace and 
The Human Adventure (ed. Patrick Parrinder). London: PNL. 
— (1993). The War of the Worlds (ed. Arthur C. Clarke). London: Dent. 
— (1994). A Modern Utopia (ed. Krishan Kumar). London: Dent. 
— (2005). Mankind in the Making. Cirencester: Echo Library. 
Wells, Herbert G. et al. (1930). The Science of Life. London: Cassell & Co. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Carey, John (1992). The Intellectuals and the Masses: Pride and Prejudice among the 
Literary Intelligentsia, 1880-1939. London: Faber & Faber. 
Carlson, Elof A. (2001). The Unfit: A History of a Bad Idea. New York: Cold Spring 
Harbor Labatory Press. 
Farrall, Lyndsay Andrew (1985). The Origins and Growth of the English Eugenics 
Movement 1865-1925. New York and London: Garland. 
Gross, Pascal (2000). Kolonialismus, Eugenik und bürgerliche Gesellschaft in 
Deutschland 1850-1918. Frankfurt and New York: Campus. 

Herbert G. Wells and the Eugenic Utopia 
109
Hamano, Teru (2001). “H.G. Wells and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights”, 
in: The Wellsian 24: 31-46. 
Klee, Ernst (2004). “Euthanasie” im NS-Staat: Die “Vernichtung lebensunwerten Le-
bens”. 11th ed. Frankfurt a. M.: Fischer. 
Mosse, George L. (1978). Toward the Final Solution: A History of European Racism. 
New York: Fertig. 
Nate, Richard (2001). “Scientific Utopianism in Francis Bacon and H. G. Wells: From 
Salomon’s House to The Open Conspiracy”, in: Barbara Goodwin (ed.). The 
Philosophy of Utopia. London and Portland: Cass, 172-88. 
Ottmann, Henning (1987). Philosophie und Politik bei Nietzsche. Berlin and New 
York: De Gruyter. 
Pallua, Ulrich (2006). Eurocentrism, Racism, Colonialism in the Victorian and Ed-
wardian Age. Heidelberg: Winter. 
Partington, John S. (2003a). Building Cosmopolis: The Political Thought of H. G. 
Wells. Aldershot: Ashgate. 
— (2003b). “H. G. Wells’s Eugenic Thinking of the 1930s and 1940s”, in: Utopian 
Studies 14: 74-81. 
Pfister, Manfred and Monika Lindner (1982). “Alternative Welten: Ein typologischer 
Versuch zur englischen Literatur”, in: Manfred Pfister (ed.). Alternative Wel-
ten. München: Fink, 11-38. 
Schenkel, Elmar (2001). H. G. Wells: Der Prophet im Labyrinth. Eine essayistische 
Erkundung. Wien: Zsolnay. 
Schnackertz, Hermann Josef (1992). Darwinismus und literarischer Diskurs: Der 
Dialog mit der Evolutionsbiologie in der englischen und amerikanischen Lite-
ratur. München: Fink. 
Smith, David C. (1986). H.G. Wells: Desperately Mortal. New Haven and London: 
Yale UP. 
Stone, Dan (2002). Breeding Superman: Nietzsche, Race and Eugenics in Edwardian 
and Interwar Britain. Liverpool: Liverpool UP. 
Weindling, Paul (1989). Health, Race and German Politics between National Unifica-
tion and Nazism, 1870-1945. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Weingart, Peter et al. (1992). Rasse, Blut und Gene: Geschichte der Eugenik und Ras-
senhygiene in Deutschland. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 


 
 
 
 
 
Persistence of Obedience:  
Theological Space and Ritual Conversion in  
George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
 
Ralph Pordzik 
 
 
Abstract: George Orwell’s novel Nineteen Eighty-Four is generally regarded as a dys-
topian text engaging the challenge posed to the personal self by totalitarian politics. 
As opposed to that, this essay seeks to recast the text in the generic frame of the con-
version narrative in which the transformation of an autonomous subject into a passive 
and ardent follower of a new faith is documented. It will be argued that for Orwell the 
re-admission to some kind of assimilative faith appears to represent a strong utopian 
element, one offering release from both individual conscience and social responsibil-
ity. Profoundly upset by the horrors of the twentieth century, Orwell in the 1940s was 
visibly beginning to deem the claims of personal judgement and humanist freedom as 
too heavy a burden for individual man. 
 
Key names and concepts: Augustine – Catholic Church – Christianity – conversion 
narrative – empiricism – inward man – Jacques Lacan – Martin Luther – John H. 
Newman – George Orwell – St. Paul – Alan Sandison – the Symbolic and the Imagi-
nary 
 
 
1. ‘Schemes of Grace’: Nineteen Eighty-Four  
as Conversion Narrative 
 
Nineteen Eighty-Four is commonly regarded as a novel devoid of any 
trace of communal or utopian spirit. For many readers it presents 
merely a bleak nightmare of a future, a no-exit disaster fiction written 
by a heavily traumatized left-wing intellectual stalled in a post-war de-
featist attitude and without any further creative resources for ideolo-
gical renewal left. The gist of many of these responses has been 
summed up, quite plausibly, in Alok Rai’s statement that the “despair 
in Nineteen Eighty-Four and its perverse intensification is, in a sense, 
Orwell’s punishment of himself for having entertained [democratic 
Socialist] hopes at all” (Rai 1988: 145f). 

Ralph Pordzik 
112
The following essay seeks to place Orwell in a different context 
and to restore to the novel’s texture its repressed utopian space by 
reading it along Lacanian lines – as a paradoxical text hinged on the 
registers of the Symbolic and the Imaginary as the only sites in dis-
course where the individual can enact and put to a test its narcissistic 
vision of itself as integral and whole (Lacan 1998: 279). On the sur-
face of the narrated plot and its political message, Winston appears to 
be the “last man in Europe” (Alan Sandison), the heroic outsider 
bravely confronting the humiliating forces of despotism and party 
rule; but in reality Winston fears nothing more than his own individu-
alism and personal responsibility towards others – his emotionally and 
sexually disastrous relationship with Julia demonstrates this point with 
admirable clarity! Winston seeks to escape the realm of communal 
and ethical responsibility in order to hand himself over to some kind 
of authoritative faith denouncing the individual’s presence and com-
mitment to life, experience, interaction and heterosexual ambition – in 
this almost complete self-effacement of the individual, I hold, lies the 
true, if only implicitly argued, utopian dimension of Nineteen Eighty-
Four. Resolutely submitting its protagonist to the logic of spiritual 
truth and the figurative and existential spaces it commands, the narra-
tive exhibits strong affinities with the doctrinal theology as developed 
by St. Paul in his epistles to the early Christian communities, even 
though the more obvious religious allusions all seem to have been 
cancelled from the “static and logical […] locked universe” (Rai 1988: 
135) of political narrative in Nineteen Eighty-Four. 
It is crucial to bear in mind that Winston has committed himself 
to a strict empiricism according to which his personal autonomy de-
pends on a direct confrontation between the individual and the data of 
his sensual experience, between the autonomous self and objective re-
ality. The strength this demands of him is immense, however, and – as 
I shall argue – the desire is strong to return (at whatever price) to that 
larger authority or faith from which, in the ‘heresies’ of empiricism 
and individualism, he has alienated himself. Unconsciously, Winston 
thus considers yielding to the Party’s will as a welcome opportunity of 
re-inscription into the quasi-religious universe of the symbolic ‘law’ 
of the father – St. Paul’s complex image of Christ as saviour or red-
emptive force, i.e. – and participation in the set standards of preor-

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
113
dained systemic solidarity.1 The idea of law as unfolded here resem-
bles, paradoxically, the much-debated concepts of ‘faith’ and ‘grace’ 
as developed in several of Paul’s epistles to the early Christian com-
munities of the Mediterranean in the 1st century CE.2 
 
 
2. Prerogatives of Faith: The Baptising of Winston 
 
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. (Job 13:15) 
 
For the average reader used to regard Nineteen Eighty-Four as a novel 
about totalitarian rule and the consequences of political terror meted 
out by the state to its citizens the idea of baptism may at first seem too 
inadequate or unorthodox a concept to grasp any of the major side-
lines of the writer’s argument.3 However, large parts of the novel are 
devoted to depicting in detail the sufferings of Winston as a painful 
yet essential process of intellectual transformation; Winston merely 
undergoes what he unconsciously wishes to undergo anyway – the los-
ing of his grip on empirical reality and so on his individuality. With 
the plot slowly progressing and the dialogue between himself and 
O’Brien intensifying in terms of epistemological complexity (both are 
verbally locked in discussing imaginary cases that involve a high de-
gree of casuistry), Winston’s stubborn rejection of the Party system in 
Oceania increasingly appears to harden into a claustrophobic delusion 
or “neurotic hallucination” (Rai 1988: 136), a fixation propped up to 
appease his hurt narcissism – the system of Big Brother embodying, in 
all respects, the ordre symbolique as the only discursive mode grant-
ing the subject full recognition as a ‘being-that-lacks’, a subject afraid 
of its fundamental freedom and independence in the world and thus 
                                                      
1  
The demands this form of introspection can set on any individual are also al-
luded to by St. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthians where he foregrounds his 
own efforts while at the same time claiming for himself the intervention of the 
Almighty – all this rendered in a paradoxical fashion ever since present in the 
dogma of Christianity: “but I laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not 
I, but the grace of God which was with me” (1 Corinth. 15:10). For further 
stimulating details of this issue, see Peters 1993, Stendhal 1963 and Ziesler 
1990. 
2  
For a detailed account of Paul’s influence on western thinking, see Hays 1989 
and Maccoby 1986. 
3  
See, e.g., Young 1991. 

Ralph Pordzik 
114
desiring to be handed over to some kind of all-embracing “corporate 
care” (Sandison 1986: 168).4 Winston is thus more or less baptized 
into understanding and believing the truth of doctrine as presented to 
him by antagonist and examiner O’Brien – a doctrine demanding of 
him unquestioning acceptance of its ultimate saving power yet also 
creating ample space for his continuous and eloquent self-projection. 
What is crucial to understand is that Nineteen Eighty-Four 
stages this fundamental notion of symbolic disempowerment as the 
history of frustrated desire in individual development; the text, guid-
ing its readers through a series of explorative stages in which 
Winston’s many thwarted ambitions are laid out, documented and fi-
nally exposed as pointlessly vain, expresses a deeply felt wish to re-
nounce individual aspiration, choice and assertiveness as forms of 
conceited and egotistical wish-fulfilment (a mode of desiring unambi-
guously located in Lacan’s imaginary register) and to become instead 
part of a larger communal, de-personalising dogma or creed – an order 
of priorities recreating the internalised father-figure in the more ab-
stract mode or register of the Symbolic: as a form of quasi-theological 
discourse concerned with witnessing and resolving the crisis arising 
from the post-war challenge of individualism and philosophical self-
centredness. 
Some remarks will have to be made in the following with re-
spect to the seminal work of Alan Sandison, George Orwell: After 
1984 (1986), in which some of the psychological implications of Or-
well’s most successful novel were thoroughly exposed for analysis for 
the first time. According to Sandison, the Catholic Church is the 
power which for Orwell represents the institution best suited to offer 
recompense for the decentring of the subject inaugurated with the 
Reformation and to renew the social pact between the individual and a 
larger communal identity (cf. Sandison 1986: 168f).5 Thus envisaged, 
the Pauline Church as “spiritual Rock” (1 Corinth. 10:4) embodies the 
                                                      
4  
According to psychoanalytic discourse, this ‘freedom’ is restricted to our ca-
pacity for symbolization or language covering over “the metaphysical or onto-
logical gap where an origin might have been” (Mellard 1991: 7). 
5  
The tendency to submissive resignation from received Protestant standards of 
self-confirmation in some English writers seems to have been a minor – if as 
yet largely unrecognized – cultural phenomenon of the late 1940s and early 
50s; see, e.g., Litvack’s analysis of Muriel Spark’s conversion to Roman Ca-
tholicism and the impact this had on her writing (Litvack 1993). 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
115
internalised paternal image the text establishes as its major point of 
symbolical reference. 
Alan Sandison has located this quest for identity and the reli-
gious conversion coming along with it in the remains of a doctrinal 
debate harking back to Luther’s confrontation of the charges estab-
lished against him by the theologian Johannes Eck (1486-1543) in fif-
teenth-century Germany (Sandison 1986: 1, 168, 182); I suggest, how-
ever, to look to the theology of St. Paul as the most impressive model 
for manifesting the power of the Symbolic as a code of paternal domi-
nance in the text. Paul’s conversion to Christianity is included in the 
Acts of the Apostles, a narrative confronting the persecutor of the 
Christians with the anger of God for the first time in the New Testa-
ment: “And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is 
hard for thee to kick against the pricks” (Acts 9:5).6 The story, with a 
few minor variations, is repeated twice more in the course of the 28 
chapters of Acts, both times retold by Paul himself. There are quite a 
few striking parallels to Orwell’s novel here some of which ask for 
careful elaboration, the most revealing being the fact of Winston in-
creasingly defining himself in relation to his torturer and interrogator 
O’Brien in a fashion that calls to mind the self-styled apostle’s expos-
tulating with God and the Lord’s impressive voice urging his “chosen 
vessel” (Acts 9:15) to go on, respectively: 
 
Don’t worry, Winston; you are in my keeping. For seven years I have 
watched over you. Now the turning-point has come. I shall save you, I 
shall make you perfect. (Orwell 1990: 256)7 
 
O’Brien offers Winston an image of himself as a man undergoing 
rapid doctrinal transformation in the service of a higher spiritual cause 
– a view strikingly parallel to St. Paul’s conversion on the road to 
Damascus (“And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; 
and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee 
                                                      
6  
Unless otherwise indicated, all quotations refer to the Authorized King James 
Version of the Bible (ed. Carroll and Prickett 1997). 
7  
Attention must be drawn to the number symbolism inherent in this scene and 
its relation to the body of ‘magical’ numbers as identified in the New Testa-
ment, especially in the Revelation of St. John; it is without doubt important to 
note that the Ministry reveals its having kept Winston under observation for 
full seven years! (Cf. Rai 1988: 148) 

Ralph Pordzik 
116
to do”, Acts 22:10). Winston once believed in his innate freedom and 
in the idea that he was made ‘in God’s image’ in order to grow up a 
critical and self-sufficient individual, but the ‘Fall’ shattered that im-
age and doomed man to the ‘sin’ of reason and the ‘darkness’ of 
worldly (empirical) common sense. The ‘Fall’, in this case, turns out 
to be Winston’s proud and immodest faith in a pre-given and indepen-
dent reality open to rational examination;8 what precisely ‘sin’ means 
in the given context is made clear in a related passage: 
 
“I am taking trouble with you, Winston”, [O’Brien] said, “because 
you are worth trouble. You know perfectly well what is the matter 
with you. You have known it for years, though you have fought 
against the knowledge. You are mentally deranged. You suffer from a 
defective memory. You are unable to remember real events, and you 
persuade yourself that you remember real events, and you persuade 
yourself that you remember other events which never happened. For-
tunately it is curable. You have never cured yourself of it, because you 
did not choose to. There was a small effort of the will that you were 
not ready to make.” (Orwell 1990: 258) 
 
What the ‘effort of the will’ requires of Winston is nothing short of 
the renunciation of self and subjective prejudice and his willingness to 
follow his ‘saviour’ O’Brien as a compliant servant or disciple. (Not 
for nothing does the torturer’s name tend to remind us of a character 
of vaguely Catholic or Irish descent;9 Winston in turn represents the 
stereotype of the averagely gifted, typical English ‘everyman’ featur-
ing prominently in national ethnography.) The whole dialogue presses 
its readers to acknowledge the resemblance between Winston’s meta-
morphosis and Paul’s intellectual contemplation of his conversion on 
the road to Damascus: “But before faith came, we were kept under the 
                                                      
8  
Observe the parallels to Gen. 3:7-11: “And the eyes of them both were 
opened, and they knew that they were naked; […] And [God] said, Who told 
thee that thou was naked?” What the encounter describes is, in other words, 
the fact of human curiosity and of the individual becoming aware of his or her 
potential for insight into the hidden apparatus of nature. 
9  
I am indebted to Alan Sandison for this instructive parallel (cf. Sandison 
1986: 182). Having in mind the persistent Catholic subtext in Nineteen 
Eighty-Four, Sandison also argues, quite persuasively, that it is not “insignifi-
cant that the only other historical period admitted by the Party is the Middle 
Ages” (179). It is indeed true that, with the Party’s weird forms of manipula-
tion and “obscurantism”, the reader is catapulted “back in the Middles ages” 
(180). 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
117
law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed. 
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us into Christ, that 
we might be justified by faith.” (Gal. 3:23-24) In discourse after 
lengthy discourse Paul and O’Brien wax lyrical about how purity and 
rectitude are revealed in and through faith alone.10 Highlighting faith 
allows in particular O’Brien to denigrate all individually inspired ac-
tions as against the system of Big Brother; generally accredited modes 
of activity such as rational thinking and circumspect political judge-
ment thus metamorphose into mortal sins. 
In the epistles of St. Paul, this self-abasing view of man goes 
hand in hand with an eschatological vision of virtue, wholeness and 
integrity: “There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor 
free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Je-
sus” (Gal. 3:28). According to the Jewish theologian, everything de-
pends on our ability to see and, seeing, to recognize our previous 
blindness: “For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to 
face: now I know in part; but then I shall know even as also I am 
known” (1 Corinth. 13: 12). (And it is only one of the many subtle 
ironies of the novel that the inherited Jewish law every truly inspired 
Christian is supposed to leave behind is associated with the received 
discourse of English common sense! It is Winston who assumes, quite 
misleadingly, to have “the form of knowledge and of the truth in the 
law”, Rom. 2:20.) The important act is not repentance but awakening 
– this is why O’Brien never wants to hear about Winston’s giving in 
to the Party’s will out of sheer conformity, fear of further physical 
pain and torture or even pure opportunism. The important act is one of 
a deeply felt sea-change, a cardinally new faith entirely transforming 
life and personal vision. At this point, the symbolic parallels between 
Winston as fictional character and St. Paul as representative of a new 
creed or Christian order of faith come fully into view: the theological 
power of Paul’s exposition or “symbolic world of belief” has never 
been in doubt (Carroll and Prickett 1997: 416), and centuries of Chris-
tianity have shown its ability to remain ethically relevant “almost from 
the moment he began to preach” (Josipovici 1988: 240ff).11 It is not 
                                                      
10  
See particularly St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans; Rom. 2-8. 
11  
The uncontested doctrinal authority of St. Paul also accounts for Stephen 
Prickett’s somehow feeling justified to call him the “Lenin of the early 
churches, transforming his own understanding of Jesus into a viable organiza-
tion[.]” (Carroll and Prickett 1997: 415, “Notes to the New Testament”) 

Ralph Pordzik 
118
for nothing that the consequences of this long-standing influence can 
be observed in a large body of spiritual writings dealing with the is-
sues of confession and conversion from a highly personal and intro-
spective standpoint, such as Augustine’s Confessions (c. 400) and 
John H. Newman’s Apologia pro Vita Sua (1864).12 
Even more far-reaching are its implications for the concept of 
the individual as deployed in Orwell’s novel. In the – given the dire 
circumstances of his imprisonment – ‘foolhardy’ defence of his ideas, 
Winston appears to take only the most unexceptional views on ex-
ternal reality, truth and empirical validity, transforming them into in-
ward events as he goes along. This inwardness is recast in entirely dif-
ferent terms by his opponent O’Brien, however; the result is the open-
ing up of a wholly new dimension of theological speculation, one in 
which the opportunity for pure, untrammelled faith becomes the 
dominant factor in the production of the space within which the 
‘community’ interacts: 
 
Only the disciplined mind can see reality, Winston. You believe that 
reality is something objective, external, existing in its own right. You 
also believe that the nature of reality is self-evident. When you delude 
yourself into thinking that you see something, you assume that every-
one else sees the same thing as you. But I tell you, Winston, that real-
ity is not external. Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere 
else. Not in the individual mind, which can make mistakes, and in any 
case soon perishes: only in the mind of the party, which is collective 
and immortal. Whatever the Party holds to be truth, is truth. It is im-
possible to see reality except by looking through the eyes of the Party. 
(Orwell 1990: 261) 
 
‘Justified’ by his final, hard-won faith in the Party and the intellectual 
and doctrinal authority it asserts over the individual, Winston can only 
make his peace with the social system through O’Brien, the authorized 
messenger of the ‘New Church’. Everything rests in the confession of 
his absolute and unconditioned faith, his declaration that there is no 
reality verifiable by the senses: in Nineteen Eighty-Four, even the fac-
tual history of the West along with its major events and developments 
is allegorized as a simulacrum and then internalized in order to reveal 
                                                      
12  
For further details, see Fredriksen 1986. A rather instructive reading of Augu-
stine’s Confessions in Lacanian terms has been offered by Goux 1965. The 
major points discussed here might also be applied, with some reservations, to 
James Joyce’s Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1915). 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
119
a spiritual dimension. To thus deny objective reality or to allow for the 
violation of the natural laws is without doubt to pose as God or any 
other being of divine power! 
What follows from this exposition is that if everything that ever 
took place in the realm of empirical facts is ‘revealed’ to have only a 
subjective dimension, then it becomes vitally important to give to 
these inward meanings some kind of quasi-objective status. This status 
is primarily (and paradoxically) achieved through mental torture: Like 
Saul of Tarsus turning into Paul, Winston is first pursued and then 
scourged and imprisoned; he is depicted as responding to O’Brien’s 
diatribes and incursions and meticulously set in scene as fending off 
either the Party soldier’s horrible threats or the persistent feeling of his 
own intellectual inferiority. Winston’s martyrdom is thus displaced 
into the sphere of the objective and universal, acquiring meaning and 
purpose as the narrative goes along. It certainly would be difficult, 
given the whole lot of awful border experiences as depicted in the 
text, not to register the writer’s implicit fondness for dwelling on the 
facts of the character’s suffering, conversion and final ‘purification’ – 
purification through physical pain somehow being the only ‘objective’ 
proof of Winston’s new-won faith in a higher truth or public discipline 
as provided by the Party! 
This is also why the various stages of Winston’s conversion 
take up so much narrative time: they help explain to the reader the di-
lemmas of personal reflection and rational self-examination; giving 
emphasis to Winston’s impending future enlightenment, their real aim 
is all the time to renounce precisely this dimension of subjective un-
derstanding, to renounce the very idea of individual self-fulfilment 
and experiential complacency!13 Like St. Paul, Orwell seems to be in-
tent on showing us that by cutting his protagonist off from his family 
and beloved (Julia), he seeks to cut him off experimentally from the 
culture and beliefs of his youth as well – and such a vision of oneness 
(in Christ?), however degrading and uprooting in itself, can indeed be 
regarded as sweet and soothing: “Because the carnal mind is enmity 
                                                      
13  
In his study on Orwell, Alan Sandison offers an excellent account clarifying 
how and why, in the twentieth century, the notion of the personal self or 
“autonomous individual” (Orwell) has come to be regarded as “susceptible to 
historical destruction” (Sandison 1986: 4f). 

Ralph Pordzik 
120
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can 
be” (Rom. 8:7).14 
At the same time, there is, in the text, a treacherous insistence 
on morality as the only external guarantor of inner change reminding 
every watchful reader of the guiding principles of the gospel – but this 
is, of course, only the Party’s perverted and self-legitimising morality 
of political performance! From the reader’s point of view, Winston 
merely appears to complete a continuing series – and the series he 
chose is that which concerns the prodigal son returning to the father’s 
house or, for that matter, to the paternal discourse of the symbolic or-
der.15 What is really developed is the story of the sinner who repents 
and is welcomed back, who – in an act of contrition – leaves off ‘wal-
lowing in the dirt with pigs’ (possibly a reference to his sexual en-
counter with Julia) and returns home to be feasted by a loving father. 
The personal dimension of this is not to be underestimated; 
there is a continuing thread of narrative in the novel connecting the 
problem of return and conversion to that of personal guilt. Winston is 
permanently conscious of being implicated in some kind of wrong or 
sense of culpability (cf. Hoevels 1996). Nineteen Eighty-Four fre-
quently alludes to Winston’s possible involvement in the disappear-
ance of his family and relatives, e.g.: 
 
When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or 
any violent grief, but a sudden change came over her. She seemed to 
have become completely spiritless. It was evident even to Winston 
that she was waiting for something that she knew must happen. (Or-
well 1990: 168) 
 
A later scene connects Winston’s sense of guilt to the biblical story of 
the prodigal son – a parable about forgiveness narrated only in Luke 
                                                      
14  
With respect to Julia, the validity of this point is best shown at the moment of 
Winston’s betraying her in order to save his own life. It is also present in the 
ruthlessness he shows in view of her imminent torture and death. Women just 
do not seem to be interesting; and the sexual encounter between the two – at 
first highlighted as an act of political rebellion against the Party – is reduced, 
en passant, to an act of mere physical or ‘carnal’ passion. 
15  
Cf. Luke 15: 11-32. We may even ask ourselves if the idea of the prodigal son 
as subliminally presented here is connected to Orwell’s never-relinquished 
faith in communism as a political and ethical ideal – displaced, perversely, 
upon the Party’s iron will to govern and manipulate. 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
121
15:11-32 – in a more explicit fashion. According to the parable, the 
younger son demands his share of ‘his’ inheritance while his father is 
still alive and goes off to a distant country where he spends his 
substance “with riotous living” (15:13); eventually he has to take work 
as a swine herder – clearly a low point, as swine are not kosher in 
Judaic culture. The story’s edifying message is also present in St. 
Paul’s problematic dismissal of Jewish law and his de-centering of the 
Jews and of Judaic culture.16 Orwell, with a different aim in mind, 
appears to draw on the parable when depicting Winston as immensely 
greedy and stealing other people’s food in times of need: 
 
“Winston, Winston!” his mother called after him. “Come back! Give 
your sister back her chocolate!” He stopped, but he did not come back. 
His mother’s anxious eyes were fixed on his face. Even now he was 
thinking about the thing, he did not know what it was that was on the 
point of happening. His sister, conscious of having been robbed of 
something, had set up a feeble wail. His mother drew her arm around 
the child and pressed its face against her breast. Something in the ges-
ture told him that his sister was dying. He turned and fled down the 
stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand. 
He never saw his mother again. […] When he came back his 
mother had disappeared. This was already becoming normal at that 
time. Nothing was gone from the room except his mother and his sis-
ter. (Orwell 1990: 170) 
 
The lesser act of stealing a piece of chocolate and the much larger one 
of implied personal betrayal are conjoined in a rigidly ethical fashion; 
personal guilt seems to take advantage of the protagonist’s weakness 
to live up to his society’s expectations and those of his former family 
circle. (It is only with his return to the inner circle of protection as 
embodied by the Party and O’Brien that Winston’s sins can be finally 
and fully forgiven.) With the novel slowly progressing, the emotional 
and ethical problems are heaped up in such a way as to suggest their 
being implicated in a frightful inward-directed tragedy: the paradigm 
thus manifested in Winston’s long martyrdom through suffering and 
persecution until the ‘privilege’ of final conversion is the paradigm of 
                                                      
16  
On the issue of Anti-Semitism as inherent in early Christianity and in the let-
ters of Paul, see Gager 1983 and Carroll & Prickett 1997: 402 and 410f 
(“Notes to the New Testament”). It should be noted that the father’s rejoicing 
in seeing his lost son appears to minister to the reader’s repressed narcissistic 
feelings as well! 

Ralph Pordzik 
122
Christ himself who lived a life of absolute obedience – to his symbolic 
father – without any outward evidence that he was really doing so. 
Orwell’s creative fashioning of the topic appears to flesh out 
this particular aspect more than any other – and thus clearly owes 
much to Pauline notions of faith versus law as postulated in the epis-
tles; as in the above example, there are no indisputable external signs 
assuring Winston of the validity of the one, empirical reality he is so 
fond of! All there ever is to be found throughout the novel’s exhaus-
tive treatment of matters of personal conscience is Winston’s rebel-
lious personal testimony as to the reality of the world he takes for 
granted; and what’s more: the fact that this world (along with his tes-
timony) is largely public and external also suggests that it will sooner 
or later become a terrible burden to Winston – who, as we have seen, 
exists for us most at precisely those moments when he seems to feel 
he is not entirely in charge, that there is always another who knows 
more than he does.17 
It thus makes sense to locate Nineteen Eighty-Four not so much 
in the dystopian tradition but to call it a negative spiritual 
(auto)biography written in the tradition of St. Augustine and the Paul 
of the Roman epistles instead. That there is indeed a link between Or-
well’s grim vision of political perversion and autobiography as genre 
and, at a deeper level, between the Pauline vision of the “inward man” 
(Rom. 7:22) and the impulse towards self-projection and spiritual 
abandonment, is made obvious by the text’s constant harping on the 
ideas of empiricism, rational comprehension and analytic examination 
as forms of ‘sinning’ – a misleading obsession with the charismatic 
gift of the individual spirit opposing acknowledged discourse and the 
given hierarchy of intellectual and cognitive values. In the final in-
stance, it is thus Winston – a mere bystander – watching as “through a 
glass, darkly” (1 Corinth. 13:12); it is ‘imperfect’, commonsensical 
                                                      
17  
This authority is mainly transmitted through O’Brien and the Party; a further 
issue related to the problem of inwardness is thus that of transgressing the 
given body of laws. In Nineteen Eighty-Four, O’Brien consents to the launch-
ing of a political resistance group only in order to find out about hidden oppo-
nents of the system. As the reader quickly learns, the system works perfectly 
well, so that it all reminds one of St. Paul apostrophising the ancient law as a 
major agent in the process of the conversion of Gentiles. Paul writes: “Be-
cause the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression” 
(Rom. 4:15). See Rom. 6-7 for further elaboration of this crucial point! 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
123
Winston who appears to us like a child in his perfidious and recal-
citrant insistence on personal truth and insight. 
What the reader is given to understand, on top of that, is that in 
order to become a ‘real’ individual under O’Brien’s patient and ortho-
dox guidance, Winston eventually will have to “put away childish 
things” (1 Corinth. 13:11) and open himself to a world of fundamental 
recompense in which the certain expectations of a ‘resurrection’ to a 
better life offer comfort to all those mourning the loss of faith in indi-
vidual sovereignty and self-sufficiency. What the reader is presented 
with here is thus a dramatisation of inner change, not the description 
of a finished process or stage of development. The emphasis, in Nine-
teen Eighty-Four, is always on suspense, on making and continuation: 
at no time does the text allow us to stand back and contemplate the 
narrated event as pure achievement. Conversion as narrative principle 
and main objective confers upon Orwell the right to create a dense, 
“paranoid” (Rai 1988: 133) structure of representation and necessi-
tates such a structure; it is also, however, the final moment which pro-
vides both a beginning and a pattern linking that beginning with the 
challenges of the political present.18 
 
 
3. The Pauline Drama as Repressed Utopian Fantasy 
 
Nineteen Eighty-Four makes the reader become aware of the re-
pressed yet always insistent presence of theological discourse in Or-
well’s work as a major mode of self-exploration and of connecting the 
Protestant impulse to introspection and autobiography with the notion 
of the utopian as literary mode. In making the reader follow Winston’s 
degradation as a fully-fledged individual, the novel renders, quite 
paradoxically, the dystopian as utopian, the exclusivist and dictatorial 
Party system as ideal state, and O’Brien as caring and omniscient, 
god-like examiner granting his victim access to the world of his re-
pressed desires and offering salvation at the same time; it subtly turns 
political disenfranchisement into cultural empowerment and thus cre-
                                                      
18  
The last passages of Nineteen Eighty-Four belong to the most rigidly self-
analytical pieces ever written by Orwell. Here he struggles to justify himself 
and to articulate his reflections on his experiences as a 20th-century intellec-
tual (cf. Rai 1988: 145f). The issue of paternal authority is always around the 
corner, however (for further details, see Hoevels 1996 and Pordzik 2006).  

Ralph Pordzik 
124
ates a new ‘utopia’ for the spiritually tortured modern “inward man” 
(Romans 7: 22) who, after the horrors of the Second World War, is 
slowly beginning to deem the claims of his own conscience, of per-
sonal judgement and introspective morality, as too heavy a burden. 
Throughout much of the narrative, Winston makes his readers think of 
a character in a film trying to wake up and being unable to do so – he 
thus tends to remind them of the eternal father-archetype in Edmund 
Gosse’s autobiography who, “although his mind dwelt so constantly 
on spiritual matters it was never betrayed into any suspension of the 
rational functions” (Gosse 1928: 322). 
In the long run, however, Orwell’s late-modern anti-hero, lost at 
first, eventually discovers his true desire in the self-effacement re-
vealed to him by his spiritual mentor O’Brien, acknowledging defeat 
and assuming, in almost every question, a semi-divine standpoint; 
slowly trying to feel safe – or perversely ‘free’ – “in the house where 
there are many mansions” (Gosse 1928: 327).19 
In a curiously warped fashion, the ‘spiritual’ bond connecting 
O’Brien and Winston thus appears to mirror that of the Holy Trinity – 
with O’Brien as Father or God, Winston as (prodigal) son, and the 
Party as Holy Spirit or representation of the one divine essence or sub-
stance governing and encompassing all the others. Even though it may 
seem inappropriate for some readers to regard the matter in these out-
spokenly doctrinal terms, the parallels are hard to deny and their pri-
mary aesthetic effects may appear even less parodic if seen in the light 
of the novel’s overall narrative context. Like Winston who is consid-
ered to accept O’Brien’s ‘brave new world’ of Party dominance with 
the conscious and full abandonment of his own soul and at a firmly set 
or ‘inspired’ moment of time, the reader is invited to take the nar-
rative’s “obsessive, hypnotic power, its claustral intensity” (Rai 1988: 
133), first of all ‘on faith’ alone; regarding Winston’s imprisonment in 
a language and meaning system not quite his own becomes a question 
of “modes of reading” (Frank Kermode) as ways of assenting to dif-
ferent narratives to the degree that we feel we can trust them. In the 
given case, it is most of all the experience of the main character’s vul-
nerability which makes the reader experience Winston’s body in his 
own and as his own. The mark of authenticity is on Winston from the 
very moment his interrogation begins; he opens up a world of intense 
                                                      
19  
Edmund Gosse’s biographical alter ego quoting John 14:2. 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
125
inwardness, a world he describes and explores in passionate detail – 
but it is also one obtained at a high cost, as he condemns himself to 
sustaining his vision by nothing else than the constant reiteration of 
the drama of his own conversion. His new ‘faith’ is thus present to us 
in a mediated form only, mediated through a state of mind which it 
helps to produce but of which it is also, simultaneously, a rationali-
sation. To permit this encroachment of external persuasive power or 
‘superior intelligence’ on one’s private right to act on the evidence of 
one’s senses and beliefs is, I feel, to take the first (and fatal) step to 
subservience to the totalitarian yet also, paradoxically, utopian fantasy 
of redemptive self-transfiguration: 
 
Alone – free – the human being is always defeated. […] But if he can 
make complete, utter submission, if he can escape from his identity, if 
he can merge himself in the Party so that he is the Party, then he is all-
powerful and immortal. (Orwell 1990: 285) 
He gazed up at the enormous face. Forty years it had taken 
him to learn what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark mous-
tache. O cruel, needless misunderstanding! […] But it was all right, 
everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had won the 
victory over himself. He loved Big Brother. (Orwell 1990: 311) 
 

Ralph Pordzik 
126
Works Cited 
 
Primary Reference 
 
Orwell, George (1990). Nineteen Eighty-Four. London: Penguin. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Carroll, Robert and Stephen Prickett (eds.) (1997). The Bible: Authorized King James 
Version. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
Fredriksen, Paula (1986). “Paul and Augustine: Conversion Narratives, Orthodox 
Tradition, and the Retrospective Self”, in: Journal of Theological Studies, 
New Series, 37: 3-34. 
Gager, John G. (1983). The Origins of Anti-Semitism: Attitudes towards Judaism in 
Pagan and Christian Antiquity. New York: Oxford UP. 
Gosse, Edmund (1907/1928). Father and Son. London: Heinemann. 
Goux, Jean-Joseph (1965). “Saint Augustin et la parole de l’Autre”, in: Tel Quel 21: 
67-75. 
Hays, Richard B. (1989). Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul. New Haven and 
London: Yale UP. 
Hoevels, Fritz Erik (1996). “1984 – Orwells Roman im Lichte der Psychoanalyse”, in: 
Psychoanalyse und Literaturwissenschaft. Grundlagen und Beispiele. Frei-
burg: Ahriman, 158-84. 
Josipovici, Gabriel (1988). The Book of God: A Response to the Bible. New Haven 
and London: Yale UP. 
Kermode, Frank (1980). The Genesis of Secrecy: On the Interpretation of Narrative. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP. 
Lacan, Jacques (1981/1998). The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis: The 
Seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book XI. New York and London: W. W. Norton & 
Company. 
Litvack, Leon B. (1993). “The Road to Rome: Muriel Spark, Newman and the ‘Nev-
ertheless Principle’”, in: David Bevan (ed.). Literature and the Bible. Am-
sterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, 29-46. 
Maccoby, Hyam (1986). The Mythmaker: Paul and the Invention of Christianity. Lon-
don: Harper Collins. 
Mellard, James M. (1991). Using Lacan, Reading Fiction. Urbana and Chicago: U of 
Illinois P. 
Peters, Gerald (1993). The Mutilating God: Authorship and Authority in the Narrative 
of Conversion. Amherst, Mass.: U of Massachusetts P. 
Pordzik, Ralph (2006). “Die Zukunft als Neurose. Ein struktural-psychoanalytischer 
Versuch zur George Orwells Nineteen Eighty-Four”, in: Werkblatt. Psycho-
analyse und Gesellschaftskritik 56: 23-45. 
Rai, Alok (1988). Orwell and the Politics of Despair: A Critical Study of the Writings 
of George Orwell. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 

Theological Space in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four 
127
Sandison, Alan (1986). George Orwell: After 1984. Houndsmills, Basingstoke: Mac-
millan. 
Stendhal, Krister (1963). “The Apostle Paul and the Introspective Conscience of the 
West”, in: Harvard Theological Review LVI: 199-215. 
Young, John W. (1991). Totalitarian Language: Orwell’s Newspeak and Its Nazi and 
Communist Antecedents. Charlottesville: UP of Virginia. 
Ziesler, John (1990) Pauline Christianity. Oxford Bible Series. Oxford: Oxford UP. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
HOMELY SPACES, INTIMATE 
BORDERS – UTOPIAS TO LIVE IN 
 


 
 
 
 
‘And is not every Manor a Little Common Wealth?’ 
Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House1 
 
Nicole Pohl 
 
 
Abstract: This article argues that the nostalgia of the country house in seventeenth- 
and eighteenth-century English and Irish Literature is fundamentally utopian. Explor-
ing the different and ambivalent manifestations of country house nostalgia of the pe-
riod, the author argues that nostalgia and utopian desire are dialectially related. 
 
Key names and concepts: country house poetry – Irish ‘Big House’ literature – nostal-
gia – utopia 
 
 
In The Story of Utopias, Lewis Mumford puts forward that the country 
house ideal, as we find it represented in literature from Rabelais to 
Chekhov, is part of a body of “collective utopias” or “social myths” 
that have shaped our political imagination significantly. For Mumford, 
these “collective utopias” “tend to perpetuate and perfect” the existing 
social and economic order (Mumford 1963: 11, 193). In other words, 
as Mumford seems to suggest, collective utopias or social myths are 
ideological smokescreens that obscure the material conditions of the 
respective society with “our perpetual ‘will to believe’”. On the other 
hand – and Mumford is ambivalent here – social myths can “perfect 
that order” (Mumford 1963: 234). Thus, collective utopias can be a 
motivating force for social and political change. 
Rather than reading the different literary manifestations of the 
country house ethos as simply ideological or mythical, I propose that 
country house literature is fundamentally public, a literature that is 
concerned with social transformation and change. To unravel the im-
plications of my argument, Ben Jonson’s “To Penshurst” shall firstly 
serve as a special case study. This poem has produced a rich and pre-
dictably contentious account of the multifaceted relationship between 
                                                      
1  
I thank Marilyn Morris and Rebecca D’Monté for their help. 

Nicole Pohl 
132
country house literature and historical reality. The readings oscillate 
between regarding “To Penshurst” as a conservative reaction to the 
complex social and political changes at the beginning of the seven-
teenth century and as ideologically implicated with mainstream cul-
ture. I however will argue that the country house ethos is positioned 
between utopia and ideology; its essence is nostalgic. The trans-
ideological make-up of nostalgia is particularly apparent in Irish coun-
try house literature of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In my 
reading of Irish texts I will show that the nostalgic longing for the past 
is not necessarily escapist and regressive if the utopian desire longs 
for a past that has yet to occur (a variation on the Blochean ‘Not-
Yet’). As Bloch writes: 
 
The true genesis is not at the beginning, but at the end, and it [begins] 
only when society and existence become radical: that is, comprehend 
their own roots. […] Once [humanity] has […] comprehended [itself] 
and […] established [its] own domain in real democracy […] some-
thing arises in the world which all [have] glimpsed in childhood; a 
place and a state in which no one has yet been. And the name of this 
something is home. (Bloch 1995: 1375f) 
 
The country house utopia comes out of a critical evaluation of the here 
and now and is instrumental in forging a collective past, future and na-
tional identity. 
 
 
*** 
 
In 1956 G. R. Hibbard published his article “The Country House 
Poem of the Seventeenth Century”, where he catalogued a “homoge-
nous body of poetry” in the seventeenth century, united by common 
ideals of simplicity, responsible use of wealth and property, good 
housekeeping and hospitality (Hibbard 1956: 159). Hibbard identifies 
Ben Jonson’s “To Penshurst” (1616), his “To Sir Robert Wroth” 
(1616), Thomas Carew’s “To Saxham” (1640) and Marvell’s “Upon 
Appleton House” (1681) as the first phase of this literary mode but 
acknowledges a continuation of the country house ethos into the 
eighteenth century in the poetry of Alexander Pope. Since Hibbard’s 
article, literary scholars have rewritten the history and socio-political 
context of the country house poetry tradition and have expanded the 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
133
range of texts and its literary forms, finally acknowledging contribu-
tions by women poets such as Aemilia Lanyer, Katherine Austen, 
Countess of Winchelsea and Mary Leapor.2 The poetic forms include 
verse epistles, elegies (Lanyer’s “To Cooke-ham”), valedictions, and 
encomiastic epigrams such as Jonson’s “To Penshurst” with clear 
roots in Martial, Horace, Statius and Virgil’s Georgics to Pliny’s Epis-
tle II, 6. However, it is the early modern dissension between the coun-
try and the city/court, the change from a feudal to a monetary land 
ownership partially fuelled by Henry VIII’s dissolution of the monas-
teries, the emergence of “possessive individualism”, accompanied by 
the introduction of the representational Palladian building styles for 
country houses, that determined the formation of this distinctive liter-
ary tradition.3 In his article, Hibbard focuses on the symbolic function 
of the country house, and more specifically its architecture, as the cen-
tre of an organic, harmonious community. We recall Jonson’s praise 
of Penshurst: 
 
Thou art not, Penshurst, built to envious show, 
Of touch, or marble; nor canst boast a row 
Of polished pillars, or a roof of gold: 
Thou has no lantern whereof tales are told, 
Or stair, or courts; but standst an ancient pile, 
And these grudged at, art reverenced the while4 
(ll. 1-6) 
 
In this poem, Penshurst, the historically specific place, is blended with 
Penshurst, the mythologized social model.5 By the time Jonson wrote 
                                                      
2  
See particularly Fowler 1994. Fowler rejects the identification of the poetry as 
“country-house” poetry and suggests the term “estate poetry” to include those 
poems and texts that do not specifically mention the architecture of the coun-
try house but are nevertheless promoting the values of the country house ethos 
(1). For a study of women’s country house poems, see Pohl 2008. 
3  
I borrowed the term “possessive individualism” from C. B. Macpherson (Mac-
pherson 1962). 
4  
Quoted in Fowler 1994: 53-62. Both Fowler and McClung have disputed Hib-
bard’s reading that Palladian architecture as representational and opulent was 
in fact the object of criticism in poems such as “To Penshurst”. See McClung 
1977. 
5  
The Arcadian echoes in Jonson’s poem go back to Renaissance Arcadianism 
that, as Adam Nicolson has recently shown in his case study of Wilton House,   
largely determined the design and management of country houses and estates. 
(Nicolson 2008)  

Nicole Pohl 
134
the poem, Penshurst was more than a humble medieval Hall. In 1594, 
state rooms and the Long Gallery were added to the original structure 
and Jonson’s contemporary, Robert Sidney, planned to turn Penshurst 
into a “prodigy house”. Rathmell argues that Jonson perhaps warned 
Sidney not to become a proud owner of an “ambitious heap” (Rath-
mell 1971: 256ff).6 This warning is also echoed in the hyperbolic 
sponte sua motif which reminds Sidney of his commitment to hospi-
tality and generosity: 
 
The purpled pheasant, with the speckled side: 
The painted partridge lies in every field, 
And, for thy mess, is willing to be killed 
(ll. 28-30) 
Bright eels, that emulate them, and leap on land 
Before the fisher, or into his hand. 
Then hath thy orchard fruit, thy garden flowers, 
Fresh as the air, and new as are the hours 
(ll. 37-40) 
 
Indeed, the negative “Thou art not, Penshurst, built to envious show” 
clearly undermines the traditional sycophantic flattery of epideictic 
poetry and allows for a more satiric reading of Jonson’s epistle.7 
The evolution from the archaic Old Hall to the Palladian coun-
try houses of the seventeenth century “suggests many metaphors and 
analogies: from communities to the individual, from anonymous to 
idiosyncratic design, from utility to display, from timelessness to 
‘modernity’, and stylistically, from horizontal to vertical thrust” 
(McClung 1977: 90). This shift from the “organic” growth of a com-
munal Hall to the individualistic act of commissioning private and 
representational buildings corresponds to the apparent decline of the 
“natural bond between lord and tenant”, now replaced by a more mer-
cantile relationship within the community that has developed since the 
sixteenth century. John Norden reminds the estate owner of his obliga-
tion to “God’s glory, the King’s service, the good of the Common-
wealth” and elevates hospitality to “a worke of true virtue” (Norden 
                                                      
6  
Malcolm Kelsall indeed suggests that “Thou art not” “carries with it a sense of 
‘Thou shalt not’, as if the house were a Biblical commandment reified.” (Kel-
sall 1993: 35)  
7  
On this point, see Dubrow 1979: 161. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
135
1979: n. p.). Both John Norden and Henry Wotton feel compelled to 
remind estate owners to adapt the fashionable Palladian architecture to 
this principle of hospitality and chivalry: “yet by the naturall Hospi-
talitie of England, the Buttrie must be more visible; and we neede […] 
a more spacious and luminous Kitchin …” (Wotton 1968: 71). The 
whole estate, comments Wotton, serves as a “Theatre of Hospitality”, 
“the Seate of Selfe-fruition, the Comfortablest part of his [master’s] 
own Life, […] Nay, to the Possessor thereof, an Epitomie of the 
whole World” (Wotton 1968: 82). Henry Vaughan’s The Golden 
Grove (1608), too, links greediness, ambition and the loss of hospital-
ity with ostentatious building projects: “for sooner shall we see a gen-
tleman build a stately house than give alms and cherish the needy” 
(Vaughan 1608: n. p.). And James I reminds the nation: 
 
Let us in God’s name leave these idle foreign toys, and keep the old 
fashion of England: For it want to be the honour and reputation of the 
English nobility and gentry, to live in the country and keep hospitality. 
(quoted in Rivers 1973: 6) 
 
Charles I still felt obliged to remind the great lords of their obligation 
to hospitality and house-keeping under duress: 
 
Whitehall 28 November 1627 
The Kings most excellent Majestie, taking unto his royall considera-
tion the present state of the times, together with the great decay of 
Hospitality & good house-keeping, which in former age was the hon-
our of this nation, the too frequent resort, and ordinary residence of 
Lords spirituall and temporall, Knights and gentlemen of quality, unto 
cities and townes, especially into, or neare about the Cities of London 
and Westminster, and manifold inconveniences which ensue by the 
absence of so many persons of quality and authority from their coun-
treys, whereby those parts are left destitute of both relief and govern-
ment, hath thought fit hereby to renew the course formerly begun by 
his dear father of blessed memorie. (quoted in Nicolson 2008: 212) 
 
But the critique of particular socio-economic relationships goes be-
yond the microcosm of the estate or country gentry. The country 
house became a receptacle of public memory and national identity, 
founded on the (by now endangered) notion of English chivalry and 
hospitality, in short, a stable social and political system. Palladianism, 
as a symbol for a growing mercantile economy and social changes, 
was seen as alien to English culture and tradition. Jonson’s eulogy of 

Nicole Pohl 
136
Penshurst that was built in the ‘Albion’ style of architecture with a 
great hall and some smaller estate buildings clustered around them 
was therefore also a celebration of a powerful, self-sufficient nation in 
the light of growing globalisation through trade (cf. Gent 1995). When 
Charles I repeated the above proclamation to his lords in the 1630s, 
the Tudor Wilton House was redesigned as a Palladian villa – “al Ital-
iano” (Nicolson 2008: 212). 
Such is the case for Jonson’s Penshurst. However, it may be 
possible to read Jonson’s poem less as an idealistic celebration of an-
cient English hospitality than an oversimplification of feudalism 
which ignores existing economic structures; as an expression of “the 
familiar hyperboles of the aristocracy and its attendants” (Williams 
1993: 33). Already Hubert Languet queried the validity of this feudal 
nostalgia in his book Against Tyranny (1579): 
 
You speak of peers, notables and officials of the crown, while I see 
nothing but fading names and archaic costumes like the ones they 
wear in tragedies. I scarcely see any remnant of ancient authority and 
liberty […] let electors, palatines, peers, and the other notables not as-
sume that they were created and ordained merely to appear at corona-
tions and dress up in splendid uniforms of olden times, as though they 
were actors in an ancient masque, or as though they were staging a 
scene from King Arthur and the Knights of the Round table. 
 
And he asks the pertinent question: “Just because someone has made 
you a shepherd for the sake of the flock, did he hand over that flock to 
be skinned at your pleasure?” (quoted in Nicolson 2008: 119f). 
Modern critics have followed this train of thought. Mumford 
unveils the idolum of the country house as a social myth (read: ideol-
ogy) based on privilege, acquisition, force and fraud (see Mumford 
1963: 203). And in his study on the neo-pastoral, Raymond Williams 
highlights that Jonson’s hyperbolic evocation of Virgil’s Georgics – 
especially in the following passage – merely obscured the unequal 
economic relationship between tenants and lords: 
 
But all come in, the farmer, and the clown, 
And no one empty-handed, to salute 
Thy lord and lady, though they have no suit. 
Some bring a capon, some a rural cake, 
 
 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
137
Some nuts, some apples; some that think they make 
The better cheeses, bring’em8 
 (ll. 48-53) 
 
Whilst Jonson’s celebration of feudal values might, at first sight, have 
served as a critique of the emerging mercantile economy and capitalist 
agriculture, Williams suggests that Penshurst, Saxham and the other 
estates from the country house tradition were already part of the new 
economic and social order. Central to Williams’ argument is his un-
derstanding of residual and emergent cultural practices: the country 
house poem is situated between the residual ideology of an organic 
feudal community and the emergent, seemingly more democratic, 
bourgeois ideology. However, the egalitarian possibility inherent in 
the latter would ultimately be erased by “the substitution of one form 
of domination for another: the mystified feudal order replaced by a 
mystified agrarian capitalist order, with just enough continuity, in ti-
tles and in symbols of authority, in successive compositions of a 
‘natural order’, to confuse and control” (Williams 1993: 39). The 
naturalization of this organic order is based on the principle of “pas-
sive ownership” and “passive enjoyment”; there is, Mumford argues 
too, “no active communion between the people and their environ-
ment” (Mumford 1963: 202). The country house ethos in this reading 
is ideological. 
Don Wayne and Kari Boyd McBride provide perhaps more nu-
anced readings of this ideological function of the country house myth 
at the beginning of the seventeenth century. They suggest that with the 
increasing commercialisation of the economy and the growing impor-
tance of trade and capital against land ownership and the increasing 
numbers of country houses that were given to the owners as gifts or 
grant-purchases by the Crown, country house poetry credited the ‘new 
aristocracy’ with authority and legitimacy (see Wayne 1984; McBride 
2001). Anabel Patterson and Kathleen Biddick have developed further 
this argument of legitimizing power. Biddick particularly highlights 
the country estates’ complicity in colonialism and conspicuous con-
sumption (see Patterson 1987; Biddick 1999). Thus, the “pastoral 
moves” in the neo-pastoral of Renaissance and indeed modern litera-
                                                      
8  
Fowler discounts this reading when he writes: “rent in kind would have been 
anachronistic in 1612, when commutation to financial payment had long been 
completed in Kent.” (Fowler 1994: 11) 

Nicole Pohl 
138
ture are, according to Biddick, ideological strategies to disavow Eng-
land’s imperial past (Biddick 1999: 67). Susan Stewart equally inter-
prets Jonson’s nostalgia for a feudal community as hostility to mate-
rial history, a longing towards “a future-past”, a past which only has 
ideological reality (Stewart 1984: 23). The idealised communities at 
Penshurst or Appleton House are perfected miniatures, timeless and 
tableau-like, “a diminutive and thereby manipulated version of experi-
ence, a version which is domesticated and protected from contamina-
tion” (Stewart 1984: 69). Stewart therefore relates the country house 
poem to a doll’s house which displays and hypostatizes “the status of 
the interior world of the ascending and upper classes” (Stewart 1984: 
62).9 Ernst Bloch compares pastoral poetry to painted still lives 
 
in which a gluttonous social class embellished the limited life that 
those people had to lead who had no choice. Indeed, they themselves 
did not lead this life of milk and honey, nor were they decorated, or 
beribboned. (Bloch 1988: 287) 
 
It seems hard to rescue the country house poem from this verdict. Isa-
bel Rivers places Jonson’s “To Penshurst” within the context of early 
seventeenth-century conflict between the country and the city and 
suggests, in a way similar to Wayne, that “Jonson is appealing to the 
feudal past but trying to provide an alternative pattern for the danger-
ous tendencies of the present” (Rivers 1973: 50). 
The dialogic structure of the neo-pastoral in Jonson echoes the 
basic structures of utopia in its juxtaposition of the real and the ideal. 
The pastoral’s yearning for containment forges an ‘artful’ harmony 
that reassures the individual in an immediate natural environment but 
at the same time alludes to the conflicts in the ‘non-pastoral’ world. 
Instead of merely harking back to the memory of a long-lost Golden 
Age, Jonson juxtaposes an idea of moral economy with the historical 
disturbances of war, feudal exploitation and the increasing split be-
                                                      
9  
See Mumford, who also makes that comparison: “Such activities as remain in 
the Country House – the pursuit of game, for instance – rest upon imitating in 
play activities which once had a vital use or prepared for some vital function, 
as a child’s playing with a doll is a preparation for motherhood” (Mumford 
1963: 202). See also Reinhard Bentmann and Michael Müller who label the 
country house ideal as “negative utopia”, an aristocratic utopia opposed to the 
true principles of “positive utopias”: equality and civil liberties. (Bentmann 
and Müller 1992) 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
139
tween country and court. Ettin thus suggests that the estrangement in 
the pastoral is “based on a perceivable distance between the alleged 
and the implied” (Ettin 1984: 12). When critics state that the neo-
pastoral literature was “of no importance politically” (Frye 1973: 40), 
they are contradicted by Sidney who very clearly identified the pas-
toral as a vehicle for social critique: 
 
It is then the Pastoral poem which is misliked? For perchance, where 
the hedge is lowest they will soonest leap over. Is the poor pipe dis-
dained, which sometime out of Meliboeus’ mouth can show the mis-
ery of people under hard lords or ravening soldiers? And again, by Ti-
tyrus, what blessedness is derived to them that lie lowest from the 
goodness of them that sit highest; sometimes, under the pretty tales of 
wolves and sheep, can include the whole considerations of wrong-
doing and patience… (Sidney 1987: 122)  
 
Pastoral’s purpose, Puttenham states, is “to insinuate and glaunce at 
greater matters, and such as perchance had not been safe to have been 
disclosed in any other sort” (Puttenham 1970: 53). And Spenser, in his 
Letter to Sir Walter Raleigh, places The Faerie Queene (1590-96) in 
the tradition of Morean utopianism, depicting “a Commune welth such 
as it should be” (Spenser 1977: 737). The “secret meaning” of 
Spenser’s Shepherd’s Calendar, The Faerie Queene, or Sidney’s Ar-
cadia in terms of political controversies is both literal and allegorical. 
The sponte sua and O fortunatos nimium theme in seventeenth-
century estate poetry and the idea of Albion as “Earth’s rare paradise” 
speak of the persistence of the Golden Age motif in English literature 
(Joshua Sylvester, quoted in Fowler 1994: 3). 
Alistair Duckworth expands this last point. Through “the logic 
of the metonym”, writes Duckworth, “the country house stands for a 
critique of the individualistic approach to property and the consequen-
tial loss of genuine ‘lordly virtues’” (Duckworth 1989: 306). Indeed, 
as the appeals of James I and Charles I suggest, the country house is 
not only a metonym for the virtues of the landlord, but stands, as a po-
litical microcosm, for the state and ultimately for the nation. But these 
descriptions of the country houses and gardens “exist and have mean-
ing in relation to an intertextual field of available fragments that both 
constrain and enable fictional expression” (Duckworth 1989: 306). By 
calling upon mythological resonances such as the Golden Age, Arca-
dia and Albion as “a hortulan Eden” (Fowler 1994: 3), the estate be-

Nicole Pohl 
140
comes a mythical place “in which dwelling is the relationship with 
others, without denial or deprivation of one’s own being, and of such a 
place as a model for human relationships on a larger social scale” 
(Wayne 1984: 173). This communal nostalgia reappears again in the 
late eighteenth and nineteenth century with the idea of the picturesque 
cottage as a signifier for a lost agrarian economy and community in 
the light of early Industrialisation and Imperialism.10 Austin argues, 
and this argument is also useful for the country house ethos, that the 
cottage functioned as both a “relic of the nation’s languishing rural 
economy” and “as an emblem of the nation’s flourishing commercial 
interests” (Austin 2007: 153). The country house (and the cottage) op-
erate as sites of a collective, national memory, torn between residual 
and emerging cultural and economic practices. 
What is at stake here is the complex correlation between ideol-
ogy and utopia, nostalgia and history. Raymond Williams himself 
points towards the dialectic connection between the latter paradigms. 
Both in his fiction and in his careful study of the neo-pastoral, does he 
acknowledge the utopian power of pastoral’s nostalgia: 
 
The idea of the country is the idea of childhood: not only of local 
memories, or the ideally shared communal memory, but the feel of 
childhood: of delighted absorption in our own world, from which, 
eventually, in the course of growing up, we are distanced and sepa-
rated, so that it and the world become things we observe. […] Great 
confusion is caused if the real childhood memory is projected, un-
qualified as history (Williams 1993: 297).11 
 
Bloch’s utopian evocation of home, Williams’ nostalgic musings, the 
communal memory of community (vs. society), “the elms, the may, 
the white horse, in the field beyond the window where I am writing”, 
conjure up an (imagined) past that is juxtaposed to modernisation, in-
dustrialisation and urbanisation but also to the alienation of feudal 
                                                      
10  
See Austin 2007: chap. 4. Austin reads the idea of the picturesque cottage in 
the light of the heritage industry where building styles of the nineteenth-
century ‘rural cottage’ were nostalgic but not historical reconstructions of 
workers’ cottages. The idealization of the simple life in the country side also 
filtered into the utopianism of Ruskin and Morris. The twentieth and twenty-
first centuries saw a similar utopian nostalgia in New Urbanism. 
11  
Austin suggests that childhood is the second site for public/communal nostal-
gia (see chap. 3). 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
141
practices (Williams 1993: 3).12 The distant form of the pastoral, argues 
Bloch, “reflects them [human beings] in an enthusiastic way of the 
most peculiar ecstasy, namely identity” (Bloch 1988: 292). Bloch’s 
and Williams’ evocation of childhood and longing for an unalienated 
existence, for a future-past, brings us to the essence of nostalgia. 
 
 
*** 
 
“I am an Arcadian, he is a Utopian.” 
W. H. Auden, “Vespers” 
 
Nostalgia’s etymological roots – the desire to return home (nostos) 
and the sensation of pain (algos) – point towards the physical and 
emotional yearning for an irrecoverable home, past or childhood, thus 
for a lost and desired space and/or time.13 Diagnosed by the Swiss 
doctor Johannes Hofer in 1688 as a new epidemic amongst the Swiss 
soldiers fighting abroad, nostalgia was originally defined as “the sad 
mood originating from the desire for the return to one’s native land” 
(Hofer 1934: 380f).14 Thus, nostalgia was a patriotic affliction, a 
yearning for the “sacred geography” of the homeland with symptoms 
of melancholy (Eliade 1982: 30). It was also recorded in the diaries of 
explorers such as Joseph Banks who recorded on his Endeavour voy-
ages that the sailors were suffering from homesickness, “the longing 
for home which the Physicians [...] esteem a disease under the name 
of Nostalgia.” Twenty years later, Thomas Trotter was to characterise 
the symptoms of extreme physical distress and psychological disorien-
tation as “scorbutic Nostalgia” (quoted in Lamb 2001: 123). The suf-
ferers went so far as “to throw themselves into the sea, mistaking it for 
green fields or meadows” (Darwin 1794-96: 367). Cure was brought 
only by returning the exiled sufferers to their homelands.15  
                                                      
12  
See Georges Perec – “The Country Side”, “Village Utopia” and “Nostalgic 
(and false) alternative” – for a wonderfully ironic evocation of nostalgia and 
utopia. (Perec 1999: 68ff) 
13  
For a more detailed and critical overview, see Boym 2001: part 1. 
14  
See Starobinski 1966; Boym 2001: part 1. 
15  
See also Coleridge’s poem “Homesick” (1799). 

Nicole Pohl 
142
But already Immanuel Kant observes that those afflicted people 
who so eagerly returned home were bound to be disappointed: “Later, 
when they visit these places, they find their anticipation dampened 
and even their homesickness cured. They think that everything has 
drastically changed, but it is that they cannot bring back their youth” 
(Kant 1978: 60). Kant thus records a paradigmatic shift from nostalgia 
as a longing for the homeland to a yearning for an irrecoverable point 
in the past: childhood. This Proustian recherche du temps perdu is 
“truly Heimweh”: the returning to the mother’s breast, to an unalien-
ated childhood, to the Golden Age, to the “experience of community 
[…] of family […] we imagine hidden in home – all the homes, where 
like the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, we think we will find 
our lost home …” (Daniels 1985: 77).16 
 
Nostalgia emphasizes human incompleteness in its temporal dimen-
sion – the way in which our finitude is conditioned by temporality. It 
is the self as divided and split temporally which is lamented in nostal-
gia. It is both my historicity and historicity itself which are lamented. 
But if the nostalgic lives under this fate of an ever-increasing distance 
from the past, he also experiences a kind of recovery. In nostalgia, dis-
tant time is brought near. (Phillips 1985: 67) 
 
This distant time is the past imagined, idealized and distorted through 
memory. The healing process for Heimweh thus could be, as Schiller 
remarked in his study of the case of Joseph Frédéric Grammont in 
1780, a mere “enactment of memory”, an evocation of the idealized 
past, the lost place and home (quoted in Austin 2007: 11). In a naval 
or military context, immediate return to the homeland was not always 
possible, so a cure for Grammont was to walk in the country side as a 
replacement for his own home and community. The pastoral func-
tioned as a foil onto which Grammont’s imagined homeland and past 
were projected. The ‘demi-vrai’ of the pastoral became “a realm of 
wish fulfilment and ease” (Austin 2007: 10).17 The memory enacted 
                                                      
16  
A Dutch source from 1718 identifies nostalgia in “youthful persons, who have 
been accustomed to their native country, and their mother’s kitchen; such a 
one reflecting on the loss of a parent’s table, the conversation of all his old 
friends and acquaintance, and the manners of his countrymen, …”. “Of the 
Nostalgia, or Home-Ach” (1759: 51). 
17  
The ‘demi-vrai’ is Fontenelle’s description of the imaginary element in the 
pastoral, evocative of the Golden Age and Eden; see Austin 2007: 9f. See also 
Purney 1717: 32f. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
143
here can be individual, part of the process of mourning for a lost 
childhood or home, the mother’s breast or for “delighted absorption in 
our own world” and will be unearthed through psychoanalysis. “Dif-
fering from the unconscious of Freudian depth psychology and hav-
ing, therefore, nothing to do with buried or forbidden memories (and, 
therefore, with repression and trauma), implicit memory is the psychic 
fabric of communal nostalgia” (Austin 2007: 85). If the nostalgic 
memory is crucial to the individual’s identity, communal nostalgia is 
also instrumental in creating a collective/national identity and utopian 
blueprints. 
Discussions of nostalgia are divided, especially of the latter 
kind. Some critics read nostalgia as “historical inversion”, a distortion 
of the present through “nostalgia-tinted spectacles”, as a weak evasion 
of “the work of mourning” (Bakhtin 1981: 147; Jameson 1991: 290; 
Ricoeur 1988: 206). The ‘backward look’, sceptics warn, will exile us 
from the present, turn us into lifeless pillars of salt in our attachment 
to the past. As the desired past (and a sense of home) never existed, 
the act of remembrance is illusion, fulfilment is never possible. This 
unreflected nostalgia conceals, as Williams suggests in his reading of 
“To Penshurst”, “real social relations” and “a privileged class”, loss of 
status, or turns, as Austin has shown, the lives of farmers and labour-
ers into heritage industry. Rosaldo, Biddick and Bhabha argue that the 
longing for the true Heim is also an important pillar in imperialist ide-
ology (“imperialist nostalgia”): “the heimlich pleasures of the hearth” 
are juxtaposed to the “unheimlich terror of the space or race of the 
Other” (Bhabha 1990: 2; see also Williams 1993: 66; Rosaldo 1989). 
The best cure against this nostalgic pathos is a “history lesson” 
(Jameson 1991: 156).18 
But what kind of history is assumed here? It is conspicuous that 
nostalgia appears at the point of unsettling historical and economic 
changes, that is, the early modern move from feudalism to mercantile 
economy, eighteenth-century military and imperial ventures and, fi-
nally, nineteenth-century Imperialism and Industrialisation. Nostalgia 
is thus manifestly modern and “transideological” (Hutcheon 1998: 
passim). Criticisms of ‘the backward look’ as regressive, anti-modern, 
                                                      
18  
The implication here is that nostalgia is an evasion of history, a process of for-
getting. See Austin 2007 for a discussion about the relationship between 
memory and nostalgia.  

Nicole Pohl 
144
escapist and unreflected assume that history is progress and perfecti-
bility. The period between 1750 and 1800 is marked by a canon of 
conjectural and philosophical histories that are dominated by this 
paradigm. In this view, “individual societies did not regress from a 
golden age into a present state of decay” (Natali 2004: 3).19 But there 
were also other hypotheses. Immanuel Kant identifies three paradigms 
of conjectural history; ‘terroristic’ history that focuses on the unrelent-
ing decline in human history; ‘eudaimonistic’ or ‘critical’ conjectural 
history that is determined by continual progress and improvement to-
wards a future state of utopian perfection, and finally the ‘abderitic’ 
history. “In the latter view, human history exhibits a tendency neither 
to decline nor to improve, but oscillates between the two, with pro-
gress and regress cancelling each other out” (Palmeri 2003: 235). 
Friedrich Nietzsche, too, unveiled three paradigms of history (‘monu-
mental’, ‘antiquarian’ and ‘critical’) which he declared as fundamen-
tally ideological. The discipline of history as ‘science’, according to 
Nietzsche, merely composes different ideologies of fall, progress and 
historical future (Nietzsche 1984). Whilst Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche and 
later Marx disputed the concept of history as fall, Rousseau proposed 
distinct ‘terroristic’ histories in his Discours sur les sciences et les arts 
(1750) and his Discours sur l’origine de l’inégalité parmi les hommes 
(1754) that are “nostalgically attached to pre-modern or primitive cul-
tures, in favour of which they reject modern society, and they write in 
order to be reconnected with an earlier age” (Palmeri 2003: 234). Im-
plicit in the terroristic history of Rousseau is a clear cultural critique 
and a utopian vision of a different kind of progress.20 Visions of Arca-
dia or the Golden Age, prevalent in the work of Rousseau, Ruskin and 
Morris but also in the country house literature discussed here, are not 
unreflected remembrances of things past but are longings for a past 
that has yet to occur. In his reading of Walter Benjamin, Ernst Bloch 
                                                      
19  
Natali provides a convincing and lucid argument of how critics who see nos-
talgia as regressive are caught up in the modern paradigm of history as pro-
gress. 
20  
Rousseau’s work and different utopian schemes range from contractual blue-
prints (Contrat Social) to the nostalgic utopia of the simple life (Discourses) 
to simple anti-utopianism. Thus, Rousseau is quite representative of eight-
eenth-century utopian thought in its variety and paradoxical nature. See also 
Nandy (1995: 44-66) and Chakrabarty (2000) for a discussion of how the idea 
of history as secular, rational and progressive is linked to the imperial Western 
nation state. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
145
opens up the possibility for a nostalgic recovery that “explodes the 
continuum of history” as described above, to become a messianic 
‘now-time’ (Jetztzeit). This ‘now-time’ “frees all essentially related, 
utopian moments from before and after within the respective dawning 
of now-time and relays their directions.” The past becomes a utopian 
future and a “time that has to be fulfilled” (Bloch 1988: 218).21 This 
paradigm of nostalgia is particularly important for postcolonial and 
diasporic anticipations. 
Nostalgia is thus “a twin of Utopia, as a marker for longing” 
and creativity (Huyssen 1995: 89).22 In current work, nostalgia is no 
longer the programmatic analogue of an idealized and unreflected 
past. Boym, Strathern, Bal, Broome, and Hirsch and Spitzer carefully 
distinguish different manifestations of nostalgia according to its criti-
cal and utopian potential.23 We have initially defined nostalgia as anti-
modern and transideological, first diagnosed as part of the imperialist 
experience of soldiers and sailors, later identified as an anti-modern 
longing in the period of Victorian Industrialisation and early moder-
nity. Recent studies have emerged post-1989 from former Eastern 
Block countries where experiences of drastic and sudden political and 
social changes have inspired different kinds of utopian longing.24 
“From this perspective, longing becomes an oscillation between what 
is and what could be. Longing is about savouring different possibili-
ties, about swaying back and forth in reflection, yet never quite arriv-
ing” (Willinger 2007). 
The anthropologist Marilyn Strathern has therefore divided the 
concept of nostalgia into “synthetic” and “substantive” forms accord-
                                                      
21  
See also the discussion of the utopian function of myths in Benjamin’s work 
by Smith (1988: 338-45). 
22  
Lerner highlights the creative aspect of nostalgic yearning: “All creation is 
really a recreation of a once loved, and once whole, but now lost and ruined 
object, a ruined internal world and self. […] The wish to create is rooted in the 
depressive position and the capacity to create depends on a successful work-
ing through it.” (Lerner 1972: 56) 
23  
See Strathern 1995, Bal (1999: 72), Broome 2007, and Hirsch and Spitzer 
(2006: 79-96). See also the special issue of the Iowa Journal of Cultural Stud-
ies 5 (2005) on Nostalgia. 
24  
See the online magazine n/osztalgia, a joint project of two magazines, Plotki 
(Berlin) and Anthropolis (Budapest), and the publication n/osztalgia – ways of 
revisiting the socialist past (2007). 

Nicole Pohl 
146
ing to their relationship with history (Strathern 1995). Substantive 
nostalgia focuses on the ‘now-time’ through a critical understanding 
of the past; its transformative element lies in the questioning reflection 
of the past, whereas synthetic nostalgia expresses simple mourning for 
the loss of the idealized past, childhood and memory.25 In her study on 
modernity and nostalgia, Boym continues this train of thought and dis-
tinguishes between “restorative” and “reflective” nostalgia (Boym 
2001: 41, 49). Restorative nostalgia seeks a simple trans-historical re-
construction of the lost home/past/national identity and tradition. Re-
flective nostalgia, on the other hand, is defined by a critical meditation 
on history and the passage of time, and, as Boym argues, can be ironic 
and playful. In their study of memory and nostalgia in Ukrainian Jew-
ish culture, Hirsch and Spitzer define further categories of nostalgia 
that preserve the element of longing and critical utopianism. Important 
for my argument is the possibility of “resistant nostalgia”, defined by 
“postmemory” – that is, a mediated relation to – in Stefan Zweig’s 
phrase – a lost “world of yesterday” (Hirsch and Spitzer 2006: 81).26 
In that sense, nostalgia can, as Mieke Bal has argued, “provide guide-
lines for a critical utopianism in the present, for a struggle towards a 
better future” (Bal 1999: 72). 
It is thus that I argue that it is possible and necessary to include 
the country house ethos into the framework of utopianism. As a social 
myth, it does inspire readers “to work towards an understanding of 
what is necessary for human fulfilment, a broadening, deepening and 
raising of aspirations in terms quite different from those of their eve-
ryday life” (Levitas 1990: 122). Whilst Mumford, as we have seen 
above, is ambivalent in allowing the country house discourse to be 
transformative, Deleuze and Guattari are much clearer about the im-
portant link between group fantasies (social myths) and utopia: “If we 
must still speak of utopia in this sense […] it is most assuredly not as 
an ideal model, but as revolutionary action and passion” (Deleuze and 
Guattari 1977: 62f). The nostalgia of the country house has the capac-
ity to generate attentiveness to the socio-political status quo and the 
                                                      
25  
Strathern borrows the term ‘synthetic’ nostalgia from Roland Robertson 1992. 
26  
Hirsch and Spitzer further discuss the “ambivalent nostalgia” which reconciles 
traumatic and negative memory with nostalgic longing (a variation on  
Boym’s reflective nostalgia) and close their discussion with the interesting 
category of “rootless nostalgia” – the “diasporic post-memory of children of 
exiles and refugees” (Hirsch and Spitzer 2006: 86). 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
147
yearning for a different kind of life and society. Country house nostal-
gia is situated between ideological compliance and critique: “Utopia 
brings its critical energies to bear on those very contradictions, break-
ing open that which is ideologically replete to make room for the work 
of building a radically different world” (Moylan 2000: 90). 
 
 
*** 
 
“Why do we like being Irish? Partly because 
It gives us hold on the sentimental English 
As members of a world that never was, 
Baptised with fairy water[.]” 
Louis MacNeice, Autumn Journal, XVI (1939) 
 
In her essay “The Big House” Elizabeth Bowen reflects nostalgically 
on the role of the Big House in Irish social and political culture (Bo-
wen 1950: 195-202). Written during the Second World War, the essay 
echoes the sentiment expressed in her novels The Last September 
(1929), The Heat of the Day (1942) and her family history Bowen’s 
Court (1942) about the decline of the Irish country house as a symbol 
for social stability and tradition. Whilst Bowen is aware of the com-
plex political iconography of the Big House in Irish history, she en-
dorses its role in the light of the now familiar country house ethos: 
 
From the point of view of the outside Irish World, does the big house 
justify its existence? I believe it could do so now as never before. As I 
said, the idea from which these houses sprang was, before everything, 
a social one – but it could extend itself, and it must if the big house is 
to play an alive part in the alive Ireland of to-day. What is fine about 
the social idea is that it means the subjugation of the personal to the 
impersonal. (Bowen 1950: 199) 
 
The “subjugation of the personal to the impersonal” stands for the idea 
of community that supersedes the individual and/or society. “As on a 
ship out at sea”, Bowen writes, “there is a sense of community” (Bo-
wen 1950: 198). W. B. Yeats has equally embraced and mythologized 
the Irish Big House in his poetry as part of the Celtic Literary Revival 
and in a period when Anglo-Irish country houses did not exist any-

Nicole Pohl 
148
more.27 The Land Acts of the nineteenth century and the period post-
1916 resulted in most of the houses being burnt down or left derelict. 
Bowen’s and Yeats’ ‘backward’ look borrowed heavily from the pas-
toral tradition to create an anti-modern Irish national identity. “Nos-
talgia”, in this case, “was the dynamic that impelled the search for the 
future” (Kreilkamp 1989: 17; Deane 1997: 2). 
What makes the Big House interesting is its ambiguous position 
in Ireland’s difficult history as an icon for Anglo-Irish colonization 
and dominion and as a reminder of an Irish pre-modern and organic 
community that seemed to have existed before Cromwell and/or 
Strongbow. In many ways, Bowen’s and Yeats’ nostalgia for the Big 
House can be read as part of an “aesthetic colonization” process that 
glosses over the actual and extended colonization process of Ireland 
(Jameson 1991: 19). In mythologizing the systems of class and reli-
gious division in Ireland as “pious feudalism”, the dominance of the 
English in Ireland is seemingly legitimized. However – and Kreilkamp 
has highlighted this in her study on the Irish Big House – the Anglo-
Irish novelist did not necessarily share the mythologizing view of 
Yeats or Bowen. The myth of the Big House was effaced by self-
scrutiny and censure on the part of the Anglo–Irish (Kreilkamp 
1998:19). 
On the other hand, we must remember that nostalgia is trans-
ideological. Revisionist history uses the country house to reshape the 
colonizer into “Ireland’s new dispossessed.”28 I want to put forward a 
different argument; the nostalgia for the Irish Big House functions as 
“a sociological phenomenon [for both the Irish and Anglo-Irish] that 
revolves around a longing for a lost culture or theoretically unrecover-
able past” (Frawley 2005: 3). As the important contribution of Maria 
Edgeworth to Big House literature has been widely acknowledged and 
discussed by critics, I will, in the following, concentrate on lesser 
known poems and ballads and close with a brief discussion of Lady 
Morgan’s country house nostalgia.29 
                                                      
27  
See W. B. Yeats, “Coole Park, 1929”, “Coole Park and Ballylee, 1931” and 
“Meditations in Time of Civil War.” 
28  
See also Boyce and O’Day 1996. 
29  
See Kirkpatrick 2000; Kowaleski-Wallace 1991; Miller 2000; Gallchoir 2001; 
Butler 1972. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
149
*** 
 
“That royal Cashel is bare of house and guest,  
That Brian’s turreted home is the otter’s nest,  
That the kings of the land have neither land nor crown  
Has made me a beggar before you, Valentine Brown.” 
(Egan O’Rahilly, transl. by Frank O’Connor) 
 
The history of Irish colonization and settlement is complex and intri-
cate. It must suffice to focus on the history and cultural iconography 
of the Irish Big House in this context. It is also necessary to preface 
this analysis with a necessary terminological clarification. Irish soci-
ety has been complex in its demographic structure; it is necessary to 
distinguish between “social function (birth, residence, etc. in Ireland) 
and ancestry (deriving from English planters, etc.)” (McCormack 
1985: 47). In the period under investigation, this structure consisted of 
a) the old Irish Catholics; b) the Old English Catholics with a lineage 
dating back to the Anglo-Norman Invasion; c) the New English Prot-
estants who were given property under Elizabeth I and James I; and 
finally d) the Cromwellian settlers, mainly soldiers, who were given 
land as reward for services rendered during the English Civil Wars. 
The term ‘Protestant Ascendancy’ was coined circa 1792 and initially 
used, as Edmund Burke wrote in a letter to Richard Burke, to describe 
“the old mastership. It is neither more nor less than the resolution of 
one set of people in Ireland to consider themselves as the sole citizens 
in the commonwealth …” (quoted in McCormack 1985: 78). 
The label ‘Anglo-Irish’ again is ambiguous, a “forced marriage 
of two races, two islands” (O’Faoláin 1957: 147).30 Julian Moynahan 
suggests that the Anglo-Irish became truly Irish after the Act of Un-
ion, and accordingly, Elizabeth Bowen trusted that “after three or four 
generations of life in Ireland” English families were “Irish in being, if 
not in interest” (Moynahan 1995: 3ff; Bowen 1942: 19). Molly Keane, 
herself a writer who takes a keen interest in the theme of the Irish Big 
House but adopts a different position, laconically highlights the con-
flict between the Irish and the Anglo-Irish: “The Anglo-Irish have said 
over and over again ‘We are Irish’ and the Irish have said ‘You are 
not!’” (Keane 1984: xii). The phrases “the Big House”/“the Great 
House” are just as complex and mirror Ireland’s colonial history. “The 
                                                      
30  
See also Deane 1997. 

Nicole Pohl 
150
Great House”, suggests Thomas Flanagan, “is English rather than An-
glo-Irish; whatever its size or description, it was ‘the castle’ to the 
gentry and ‘the big house’ to English-speaking peasants” (Flanagan 
1959: 190). 
It follows thus that the Big House’s “scale may not be confused 
with moral grandeur”, but its appropriation by the Old English, the 
Irish and the Ascendancy indicates similar anxieties concerning the 
English country house regarding moral values and moral leadership 
(W. J. McCormack, quoted in Kreilkamp 1989: 8). In addition, the 
‘rightful’ ownership, national allegiance and governance of Ireland are 
negotiated through the metonym of the Big House. The Irish country 
house ethos, burdened with a history of colonization and dominance, 
takes a critical stance right from its emergence into literature. As a re-
flective nostalgia, it acts as a conduit for a critical utopian future. This 
critical reflectiveness is apparent in the history of the Big House. 
Whilst the Big House has often been read as a landmark of 
Protestant domination, Guy Felhmann has suggested that it already 
“has been part and parcel of Irish history since the middle of the 
twelfth century” (Felhmann 1991: 15). Historically, and certainly be-
fore Cromwell, the redistribution of land to the English carried conno-
tations of improvement, taste and good housekeeping. The establish-
ment of estates was seen as a necessary part of the civilizing of the 
Irish. Spenser’s poem to his patron “The right honourable Thomas 
Earle of Ormond and Ossory” (1596) documents this ‘brave undertak-
ing’: 
 
And in so faire a land, as may be redd, 
Not one Parnassus, nor one Helicone 
Left for sweet Muses to be harboured, 
But where thy self hast thy braue mansione31 
(Spenser 1977: 742) 
 
Cromwell’s settlement brought a very different population and ethos 
to Ireland, though: soldiers and adventurers who were given the land 
previously owned by Irish clans or Hibernian-Norman dynasties. 
                                                      
31  
Rankin has argued that Ware’s reprinting of this poem in his Two Histories of 
Ireland solidified the idea that “the regenerative possibilities which civiliza-
tion holds for Ireland are located, then, in the home of the English Catholic 
lord who had embraced Protestantism”. (Rankin 2005: 91) 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
151
Each private man shall there be a Freeholder 
And Gentleman to boot, is ev’ry soldier. 
(Mercer 1675: 9) 
 
Cromwell’s invasion put into practice what James Harrington con-
ceived or legitimized in his utopia of 1656: 
 
For the agrarian of Panopea, it allowing such proportions of so good 
land, men that conceive themselves straitened by this in Oceana, will 
begin there to let themselves forth, where every citizen will in time 
have his villa. And there is no question, but the improvement of that 
country by this means must be far greater than it has been in the best 
of former times. (Harrington 1774: 103) 
 
After the Restoration, some land was returned to Catholic landowners. 
The conflicts that the two classes of landowners consequently had 
were not only about religion and nationalist allegiance but also about 
moral values. The Protestant settlement brought new concepts of land 
ownership, trade and credit into the country. It is thus that, in the 
eighteenth century, Cromwellian ‘planters’ and absentee landlords 
were seen as the lesser landowners, neglectful of their public duties 
towards the Irish and the land. These landlords were depicted by writ-
ers such as Maria Edgeworth and Lady Morgan as merely exploiting 
their Irish tenants and the land. So whilst Cromwell propagated that 
the current Royalist landowners “had not manifested constant good af-
fection to the interest [...] of England”, it was the restored Irish Catho-
lic landowners and the enlightened Protestant Ascendancy who pro-
moted the country house ethos of good housekeeping, social responsi-
bility and community (quoted in Esson 1971: 161). “By the eighteenth 
century”, argues Barnard, “the soldiers were linked with the traits of 
excess”, whereas the other landowners attempted to avoid public dis-
play of wealth and status (Barnard 1999: 77).32 The nostalgia for the 
                                                      
32  
The landless Irish would then be moved out to the West; the choice was to go 
“to hell or to Connaught”. A contemporary priest’s utopian vision reflects the 
suffering of the Irish Catholics at the time:  
The Gaels are being wasted and deeply wounded  
Subjugated, slain, extirpated,  
By plague, by famine, by war, by persecution.  
Then shall Erin be freed from settlers.  
Then shall perish the English tongue.  

Nicole Pohl 
152
organic community of the (Old English) Big House, brutally destroyed 
by Cromwell’s settlements, is aptly expressed in Yeats’ “The Curse of 
Cromwell” (1937): 
 
I came on a great house in the middle of the night, 
Its open lighted doorway and its windows all alight, 
And all my friends were there and made me welcome too; 
But I woke in an old ruin that the winds howled through; 
And when I pay attention I must out and walk 
Among the dogs and horses that understand my talk. 
O what of that, O what of that, 
What is there left to say? 
 
The Irish contribution post-Cromwell to the estate poem is under-
standably elegiac.33 The Gaelic song “Lament for Kilcash (Cill 
Cháis)” mourns, very much within the parameters of the country 
house ethos, the decline of the household of Margaret Butler, Vis-
countess Iveagh (before 1674-1744): 
 
Now what will we do for timber,  
with the last of the woods laid low? 
There’s no talk of Kilcash or its household 
and its bell will be struck no more. 
That dwelling where lived the good lady 
most honored and joyous of women 
– earls made their way over wave there 
and the sweet mass once was said. 
(Kinsella 1989: 253f) 
 
The initial lament for the loss of the forests during the Civil Wars is 
poetically linked to the death of Margaret Butler (before 1674-1744) 
of Kilcash who, together with Colonel Thomas Butler, sheltered 
Catholic clergy.34 
                                                                                                                  
The Gaels in arms shall triumph 
Over the crafty, thieving false set of Calvin. 
(quoted in Walsh) 
33  
On Irish-language poetry and nostalgia of the period, see Dhiarmada 2007. 
Oliver Goldsmith’s The Deserted Village (1770) and the earlier essay The 
Revolution in Low Life (1762) reflect this elegiac mood, projecting the decline 
of the Irish rural community onto the fictional English Auburn.  
34  
There were more Celtic songs lamenting the destruction of forests during the 
Wars. See, for instance, “Bonny Portmore”. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
153
Ducks’ voices nor geese do I hear there,  
nor the eagle’s cry over the bay,  
nor even the bees at their labour bringing honey and wax to us all. 
No birdsong there, sweet and delightful,  
as we watch the sun go down,  
nor cuckoo on top of the branches 
settling the world to rest. 
 
The elegiac valediction continues to mark the absence of the ‘good 
lady’ as the complete decline of the once productive and fertile estate. 
In accordance with the now familiar country house poem, the meto-
nym of the estate expresses nostalgia for a once organic and whole-
some rural community destroyed firstly by invasion and war, then by 
death. Ultimately, the estate will be abandoned in favour of Kilkenny 
Castle in 1766. The poem closes with the utopian longing for recovery 
of this pastoral idyll and the reinstatement of Irish rule: 
 
I call upon Mary and Jesus 
to send her safe home again: 
dances we’ll have in long circles 
and bon-fires and violin music; 
that Kilcash, the townland of our fathers; 
will rise handsome on high once more 
and till doom – or the deluge – returns –  
we’ll see it no more laid low. 
 
Another variation of the lament was written by Father John Lane and, 
translated by James Clarence Mangan, was a clear comment on the 
abandonment of Kilcash by Walter Butler as a seat for the But-
ler/Ormond family: 
 
Oh sorrow the saddest and sorest,  
Kilcash’s attractions are fled –  
Felled lie the high trees of its forest,  
And its bells hang silent and dead. 
There dwelt the fair lady, the vaunted 
Who spread through the island her fame;  
There the Mass and the vespers were chanted,  
And thither the proud Earls came. 35 
 
                                                      
35  
See Appendix XV in Blackall 1952. Lady Iveagh was previously celebrated in 
the tune ‘Bantighearna Ibheach’ or ‘Bantiarna Ibheachadh’, as the wife of the 
Jacobite Brian Maginnis, Viscount Iveagh. 

Nicole Pohl 
154
Similar to the other version, the elegiac lament here is for the once 
glorious forests, the estate, but also for the hospitality shown to the 
Catholic nobility who could exercise their faith without prosecution. 
The pastoral valediction juxtaposes a Golden Age of Irish nobility and 
Catholic faith with the “ruin and black devastation” of the English 
conquest but does not revert back to the utopian vision of the return of 
Irish lords. 
 
 
*** 
 
In the period following the Cromwellian invasion, the Irish Big House 
integrated the ruins of Anglo-Norman houses or ruined abbeys but de-
veloped architecturally alongside the English Neo-Palladian fashion, 
with some few indigenous architects such as Sir Edward Lovett 
Pearce. The building wave started in 1720 with the largest number of 
estates erected in the period between 1780 and 1815, thus covering the 
brief period between parliamentary Independence, Act of Union and 
post-Union political consolidation. Eighteenth-century improvements 
of the Irish transport infrastructure and the development of Dublin, 
Limerick and Armagh encouraged English travellers who already pre-
ferred Home Tours to Grand Tours to visit Ireland from the 1750s 
onwards. Travel accounts by John Bush (1769) and Arthur Young 
(1780) recorded Irish landscape and estates through the lens of pic-
turesque travellers. Glenn Hooper has argued that “Bush had explicitly 
identified a non-classical Irish landscape as preferable to the Palladian 
aesthetic” (Hooper 2005: 36). 
 
At CH is a house belonging to the Counsellor H-b-t [Herbert], in a 
situation by nature the most rurally elegant, romantic, and entertain-
ing, that I ever yet found a house in either England or Ireland. […] I 
can also give you the testimony of the celebrated Bishop of Cloyne, 
who, in a kind of rapture with the natural beauties and grandeur of the 
Place, expressed himself, that Lewis of France might build another 
palace of Versailles, but Nature only could produce a lake of Kilarny. 
There is in truth, the most delightful and entertaining scenery on this 
peninsula [Muckross Peninsula] and in prospect from it, that imagi-
nation can paint, or the most romantic scenery can conceive. (Bush 
1769: 142ff) 
 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
155
Whilst the elegiac praise of the prospect is part and parcel of eigh-
teenth-century picturesque vocabulary, Tim Fulford highlights how 
through 
 
the prospect-view, the propertied classes were able to present their po-
litical dominance as confirmed by the natural scenery. The ability to 
distinguish and possess shared standards, independent of self-interest 
(standards of aesthetic value and taste) in agreement about beauty and 
sublimity of landscape seemed not only a mark of the viewer’s 
gentlemanliness but a criterion for the exercise of legitimate social and 
political power. (Fulford 1996: 2f) 
 
The fashion of Palladian architecture and picturesque landscape gar-
dening, equally foreign to England or Ireland, reveals the cultural and 
political strategies of Imperialism, denied by Yeats or Bowen. “The 
Ascendancy built in order to convince themselves not only that they 
had arrived, but that they would remain” (Foster 1989: 194). Far from 
building an ‘Irish Arcadia’, Craig, Barnard, Clarkson, and Busteed 
have convincingly argued that despite their architectural style, the 
Irish country houses were actually built more humbly than their Eng-
lish counterparts.36 Indeed, the greater Palladian projects by the Prot-
estant Ascendancy were often condemned as excessive “prodigy 
houses” and in some cases led to the owners’ bankruptcies (see Bar-
nard 2004). Patrick Delany’s “notorious improvements” at Delville, 
near Dublin, were satirized by contemporaries as vain and unneces-
sary: 
 
In short, in all your boasted seat,  
There’s nothing but yourself that’s Great. 
(Sheridan 1998: 165) 
 
As the income of Irish Peers was generally smaller than that of their 
English counterparts, existing houses were modernized or smaller 
houses were built for family households. Colonel Newburgh’s im-
provement at Ballyhaise is a good example of how taste and financial 
prudence could be combined: 
 
                                                      
36  
For the idea of country houses and parks rebuilding Arcadia, see Harris et al. 
1973; Jackson-Stops 1992; Wheeler 1992; Busteed 2000; Barnard 1999 and 
2004; Craig 1976; Clarkson 1999. 

Nicole Pohl 
156
It were also to be wished that even our gentlemen would in their coun-
try-seats imitate Colonel Newburgh, a great improver in the Co. of 
Cavan, who, as well as several others, does not only use stucco work, 
instead of wainscot, but has arched his fine dwelling-house, and all his 
large office-houses, story over story, and even all their roofs in the 
most beautiful manner without any timber. (Madden 1738: 25)  
 
The Georgian house of Dundrum Castle, built in the 1730s, is cele-
brated by an unknown visitor in a poem written before 1750. Emulat-
ing the English country house poem “An Essay on Sir Robert Maude’s 
fine Seat at Dundrum in Ireland”, it also praises the balance between 
exquisite taste and managerial prudence, designed by a “Genius of the 
Place.”37 The abundant nature provides for the estate inhabitants less 
in a Jonsonian sponte sua manner than encouraged by labour: 
 
‘Tis here that their delicious Task the Bees 
Perform, and One, in Swarming Millions sees, 
Inform’d Troops, the busy Nation fly, 
Cling to the Budds, with Tubes inserted, try 
With more than Chymist’s Art, t’extract with Toil,  
And on their golden wings bring home their luscious spoil. 
(ll. 33-39) 
 
The orchards offer an abundance of food, “big with bending Fruit” (l. 
55), and the walled garden bestows more exotic fruit such as the 
“ruddy Nectarine”, “th’empurpled Plumb” or “lucious Figs” (ll. 65-
70). The newly built house and park bear testimony to the good taste 
of the owner with prospects and vistas facing the Golden Vale (l. 89). 
The estate is a well-deserved retreat from “Court’s flippery Pomp” 
and “the weary Labyrinth of State” (ll. 120-21); instead, Sir Robert 
Maude follows the principles of ancient Briton hospitality for every-
one: “A Table daily elegantly spread, / Where Friends are welcome, 
and the Poor are fed” (ll. 125-26). The poem closes with a general 
celebration of the Anglo-Irish nobility whose improvements civilize 
the country and bring to it traditions of hospitality, friendship and 
chivalry: 
 
Whose Gentlemen their splendid Seats improve, 
Are social Bands of Amity and Love, 
To Strangers Civil, Hospitably Kind, 
                                                      
37  
BL. Eg 846.A.f.160 (British Library, London). 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
157
Like their old Brothers-Britons still we find, 
How bless’d in all your Neighbouring Friends around, 
Where such a chore of Harmony is found. 
(ll. 147-52) 
 
What the poet leaves out is the Irish heritage of Dundrum Castle. This 
was once the home of the Irish clan O’Dwyer who lost their properties 
in the Act of Settlement in 1662. The original Dundrum Castle was 
destroyed sometime afterwards. The estate passed into the hands of 
Robert Maude of the Cromwellian Army, and remained with his de-
scendants for many generations. Sir Robert Maude, first Baronet of 
Dundrum, built the Georgian mansion on the grounds of the old Cas-
tle. The metonym of Dundrum Castle stands for conquest and coloni-
alism; the restorative nostalgia of amity, love and harmony in the 
poem underpins the moral superiority of the Anglo-Irish landowners. 
Thus, the “pastoral moves” in “An Essay on Sir Robert Maude” are in 
part ideological strategies to obscure the Anglo-Irish imperial past 
(Biddick 1999: 67). 
 
 
*** 
 
Mervyn Busteed has argued that whilst “the concept of ‘improvement’ 
became inextricably lined with ideas on estate design and manage-
ment” in Georgian England, “it was part of a broader school of what 
has been described as civic humanism with its roots in the Enlighten-
ment” (Busteed 2002: 16). The emphasis was therefore on socio-
economic and moral improvement, often expressed in ideas about im-
proving the working conditions and the economic viability on the es-
tate. Given the different origins of the Anglo-Irish (Old English and 
the Ascendancy), patriotic loyalties to Ireland were complex. As we 
have seen, some estate owners, like Patrick Delany and Sir Robert 
Maude, emulated Palladian fashion and English garden design, occa-
sionally even to their financial detriment. 
Sir James Caldwell and Richard Edgeworth are examples of 
Anglo-Irish estate owners who exercised their paternalistic duties and 
responsibilities towards the land and the Catholic tenantry in a patri-

Nicole Pohl 
158
otic way.38 Both landlords saw it as their duty as Irish and as land-
owners to manage their estates in a responsible and prudent way. In an 
address to the Dublin Society, Caldwell wrote: 
 
It […] behoves every native of Ireland, who has her interest and his 
own honour at heart, who prefers the dignity, influence and indepen-
dence of residing in the midst of his relations and countrymen, upon 
his paternal estate, to the obscurity and insignificance of squandering 
its revenue unknown if not despised, in another kingdom; to consider 
how these natural advantages of his country may be improved.39 
 
Like Edgeworth later on, Caldwell also reclaimed bog and wasteland 
to intensify and extend farming and thus be able to provide for all the 
tenants. He saw the importance of the linen industry and adapted his 
estate accordingly. He offered low rents to his tenants, and in times of 
need, provided additional help and funds. He acted, according to Bus-
teed, as a “patriotic Christian landlord”, on principles of benevolence, 
hospitality and harmony (Busteed 2002: 31): 
 
The Lough that winds through islands  
under Turaw mountain green, 
And Castle Caldwell’s stretching woods  
with tranquil bays between 
(Allingham 1922: 186) 
 
Richard Lovell Edgeworth’s improvements of Edgeworthstown House 
are documented in his memoirs and his daughter’s notes (see Edge-
worth 1844). Edgeworthstown House was originally built in 1672 as 
“a tolerable house, built according to the taste of the foregoing half 
century, when architecture had not been much studied in Ireland” 
(Edgeworth 1844: 213). When Richard Lovell Edgeworth moved his 
family to Ireland in 1773, he not only rebuilt the house but, more im-
portantly, reformed the management of his estate. Scandalized by his 
tenants’ poverty, interested in public education, and finally, concerned 
about the political future of Ireland (he famously voted against the Act 
of Union), Edgeworth’s reforms were significant.40 He reclaimed con-
                                                      
38  
Both, interestingly, opposed the proposed union of the British/Irish Parliament 
(1769, 1801).  
39  
Sir James Caldwell to the Dublin Society, 1767: B3/21/11, Letter 2 (quoted in 
Busteed 2002: 26).  
40  
See his Essays on Professional Education (1809). 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
159
siderable tracts of bog and mountain land and so improved the value 
of his estate. He abolished the system of agents and drivers, so de-
plored by his daughter in Castle Rackrent (1800) and The Absentee 
(1812), to collect rent himself (see Edgeworth 1844: 265ff). He elimi-
nated feudal debts and duties, rented out cottages to workers at a low 
rent and abolished duty work. He also published a report on the possi-
ble reclamation of some 34,500 acres of Irish bog to make more land 
agriculturally viable. Because he showed a paternalistic sense of jus-
tice and responsibility, fairness and chivalry, it was added to his char-
acter as a good landlord that he was a “real gentleman” (Edgeworth 
1844: 274). 
These two reformers clearly defined their responsibilities and 
duties in view of the traditional country house ethos. In this, as Bus-
teed suggests, they were also “strongly reminiscent of the Irish Gaelic 
Chieftains who had been displaced at the start of the seventeenth cen-
tury” in their quasi-feudal patronage of tenants and estate (Busteed 
2002: 32). Lady Morgan’s post-union “national tale” The Wild Irish 
Girl (1806) appropriates the nostalgia for estate hospitality and pa-
tronage, culture and chivalry to create a distinct Irish nationality and 
history. 
 
 
*** 
 
This race of men, tho’ savage they may seem, 
The country, too, with many a mountain rough, 
Yet are they sweet to him who tires and tastes them. 
(Fazio Delli Uberti, Travels through Ireland in the 14th Century) 
 
Whilst Anglo-Irish country house literature either disavows the colo-
nial complicity of the country ethos or, in the case of Maria Edge-
worth, shows the difficulty of marrying the hybrid identities of the 
Anglo-Irish and the Irish in a gesture of reconciliation, Irish texts of 
the period are elegiac or visionary. Both poetic modes are nostalgic, 
forging a collective past, future and national identity for the lost Irish 
nation – the ‘Not-Yet’ of these texts projects an idealized history of 
Gaelic supremacy into the future. This restorative nostalgia is particu-
larly apparent in the political aisling, a form of Irish visionary poetry 
(Dhiarmada 2007: 1) where 

Nicole Pohl 
160
the prophetic message foretold the return of the natural order: the 
rightful king on his throne, the native aristocracy restored to their an-
cestral lands, the Catholic Church re-established, the rehabilitation of 
the native intelligentsia. But the restoration of the rightful king was 
not a goal in itself, it was the mechanism by which more universal 
changes would be brought about and from which would flow the reali-
sation of the millennial dream. […] In Irish political literature, as in 
other cultures, millennialism constituted the main structure of mean-
ing through which the contemporary events were linked to an exalted 
image of an ideal world; it provided a set of images in which people 
could express both individual and collective needs. (O’Buchalla 1996: 
109)  
 
It is perhaps not surprising that this collective longing between what 
once (perhaps) was, what is and what will be can only be expressed in 
Irish: 
 
Duchas is a difficult word to explain in English but basically it means 
a connection, a feeling of attachment to a place, a tongue, a tradition, a 
belief that one belongs to a sustaining cultural and communal energy. 
[…] [F]or me the duchas is not a flight into the past, rather a rejoining 
of the past, the present and the future. It is a quest, perhaps for an ex-
panded present which flows backwards and forwards with one and the 
same movement. (Ó Searcaigh 2004: 232f) 
 
Sydney Owenson’s national tale, The Wild Irish Girl (1806), ex-
presses this desire for duchas in promoting quite forcefully and ency-
clopaedically a positive image of ancient Irish culture in contrast to 
English colonial culture. On the other hand, Owenson’s tale is ambi-
valently nostalgic. The hope of a utopian future is dampened by the 
impossibility of a satisfactory reconciliation between the two nations. 
But the text successfully holds the conflict between traumatic memory 
of colonisation and nostalgic projection into a past-future.  
In many ways, Owenson’s celebration of Irish culture partici-
pates in the post-Union wave of antiquarian writings about Ireland. 
Thus the catalogue of ancient Irish achievements, ranging from litera-
ture, music, language and mythology to, importantly, government of 
land and people (all glossed with long footnotes and evidence), is a 
nostalgic ‘folklore’. However, as Kirshenblatt-Gimlett argues, ‘those 
who are concerned with demonstrating the possession of national [cul-
ture] […] cite this attribute as a mark of being civilized” (Kirshen-
blatt-Gimlett 1991: 422f). It is the protagonist and by proxy the British 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
161
reader who is to be convinced of the validity of a hegemonic Irish cul-
ture and civilization: 
 
But sent to a country against which I have a decided prejudice – which 
I suppose semi-barbarous, semi-civilized; has lost the strong and 
hardy features of savage life, without acquiring those graces which 
distinguish polished society – I shall neither participate in the poignant 
pleasure of awakened curiosity and acquired information, nor taste the 
least of those enjoyments which courted my acceptances in my native 
land. (Owenson 1999: 20) 
 
Critics have suggested that Owenson was ‘orientalizing’ Ireland; the 
‘real’ Ireland that Horatio encounters and that essentially is displayed 
like a museum to him mirrors English partiality for the picturesque 
and antiquarianism. Indeed, what is left of the Gaelic Chiefdom is a 
“cabinet of national antiquities, and national curiosities. In short, it is 
the receptacle of all [the] precious relics, […] the emporium of the an-
tiquities of Inismore, which are arranged along its walls, and sus-
pended from its pillars” (Owenson 1999: 64). But I agree with Nata-
sha Tessone who highlights the contesting representation of Ireland 
and Irish history in The Wild Irish Girl (see Tessone 2002). Owenson, 
like Edgeworth, is not only concerned, if in different ways, with the 
representation of Irish culture and society, but more specifically with 
land ownership and management. Like Robert Edgeworth and Cald-
well, she projects back to the rule of the Gaelic Chieftains to criticize 
Anglo-Irish absenteeism, the system of exploitative agents (“West-
Indian planters”) and sub-agents, the enslavement of the Catholic 
population, in short: the absence of true chivalry and nobility amongst 
the land-owning class (Owenson 1999: 34). The promotion of an ide-
alised feudalism underlines the different motivations and allegiances 
of the landowners in Ireland: the Irish Chieftains were motivated by 
duty and responsibility towards the land and the tenantry, whereas the 
Anglo-Irish landlords are motivated by material gain; their estates are 
complicit in the colonial exploitation of Ireland. Owenson’s celebra-
tion of the Prince and his estate borrows from the bardic poetry of the 
Middle Ages and the Renaissance where the “lord [is represented as] 
being married to his land and the land, under the right rule, [is] pros-
pering” (Frawley 2005: 24). The political vision here is the return of 
this Gaelic rule and the reinstatement of true chivalrous values. 

Nicole Pohl 
162
The true nobility of the Irish Prince (“not a drop of Strong-
bonean flowed in their Irish veins agrah!”, Owenson 1999: 38), is ex-
pressed through the metonym of his lordly virtues, even in exile: 
 
This very curious apartment is still called the banqueting-hall – where  
‘Stately the feast and high the cheer, 
Girt with many a valiant Peter,’ 
was once celebrated in all the boundless extravagance and convivial 
spirit of ancient Irish hospitality. (Owenson 1999: 102) 
 
“Notwithstanding the exile”, continues Owenson, “[…] the Prince af-
fects an air of grandeur, and opulence – he keeps a kind of open table 
in his servants’ hall, where a crowd of labourers, dependents, and 
mendicants, are daily entertained, and it is evident his pride would re-
ceive a mortal stab, if he supposed that his guest, and that guest an 
Englishman, suspected the impoverished state of his circumstances” 
(Owenson 1999: 169). And her footnote explains further: 
 
The kitchen, or servants’ hall, of an Irish country gentleman, is open 
to all whom distress may lead to its door. Professed and indolent men-
dicants take advantage of this indiscriminating hospitality, enter with-
out ceremony, set themselves by the fire, and seldom (indeed never) 
depart with their demands unsatisfied, by the misapplied benevolence 
of an old Irish custom, which in many instances would be – more 
honoured in the breach than the observance. (Owenson 1999: 169, 
note 1) 
 
Verses on the Present State of Ireland, By a Lady (1778) equally cele-
brates ancient Irish hospitality and honour even amongst enemies: 
 
It is said that formerly, in the contests between the old Irish and the 
English settlers, that when an Irish Chieftan got the better of his an-
tagonist, and took his castle, that he often gave him back the posses-
sion of it, upon his promising never to shut his doors when he went to 
dinner. (Anon. 1778: 20) 
 
The contrast set up in both texts is between paternalistic feudalism 
based on principles of ancient hospitality, honour and chivalry and a 
mercantile landownership motivated by despotism and self-interest. It 
seems that even Lord M-, the archetypal absentee landlord, has learnt 
from the exemplum of the Gaelic Prince when he instructs Horatio: 
 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
163
Remember that you are not placed by despotism over a band of slaves, 
creatures of the soil, and as such to be considered; but by Providence, 
over a certain portion of men, who, in common with the rest of their 
nation, are the descendants of a brave, a free, and an enlightened peo-
ple. […] Within the influence then of your own bounded circle pursue 
those means of promoting the welfare of the individuals consigned to 
your care and protection, which lies within the scope of all those in 
whose hands the destinies of their less fortunate brethren are placed. 
(Owenson 1999: 251) 
 
However, at second sight, this is an ambivalent and problematic 
speech. Lord M- defends a different kind of paternalism than the 
Gaelic Prince and encourages his son on his marriage to be a true feu-
dal lord to his “less fortunate brethren”. The forced marriage between 
Horatio and Glorvina is symbolic of the Act of Union – union is pos-
sible but true reconciliation is not. 
The nostalgia of the English country house ethos projected onto 
Anglo-Irish estates, the return to Irish Chieftains’ “pious feudalism” in 
the political aisling, speaks of the transideological make-up of nostal-
gia. Frank O’Connor’s words relate to both the Irish and Anglo-Irish 
when he says that “I am not sure that any country can afford to discard 
what I have called ‘the backward look’, but we in Ireland can afford it 
less than any other because without it we have nothing and are nothing 
[…]” (O’Connor 1967: 230). 
 
 
*** 
 
Nostalgia is dialectical; it discredits the idea of linear historical pro-
gress with what Walter Benjamin called now-time; that very moment 
of the present in which we realise its synthesis with past aspirations 
and (utopian) dreams. Paul Klee’s Angelus Novus which epitomizes 
Benjamin’s critique of progress turns his face toward the past to see 
the present and future more clearly. “This is how one pictures the an-
gel of history”, Benjamin writes. “His face is turned toward the past. 
Where we perceive a chain of events, he sees one single catastrophe 
which keeps piling wreckage upon wreckage and hurls it in front of 
his feet. The angel would like to stay, awaken the dead, and make 
whole what has been smashed. But a storm is blowing from Paradise; 
it has got caught in his wings with such violence that the angel can no 
longer close them. This storm irresistibly propels him into the future 

Nicole Pohl 
164
to which his back is turned, while the pile of debris before him grows 
skyward. This storm is what we call progress” (Benjamin 1969: 257f). 
For Benjamin, the storm is blowing from paradise towards an inde-
terminate future. However much the Angel of History is confounded 
by destruction and disaster, there is a (utopian) hope of now-time that 
remains shaped by our reflective memory of Paradise. In a radio 
broadcast of 1951, Elizabeth Bowen similarly defends the idea of nos-
talgia, not as a blind return to some idealized past but as a necessary 
element of literary imagination; “Ideally, shouldn’t the book, story or 
poem constitute what has not yet been, what is new?” (Bowen 1951: 
2). The Blochean ‘Not-yet’ is informed here again by the fusion of the 
past and a messianic present; “What has great art done but enclose that 
eternal ‘now’”? (Bowen 1951: 7). Thus, we cannot deny the critical 
and utopian potential of nostalgia. My understanding of nostalgia as 
reflective longing and desire makes it possible to include the country 
house nostalgia into the framework of utopianism. It does inspire 
readers “to work towards an understanding of what is necessary for 
human fulfilment, a broadening, deepening and raising of aspirations 
in terms quite different from those of their everyday life” (Levitas 
1990: 122). It is the capacity to generate attentiveness to the socio-
political status quo and the yearning for a different kind of life and so-
ciety that lie at the heart of the country house ethos. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
165
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Allingham, William (1882/1922). “The Winding Banks of Erne”, in: Padraic Colum 
(ed.). Anthology of Irish Verse. New York: Boni and Liveright, 184-87. 
Anon. (1778). Verses on the Present State of Ireland, By a Lady. London: P. Elmsly. 
Blackall, Henry (1952). The Butlers of County Clare. Limerick: North Munster Anti-
quarian Journal. 
Bowen, Elizabeth (1942). Bowen’s Court. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Bush, John (1769). Hibernia curiosa. A letter from a gentleman in Dublin, to his 
friend at Dover in Kent. Giving a general view of the manners, customs, dis-
positions, &c. of the inhabitants of Ireland. […] Collected in a tour through 
the kingdom in the year 1764. Ornamented with a map of the city of Dublin 
and several copper plates. Dublin: J. Potts. 
Darwin, Erasmus (1794/96). Zoonomia; or, The Laws of Organic Life. Vol. II. Lon-
don: J. Johnson. 
Edgeworth, Richard Lovell (1844). Memoirs of Richard Lovell Edgeworth, begun by 
himself and concluded by his daughter Maria Edgeworth. London: Richard 
Bentley. 
Harrington, James (1774). Oceana and Other Works (ed. John Toland). London: A. 
Millar. 
Hofer, Johannes (1688/1934). Dissertatio Medica de nostalgia (tr. Carolyn Kiser 
Anspach), in: Bulletin of the Institute of the History of Medicine 2: 376-91. 
Kinsella, Thomas (1989). The New Oxford Book of Irish Verse. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
Madden, Sam (1738). Reflections and Resolutions Proper for the Gentlemen of Ire-
land. Dublin: G. Ewing. 
Mercer, William (1675). The Moderate Cavalier or the Soldiers Description of Ire-
land. Cork: n. pub. 
Norden, John (1618/1979). “To the benevolent Readers”, in: The Surveiors Dialogue. 
Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis, n. p. 
“Of the Nostalgia, or Home-Ach. 1759. From the Breslaw Collection, 1718”, in: Lit-
erary Memoirs of Germany and the North, being a choice Collection of Es-
says on the following interesting subjects, viz. alchemy, […] agriculture, &c. 
&c. Vol. II. London: J. Warcus and J. Ross. 
Owenson, Sidney (1806/1999). The Wild Irish Girl: A National Tale (ed. Kathryn 
Kirkpatrick). Oxford: Oxford World Classics. 
Sheridan, Thomas (1998). “A Description of Doctor Delany’s Villa”, in: Andrew 
Carpenter (ed.). Verse in English from Eighteenth-century Ireland. Cork: Cork 
UP, 164f. 
Sidney, Philip (1595/1987). The Defence of Poesy, in: Selected Writings (ed. Richard 
Dutton). Manchester: Fyfield Books, 102-48. 
Spenser, Edward (1596/1977). The Faerie Queene (ed. A. C. Hamilton). London: 
Longman. 
Vaughan, Henry (1608). The Golden-Grove, Moralized in three Bookes: A Worke 
very necessary for all such, as would know how to governe themselves, their 
houses, or their country. London: Simon Stafford. 

Nicole Pohl 
166
Wotton, Henry (1624/1968). The Elements of Architecture (ed. Frederick Hard). Char-
lottesville: U of Virginia P. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Austin, Linda M. (2007). Nostalgia in Transition, 1780-1917. Charlottesville: U of 
Virginia P. 
Bakhtin, Mikhail (1981). The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays (tr. and ed. Michael 
Holquist). Austin: U of Texas P. 
Bal, Mieke (1999). Quoting Caravaggio: Contemporary Art, Preposterous History. 
Chicago: Chicago UP. 
Barnard, Toby (1999). “Public and Private Uses of Wealth in Ireland, c. 1660-1760”, 
in: Jacqueline Hill and Colm Lennon (eds.). Luxury and Austerity. Dublin: U 
College Dublin P, 66-83. 
— (2004). Making the Grand Figure: Lives and Possessions in Ireland, 1641-1770. 
New Haven: Yale UP. 
Benjamin, Walter (1969). Illuminations: Essays and Reflections. New York: 
Schocken Books. 
Bentmann, Reinhard and Michael Müller (1992). The Villa as Hegemonic Architec-
ture (tr. Tim Spence and David Craven). New Jersey: Humanities Press. 
Bhaba, Homi K. (ed.) (1990). Nation and Narration. London: Routledge. 
Biddick, Kathleen (1999). The Shock of Medievalism. Durham: Duke UP. 
Bloch, Ernst (1954/1995). “Karl Marx and Humanity: The Material of Hope”, in: The 
Principle of Hope (tr. Neville Plaice, Stephen Plaice and Paul Knight). Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 1354-76. 
— (1956/1988). “On the Present in Literature”, in: The Utopian Function of Art and 
Literature: Selected Essays (tr. Jack Zipes and Frank Mecklenburg). Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 207-23. 
— (1959/1988). “The Representation of Wish-Landscapes in Painting, Opera and Po-
etry”, in: Bloch 1956/1988, 278-92. 
Bowen, Elizabeth (1942/1950). “The Big House”, in: Collected Impressions. New 
York: Alfred Knopf, 195-202. 
— (1951). “The Cult of Nostalgia”, Radio Broadcast, 26 July 1951. Elizabeth Bowen 
Collection, Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin. 
Boyce, David George and Alan O’Day (eds.) (1996). The Making of Modern Irish 
History: Revisionism and the Revisionist Controversy. London: Routledge. 
Boym, Svetlana (2001). The Future of Nostalgia. New York: Basic Books. 
Broome, Judith (2007). Fictive Domains: Body, Language and Nostalgia, 1717-1770. 
Lewisburg: Bucknell UP. 
Busteed, Mervyn (2002). “The Practice of Improvement in the Irish Context – The 
Castle Estate in County Fermarnagh in the Second Half of the Eighteenth 
Century”, in: Irish Geography 33.1: 15-36. 
Butler, Marilyn (1972). Maria Edgeworth: A Literary Biography. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Chakrabarty, Dipesh (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and His-
torical Difference. Princeton: Princeton UP. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
167
Clarkson, L. A. (1999). “Hospitality, Housekeeping and High Living in Eighteenth-
century Ireland”, in: Jacqueline Hill and Colm Lennon (eds.). Luxury and Aus-
terity. Dublin: University College Dublin Press, 81-105. 
Craig, Maurice (1976). Classic Irish Houses of the Middle Size. London: The Archi-
tectural Press. 
Daniels, E. B. (1985). “Nostalgia: Experiencing the Elusive”, in: Don Ihde and Hugh 
J. Silverman (eds.). Descriptions. Albany: SUNY Press, 76-90. 
Deane, Seamus (1997). Strange Country: Modernity and Nationhood in Irish Writing 
since 1790. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari (1977). The Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizo-
phrenia. Minneapolis: Minneapolis UP. 
Dhiarmada, Briona Nic (2007). “Aspects of Utopia, Anti-Utopia, and Nostalgia in 
Irish-Language Texts”, in: Utopian Studies 18.3: 365-78. 
Dubrow, Heather (1979). “The Country House Poem: A Study in Generic Develop-
ment”, in: Genre 12: 153-79. 
Duckworth, Alistair (1989). “Gardens, Houses, and the Rhetoric of Description in the 
English Novel”, in: Gervaise Jackson-Stops et al. (eds.). The Fashioning of 
the British Country House. Hanover: UP of New England for The National 
Gallery of Art, Washington, 395-417. 
Eliade, Mircea (1982). Ordeal by Labyrinth: Conversations with Claude-Henri 
Roquet. Chicago: Chicago UP. 
Esson, Denis M. R. (1971). The Curse of Cromwell: The History of the Ironside Con-
quest of Ireland, 1649-53. Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield. 
Ettin, Andrew V. (1984). Literature and the Pastoral. New Haven: Yale UP.  
Felhmann, Guy (1991). “A Historical Survey”, in: Jacqueline Genet (ed.). The Big 
House in Ireland: Reality and Representation. Dingle: Brandon, 15-18. 
Flanagan, Thomas (1959). The Irish Novelists 1800-1850. New York: Columbia UP. 
Foster, Roy (1989). Modern Ireland 1600-1972. London: Penguin. 
Fowler, Alistair (1994). The Country House Poem: A Cabinet of Seventeenth-Century 
Estate Poems and Related Items. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP. 
Frawley, Oona (2005). Irish Pastoral: Nostalgia and 20th-Century Irish Literature. 
Dublin: Irish Academic Press. 
Frye, Northrop (1973). “Varieties of Literary Utopias”, in: Frank E. Manuel (ed.). 
Utopias and Utopian Thought. London: Souvenir Press, 25-49. 
Fulford, Tim (1996). Landscape, Liberty and Authority: Poetry, Criticism and Politics 
from Thomson to Wordsworth. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Gallchoir, Clíona (2001). “Gender, Nation and Revolution: Maria Edgeworth and 
Stephanie-Felicite de Genlis”, in: Elizabeth Eger et al. (eds.). Women, Writing, 
and the Public Sphere, 1700-1830. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 200-16. 
Gent, Lucy (1995). “‘The Rash Gazer’: Economies of Vision in Britain, 1550-1660”, 
in: Lucy Gent (ed.). Albion’s Classicism: The Visual Arts in Britain, 1550-
1660. New Haven: Yale UP, 377-93. 
Gibbons, Luke (1996). Transformations in Irish Culture. Notre Dame: U of Notre 
Dame P. 
Harris, John et al. (eds.) (1973). The King’s Arcadia: Inigo Jones and the Stuart 
Court. London: Arts Council of England. 
Hibbard, G. R. (1956). “The Country House Poem of the Seventeenth Century”, in: 
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 19: 159-74. 

Nicole Pohl 
168
Hirsch, Marianne and Leo Spitzer (2006). “‘We would not have come without you’: 
Generations of Nostalgia”, in: Katherine Hodgkin and Susannah Radstone 
(eds.). Memory, History, Nation: Contested Pasts. London: Transaction, 79-
96. 
Hooper, Glenn (2005). Travel Writing and Ireland 1760-1860: Culture, History and 
Politics. London: Palgrave. 
Hutcheon, Linda (1998). “Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern”, in: University of 
Toronto English Language (UTEL). Main collection. [http://www.library. 
utoronto.ca/utel/criticism/hutchinp.html]. 
Huyssen, Andreas (1995). Twilight Memories: Marking Time in a Culture of Amnesia. 
New York: Routledge. 
Inskip, Peter and Richard Wheeler (1992). English Arcadia: The Landscape and 
Buildings of Stowe. San Marino: Huntington Library Press. 
Jackson-Stops, Gervase (1992). An English Arcadia 1600-1990. London: National 
Trust. 
Jameson, Fredric (1991). Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 
London: Verso. 
Kant, Immanuel (1798/1978). Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (tr. Vic-
tor Lyle Dowdell). Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP. 
Keane, Molly (1984). The Rising Tide. London: Virago. 
Kelsall, Malcolm (1993). The Great Good Place: The Country House & English Lit-
erature. New York: Columbia UP. 
Kirkpatrick, Kathryn J. (2000). Border Crossings: Irish Women Writers and National 
Identities. Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P. 
Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Barbara (1991). “Objects of Ethnography”, in: Ivan Karp and 
Steven D. Lavine (eds.). Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and the Politics of 
Museum Display. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 386-443. 
Kowaleski-Wallace, Elizabeth (1991). Their Fathers’ Daughters: Hannah More, 
Maria Edgeworth, and Patriarchal Complicity. New York: Oxford UP. 
Kreilkamp, Vera (1998). The Anglo-Irish Novel and the Big House. Syracuse: Syra-
cuse UP. 
Lamb, Jonathan (2001). Preserving the Self in the South Seas, 1680-1840. Chicago: U 
of Chicago P. 
Lerner, Laurence (1972). The Uses of Nostalgia: Studies in Pastoral Poetry. London: 
Chatto & Windus. 
Levitas, Ruth (1990). The Concept of Utopia. London: Philip Allen. 
Macpherson, C. B. (1962). The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes 
to Locke. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
McBride, Kari Boyd (2001). Country House Discourse in Early Modern England: A 
Cultural Study of Landscape and Legitimacy. Aldershot: Ashgate. 
McClung, William A. (1977). The Country House in English Renaissance Poetry. 
Berkeley: U of California P. 
McCormack, W. J. (1985). Ascendancy and Tradition in Anglo-Irish Literary History 
from 1789 to 1939. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Miller, Julia Anne (2000). “Acts of Union: Family Violence and National Courtship 
in Maria Edgeworth’s The Absentee and Sydney Owenson’s The Wild Irish 
Girl”, in: Kathryn Kirkpatrick (ed.). Border Crossings: Irish Women Writers 
and National Identities. Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P, 13-37. 

Nostalgia, Utopia and the Country House 
169
Moylan, Tom (2000). Scraps of the Untainted Sky: Science Fiction, Utopia and 
Dystopia. Boulder: Westview. 
Moynahan, Julian (1995). Anglo-Irish: The Literary Imagination of a Hyphenated 
Culture. Princeton: Princeton UP. 
Mumford, Lewis (1963). The Story of Utopias. New York: Viking. 
Nandy, Ashis (1995). “History’s Forgotten Doubles”, in: History and Theory 34: 44-
66. 
Natali, Marcos Piason (2004). “History and the Politics of Nostalgia”, in: Iowa Jour-
nal of Cultural Studies 1 (October): 10-26. 
Nicolson, Adam (2008). Earls of Paradise: England & the Dream of Perfection. Lon-
don: Harper Collins. 
Nietzsche, Friedrich (1874/1984). Vom Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie für das Le-
ben. Basel: Diogenes. 
O’Buchalla, Breandan (1996). “Irish Jacobitism and Irish Nationalism: The Literary 
Evidence”, in: Michael O’Dea and Kevin Whelan (eds.). Studies on Voltaire 
and the Eighteenth Century 355. Oxford: The Voltaire Foundation, 103-15. 
O’Connor, Frank (1967). The Backward Look. London: Macmillan. 
O’Faoláin, Sean (1957). The Vanishing Hero: Studies in Novelists of the Twenties. 
Boston: Little Brown. 
Ó Searcaigh, Cathal (2004). “The View from the Glen”, in: Irish Pages 2.2: 229-35. 
Palmeri, Frank (2003). Satire, History, Novel: Narrative Forms, 1665-1815. Newark: 
U of Delaware P. 
Patterson, Anabel (1987). Pastoral and Ideology: Virgil to Valery. Berkeley: U of 
California P.  
Perec, Georges (1999). Species of Spaces and Other Pieces (tr. John Sturrock). Har-
mondsworth: Penguin.  
Phillips, James (1985). “Distance, Absence and Nostalgia”, in: Don Ihde and Hugh J. 
Silverman (eds.). Descriptions. Albany: SUNY Press, 64-75. 
Pohl, Nicole (2008). Women, Space and Utopia, 1600-1800. Aldershot: Ashgate. 
Purney, Thomas (1717). Enquiry into the true Nature of Pastoral. London: Jonas 
Brown. 
Puttenham, George (1589/1970). The Arte of English Poesy. Kent: Kent State UP. 
Rankin, Deana (2005). Between Spenser and Swift: English Writing in Seventeenth-
Century Ireland. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Rathmell, J. C. A. (1971). “Jonson, Lord Lisle and Penshurst”, in: English Literary 
Renaissance I: 250-60.  
Ricoeur, Paul (1988). Time and Narrative (tr. Kathleem Blamey and David Pellauer). 
Vol. III. Chicago: U of Chicago P. 
Rivers, Isabel (1973). The Poetry of Conservatism 1600-1745: A Study of Poetry and 
Public Affairs from Jonson to Pope. Cambridge: Clarendon. 
Robertson, Roland (1992). Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture. London: 
Sage. 
Rosaldo, Renato (1989). Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis. Bos-
ton: Beacon Press. 
Smith, Gary (ed.) (1988). On Walter Benjamin: Critical Essays and Recollections. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Starobinski, Jean (1966). “The Idea of Nostalgia”, in: Diogenes 54: 81-103. 

Nicole Pohl 
170
Stewart, Susan (1984). On Longing: Narrative of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the 
Souvenir, the Collection. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins UP.  
Strathern, Marilyn (1995). “Nostalgia and the New Genetics”, in: Debborah Battaglia 
(ed.). Rhetorics of Self-Making. Berkeley: U of California P, 97-120. 
Tessone, Natasha (2002). “Displaying Ireland: Sydney Owenson and the Politics of 
Spectacular Antiquarianism”, in: Éire-Ireland 37: 169-86. 
Walsh, John. Oliver Cromwell: The Tyranny of 1649. [http://www.irish-society.org/ 
Hedgemaster%20Archives/Cromwell_1.htm]. 
Wayne, Don E. (1984). Penshurst: The Semiotics of Place and the Poetics of History. 
London: Methuen. 
Williams, Raymond (1993). The Country and the City. London: The Hogarth Press. 
Willinger, Isabella (2007). “Nostalgia and Longing: The Politics of Sentiment vs. a 
Poetics of Sentiment”, in: Nosztalgia. [http://www.nosztalgia.net/cms/index. 
php?option=content&task=view&id=13]. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Watchdogs of Eden: Chesterton and Buchan 
Look at the Present of the Future 
 
Christoph Ehland 
 
 
Abstract: Ebenezer Howard’s idea of the garden city represents one of the most influ-
ential schemes in social utopianism that developed during the late-Victorian period. 
Despite the fact that in 1908 the first garden city was eventually established in rural 
Hertfordshire the literary scene largely ignored its existence and did not take part in 
the heated debates on the scheme at the time. G.K. Chesterton and John Buchan are 
among the very few writers who integrate the utopian space of the garden city into 
their literary worlds. This essay discusses the strategies by which writers of a point-
edly conservative stance not only criticise and deconstruct the utopian space of the 
garden city but also set out to construct conservative counter-utopias. 
 
Key names and concepts: anti-utopia – Bedford Park – John Buchan – G.K. Chester-
ton – Englishness – First World War – garden city – garden suburb – Ebenezer How-
ard – Letchworth Garden City – rural England – utopia – war literature 
 
 
A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even 
glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is 
always landing. And when Humanity lands there, it looks out, and 
seeing a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realisation of Utopias.  
Oscar Wilde, “The Soul of Man Under Socialism” 
 
1. Introduction 
 
English literature seems to have an affinity for both utopian and 
dystopian writing. Thomas More gave the world the term utopia along 
with his idea of an ideal community, and ever since British writers 
have been eager to take their readers to the places of alternative socie-

Christoph Ehland 
172
ties.1 Despite what seems to be a general literary inclination to think 
along utopian lines – from the prophecy of a happier world in William 
Morris’ News from Nowhere to the nightmarish prospect of a distant 
future and its human distortions in H.G. Wells’ The Time Machine – 
the word ‘utopian’ does not immediately spring to mind when think-
ing about the historical development of English society. The Roma-
nian writer Émile M. Cioran once characterised the political system of 
England as follows: 
 
Rousseau war eine Geißel für Frankreich, wie Hegel für Deutschland. 
England dagegen, ebenso unempfänglich für Hysterie wie für Syste-
me, England hat sich mit der Mittelmäßigkeit abgefunden; seine ‘Phi-
losophie’ hat den Wert der Wahrnehmung aufgestellt; seine Politik 
den des Geschäfts. Der Empirismus war seine Antwort auf die Hirn-
gespinste des Kontinents; das Parlament seine Absage an die Utopie, 
an die heroische Pathologie. (Cioran 1980: 39) 
 
Cioran understands England as a country governed by an anti-
revolutionary and also anti-utopian spirit deeply ingrained in the in-
evitable pragmatism of a political system resulting from capitalist 
complacency. However, one should not be misled by the darker tones 
audible in Cioran’s typically misanthropic cynicism; his analysis gives 
expression to a view of English society which is – in a more positive 
form – also present in the image of England as a country of tradition 
and continuity. The latter’s ideological demarcation has been para-
digmatically summarised by Edmund Burke in his famous reproach of 
the English for displaying sympathy towards the French Revolution: 
 
The people of England will not ape the fashions they have never tried, 
nor go back to those which they have found mischievous on trial. 
They look upon the legal hereditary succession of their crown as 
among their rights, not as among their wrongs; as a benefit, not as a 
grievance; as a security for their liberty, not as a badge of servitude. 
(Burke 1999: 26) 
 
Of course, a defensive attitude to radical change is to be expected of 
such a stoic nation, immune to hysteria and revolution and inclined to 
                                                      
1  
For a history of utopian thought and utopian schemes in Britain, see Chris 
Coates’ book Utopia Britannica: British Utopian Experiments 1325 to 1945, 
vol. 1 (Coates 2001) and Gregory Claeys’ study Modern British Utopias 
1700-1850 (Claeys 1997). 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
173
answer elusive continental idealism with cool-headed English com-
mon sense. There remains the question of the startling discrepancy be-
tween an obvious affinity for the literary utopia on the part of English 
writers and a socio-political mentality generally hostile to it. A solu-
tion to this apparent paradox is offered by Wolf Lepenies who ob-
serves in Melancholie und Gesellschaft that utopian thinking has its 
origin within a dialectical system of containment that characterises the 
situation of the intellectual in capitalist societies: in a culture propa-
gating the vita activa over the vita contemplativa, the utopian vision is 
a compensatory and often escapist act by which the intellectual as a 
melancholy man is able not only to give expression to his tormented 
self in current society but also to flee from what is tormenting him.2 
Generally speaking, many literary utopias and dystopias which com-
municate their authors’ urge for reform seem to function in this parti-
cular way: “Der Intellektuelle klagt über die Welt, und aus dieser Kla-
ge entsteht das utopische Denken, das eine bessere Welt entwirft und 
damit die Melancholie vertreiben soll.” (Lepenies 1998: xxi) 
With regard to this, one may be less surprised to find that in a 
country where social and constitutional change takes place in an evo-
lutionary rather than in a revolutionary manner the idea of an alterna-
tive society has frequently been put forward by writers in their despair 
over the ideological status quo. There can be no doubt that the sheer 
stability of the English constitutional settlement in alliance with the 
anti-intellectual tendencies of a capitalist Protestantism has always fu-
elled this kind of escapism. If it is therefore true that, historically, 
England, unlike most continental European nations, is characterised 
by constitutional perseverance and that the traces of revolutionary 
thought have not impinged upon its political system, one must still 
draw attention to the fact that traces of utopian yearning have trans-
gressed the limitations of a predominantly text-centred discourse and 
can be found in the material spaces throughout the country. 
                                                      
2  
Lepenies writes: “Die Melancholie, die als Zeichen des inneren Aufruhrs und 
der drohenden Revolte gilt, gerät daher früh in Verdacht – und damit der Intel-
lektuelle. Wenn er auf der einen Seite nicht das sacrificium intellectus bege-
hen und sich der Welt anpassen und wenn er auf der anderen Seite nicht seine 
Existenz in der offenen Auflehnung riskieren will, muß der Intellektuelle sich 
eine andere, eine bessere Welt ausdenken und erträumen. So wird die Utopie 
geboren, jenes literarische Genre, das den Aufbruch Europas in die Moderne 
begleitet.” (Lepenies 1998: xx) 

Christoph Ehland 
174
With regard to the conservative stance observed above it may 
seem ironical that nineteenth-century industrialists in particular have 
employed architecture and town planning to transform the community 
– usually that of their workers – into an ideal place. The traces of their 
individual vision of a futurescape for their time can still be seen in 
brick and mortar in various parts of the British Isles. With varying de-
grees of social idealism such experimental schemes as Robert Owen’s 
New Lanark, Titus Salt’s Saltaire, Edward Akroyd’s Akroydon, Lord 
Leverhulme’s Port Sunlight or Edward Cadbury’s Bournville bespeak 
the hope for a renewal of industrial society in alternative spaces. 
The criticism can be made that these examples are misleading 
and reveal a conceptual misunderstanding of what a utopia represents. 
The question may arise whether these places really qualify as utopian 
spaces. Strictly speaking, anything that becomes reality ceases to be a 
utopia. It is an ontological impossibility that a non-place becomes a 
distinct place. In spite of this qualification, one may ask whether the 
sites listed above are not still characterised by the utopian spark that 
initially conceived them – irrespective of the question whether they at-
tained their aims of social reform or not. As Hans Ulrich Seeber has 
put it, utopianism is always characterised as “wünschenswertes und 
angstvolles Vorausgreifen” (Pordzik and Seeber 2002: 7), that is, as a 
programmatic reaching beyond the calamities of the present. There-
fore the search for the utopian element in the built environment of 
Britain’s ‘intentional communities’ may still seem a rather too practi-
cal reading of utopian thought but, as will become clearer subse-
quently, this particular understanding of the concept is the necessary 
prerequisite of the argument in this essay. In an eloquent defence of 
the garden city against its critics Geoffrey Hamilton explains the es-
sentially utopian nature of the scheme: 
 
It is not entirely novel, at least, in theory. From Plato’s Republic to 
Cadbury’s Bournville, from More’s Utopia to Howard’s Garden City, 
hardly a century has lacked its dreamer who pictured and longed for 
an ideal state or the perfect city of his loftiest desire. (Hamilton 1906: 
48) 
 
Since promoters and critics of the idea univocally emphasised the uto-
pian essence of the scheme – only with different connotations in mind 
– it seems justifiable in what follows to use the term ‘utopia’ for those 
spatial applications of utopian principles where the creation of a par-

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
175
ticular space aims not only to improve social conditions but also to 
shape a better community. 
The social issue, of course, was one of the pressing problems of 
the last decade of Victoria’s reign. Many of the utopian futurescapes 
of the nineteenth century represent reactions to the metropolitan and 
industrial transformation Victorian Britain underwent. As the schemes 
listed above show, this period fostered the establishment of alternative 
spaces as an answer to the severe social and hygienic problems of ur-
ban agglomeration increasingly encountered by Britain’s industrial-
ised society.3 The close link between the urban crisis and the utopian 
element has been highlighted by Raymond Williams. In The Country 
and the City he maintains that “[o]ut of the experience of the cities 
came an experience of the future” (Williams 1973: 272). Although not 
all of these schemes may embrace the principles of utopian socialism 
as wholeheartedly as Robert Owen’s New Lanark, the majority of 
them still carry an innate utopian element. Among the types of utopia 
that were destined to transgress their utopian nature and be turned into 
reality is also the idea of the garden city.4 The originator of this idea, 
Ebenezer Howard, was influenced by the philosophical thinking of 
Ralph Waldo Emerson and by Edward Bellamy’s utopian romance 
Looking Backward: 2000-1887 (1888). In 1898 Howard published To-
Morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform (republished in 1902 under 
the better known title Garden Cities of To-Morrow), setting out his 
concept of an ideal of new towns that combined urban functions with 
the rural scene. 
Both as a concept and as an actual building scheme the garden 
city represents a link between the nineteenth century’s search for the 
improvement of social conditions and the twentieth century’s political 
hope of “a new collective consciousness” (Williams 1973: 272) in a 
new space.5 Andrew Sanders lists the garden city and the garden sub-
                                                      
3  
In his study of the town planning movement Gordon E. Cherry infers that 
“[c]ensus data at the end of the nineteenth century reveal starkly the severity 
of the housing problem nationally, particularly in the larger cities” (Cherry: 
307) and points to the appalling sanitary conditions in the slums of the larger 
British cities.  
4  
Ebenezer Howard strategically emphasised the kinship of his scheme with 
Bournville and Port Sunlight (Howard 1904: 177, 188). 
5  
This particular aspect of Howard’s scheme is concisely summarized by Geof-
frey Hamilton: “The Garden City movement is at once a protest against the 

Christoph Ehland 
176
urb among the most lasting contributions of Edwardian culture to ar-
chitectural history, a contribution which not only “took Britain to the 
forefront of international design” but also “touched the lives of men 
and women of all classes” (Sanders 1994: 485). There can be no doubt 
about the utopian core of the idea of the garden city: campaigning for 
the establishment of the first garden city in Britain, Letchworth, Ebe-
nezer Howard expresses his conviction that it would “make possible 
the organization of society on sound principles, – safeguarding at once 
the true interests of the community and of the individual” (Howard 
1904: 177). In every detail Howard’s experiment in town planning 
was conceived as a space for the betterment and the healing of society. 
In his writing he reacted to the situation he encountered in late-
Victorian cities and described the deprivations of “the workhouse, the 
slum, or the overcrowded tenement”, making mention of “the dulness 
[sic] and misery of millions of human lives, and of the low physique 
of vast numbers of our city dwellers” (171) which had their origin in 
these living conditions. Howard’s was a social as much as a moral ex-
periment since he firmly believed that the garden city not only catered 
better for the physical needs of society but also promoted “a step for-
ward on the moral, the intellectual and, let us hope, also on the spiri-
tual plane” (171). 
Taking into account the allusion to a ‘spiritual’ or metaphysical 
element, it is not all that unexpected that Howard’s campaign met with 
some scepticism. Howard’s reassurance that his project was “entirely 
non-political and non-sectarian” (Howard 1904: 173) evidently did not 
calm his critics. The Scottish sociologist and biologist Patrick Geddes 
complains about the “diffuse and sermonising” (Geddes 1906: 50) 
style in which Howard’s idea was popularised by his followers. An 
anonymous reviewer described Letchworth in 1911 with spiteful sar-
casm as “this Mecca of the simple life and higher thought, this me-
tropolis of cranks and faddists” (Anon. 1911: 416). Similarly dispar-
aging words were used by the novelist Robert Barr who wrote, after a 
visit to Letchworth: “I remember what a dreary, unkempt, half-baked, 
never-finished wilderness of faddy houses Letchworth is, the so-called 
Garden City” (Barr 1908: 103). 
                                                                                                                  
existing state of things and a sound attempt to substitute a more excellent 
method. Its supporters are engaged in an effort to create something better 
without going the whole weary round of everything worse. Herein lies the 
chief fascination of the experiment.” (Hamilton 1906: 37) 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
177
Although from today’s perspective the idea of the garden city 
must appear as feasible as it was successful in the long run, in the eyes 
of its contemporaries the utopian core of the concept looked suspi-
cious. From a conservative standpoint the most compromising asso-
ciation of the scheme were its leanings towards socialism. In his books 
Howard had advocated a co-operative management of the garden city 
where the land would belong to the community. Despite the fact that 
in the case of Letchworth he had given in to a compromise regarding 
the question of property, which was to be based on traditional princi-
ples of estate management,6 the association of the scheme with the co-
operative movement and socialism had irrevocably been established. 
Some of the prejudiced hesitation is summarised by Thomas Adams, 
writing in 1901 in The Speaker: 
 
At first sight the scheme, as I have said, suggests the word ‘Utopia’ to 
the practical man. He is blinded first by the doubt that because the 
scheme has not yet been tried it must therefore be impracticable, and 
secondly by prejudice which associates all such proposals with social-
istic failures. (Adams 1901: 721) 
 
Adams’s article is partly apologetic, partly clarifying what he sees as 
the benefits of the scheme and thereby urging its readers to overcome 
their reservations. Other hesitations resulted from the strong literary 
leanings of Howard’s concept. Simon Pepper emphasises the extent to 
which Howard’s practical considerations were inspired by literary 
utopias: “[e]ach component [of the Garden City] had its precedent in a 
tradition of utopian literature that extended back from William Mor-
ris’ News from Nowhere, to the Renaissance, and beyond” (Pepper 
1992: 101). Within Howard’s scheme the relationship between the lit-
erary and the real is therefore particularly close.7 Despite his concept 
                                                      
6  
Dennis Hardy maintains that these compromises mark “a downhill route from 
high idealism to official conformity” (Hardy 2000: 84). Howard describes the 
reasons for this compromise at some length in his article “Our First Garden 
City” but simultaneously expresses his belief that “the day will surely come 
when such a system [of co-operative management] will be adopted” (Howard 
1904: 182). It is clearly amidst this mixture of realism and future hopes that 
the utopian spirit of Howard’s project becomes most audible.  
7  
Simon Dentith writes about Ebenezer Howard’s book Garden Cities of To-
morrow: “Howard’s plan, as laid out in this strikingly successful piece of uto-
pian propaganda, is a frank amalgam of various preceding schemes and vi-

Christoph Ehland 
178
having this literary ancestry, literature itself never really warmed to 
the garden city as a setting or as a spatial concept after the first exam-
ple had been established. It may not be an accident that one of the 
very few schemes of urban planning that had started as nothing more 
than a utopian dream and eventually succeeded in being turned into a 
real space and a real community was more or less ignored by the liter-
ary scene of its time.8 The garden city is indeed one of the surprising 
voids of modern literature – the more so for the widespread support its 
campaigners received from the representatives of the literary scene. 
The omission is all the more startling when one thinks of writers such 
as William Morris, H. G. Wells, Aldous Huxley or George Orwell, all 
representatives of those left-wing intellectuals of the early twentieth 
century who tried either by their utopian reveries or by their dystopian 
fantasies to urge for social reform. Symptomatic for a whole genera-
tion of left-wing authors is the Scottish writer Lewis Grassic Gibbon 
(James Leslie Mitchell) who even made his home in Welwyn Garden 
City – Ebenezer Howard’s second foundation – in the late 1920s. De-
spite his personal preference for the place his novels ignore the possi-
bility of the garden city as a setting or a literary topos. The protago-
nists of his so-called ‘English novels’ must either cope with the grim 
reality of Chatham (Image and Superscription) or dive into the polar-
ising craze of jazz-age London (Stained Radiance). The same is true 
of his utopian science fiction novels Gay Hunter and Three Go Back, 
whose plots are set either in the distant territories of a primordial 
Golden Age or in a post-nuclear utopian world and simply have no 
room for the experiment started at Letchworth. 
One should withstand the temptation to speculate about the rea-
sons for this omission. However, beyond speculation there still is the 
innate logic of utopian space in its literary representation. To a certain 
extent the silence of the left-wing writers of the early twentieth cen-
tury with regard to the Garden City may be explained by the logical 
conclusion that in utopia all utopian thought must end. The silent 
omission of Howard’s scheme in the wider context of the literary 
                                                                                                                  
sions; it emerges directly from the milieu of socialist argument and debate that 
Howard inhabited in the late nineteenth-century London.” (Dentith 2000: 16) 
8  
The author of this essay has browsed a large number of novels from the first 
three decades of the twentieth century searching for representations of the 
Garden City or the Garden Suburb as a literary setting. Any advice where to 
find fictional texts that feature either of the two is more than welcome. 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
179
realm may thus indicate that the very existence of places like Letch-
worth or Welwyn threatens the libertarian essence of the utopian or 
dystopian fantasy in literature; a fantasy which must promote the de-
nial of such an arrival in reality in favour of that sort of progression 
that Oscar Wilde defined as the never-ending realization of utopia (see 
Wilde 2004: 13). It is no coincidence that utopian writers have ac-
tively banned from their ideal worlds the melancholic disposition as 
the creative source of utopian thought.9 In his introduction to a reprint 
of Howard’s Garden Cities of Tomorrow Frederic J. Osborn explains 
that even the Fabian Society dismissed Howard’s garden city project 
as simply “futile” (Osborn 1998: 11). George Orwell, who visited 
Letchworth in 1937 to attend the summer school of the I.L.P. (Inde-
pendent Labour Party),10 sustains this view in The Road to Wigan Pier 
in which he dismisses Letchworth and thus Howard’s alternative 
space as the mere agglomeration of “fruit-juice drinker, nudist, sandal-
wearer, sex-maniac, Quaker, ‘Nature Cure’ quack, pacifist and femi-
nist in England” (Orwell 1984: 152). 
Strangely, however, the garden city is a setting that is adopted 
by conservative writers. G.K. Chesterton begins the hunt for a set of 
anarchistic conspirators in his novel The Man Who Was Thursday 
(1908) in a fictitious garden suburb and John Buchan explores the 
space and community of a garden city at some length in his spy-novel 
Mr Standfast (1919). Without doubt, Chesterton and Buchan must 
seem unlikely names in the context of intentional communities and 
neither of these two authors may feature prominently on any list of 
representatives of utopian writing from the British Isles. They seem 
much more the agents of a conservative system of thought hostile to 
experiment and averse to change. If it is true that for the thrust to-
wards utopia in British arts and literature the cultivation of a feeling of 
alienation by British intellectuals and artists has always been a signifi-
cant catalyst, one encounters in Chesterton and Buchan two writers 
who operate from the centre of British society rather than the margins. 
                                                      
9  
Wolf Lepenies observes that “in Utopia herrscht ein rigoroses Melan-
cholieverbot. […] Dieses Melancholieverbot findet sich bei Robert Burton 
ebenso wie bei Campanella, bei Morus wie in George Orwells Dystopie 
1984.” (Lepenies 1998: xxi) 
10  
For a discussion of Orwell’s opinion on the garden city, see Dentith 2000: 
27ff. 

Christoph Ehland 
180
Their value system is conservative or at least traditionalist and defines 
their perspective on the garden city and its community. 
The irony clearly is that with the establishment of Letchworth 
Garden City in the first decade of the twentieth century a utopia, a 
non-place, had become reality. As these two writers respond in their 
writing to the fact of the presence of a future vision in a place like 
Letchworth, this real yet still utopian place begins to cast its shadow 
on their fictitious world. 
 
 
2. Chesterton’s Suburban Anarchists 
 
There are good arguments against the inclusion of Chesterton’s repre-
sentation of the fictitious garden suburb of Saffron Park in this discus-
sion. First, the place is not even a garden city proper. It is a garden 
suburb. Second, in direct comparison with John Buchan’s treatment of 
the garden city theme in Mr Standfast Chesterton only mentions it 
briefly at the beginning and at the very end of his novel. It seems ne-
cessary to deal with both of these objections before entering upon the 
analysis. With regard to the precise nature of Chesterton’s Saffron 
Park one can say that although Ebenezer Howard did not intend the 
garden city as simply a greener suburb, his contemporaries were apt to 
be less strict about the precise distinction and allowed the two to be-
come confused. In fact, the place Chesterton alludes to, Bedford Park 
at Turnham Green in west London,11 is often seen as a precursor of 
Letchworth Garden City in terms of its architecture and layout. Built 
from 1875 by the speculative developer Jonathan Carr, under the di-
rection of the architect Richard Norman Shaw, the scheme, in its var-
ied house designs and picturesque street patterns, was informed by the 
Aesthetic movement of the 1870s. By the 1880s the place aspired to 
become one of London’s most fashionable addresses and soon at-
tracted a community of artists and writers who moved to the suburb – 
a likely factor, as will become clear, for Chesterton’s choice of place. 
With regard to the brief and somewhat marginal treatment of Saffron 
Park in the novel it seems that this marginality underlines rather than 
undermines the symbolic significance of the setting. The relative brev-
                                                      
11  
For a detailed architectural discussion of Bedford Park, see H. Muthesius 
2007: 132-39 and also Dixon and S. Muthesius 1993: 68-69. 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
181
ity of the description cannot be denied but in a text that only glances 
in passing at the rest of its settings it is still a comparatively detailed 
account. Chesterton highlights the significance of the garden suburb 
for his story by virtually positioning it outside the parentheses of the 
plot. The text constructs this frame before the plot accelerates and the 
settings become inevitably subordinated to the spatial dynamics of the 
action. Saffron Park marks the starting point from which the narrative 
teleology develops as well as its endpoint. This is further emphasised 
by the fact that the only real anarchist in the entire story comes from 
this very place. Thus set apart within the textual universe, it is, as it 
were, the fixed point in Chesterton’s argument while at the same time 
it reveals the main trajectories of the conservative attack on utopian 
space. With regard to this it is clear that the choice of the initial setting 
for the novel is as remarkable as the description of the place itself: 
 
The suburb of Saffron Park lay on the sunset side of London, as red 
and ragged as a cloud of sunset. It was built of a bright brick through-
out; its skyline was fantastic, and even its ground plan was wild. It had 
been the outburst of a speculative builder, faintly tinged with art, who 
called its architecture sometimes Elizabethan and sometimes Queen 
Anne, apparently under the impression that the two sovereigns were 
identical. It was described with some justice as an artistic colony, 
though it never in any definable way produced any art. But although 
its pretensions to be an intellectual centre were a little vague, its pre-
tensions to be a pleasant place were quite indisputable. (Chesterton 
2001: 7) 
 
There is an unmistakeable air of ironic contempt in this opening pas-
sage of Chesterton’s The Man Who Was Thursday and it is not diffi-
cult to spot the “down-to-English-earth Chesterton” (Sanders 1994: 
490) somewhere in the midst of the subtle paradoxes and witty belit-
tlements that characterise the implicit argument of this description. 
The tone of mockery in the passage is therefore all the more impor-
tant: it reveals a place and a community that lives on pretensions 
rather than real achievements. Nonetheless, described as ‘red and 
ragged’, ‘fantastic’ and ‘wild’, the architecture of Saffron Park already 
acquires the air of a slightly scary ‘outburst’, a sudden and somewhat 
disturbing appearance on the horizon of Edwardian society. Although 
it is Chesterton’s intention to demystify and deconstruct the suburban 
futurescape, its presentation strategically oscillates between derision 

Christoph Ehland 
182
and fear. His efforts in maintaining suspense are regularly counter-
poised by his style of presentation. 
However, the only faint hint of art, the confusion in the archi-
tectural style, mocks the lack of knowledge not only of the proprietor 
but also of those who choose to live in such a stylistic crossbreed. The 
mockery is orchestrated by a tongue-in-cheek yet still audibly class-
conscious recourse to the general misunderstanding of English tradi-
tions observable in the place. Although it is only hinted at, class seems 
to be an issue at stake here. Neither Chesterton nor Buchan – as will 
be seen subsequently – enters into any open discussion of the class 
system. On the contrary, social distinctions are presupposed and seen 
as self-evident. It goes almost without saying that the adversaries who 
crowd into the utopian community are invariably representatives of 
the lower classes, as passing remarks about ‘cockney looks’ etc. indi-
cate. The general effect of this is a social stability at the base of their 
argument that represents a firm vantage point whence the flux of other 
aspects of life can be observed. 
With regard to this one must point to the particularly close rela-
tionship between aesthetic and social discourses in this sort of criti-
cism. Chesterton’s treatment of the garden suburb shows a simultane-
ous attempt not only to conjure up general prejudices against the ‘arty-
farty’ left-wingers who have taken up residence in this derisory suburb 
but also to project the stylistic criticism of the built environment as a 
moral judgment onto the group living there. Place and creed become 
synonymous or rather they reflect each other. Despite its being pre-
sented as a leafy suburban haven of tranquillity there is an excess of 
ironic disparagement felt in Chesterton’s description of the place and 
its ‘artistic colony’. For a writer who entertained a notion of his coun-
try as “based on a nostalgic, Cobbett-like, vision of a lost, happy, 
Catholic England of beef, frothy beer, and good cheer” (Sanders 1994: 
490), the ‘fantastic’ he encounters in a place such as Saffron Park 
naturally means a provocation to the time-honoured values inherent in 
this notion of Englishness. 
Chesterton himself called his story an “Anti-Anarchist ro-
mance” (Chesterton 2001: 193). The restless story of the hunting 
down of an anarchist organisation in Edwardian London derives part 
of its effect from playful references to the very real anxiety at the time 
about a possible anarchist overthrow of the existing order. During the 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
183
fin de siècle and the Edwardian period anarchism was becoming rather 
a public obsession. Newspapers reported frequently on the gloomy 
machinations of anarchist conspirators who operated not only in po-
litically suspect countries like France or Germany but also on the Eng-
lish home front. Amidst the anxious search for the ‘enemy within’ the 
more conservative attitude towards the political spectrum left of the 
centre became increasingly overcast as the distinctions between so-
cialism and anarchism became blurred, a situation that is particularly 
relevant with regard to the perception of utopian schemes such as the 
garden city. An anonymous author, for example, detected a “solidarity 
of feeling” (Anon. 1911: 338) between anarchists and socialists and 
warned the readers of the Fortnightly Review in 1911 that “the Anar-
chists are again in complete union with leading Socialists” (341). 
Geoffrey Langtoft, another contemporary writer, states that “[t]he An-
archists do the underground work, the Socialists the above-ground 
work, but it is one work.” (Langtoft 1900: 548) What initially appears 
to be a reckoning with the anarchist philosophy of Bakunin and Kro-
potkin thus quickly becomes defamation of the Labour Party and its 
leaders, in fact, of democracy itself.12 Scare-mongering obviously runs 
rampant when commentators see “the floods of socialism […] rising 
all around [them], threatening to sweep away the very foundations” 
(558) of society, and readily assume the ‘suburban anarchist’ to be the 
constant companion of the active dynamiter and an ally of foreign 
spies.13 
It is this general atmosphere of anxious suspicion with its par-
ticular patterns of group identification and differentiation which Ches-
terton utilises for his story. Although he postulates “the exhilarating 
signs” (Chesterton 2001: 194) of the break-up of civilisation in his 
commentary to The Man Who Was Thursday, one should not be mis-
                                                      
12  
Langtoft writes: “A nation wholly abandoned to the heady lawlessness of 
Democracy is stricken to its very vitals with a deadly and incurable malady. 
Such a nation is a spectacle over which the gods might well weep tears of pity. 
And such a spectacle is England to-day.” (Langtoft 1900: 545) Part of the 
anxiety that finds expression in Langtoft’s article must be seen as the direct 
result of the increasingly successful agitation of the Suffragette movement and 
the growing parliamentary consent to the principle of enfranchising women 
(see Cannon 1997: 793). 
13  
In this context Niall Ferguson describes the paranoid culture of the so-called 
spy-craze before the First World War (Ferguson 1999: 1-11). 

Christoph Ehland 
184
taken and read his novel as a story of doom. On the contrary, the 
nightmare in which Chesterton dresses his argument allows him to 
construct an inverse logic: he himself states that it results in “a topsy-
turvy tale about a man who fancied himself alone among enemies, and 
found that each of the enemies was in fact on his own side and in his 
own solitude” (194). The description reveals the cultural impotence of 
the place and its community which is hidden under a thin veneer of in-
tellectual pretence, a deception which evidently only works if the art-
ists are taken seriously. 
To convey this soothing message, Chesterton assumes for him-
self a viewpoint external to that of the over-anxious establishment 
which feels endangered by social groups such as the artists in Saffron 
Park whose presence on the margins of society “at once tickled and 
terrified the nerves of a neurotic population” (Chesterton 2001: 9). To 
emphasise this fact, Chesterton relies, in his narrative construction of 
the place, on a strategy of dissociation from Saffron Park that helps 
him to pre-structure the reception of the spatial associations. The ex-
clusive position of the setting in the construction of the novel is fur-
ther heightened by the perspective from which it is presented. It is in 
fact the perspective of the outsider that directs the narrative focus in 
the passage: 
 
The stranger who looked for the first time at the quaint red houses 
could only think how very oddly shaped the people must be who could 
fit in to them. Nor when he met the people was he disappointed in this 
respect. The place was not only pleasant, but perfect, if once he could 
regard it not as a deception but rather as a dream. (Chesterton 2001: 7) 
 
In his account of the suburban ‘artistic colony’, Chesterton evidently 
assembles the typical prejudices to be expected from a conservative 
writer in Edwardian England: there is a subtle sense of anti-
intellectualism present in the accusation of the artistic inactivity and 
cultural impotence of the population of Saffron Park. The particular 
class of artists that lives in the suburb are shown to coquet with “the 
old cant of the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness” (8) and 
thus expose themselves as just an unimaginative copy of the decadents 
of the 1890s. The utopian community is seen as ensnarled in a lifeless 
imitation of outworn models of the past, a form of existence that bor-
ders, according to the sardonic remark of Chesterton’s narrator, on a 
“written comedy” (8). 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
185
The same pattern of imitation can be observed in the aesthetics 
of Saffron Park. Its architectural style is only a simulacrum of patterns 
of Englishness, its picturesque appearance the result of a cheap imita-
tion – misunderstood, misapplied and to be mistrusted. The utopian 
space is thereby virtually deprived of any cultural signifying status. It 
is a substitute masked as something real. If it is not what it pretends to 
be, what is it? Roger Webster observes of the representation of subur-
bia in literature that “[i]t occupies a space as much defined by what it 
is not as by what it is, constructed by differences and imitation rather 
than possessing innate and original features” (Webster 2000: 2). The 
result is the feeling of a decentred and depthless place: “a sterile zone, 
devoid of cultural and aesthetic value so that the very absence of sig-
nification becomes a haunting presence” (2). This feeling of the ab-
sence of the real dominates Chesterton’s garden suburb. An air of cal-
lowness characterises the place which, as Chesterton’s narrator sarcas-
tically remarks, “had to be considered not so much as a workshop for 
artists, but as a frail but unfinished work of art” (8). The artists who 
have made their home in Saffron Park are represented as a socially 
(self-)alienated class of pseudo-intellectuals. This apparent ‘otherness’ 
is exemplified rather than explained. The effect is that sort of “attrac-
tive unreality” (8) that characterises the void of the decentred, mar-
ginal space of the garden suburb. The outside/inside differentiation in 
the text means that the narration assumes for itself a position from 
which the ‘inside’ of the utopian space is simultaneously exposed as 
the chief target of criticism and at the same time robbed of any defin-
ing feature. With regard to this it becomes clear that the atmosphere of 
“violent secrecy” (9) observed by the narrator depends not so much on 
the fact that it is a “red-haired revolutionary” who “seemed like a 
walking blasphemy” (9) who reigns over the suburb but on the haunt-
ing absence of any sustained qualities of the place. The ‘pleasant per-
fection’ of Saffron Park is the defining feature of the liminal space. 
The artists who live there are at their best harmless cranks – the dan-
ger is their identification with a space that does not function within 
stable dichotomies. 
The concise sequence of spatial signification in The Man Who 
Was Thursday is the more remarkable because it establishes a semiotic 
system of space in the text which serves Chesterton’s reckoning with 
what he has repeatedly called the heresies of pessimism and material-
ism in his age. In terms of its narrative realisation, however, this criti-

Christoph Ehland 
186
cism inevitably turns the utopian space of the garden suburb into a 
space of active ‘othering’. It needs to be seen from without, against 
what Roger Webster calls “an ‘other’ zone” (Webster 2000: 2), not 
only to be attacked and defamed but to be made comprehensible in the 
first place. The other zone, that central place of sanity in Chesterton, is 
present only in the silent assumptions of the implied author. In John 
Buchan’s Mr Standfast this silence is broken: the critical account of 
the utopian space gives way to the construction, visualisation and 
propagation of a counter-utopian ideal. Chesterton’s nightmarish 
novel, however, exemplifies the two main lines of the attack on uto-
pian space: the conservative writer imagines the textual universe as 
the site of an aesthetic battle in a social war. 
 
 
3. Buchan’s “The Village named Morality”14 
 
In an excited review the publication of Mr Standfast not quite a year 
after the end of World War One is hailed as “as ingenious and thrilling 
a war story as any we have had” (Anon. 1919: 145). Written by some-
one who was still under the influence of the recent British victory over 
Germany, the novel seemed a most attractive adventure yarn: 
 
Here is breathlessness, here is ecstasy, high and proud adventuring, 
patriotism, comradeship, the outwitting of the arch outwitter, the 
breaking of a spy – a super-head-centre of German intrigue, all in the 
best and most rollicking kind of good form and zest. (Anon. 1919: 
144) 
 
Either written or at least conceived during the First World War, the 
first three of John Buchan’s Richard Hannay spy-novels are outbursts 
of wartime sentiment and take their readers into a world of racy ad-
ventures all over the battlefields of Europe and the Middle East. The 
Thirty-Nine Steps, largely set in London and Scotland, brought Bu-
chan his first success as a writer of spy-novels in 1915 and was 
quickly followed by the middle-eastern adventure of Greenmantle in 
1916 and eventually by Mr Standfast in 1919. Despite this pedigree of 
war it would be rash to reduce these tales to the mere accumulation of 
propaganda full of anti-German agitation and deep-rooted xenophobia. 
                                                      
14  
Title of the second chapter of Mr Standfast. 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
187
Written largely under the general strain of the war, the novels make an 
attempt to do far more than simply entertain their readers or heap up 
evidence of German wickedness. With regard to Mr Standfast one 
must note that the novel itself is still part of the so-called spy-craze of 
the pre-war period: many of its plot elements and characterisations are 
taken straight from the arsenal of paranoid scaremongering that accu-
mulated in the numerous spy-stories that had swamped the British 
bookmarket in the two decades before 1914. The author himself may 
dismiss the stories as mere “shockers” (Buchan 1928: ix) but in the 
end it is the stability of the spy-genre which allows these books to deal 
with more subtle issues than simply “outwitting the arch outwitter”. 
Sent as an undercover agent to the Garden City of Biggleswick, 
Buchan’s protagonist Richard Hannay has an operational interest in 
the utopian community and its way of life. The provisional integration 
in the community he achieves for himself also defines the vantage 
point from which the place is seen and analysed. Hannay, who is also 
the narrator of the story, is thus firmly installed in the same in-
side/outside matrix as has been observed earlier in Chesterton’s novel. 
Despite the fact that he moves in and through the garden city he re-
mains an outsider, so that his presence in Biggleswick confirms the 
peripheral situation of the utopian space in the processes of significa-
tion. This programmatic marginality is already highlighted at the mo-
ment of his first coming to the place: 
 
But for the present I was in a backwater, no less than the Garden City 
of Biggleswick, where Mr. Cornelius Brand, a South African gentle-
man visiting England on holiday, lodged in a pair of rooms in the cot-
tage of Mr. Tancred Jimson. The house – or ‘home’ as they preferred 
to name it at Biggleswick – was one of some two hundred others 
which ringed a pleasant Midland common. It was badly built and 
oddly furnished; the bed was too short, the windows did not fit, the 
doors did not stay shut; but it was as clean as soap and water and 
scrubbing could make it. (Buchan 1951: 37) 
 
At first glance, the depiction of Biggleswick’s built environment 
seems to echo the same aesthetic disapproval seen in Chesterton. In 
The Man Who Was Thursday the stability of the spatial argument de-
rives mainly from the disparaging tone of the narration. It is not diffi-
cult to discern a similar approach in Buchan’s first-person narrator: 
just as in Saffron Park, where the stranger had to wonder what kind of 
‘oddly shaped people’ must live in the ‘quaint red houses’, Biggles-

Christoph Ehland 
188
wick’s dwellings are also “badly built and oddly furnished” (37) and 
the people reside in places “so artistic that you broke your head 
whichever way you turned” (45). However, while in Chesterton’s 
novel the pleasantness of the place seems a mere pretence, where it 
seems just too ‘perfect’ not to be suspect, the Midland common in 
Biggleswick is ‘pleasant’ without further qualification. Evidently Bu-
chan’s text applies an alternative set of differentiations in its assess-
ment of the utopian space: if the pleasantness of Chesterton’s suburb 
is subdued by the narrator’s mocking tone and disparaging remarks 
Buchan’s narrator is more willing to commit himself to the tranquillity 
of the garden city setting. 
One of the obvious complications for the critical account of the 
garden city in Mr Standfast is that some of the aspects characterising 
the place coincide with traditional values of Englishness. In this re-
gard a change of attitude towards the utopian space is necessary. This 
change can be seen in the following brief scene: “as I unpacked in my 
fresh little bedroom with the west wind blowing in at the window I 
considered that I had seen worse quarters” (38). Not only is the de-
scription of the room genuinely positive but the mood of the protago-
nist also seems to display the tranquillity of the holiday guest rather 
than the suspicious mistrust of the secret agent. The place is not barred 
from being pleasant and is therefore not perceived as an aberration per 
se. This observation is significant because it points to the fact that Bu-
chan employs a different conception of the utopian space itself. 
Chesterton’s argument in The Man Who Was Thursday depends 
from the start upon a fundamental confrontation between the implied 
values of the narration and the dangerous amalgamation of anarchists 
in the garden suburb. The utopian space is bound to be the connotation 
of an insane creed and is therefore once and for all dismissed. This ri-
gidity may be a functional necessity owed to the conciseness of the 
description but it still serves to cement the spatial distinctions in the 
text once they have been established. This radical dismissal of a place 
alongside its community can be explained by a look at Michel Fou-
cault’s concept of the ‘darkened spaces’. Foucault points out that in 
the Gothic novel there is a sort of complicity between the fantastic 
darkened spaces and the villains (see Foucault 1980: 153f). With re-
gard to the marginalised space of the garden suburb Chesterton seems 
to imply just such complicity when he speaks about “the whole insane 
village” (Chesterton 2001: 8).  

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
189
Despite the fact that the main trajectories of the attack on the 
utopian space seem basically the same, Buchan’s spatial system dif-
fers from that of Chesterton because his novel operates according to a 
different mind-set. Where Chesterton’s impressionistic narrative of a 
fantastic nightmare can be radically dismissive, Buchan’s realism is 
compelled to be missionary. Space in the world of Richard Hannay is 
not in complicity with the traitors. On the contrary, it is constantly dis-
sociated from them. The spy-novel builds its fictitious world out of 
sequences of ‘darkened spaces’, hide-outs of secret societies, under-
ground movements, traitors, conspirators, anarchists. Yet Buchan 
again and again places his protagonist against these darkened spaces 
which hide the enemies within. A fight is going on. In Buchan’s novel 
the darkening of spaces, the territorial expansion of the villains, is re-
sisted, whether in the Scottish Highlands, in the airspace above the 
western front in France or in the backwaters of rural England. De-
picted as a physical strife, hunting down the arch-enemy with one’s 
gun in one’s hand, it is in fact a battle over signification. The image of 
the undercover agent who infiltrates and investigates suspicious 
spaces expresses this in a nutshell: Hannay’s presence in Biggleswick 
sheds light on the convictions entertained by the inhabitants of the 
‘odd settlement’ but it does not assume that place and creed are the 
same. The distinction between spatial and social signification is mean-
ingful because it deeply influences the depiction of the garden city as 
a utopian space essentially devoid of its own profound signification 
status (see Webster 2000: 2). Although Biggleswick occupies a space 
it is not conceived as a territorial occupation but as an agglomeration 
of detestable or just silly cultural practices. 
The narrative attention focuses on the social community and its 
misconceptions about reality. “[P]uffed up with spiritual pride” (Bu-
chan 1951: 47), the community’s ideal of a “simple life” (38) is ex-
posed as mere escapism from reality. It is a dream without substance, 
a void, which the inhabitants of the garden city try to fill with numer-
ous religious, quasi-religious and mystical convictions (see 50) as well 
as a deep sense of neurotic antagonism to the world outside Biggles-
wick. The anaemic nature of the spiritual community is mirrored by 
the physical deficiency and weakness of its members: men are typi-
cally “weedy looking” (40) and unpractical with “two left hands” (47), 
whereas girls are “half-witted” (46) and “rather badly dressed and in-
clining to untidy hair” (40) and their intellectual prophets just “tuber-

Christoph Ehland 
190
culous in mind and body” (46). In their general ineptitude and conceit 
the inhabitants may remind one more of the spoiled yet pitifully naïve 
Eloi in H.G. Wells’ The Time Machine than of an anarchistic threat. 
Hannay even admits: “I found it impossible to be angry with them for 
long, they were so babyishly innocent” (49). What lurks behind this is 
the conflict between the ideal world of the vita activa and a dystopian 
one subdued by the destructive spirit of the vita contemplativa. 
The danger posed by this amalgam of queer characters in the 
community of the garden city is not that it is actively subversive as in 
Chesterton but that their utopian existence, like that of Wells’ Eloi, is 
shown to be deceptive in its passivity: their idealist community has 
become a harbour for the dark plots of reckless conspirators. Having 
turned their back on the present calamities of war to live the dream of 
an idealist future they have become vulnerable because they have 
given themselves up to a form of life that is built on a void. It thus be-
comes clear that Hannay’s agency is only partly defined by the plot – 
the hunting down of the conspirators – while another essential narra-
tive function of his presence in the garden city is to wander back and 
forth between the space occupied by the utopian community and the 
surrounding countryside:  
 
In the afternoons I took my exercise in long tramps along the good 
dusty English roads. The country fell away from Biggleswick into a 
plain of wood and pasture-land, with its low hills on the horizon. The 
place was sown with villages, each with its green and pond and an-
cient church. Most, too, had inns, and there I had many a draught of 
ale, for the inn at Biggleswick was a reformed place which sold noth-
ing but washy cider. (43f) 
 
Hannay’s outings recall the qualities of “the priceless heritage which 
is England” (43) and thus emphasise a set of traditional values of Eng-
lish society in direct contrast to those of the people of Biggleswick. 
The imagery, of course, is as unreal as the utopian community. In fact, 
one finds that the city/country dichotomy forms the backbone of Bu-
chan’s argument. Those living in Biggleswick are “modest folk, who 
sought for a coloured background to their prosaic city lives and found 
it in this odd settlement” (41). Their interest in the countryside, how-
ever, is decorative at its best and generally characterised by a funda-
mental misunderstanding of what rural England is about. Their fault is 
that they do not seem to be interested in their surroundings. Hannay 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
191
complains about this lack of interest: “If you talked to them about that 
divine countryside, you found they didn’t give a rap for it and had 
never been a mile beyond the village.” (46) They have lost connection 
with what is propagated in the novel as the cornerstones of a shared 
English identity. 
Robert Crawford observes that Buchan’s “best books seem 
imaginative sanctuaries, pacy escapes” (Crawford 2007: 526), and as-
serts that in Buchan “a vital sense of Arcadia persists” (527). It is this 
Arcadian element which connects a novel such as Mr Standfast with 
the wider context of war writing. Although Hannay’s adventure 
breathes the air of a world ‘worth fighting for’, the novel unmistaka-
bly represents a coming to terms with a world in flux. It is part reck-
oning with and part meditation on Britain’s hesitant yet inevitable 
move towards twentieth-century modernity. 
For a conservative writer like Buchan the war experience did 
not represent the kind of liberating catalyst it meant for the modernist 
movement.15 For him and his class it became the ultimate challenge to 
their accustomed ways of life. In “Home Thoughts from Abroad”, a 
poem he composed in 1917 when still in the trenches in France, Bu-
chan allows a Scottish soldier to express this anxiety about the trans-
formation of life which might result from the war experience:  
 
Aifter the war, says the papers, they’ll no be content at hame, 
The lads that hae feucht wi’ death twae ’ear i’ the mud and the rain 
and the snaw; 
For aifter a sodger’s life the shop will be unco tame; 
They’ll ettle at fortune and freedom in the new lands far awa’. 
No me! 
By God! No me! 
(Buchan 2006: 311) 
 
Calling on God, the last two lines of the poem exhibit an almost reli-
gious sense of endurance. This outspoken will not to allow the war to 
change one’s world is also present in Mr Standfast; here, the utopian 
space and its community turn into a territory for exemplifying a per-
sistent sense of determination. Anxieties and fears are subdued in 
genre-typical bravado: whether a wimpish pacifist in a utopian com-
                                                      
15  
In this context Modris Eksteins explains: “Like all wars, the 1914 war, when it 
broke out, was seen as an opportunity for both change and confirmation.” (Ek-
steins 2000: xv) 

Christoph Ehland 
192
munity or the sinister spy of an alien power, each and every enemy is 
laid low and the danger on the English horizon made to vanish into 
thin air. Deep down in the structure of the plot, however, the anxieties 
about change remain. 
With regard to this, the persistent evocation of the English 
countryside which Hannay explores from Biggleswick seems to be 
predominantly nostalgic, a yearning for an unspoiled, premodern rural 
haven. It is only when one realises that this image of the mind needs 
to be de-temporalised to allow it permanence, that is, needs to be 
taken out of history, that the essentially utopian core of it becomes 
clear. The idea of ‘rural England’ is a commemorative practice ori-
ented towards the present; it is, as Jan Assmann has put it, a “kul-
turelle Mnemotechnik” which functions “konterpräsentisch” (Ass-
mann 2000: 227). In this sense the idea of rural England, that emblem 
of the “divine countryside” (Buchan 1951: 46), is a heterochronic 
structure of memory: a utopian projection counterpoised to if not 
placed against the present and thus transcending it.16  
For those ‘harmless young shepherds in a soldier’s coat’ (cf. 
Blunden 2000: 191) in the killing fields of the First World War the 
evocation of a pastoral England was a mental dug-out, the most real of 
unreal dreams, their utopian retreat amidst the dying in the trenches. 
The image of rural England is an antidote that comes as soothing balm 
in their ‘home thoughts from abroad’.17 At the same time, however, it 
is an old and somewhat worn haven of the English imagination. De-
                                                      
16  
With regard to the idea of rural England Raymond Williams observes that 
“[t]he structure of feeling within which this backward reference is to be un-
derstood is then not primarily a matter of historical explanation and analysis. 
What is really significant is this particular kind of reaction to the fact of 
change, and this has more real and more interesting social causes” (Williams 
1973: 35). It is one of the astonishing phenomena of modernity that the more 
the rural experience of English society diminished along with the pressures of 
the industrial and commercial urbanisation the more did the country’s collec-
tive consciousness have recourse to the imagery of rural England. 
17  
Paul Fussel writes in The Great War and Modern Memory: “Recourse to the 
pastoral is an English mode of both fully gauging the calamities of the Great 
War and imaginatively protecting oneself against them. Pastoral reference 
[…] is a way of invoking a code to hint by antithesis at the indescribable; 
[…].” (Fussel 2000: 235) Robert Browning’s longing after a Chaucerian April 
in England in “Home-thoughts, From Abroad” is loosely taken up and Scoti-
cised by John Buchan in his war poem of the same title. 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
193
spite the fact that it is more a fantasy than reality, it is and has been 
crucially relevant for the shaping of English identity. Of course, this is 
a story that has already been written18 and does not need to be retold 
here. In Buchan’s wartime fiction one finds the images of pastoral 
England revived as a reaction to the social changes a space such as the 
garden city represents. 
During the interwar period with its extremely polarised social 
energies, when the sense of futility and exhaustion became more 
widespread, the ‘W’ of the war would eventually be capitalised. In 
Buchan’s two sequels to Mr Standfast, written during the 1920s, his 
recourses to the images of an allegedly unspoiled and pastoral Eng-
land increase with the distance from the War. By the mid-1920s, the 
domestic settlement which Buchan allows his hero to enjoy at the be-
ginning of The Three Hostages is set in an Arcadian landscape.19 
The dream of rural England is without doubt the most persistent 
myth of Englishness. It must seem almost a paradox that the conserva-
tive gaze deconstructs the utopian space of the garden city only to 
construct in its place a counter-utopia of Englishness. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Closer analysis of the representation of the garden city as a utopian 
space in the fiction written before and just after the First World War 
shows how conservative writers – implicitly or explicitly – decentre 
and marginalise its signifying status. Like watchdogs of Eden, Ches-
terton and Buchan guard the sanctuaries of the English imagination. 
                                                      
18  
See chapter VII “Arcadian Recourses” in Paul Fussel’s 1975 book The Great 
War and Modern Memory. 
19  
The contrast between rural England and the world of spies and intrigue is a 
tempting one. At least Buchan’s decision to allow his hero to retire into the ru-
ral haven of his house in the English countryside stirred the imagination of his 
readers. Louis J. McQuilland, who reviewed the fourth of Buchan’s Hannay 
adventures, The Three Hostages, remarks: “It might have been thought by the 
compassionate that the war-beaten Hannay had done enough for honour; and 
Mr. Buchan was no doubt loath to drag him out of his handsome house, Fosse 
Manor […] where he was spending a halcyon time with her [his wife] and 
their son […].” (McQuilland 1924: 321) 

Christoph Ehland 
194
Since both novelists represent the utopian space as seen from a 
contemporary perspective, they offer insights into the cultural pro-
cesses of public opinion-making and societal self-assertion that char-
acterise the period immediately before and after World War One. In 
this sense the representation of the garden city or the garden suburb by 
Chesterton and Buchan becomes not only a screen for the projection 
of social anxieties but a site of territorial conflict in which the material 
representation of a utopian dream is challenged and deconstructed by 
its critics. Their particular line of attack reveals not only the deep-
rooted reflexes of British society towards the experimental and the 
utopian but also reaffirms the innate myths of Englishness as viable 
counter-utopias. 
The two novels grant an insight into the process by which uto-
pian spaces enter into a close interrelationship with their criticism. In 
this process, the counter-utopian is a spin-off of the deconstruction of 
the utopian space; that is, it is constructed against those forces which 
seem to threaten the complacency of a socio-economic settlement of-
ten nostalgically envisioned by conservative writers as “Old England” 
with a capital ‘O’. This becomes particularly clear in Buchan’s novel: 
whenever the pace of action allows its author to reflect on the conno-
tations of his settings, one finds Buchan’s idea of England to be a pro-
jection of artificial set pieces of Englishness rather than a tangible 
network of places. Since the plot of his spy-story links the spatial ar-
rangements in the text, the aesthetic impression derived from the indi-
vidual spatial vignettes enters into a system of interrelations and inter-
connections that counters every utopian threat with a counter-utopian 
answer. The conservative reaction to the garden city or garden suburb 
thus helps to sense the conflicts shaping the projected collective self 
of British society. 
Utopias are first of all characterised by the cultural practices of 
the intentional communities which they accommodate. This analysis 
has aimed to examine the sets of differentiation and identification 
which the perception of these utopian spaces puts into operation. Seen 
from this particular perspective, the representation of the garden city 
discloses the utopian threat posed by this specific ‘real’ – or the real 
threat of the utopian – and makes explicit how this threat provokes 
and defines some crucial aspects of the conservative reaction to it. In 
their attempt to undermine and counterpoise what is seen as a utopian 
subversion, its critics digress into the construction and idealisation of 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
195
a reality that is at heart more utopian than the idea of the garden city 
itself. Therefore, what one can see in Buchan’s spy-novel is a cross-
fertilisation between the criticised traits of the utopian space and the 
counter-utopian efforts it provokes. It is clear that the counter-image 
itself would not qualify to be called ‘utopian’ if the discourse itself 
was either strictly dismissive or exclusively aesthetic. In Buchan’s 
writing in particular, however, aesthetic discourse and social criticism 
are closely interlinked. 
To say that in Mr Standfast a utopian reality is countered by a 
real utopia may admittedly be a paradox but it still expresses the issue 
in a nutshell. The irony clearly is – and here one might want to recall 
Lepenies’ observation of the ‘Utopieverbot’ in utopian societies men-
tioned at the beginning – that the conservative writers may criticise, 
deconstruct and dismiss the utopian spaces of the garden city not pri-
marily for their subversive effect on society but for the threat they 
pose to the essentially utopian core of the collective myths of English-
ness propagated in their texts. Looked at from this angle, the narra-
tives of Chesterton and Buchan reveal themselves as more intrinsi-
cally utopian than the spaces they attack. This, of course, may be all 
too playful and paradoxical a reading of the anti-utopian efforts one 
can observe in Chesterton and Buchan but how real, one may ask, has 
the idea of rural England ever been during the twentieth century?  
To conclude, one may glance once more at Buchan. In the dedi-
catory epistle to Greenmantle he almost playfully calls upon his read-
ers: “Let no man or woman call its events improbable. The war has 
driven that word from our vocabulary, and melodrama has become the 
prosiest realism.” (Buchan 1927: v) In such a world the real passes for 
utopian and the utopian becomes the real. 

Christoph Ehland 
196
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Adams, Thomas (1901). “A Conference on the Housing Question”, in: The Speaker: 
The Liberal Review (28 Sept. 1901): 720-22. 
Anon. (1911). “Anarchist Propaganda in England”, in: Fortnightly Review 89.529 
(February): 333-43. 
Anon. (1911). “A Visit to Letchworth, the First Garden City”, in: The Review of Re-
views 43 (April 1911): 416-19. 
Anon. (1919). “Novel Notes: Mr Standfast”, in: The Bookman (July): 144-45. 
Barr, Robert (1908). “The Idlers’ Club: The Ideal Village”, in: Idler: An Illustrated 
Monthly Magazine 34.73 (October): 102-12. 
Blunden, Edmund (1928/2000). Undertones of War. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Buchan, John (1916/1927). Greenmantle. London and Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson 
and Sons. 
— (1919/1951). Mr Standfast. London and Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson and Sons. 
— (1915/1928). The Thirty-Nine Steps. London and Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson and 
Sons. 
— (1917/2006). “Home Thoughts from Abroad”, in: Walter Elliot (ed.). The New 
Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: 1805-2005. Selkirk: Deerpark Press, 311-
12. 
— (1924/1995). The Three Hostages. Ware: Wordsworth. 
Chesterton, Gilbert Keith (1908/2001). The Man Who Was Thursday: A Nightmare. 
New York: Modern Library. 
Geddes, P. (1906). “Review: A. R. Sennett (1905): ‘Garden Cities in Theory and 
Practice’”, in: Saint George: A National Review Dealing with Literature, Art 
and Social Questions in a Broad and Progressive Spirit 9.33 (January 1906): 
50-54. 
Hamilton, Geoffrey (1906). “The Garden City Movement”, in: London Quarterly Re-
view (January): 33-48. 
Howard, Ebenezer (1902/1998). Garden Cities of To-Morrow. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press. 
— (1904). “Our First Garden City”, in: Saint George: A National Review Dealing 
with Literature, Art and Social Questions in a Broad and Progressive Spirit 
7.27 (July): 170-88. 
Langtoft, Geoffrey (1900). “Socialism and Anarchism”, in: Fortnightly Review 68.408 
(October): 544-58. 
McQuilland, Louis J. (1924). “The Cloak of ‘Greenmantle’ again”, in: The Bookman 
(September): 321-22. 
Orwell, George (1937/1984). The Road to Wigan Pier. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
 
 

Chesterton and Buchan Look at the Present of the Future 
197
Research Literature 
 
Assmann, Jan (1992/2000). Das kulturelle Gedächtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und politi-
sche Identität in frühen Hochkulturen. München: C. H. Beck. 
Burke, Edmund (1790/1999). Reflections on the Revolution in France. Oxford: Ox-
ford UP. 
Cannon, John (ed.) (1997). The Oxford Companion to British History. Oxford: Oxford 
UP. 
Cherry, Gordon E. (1979). “The Town Planning Movement and the Late Victorian 
City”, in: Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, New Series, 
vol. 4.2 (The Victorian City): 306-19. 
Cioran, Émile Michel (1952/1980). Syllogismen der Bitterkeit. Frankfurt am Main: 
Suhrkamp. 
Claeys, Gregory (ed.) (1997). Modern British Utopias 1700-1850. 8 vols. London: 
Pickering & Chatto. 
Coates, Chris (2001). Utopia Britannica: British Utopian Experiments 1325 to 1945. 
Vol. 1. London: Diggers & Dreamers. 
Crawford, Robert (2007). Scotland’s Books: The Penguin History of Scottish Litera-
ture. London: Penguin. 
Dentith, Simon (2000). “From William Morris to the Morris Minor: An Alternative 
Suburban History”, in: Roger Webster (ed.). Expanding Suburbia: Reviewing 
Suburban Narratives. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books, 15-31. 
Dixon, Roger and Stefan Muthesius (1985/1993). Victorian Architecture. London: 
Thames and Hudson. 
Eksteins, Modris (1989/2000). Rites of Spring: The Great War and the Birth of the 
Modern Age. London: Papermac. 
Ferguson, Niall (1998/1999). The Pity of War: Explaining World War I. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Foucault, Michel (1980). Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 
1972-1977. New York: Pantheon Books. 
Fussel, Paul (1975/2000). The Great War and Modern Memory. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
Hardy, Dennis (2000). Utopian England: Community Experiments 1900-1945. Lon-
don: Spon.   
Lepenies, Wolf (1998). Melancholie und Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.   
Light, Alison (1991). Forever England: Femininity, Literature and Conservatism be-
tween the Wars. London and New York: Routledge. 
Muthesius, Hermann (1979/2007). The English House (tr. Janet Seligmann and Stew-
art Spencer). 3 vols. London: Francis Lincoln. 
Osborn, Frederic J. (1945/1998). “Introduction”, in: Ebenezer Howard. Garden Cities 
of Tomorrow. Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT. 
Pepper, Simon (1992). “The Garden City”, in: Boris Ford (ed.). The Cambridge Cul-
tural History: Early 20th Century Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 100-15. 
Pordzik, Ralph and Hans Ulrich Seeber (2002). Utopie und Dystopie in den neuen 
englischen Literaturen. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter. 
Roberts, Sydney (1963). Edwardian Retrospect. London: English Association. 
Sanders, Andrew (1994). The Short Oxford History of English Literature. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Christoph Ehland 
198
Webster, Roger (2000). “Introduction: Suburbia Inside Out”, in: Roger Webster (ed.). 
Expanding Suburbia: Reviewing Suburban Narratives. New York and Oxford: 
Berghahn Books, 1-14. 
Wilde, Oscar (1891/2004). The Soul of Man Under Socialism. Whitefish, Montana: 
Kessinger. 
Williams, Raymond (1973). The Country and the City. London: Chatto and Windus. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
The Land that Time Forgot: 
Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
 
Elizabeth Leane 
 
 
Abstract: Antarctica’s unique spatiality – its isolation, its position on the ‘bottom’ of 
the world, its seemingly limitless icescape – produces a complex and contradictory 
temporality. The preserving power of ice, along with the unfamiliar diurnal rhythms 
of high latitudes, gives the sense that time progresses differently in the southernmost 
continent. Antarctica thus offers itself as an ideal location for speculative fiction deal-
ing with strange temporal phenomena, including ‘allochronic’ fiction – novels in 
which different periods in history are juxtaposed – and ‘cryonic’ fiction, in which ice 
acts as a form of time machine, allowing a living being effectively to fast-forward into 
the future. With the advent of global warming, the Antarctic ice has taken on in-
creased temporal significance: its layers of ice provide a record of past ages and hence 
a means of predicting the future, and its collapsing ice shelves ominously point to-
wards catastrophes to come. Antarctica has become a literal futurescape, an idea that 
dystopian writers (and filmmakers) have seized upon. Focussing primarily on science 
fiction but also drawing on exploration narratives, this paper explores the way in 
which time and space are intertwined in textual representations of Antarctica. 
 
Key names and concepts: allochronic fiction – Antarctica – chronotope – cryonic fic-
tion – futurescape – ‘lost world’ romance – temporality 
 
 
In 2005, the Australian firm Skin Doctors, makers of “cosmeceuti-
cals”, advertised a new product: a “cosmetic collagen alternative” 
called “Antarctilyne”. “Skin Doctors’ latest moisturiser sounds as if 
it’s straight out of a science fiction novel”, enthused Who magazine, 
“but this is for real. Characteristics of a bacterial strain from an Ant-
arctic glacier have been adapted for the face cream” (Anon. 2005). 
The company’s website explains that the active ingredient of Antarc-
tilyne is a molecule discovered at the bottom of an Antarctic glacier. If 
this molecule has the resilience to withstand the hostile conditions of 
the South Polar continent, Skin Doctors reason, “just imagine what it 
could do for your skin!” 

Elizabeth Leane 
200
The power of this marketing campaign lies in its harnessing of a 
series of qualities associated with the Antarctic continent, and its 
synecdochal projection of them onto the “bacterial strain” (and hence 
the skin cream). The unique spatiality of the continent – its seemingly 
blank white spaces – suggests smooth, unblemished skin; and its 
clean, sterile, unearthly environment evokes the laboratory or the “sci-
ence fiction novel”, a suitable source for a high-tech anti-wrinkle solu-
tion. But it is not only notions of Antarctic space that give this adver-
tisement its effectiveness; just as important is Antarctic time. Antarc-
tilyne’s main claim is that it ‘freezes’ the historical progress of events. 
This claim draws its strength from the preserving qualities of the ice in 
which the bacteria was found, but also from a more general sense of 
Antarctica as a place with its own distinct temporality, different from 
the rest of the world. 
Who magazine is right to describe the discovery that led to Ant-
arctilyne as science fictional. Nowhere is the sense of Antarctica as a 
continent of temporal anomalies more evident than in the imaginative 
narratives woven around it – narratives that regularly take the form of 
speculative fiction: utopias; fantastic voyages; gothic horrors; scien-
tific romances; stories of lost worlds, hollow Earths and ancient buried 
beings. Critics have slowly begun to analyse the way in which Antarc-
tic spatiality lends itself to certain genres and tropes (see e.g. Pyne 
1986; Simpson-Housley 1992; Nelson 1997; Leane 2005a). But Ant-
arctic temporality, as it is manifested in literature, has so far gone 
largely unexamined. This chapter explores the way in which time and 
space are intertwined in textual representations of Antarctica, concen-
trating primarily on speculative fiction, but also drawing at times from 
non-fiction exploration narratives. 
Of the literary critical tools available to talk about the temporal 
associations of a place, the most prominent is Mikhail Bakhtin’s con-
cept of the “chronotope”, explained in his Dialogic Imagination. Bak-
htin coined the term, which literally means “time space”, to talk about 
“the intrinsic connectedness of temporal and spatial relationships that 
are artistically expressed in literature” (1981: 84). He uses ‘chrono-
tope’ in an abstract sense to refer to the way that time and space are 
linked within a genre, but also more concretely to describe a defined 
space within the world of the text that is connected with a specific 
temporality. Thus, Bakhtin argues that the castle in Gothic novels is 
“saturated through and through” with “the time of the historical past”, 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
201
and the provincial town in nineteenth-century realist novels is a space 
linked with “cyclical, everyday time” (245-48). For Bakhtin, these 
chronotopes are “the organizing centres for the fundamental narrative 
events of the novel […] to them belongs the meaning that shapes nar-
rative” (250). 
The concept of the chronotope neatly encapsulates the insepara-
bility of the sense of time and place in Antarctic narratives. But the 
task of understanding the nature of this chronotope, relatively straight-
forward in the case of the Gothic castle, is messier when it comes to 
Antarctica, because the continent has multiple and contradictory rela-
tionships with time. Sometimes a concern with anomalous temporality 
can emerge in the narrative structure of Antarctic-based novels. For 
instance, one critic writing about H. P. Lovecraft’s horror story At the 
Mountains of Madness emphasizes the unusual “treatment of time” in 
this text: “the major portion of the total elapsed time comes from the 
action of the first 35% of the text, and the remaining 65% of the text 
deals with the events of a mere sixteen hours – as if, in those brief but 
portentous hours, time itself has been as frozen as the polar wastes in 
which the final revelations come” (Burleson 1983: 166).  
For the most part, however, those who write creatively about 
Antarctica are not much interested in the kinds of formal experiments 
with narrative time that characterize many modernist and postmodern-
ist novels. The majority of Antarctic-based novels and short stories 
employ a traditional, realist, linear time scheme. Arguably this formal 
conservatism is itself a response to the temporal confusion of the con-
tinent: just as science fiction writers find it difficult to describe an ex-
perimental world through an experimental style, so Antarctica’s tem-
poralities can best be explored when other variables – such as the pace 
and direction of the narrative – remain constant and familiar. 
Yet, even when Antarctic chronotopes are explored thematically 
rather than formally, these explorations often pull in contrary direc-
tions. Antarctica is a place that appears to offer direct access to the 
past, its ice acting as a kind of archive of previous ages; but it also 
points ominously towards future perils. It enables time to be stretched 
out, so that a day lasts several months, or to be compressed, so that a 
hundred years seems no more than a day. Antarctica acts as a time 
machine, in science as well as fiction and cosmetics advertisements; 

Elizabeth Leane 
202
little wonder that the Tardis has landed there twice.1 To understand 
fully the role that the southernmost continent plays in the modern 
imagination, it is necessary to explore its strange relationship with 
time. 
 
 
1. Diurnal Disturbances 
 
Antarctic temporal strangeness reaches its zenith at the South Pole it-
self: a singularity (in the mathematical sense) within the systematized 
social temporality of time zones. Expeditioners at Scott-Amundsen 
base must arbitrarily select one of these zones, as they technically be-
long to none. They choose not, as might be imagined, the time zone of 
their home nation, but that of the largest U.S. Antarctic station, 
McMurdo, which in turn uses the local time of New Zealand, the op-
erational base for U.S. flights to the continent. Consequently, and 
rather charmingly, the Scott-Amundsen expeditioners adopt daylight 
savings time when New Zealanders do, even though their days and 
nights are effectively six months long. At the South Pole, observes 
travel writer Barry Lopez, “the crush of meridians […] the absence of 
any event even approaching a sunset” makes “the issue of determining 
the hour only a vaguely foreboding curiosity” (1989: 43). And while 
all other places within Antarctica technically belong to a time zone, 
the diurnal disturbances that achieve their limit at the Pole are evident 
to varying degrees throughout the far southern latitudes.  
Time is intimately linked to spatial location in a continent that 
is, in parts, as featureless as the ocean, and where the proximity of the 
Magnetic Pole makes compasses unreliable. Early explorers required 
accurate chronometers in order to navigate their sledging trips. Thus 
Scott, in the diary of his ill-fated polar journey, finds it “very annoy-
ing” to discover that his companion Birdie Bowers’ watch has lost 
twenty-six minutes, and worries about how his party will relocate food 
depots if their time-keeping is not trustworthy (1973: 418). But even 
ignoring navigation issues, the absence of familiar patterns of night 
and day would have been confusing in a deep bodily sense for these 
                                                      
1  
The Time Lord visits Antarctica in two different Dr Who television series, 
“The Seeds of Doom” (1976) and “The Tenth Planet” (1966). Both have also 
appeared as books, and a written sequel to the latter, Iceberg, by David Banks, 
was published in 1993. 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
203
(as for present-day) explorers. This is one reason why the regular up-
keep of a diary is such a significant activity in the far south: in addi-
tion to its obvious functions of keeping a record of events and provid-
ing psychological release, it forms an important way of maintaining a 
sense of control over time. Likewise, irregular entries can indicate 
high anxiety and impending loss of control. So, in Scott’s remarkably 
well-kept diary, the entry beginning “Friday, March 16 or Saturday 
17 – Lost track of dates ...” suggests that the end is not far. It is this 
same entry that describes Lawrence ‘Titus’ Oates’ departure from the 
expedition tent and from history, with the famous words: “I’m just go-
ing outside and may be some time” (463-64). His exit line is justly 
known for its cool understatement, but in this context its vagueness is 
equally striking: where the demarcated time of the diary corresponds 
to a sense of control and survival, the indefiniteness of “some time” 
signals the relinquishing of this control and the embracing of death.  
Just as the diary acted as a personal metronome for early Ant-
arctic explorers, the celebration of anniversaries – birthdays, public 
holidays, significant dates in the expedition’s progress – represented a 
kind of communal time-keeping. As the night grew longer, and the 
passage of time vaguer, these anniversaries proliferated. “The mania 
for celebration became so great”, writes Douglas Mawson of the Aus-
tralasian Antarctic Expedition, “that reference was frequently made to 
the almanac. During one featureless interval, the anniversary of the 
First Lighting of London by Gas was observed with extraordinary 
éclat” (1915: 146). The regular holding of Sunday services performed 
the same function, as did the production of an expedition ‘newspaper’, 
such as Scott’s South Polar Times or Mawson’s Adelie Blizzard. This 
organ traditionally released its first issue at the same time that the sun 
disappeared for the polar winter, and later issues followed as regularly 
as possible throughout the dark season. Men living together in 
cramped quarters had no literal need, of course, for news of their own 
activities; the high-latitude newspaper served other functions. Not 
only the regular appearance of its issues but the very concept of the 
newspaper provided a reassuring sense of stable temporality. Benedict 
Anderson has argued in a more general context that the emergence of 
the newspaper as a form was closely tied to the development of a 
sense of shared temporality within a community (1983: 30). Newspa-
pers contain accounts of events joined only by “simple calendrical co-
incidence” (37); their readers are likewise linked by their simultane-

Elizabeth Leane 
204
ous consumption of the material in the newspaper’s pages. By produc-
ing their own newspaper, Heroic-Era explorers created an imaginary 
sense of temporal unity with the world beyond their Antarctic out-
posts.2  
This preoccupation with time in a featureless environment also 
informs fictional inhabitations of Antarctica, such as Marie Dar-
rieussecq’s White (2003; English translation 2005). White is set in a 
fictional European station close to the South Pole, with the action tak-
ing place in the near future, about a hundred years after Scott’s death. 
Its concern, however, is very much with the past: with Antarctica’s 
past, and the traumatic pasts of the two main protagonists, radio com-
munications expert Edmée Blanco and heating engineer Peter Tom-
son. The narrative begins with alternating descriptions of their sepa-
rate journeys to Antarctica – journeys joined only by their temporal 
coincidence and their eventual intersection. Peter arrives first by aero-
plane, and his time is then measured against Edmée’s progress in an 
icebreaker: “Pete Tomson spends the rest of the day checking out the 
generator. Never mind about the word ‘day’, when the sun does not 
set. What is certain is that, at the same time, up, crack, chchch, Edmée 
Blanco is breaking the ice and advancing towards Pete Tomson” (35). 
This constant obsession with time and progress is tied to the unusual 
narrative voice – a communal voice composed of a chorus of ghosts. 
Spirits of individual explorers, and even their animals, drift in and out 
of focus, but most often these voices speak as an undifferentiated 
group. As ghosts, they are not constrained by time, and neither is their 
narrative: “if we want, we can view the film speeded up, forwards or 
backwards, in slow motion, the film of the approach, the film of the 
ice, the film of time solidifying here like ice. […] We can let our-
selves be rocked in time to the frost: imagine the power to make the 
rigging turn white” (31). In the way of ghosts, they are tied to place – 
“the South Pole is our identity” (34) – and movement through time is 
their primary freedom. Their anomalous temporal existences are 
matched by Antarctica’s.  
For Pete and Edmée, the season at the station is a kind of time 
outside of time, a hiatus in their life narratives. As one reviewer re-
marks, “White is not so much a story as an ongoing situation”, with 
                                                      
2  
See Leane 2005b for a more detailed discussion of the role of newspapers on 
Antarctic expeditions. 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
205
the protagonists floating “in some spirit-filled Sartrian limbo” (Jough-
in 2005: 54). The ghosts correspondingly narrate their tale predomi-
nantly in the present tense. Near the South Pole, it seems, historical 
time ceases, and all events take place simultaneously, trapped in a 
kind of temporal gravity well: 
 
Peter Tomson’s preoccupations are quite different from those of Ro-
bert Falcon Scott, one century earlier; but it’s not hard to imagine that 
the same vortex of dead time unravels here every year (we rush in); 
that blatant hollows are formed in the progression of time (we rush 
in); and that only winners like Amundsen manage to extricate them-
selves from them, whipping onwards their dogs and their hours. (Dar-
rieussecq 2005: 96) 
 
Time takes on its own inertia and solidity here: it is a quicksand suck-
ing on its victims, a polar whirlpool spinning them into its depths. To 
survive Antarctica is to take control of time, to shape it to your will ra-
ther than let it shape you. The protagonists attempt this as best as they 
can. Pete becomes increasingly quick at completing his technical 
tasks, to prepare for “feeling time slow down” (97). Edmée is bereft of 
all sense of location in time and in language: “It’s as if even the sim-
plest words are losing their meaning; as if ‘this evening’ refers to in-
definite time, as if ‘urgent’ means ‘later’, as if a verb in the future de-
scribes a completed action” (120). She turns for solace to Scott’s di-
ary, only to read the entry describing the inexplicable loss of twenty-
six minutes on Bowers’ watch.  
The sole escape for Pete and Edmée from this temporal quag-
mire is to find forward direction in acceptance of each other, rather 
than remaining constrained by the memories of their individual 
haunted pasts. Towards the end of novel, they drive a scooter out of 
the station at four in the morning, travelling fifteen kilometres to the 
Pole itself. Here they kiss: “History, of course, does not turn over in 
its cavern. Time only glances back over its shoulder, like an animal 
raising its snout for a moment from the carcass it is devouring. But it 
is enough for space to be able to dig out its slopes again ...” (130). At 
this point, they discover in the snow an old-fashioned watch, warm 
and ticking. While their own modern watches indicate they have been 
absent from the station for twenty-six minutes, the older watch – it is, 
of course, Bowers’ watch – remains at four o’clock. On their return, 
they discover that in fact a half-day has passed, and it is now four in 

Elizabeth Leane 
206
the afternoon; Bowers’ watch has already run down, and can no longer 
be located. These polar time-slips extend to Edmée’s own bodily 
rhythms: she realises that in seventy-two days at the station, she has 
had her period only once (141). The obvious and correct conclusion – 
a pregnancy – is confused by the fact that her relationship with Pete 
began only towards the end of their stay, and the moment of concep-
tion, though vague, appears to occur during their trip home on an ice-
breaker. However, by this stage – the end of the novel – all temporal 
confusions have dissipated: the foetus is steadily growing, “[t]he 
blood circulates, the sea is smooth, the Earth spins, and at both poles 
all is calm and white” (145). The rhythms of everyday life resume as 
the ship sails northward, leaving behind the unearthly stasis of the An-
tarctic continent. 
 
 
2. The Land that Time Forgot: Allochronic Fiction 
 
Diurnal disturbances, temporal featurelessness and resulting anxieties 
are not, of course, confined to the far southern regions; they apply 
equally to the far north. But the different spatialities of the Arctic and 
Antarctic translate to different temporalities. The Arctic encompasses 
inhabited regions; an ocean surrounded by land; it is continuous with 
the landmasses of the northern hemisphere, and includes large parts of 
Canada, Russia and several European countries. Antarctica, by con-
trast, is a continent surrounded by a rough and extensive ocean: it is 
spatially separate. It is not only Antarctica’s strange diurnal patterns 
that signal its temporal anomalousness, but its spatial isolation. This is 
true in the texts mentioned above, but even more so in a group of nov-
els which use Antarctica to stage the juxtaposition of two or more pe-
riods in history: narratives that might be termed ‘allochronic fiction’. 
In fiction, and in everyday speech, time is often figured through 
spatial metaphor. Thus a process of development in time can be de-
scribed as a journey, even though little actual spatial movement oc-
curs. Conversely, the journey through space is often associated with 
movement in time. The more remote the destination from population 
centres and infrastructure, the more acute the sense of a time shift. 
This temporal distancing is not neutral, but carries political implica-
tions. The anthropological device of creating distance between ob-
server and observed by positioning the latter in a different time – la-

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
207
belling a people ‘prehistorical’ or ‘primitive’ or ‘primeval’ – is well 
known. Johannes Fabian, in Time and the Other, uses the terms “de-
nial of coevalness” and “allochronism” to describe this kind of chro-
nological displacement (1983: 31). Allochronism is not geographically 
limited; as Fabian points out, Western societies denigrate particular 
aspects of their own cultures by labelling them in this way (30). How-
ever, this rhetorical device is particularly readily applied to regions or 
peoples that are spatially remote. An obvious case in point is the Aus-
tralian Aborigines, consistently labelled as “stone age” by European 
colonisers (McGregor 1997: 33-48). To relegate a people to a past age 
is to refuse their capacity to change: whether they are doomed in So-
cial Darwinist terms as destined for extinction or nostalgically roman-
ticised, they are denied a future.  
Antarctica, of course, is not a people but a continent; yet the ef-
fect of allochronism can be political in its case as well. Robin Burns, 
in her analysis of women’s experiences in Antarctica, Just Tell Them I 
Survived, argues that in the late twentieth century, when women were 
increasingly expanding their presence in non-traditional fields, “Ant-
arctica seemed caught in a time warp contingent on its ‘special’ 
status” (2001: vii). The sense of Antarctica as a place apart meant it 
could also be considered a time apart, and its communities could sus-
tain views of gender roles outdated elsewhere. 
This image of an Antarctic community caught in a time warp is 
one that was fostered by creative writers before the continent began to 
be explored. One of the most prominent genres within Antarctic fic-
tion in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was the ro-
mance of the ‘lost world’. This genre, Peter Nicholls observes, “be-
longed to a cartographically ‘closed’ world” (1995: 735): it flourished 
at a time when blank spaces on the map were fast disappearing, and 
Antarctica, along with the Arctic, the Himalayas, the Amazon basin 
and the Australian outback, was one of the few enclaves still predomi-
nantly unexplored. As Nicholls notes, the genre was “largely anachro-
nistic […] from its beginning” (1995: 735): certainly in the case of 
Antarctica, writers continued to postulate unknown southern worlds 
inhabited by an array of unlikely creatures long after the continent’s 
icy, hostile nature had been established. In nineteenth-century Antarc-
tic lost-world narratives, a ring of ice hides a temperate or tropical in-
terior (land or island-dotted sea) harbouring beings who seem to be-
long to an earlier stage in history – descendants of people who long 

Elizabeth Leane 
208
ago colonised the region and have remained isolated ever since. After 
the Pole had been reached, writers commonly replaced the hidden in-
habitable land by less obviously unrealistic scenarios, such as caverns 
beneath the ice. In either case, the narrative inevitably centres on the 
intrusion into the lost polar civilization of contemporary protagonists, 
so that the far south becomes the site of different but co-existing tem-
poralities. 
Although there were a number of remote locations that leant 
themselves to lost-world narratives, Antarctica at the turn of the twen-
tieth century was particularly suited to allochronic fictions. The dis-
covery of an entirely uninhabited and undeveloped continent during a 
period of rapid industrialization and mechanization is appealingly in-
congruous, suggesting an apparent juxtaposition of the modern and the 
prehistoric. Antarctica, as Elena Glasberg has observed, is in this 
sense “a spatialized symbol of time, of the lateness of the hour” (2002: 
100). In the early nineteenth century, when Australia – the other half 
of the erstwhile terra australis incognita – was the site of several 
growing colonies, no one had even glimpsed the Antarctic continent. 
By the end of the century, when the era of European imperialism had 
already reached its height, the first official landing on Antarctica had 
only just occurred. By the time Robert Scott and Roald Amundsen 
were laboriously making their way on foot and ski to the South Pole, 
the motor car, the aeroplane and the special theory of relativity had 
been invented. Mawson’s Antarctic expedition of 1911-14 communi-
cated with the outside world through telegraphy. The most remote of 
lands was explored when communications technologies were altering 
perceptions of distance, when the “time-space compression” charac-
teristic of the modern era was already well in train (Dodds 1997: 47; 
Harvey 1989: 240). As Les Murray’s poem “Antarctica” suggests, the 
continent is simultaneously the “[m]ost modern of the Great South 
Lands” and “prehuman” (1990: 83). Prior to satellite mapping and the 
establishment of numerous scientific stations, it provided the perfect 
‘lost world’ in the midst of modernity. 
In some narratives, the lost people discovered in Antarctica are 
culturally or technologically superior to the author’s own society. The 
nineteenth century was the hey-day of Antarctic utopias (see Leane 
2004), the continent providing the ultimate in empty, remote space on 
which to inscribe an alternative social vision. Examples include Frank 
Cowan’s Revi-Lona (ca. 1880s), in which a sailor finds (and eventu-

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
209
ally destroys) a harmonious matriarchal society in the far south; Chris-
topher Spotswood’s Voyage of Will Rogers to the South Pole (1888), 
in which the Antarctic land of “Bencolo” is as praiseworthy as its 
name suggests; and George McIver’s aptly titled Neuroomia (1894), 
which depicts a cultivated, orderly society centred around a stately 
South Polar city.  
More often in ‘lost world’ fiction, however, the community dis-
covered in the Antarctic interior is not enlightened but primitive, ‘fro-
zen’ in the undeveloped state of its ancestors while the rest of human-
ity moved on. In many cases, the ‘lost race’ represents an earlier evo-
lutionary stage and reflects post-Darwinian anxieties about racial hier-
archies. The best-known examples are Edgar Rice Burroughs’ The 
Land that Time Forgot (1918) and its two sequels. Burroughs’ novels 
are set in “Caspak”, a far southern continent fringed by icebergs and 
inhabited by humanity’s evolutionary ancestors, along with a variety 
of prehistoric creatures. Writing several years after Amundsen reached 
the South Pole, Burroughs invented an alternative Antarctica in order 
to relive myths of a tropical polar land when they were well past their 
used-by date. Similar stories followed. John Taine’s The Greatest Ad-
venture (1928) sees a scientist, his spirited daughter and their compan-
ions fend off dinosaurs in caverns beneath the Antarctic ice. In Edison 
Marshall’s Dian of the Lost Land (1935), two scientists flying an 
aeroplane to a hidden region of Antarctic tundra are effectively 
“transported to the Glacial Age, to the wild glory of the Age of Mam-
mals, where the splendid Cro-Magnon and the darkened Neanderthal 
fought their savage wars” (1966: 111). One of the men, realizing that 
the Cro-Magnons have “preserved something that will never come 
again on this earth”, determines that he will in turn fight to “preserve 
these wonderful people” until society is ready to accept them without 
exploitation (80). He stays behind when his companion flies away, re-
velling in the chance to release the atavistic qualities within himself: 
“He was not the lawful child of civilization, but a throwback to the 
Stone Age. […] Adam, the youth, the primal man, had entered into his 
heritage” (148). 
In a few cases, the time to which the lost race harks back is not 
a vague primeval era, but a specific period in history. One example is 
Eugene Bisbee’s Treasure of the Ice (1898), in which ancient Greek 
culture is discovered flourishing in the Antarctic. Charles Stilson’s 
Polaris of the Snows (1915) also features a people described as “an 

Elizabeth Leane 
210
offshoot of old Greece” (1965: 92), and Charles Dake’s A Strange 
Discovery (1899) opts for descendents of ancient Rome. Most explicit 
about its juxtaposition of two historical periods is Edward Bouvé’s 
Centuries Apart (1894); the second chapter is entitled “The Meeting 
of the Sixteenth and Nineteenth Centuries”. Set during the American 
civil war, Centuries Apart recounts the adventures of Captain Arthur 
Percy, from whose journal the narrative is purportedly constructed. 
Percy sails in a group of ships transporting Union soldiers from the 
east to the west coast of North America. Forced south by storms off 
Cape Horn, the ships are drawn through a channel in the ice by the 
warm current so ubiquitous in Antarctic fiction of this period. The 
soldiers find themselves in an open polar sea, where they encounter a 
“medieval” ship crewed by people wearing period dress and speaking 
an archaic English: “It was the Middle Ages over again, and the 
Americans gazed as if in a dream” (16). The Antarcticans are refugees 
from a much earlier civil war: they are the ancestors of English exiles 
who, disgruntled by the accession of Henry Tudor in 1485, embarked 
with a group of French people to form a new colony. Their Antarctic 
settlement is a literal replica of northern geography: “South England”, 
an island “seeming somewhat like unto England” (45) is separated by 
a channel from “La Nouvelle France”. Society, dress and customs in 
both countries have stalled in sixteenth-century mode. This is effec-
tively a time-travel story, and its most obvious forebear is Mark 
Twain’s A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court, published five 
years earlier. But where, in that tale, a bump on the head is required to 
send the Yankee into the past, in Bouvé’s novel Antarctica functions 
as a time machine that makes the past simultaneous with the present.  
Heroic-Era explorers themselves used the devices of speculative 
fiction to portray a temporally distanced Antarctica, although rather 
than bringing the past into the present, they tended to imagine the pre-
sent as past. The in-house newspaper of Scott’s two expeditions, the 
South Polar Times, published a series of six semi-fictional pieces in 
which the men satirized their own activities by reporting them in the 
form of archaic documents discovered by future societies. These have 
titles such as “Leaves from an Ancient Papyrus”, “Hieroglyphic Re-
cord” and “Extracts from Some Antarctic Archives”. One of Scott’s 
men, Frank Debenham, explains that “The idea behind the Archives is 
that many centuries hence tourists might visit the scene of the expedi-
tion on Ross Island and might there dig up bricks with the story en-

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
211
graved or painted on them, just as archaeologists piece together the 
happenings of two thousand years ago in Egypt or Mesopotamia” 
(1952: 18). The articles are written in a mock-ancient tongue, de-
signed to evoke the estrangement effect that Edwardian speech might 
produce in readers hundreds of years in the future. The ‘ancient manu-
script’ device, with its imagined temporal shift, enabled the expedi-
tioners to make fun of each other from a secure distance – an impor-
tant thing when a group of men are living together in one hut for sev-
eral years. But, on another level, it also allowed them to speculate, un-
der the guise of humour, that their achievements would indeed have 
some meaning for posterity. The expedition represented itself to itself 
as a kind of time-capsule waiting for discovery by a future society.  
Fictions of this kind can be classed as auto-allochronic – expe-
ditioners deny their own coevalness, placing their present as the past 
of the outside world, and conversely representing the outside world as 
their future. This is not surprising, given the rudimentary way in 
which they were forced to live. Mawson considered his expeditioners, 
wintering in a snow-covered hut in 1913, “a case of history repeating 
itself – cave man and the great ice age” (1988: 195). They agreed: 
Morton Moyes, in an account of his experiences during Mawson’s ex-
pedition, compares the Antarctic explorer to “a Neanderthal simian on 
some desperate migration to a land of firewood and hunting” (1964: 
22). Equally relevant in this context was their spatial isolation. The 
extreme remoteness and inaccessibility of the Antarctic continent 
meant that early explorers were removed from all contact with the 
outside world for months or even years. Their members, on return to 
the north, were like time travellers emerging into an unknown future. 
The most famous case of this temporal dislocation comes from Shack-
leton’s Endurance expedition, which had no outside contact from the 
time it left South Georgia in December 1914 to Shackleton’s return 
there in May 1916. Having departed Britain the same week that war 
was declared, Shackleton expected the conflict to be finished by the 
time he returned. Greeting whalers at South Georgia after spending 
nearly eighteen months trapped in ice, he asked “… when was the war 
over?” and was informed, “The war is not over […] Millions are being 
killed. Europe is mad. The world is mad” (Shackleton 1999: 227). 
Even those intermittently in contact with the north, such as Mawson’s 
men, who had the benefit of a temperamental wireless communica-
tions system, felt that returning to society would be tantamount to 

Elizabeth Leane 
212
travelling into the future. One anonymous contributor to the Adelie 
Blizzard, writing about the “Evolution of Women”, conveys a “horri-
ble premonition that the times have changed; that like Rip Van Winkle 
in his day, we shall after two years of hibernation, find ourselves con-
fronted with a being far more terrible than a suffragette” (McLean 
1913: 18). Both Scott’s and Mawson’s expeditioners wrote several fic-
tional pieces which speculated about or satirized their likely reception 
on return to society. Writing fiction set in the future which posited 
their own present as past allowed these men to prepare psychologi-
cally for the changes that lay ahead. 
 
 
3. Antarctic Cryonics 
 
While in Antarctic allochronic fictions the continent’s ice functions 
metaphorically, its preserving powers underscoring the apparent pres-
ervation of an earlier time period, in a number of other tales the Ant-
arctic ice moves from being a metaphor to a literal device for deceler-
ating or stopping the changes brought on by time. The most extreme, 
and most comical, fictional example of anomalous temporalities pro-
duced by icy conditions is the conceit of “frozen words”, the literary 
history of which has been outlined by Edward M. Wilson and P. 
Rickard. The idea stretches back to Plutarch’s Moralia, which relates 
a report “that in a certain city words congealed with the cold the mo-
ment they were spoken, and later, as they thawed out, people heard in 
the summer what they had said in the winter.” This absurd idea is then 
explained as a metaphor for delayed understanding: philosophical 
ideas heard by men in their youth are comprehended only when they 
grow old (quoted in Wilson and Rickard 1956: 95). The concept of 
“frozen words” is employed by a number of later writers (some of 
whom relocate the generic “city” to the North Pole), most famously 
and extensively by François Rabelais in his History of Gargantua and 
Pantagruel. These writers elaborated on the original conceit and sug-
gested further absurdities, such as “polar wars” which are “frequently 
waged six months before they have been declared”, and protestations 
of love which are heard amid a later quarrel (Jean Paul, quoted in Wil-
son and Rickard 1956: 107). None of the examples listed by Wilson 
and Rickard are specific to Antarctica (all of their examples pre-date 
its discovery), but the general principle – that ice and the freezing 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
213
process result in temporal paradoxes – is one that is employed repeat-
edly in Antarctic fiction. Antarctica offers at least one example of ac-
tual cryonics: the midge Belgica Antarctica, in its larval stage, is able 
to freeze over winter and effectively ‘come to life’ again after it thaws 
out.3 The category of Antarctic literature that might be termed 
‘cryonic fiction’ extrapolates this idea to larger bodies – both human 
and monstrous. 
Although the term ‘cryonics’ appeared only in the mid-1960s, 
the idea of prolonging a life through freezing has a longer history in 
literature. In time-travel fiction, preservation in ice is the most popular 
of a variety of suspended animation devices that can take the place of 
a time machine (others include the long sleep or hypnotic trance) 
(Stableford 1995b). The earliest example of cryonics in fiction can be 
found in an Antarctic-based novel, W. Clark Russell’s The Frozen Pi-
rate, published in 1887 (Stableford 1995a). The eponymous buccaneer 
is discovered on a ship that has been frozen in an iceberg for fifty 
years; when accidentally defrosted, he comes to life, unaware of the 
half-century that has passed. Russell’s pirate is the first in a long line 
of fictional creatures – often unearthly, and usually hostile – discov-
ered buried in ice on the underside of the world. Typical examples are 
the terrifying alien creatures that feature in Lovecraft’s serialized 
novel At the Mountains of Madness (1936) and John W. Campbell’s 
short story “Who Goes There?” (1938). Lovecraft was familiar with 
Antarctic preservation stories; he had read The Frozen Pirate as a boy 
(Miéville 2005: xviii). In his tale, Campbell’s, and later imitations 
such as the Dr Who series “The Seeds of Doom”, creatures defrosted 
in Antarctic ice devastate an expedition base and threaten the world at 
large. In each case, it is the ancient and alien nature of the frozen or-
ganism – its obvious difference from other life forms – that is the pri-
mary source of fear. As China Miéville observes in his introduction to 
Lovecraft’s novel, the “preserving power of the cold” allows “our 
supposed atavistic and repressed anxieties to be put on ice, and the 
Antarctic becomes almost vulgarly overdetermined as a site for psy-
chically anxious fiction” (2005: xvii). 
                                                      
3  
There are other arthropods that are able to supercool, and thus avoid freezing 
at low temperature, but Belgica Antarctica is the only species that is able to 
tolerate actual freezing (Block 1984: 203). 

Elizabeth Leane 
214
A ‘real life’ counterpart for these nightmare creatures can be lo-
cated: in 2002, New Zealand scientists found signs of anthrax bacteria 
in Scott’s huts at Cape Evans, possibly carried there by the mules and 
ponies Scott brought with him and preserved by the ice ever since. 
The story reignited earlier speculations that anthrax might have caused 
the death of Evans on the polar journey (Chapman 2002; Falckh 
1987). While later attempts to isolate anthrax spores in the samples 
failed and the hut was declared safe, the incident raised the spectre of 
what might happen if a strain of bacteria or virus eradicated from the 
rest of the world remained hibernating, awaiting release, in the Ant-
arctic ice. 
Yet perhaps more fearful, because more real, than the notion of 
a hostile organism hidden in the ice, are the preserved bodies of 
unlucky expedition members. The frozen body of the explorer forms a 
central part of the southern continent’s most frequently repeated story, 
that of ‘Scott of the Antarctic’. The five members of Scott’s party all 
died during the return from the Pole in early 1912, and their bodies are 
still encased in Antarctic ice.  Evans and Oates were the first casual-
ties, and their remains were never located. Scott, Bowers and Wilson 
died later in their tent; they were discovered by Cherry-Garrard and 
others the following southern spring and buried in situ. Their bodies 
have remained encased in the ice ever since, inexorably making their 
way towards the coast, and presumably will one day leave the conti-
nent inside calved icebergs. The idea of these preserved explorers 
slowly completing their original journey north is an evocative one. Al-
though the bodies of Scott and his companions were in bad shape 
when found by Cherry-Garrard’s party (Wheeler 2002: 142), it is 
tempting to imagine the dead men lying, protected from decay by the 
cold, exactly as they might have looked in life. The image of the men 
as preserved sleepers is further bolstered by the often-noted links be-
tween Scott and the fictional character of Peter Pan, a boy who does 
not age. Peter Pan’s creator, J. M. Barrie, was close friends with Scott 
and godfather to Scott’s son Peter, who was named after Barrie’s 
character. Barrie himself made the connection between Scott’s body 
and eternal youth explicit in his 1922 address Courage:  
 
When I think of Scott I remember the strange Alpine story of the 
youth who fell down a glacier and was lost, and of how a scientific 
companion, one of several who accompanied him, all young, com-
puted that the body would again appear at a certain date and place 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
215
many years afterwards. When that time came round some of the survi-
vors returned to the glacier to see if the prediction would be fulfilled; 
all old men now; and the body reappeared as young as on the day he 
left them. So Scott and his comrades emerge out of the white immen-
sities always young. (s.d.: 32) 
 
The obvious point of comparison in the context of Barrie’s address is 
the courage of the young men lost in the war just past, and his use of 
the present tense in the final line of this passage emphasizes that the 
explorer, like the fallen youth of the war, is immortalized in memory. 
However, while the bodies of those young soldiers decayed like any 
other, Scott’s figural preservation is heavily underscored by his literal 
one. Similarly, the common euphemism of death-as-sleep takes on a 
certain materiality when applied to bodies preserved by ice. 
In this sense, Scott’s legend parallels that of other sleeping – 
and hence time-travelling – heroes. Bud Foote, in an analysis of time-
travel stories, observes that the device of “The Long Sleep” is “re-
served for cultural heroes”: “The mythic landscape of Europe is lit-
tered with Arthurs, Barbarossas, and Karageorges, all sleeping up in 
caves until their peoples shall have need of them”. In the First World 
War, Foote notes, there was a widely circulated story of “the appear-
ance of a band of King Arthur’s knights at a crucial moment for the 
English forces on the Western front” (1991: 25). Scott slots readily 
into this pantheon of slumbering heroes: he too provided a motivating 
example for British troops (Jones 2003: 254-61); his party’s deeds 
were often celebrated in the language of chivalry (Jones 2003: 239f; 
Girouard 1981: 2-4); and (along with Oates) he has come to symbolise 
the last gasp of a certain type of British masculinity: one characterized 
by courage, self-sacrifice, and gallantry. 
Yet, while the myth of the sleeping hero is a conservative, com-
forting one, when literalized in an explorer’s frozen corpse it takes on 
disquieting resonances. The uncanniness of Scott’s preserved body is 
the central focus of Jane Yolen and Robert J. Harris’ short story 
“Requiem Antarctica”, published in Isaac Asimov’s Science Fiction 
Magazine (2000). In this story, the expedition surgeon Edward Atkin-
son reports on his death bed that when he entered the tent of Scott, 
Wilson and Bowers, he found a letter from Scott providing an unex-
pected piece of information: he is a vampire, and can only stop his 
bloodthirsty activities by freezing himself. Atkinson explains to his 
confessor:  

Elizabeth Leane 
216
What haunts me most is this […] By his own testimony Scott cannot 
truly die. He merely sleeps beneath the Antarctic ice, his thirst dor-
mant. But what climatic changes might occur in millennia yet to 
come? In some distant age, the polar ice melted, might he not rise 
again to haunt an unrecognizable world, to feed a thirst grown gigantic 
over a thousand frozen centuries? (Yolen and Harris 2000: 61)  
 
The threat of rising sea levels and flooded cities is nothing in compari-
son to the spectre of the voracious undead explorer. This vampiric 
Scott merges into the horrific aliens of Campbell’s and Lovecraft’s 
tales rather than King Arthur: not the victorious triumph of the sleep-
ing hero but the return of the repressed.  
The repressed returns with some vengeance in an Antarctic sci-
ence fiction thriller published around the same time as “Requiem Ant-
arctica”, Scott Browning’s Searchers. Browning’s narrative centres on 
the mysterious disappearance of a fictional Antarctic expedition of 
1909 led by Robert Talon, who believed that the South Magnetic Pole 
held the secret of time travel. The frozen body of one of Talon’s men 
is discovered by scientists near McMurdo station in the late twentieth 
century. This find provokes two antagonistic brothers to continue the 
search for the Antarctic time tunnel (now understood as a “worm 
hole”), only to discover that they were members of the original expe-
dition. The fragmented childhood memories that torment them belong 
to the nineteenth century, and their true origins lie much further in the 
past:  
 
As if unlocked by the words themselves, the crude foundations, long-
abandoned, buried under the silencing ice, became whole again in Ja-
red’s mind … he stared at the scene, knowing finally the truth of who 
he was. It’s what had drawn him to Antarctica to seek the origins of 
man, digging for bones in the hard ice, never realizing it was his own 
origins he sought. This place in the shadow of the foothills, in ancient 
Antarctica, had been a refuge for his family. (Browning 2001: 246) 
 
Before their adventures in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the 
reader learns, the time-travelling brothers belonged to a group of refu-
gees from a dystopian future Earth who found shelter in prehistoric 
Antarctica. The brothers’ Antarctic journey provokes colliding visions 
of past, present and future that eventually leave one dead and the other 
his reluctant killer. The latter demands that the time-tunnel be buried 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
217
along with his brother’s body: “The world isn’t ready for this place” 
(255). 
Where in these cases an explorer’s material body sets a story in 
train, for another contemporary science fiction writer, Brenda Clough, 
the absence of a body provides the central conceit. In her short story 
“May Be Some Time” and its sequel “Tiptoe, on a Fence Post”, 
Clough explores a scenario in which Oates’ parting phrase becomes 
literal truth rather than stylish understatement. Her narrative takes up 
Oates’ story where it usually ends, with his famous exit from the tent. 
Following a brief initial period of suffering, he falls into a warm sleep, 
waking again “after some unknowable time” (Clough 2001: 12). To 
his consternation, he learns that he has been brought one hundred and 
thirty-three years into the future. His rescuers have chosen him as a 
guinea pig to test their time-travel technology. Oates is uniquely quali-
fied for such a test, they explain: his otherwise certain death renders 
his irreversible removal to a future time morally justifiable. Thanks to 
Scott’s diary, Oates’ body can be accurately located in space and time, 
“on the 80th parallel on March 16th, 1912”; yet the fact that it was 
never found, and the sterile environment in which it lies, means that 
no alteration in events can be caused by its absence (Clough 2001: 15, 
31). Safely in the future, Oates is able to read over the myriad ac-
counts of the expedition and see his own legend, as well as Scott’s, in 
the making. But Oates’ trials are not over. Like Mawson’s expedition-
ers fearing the “evolution of women”, he is confronted with social 
changes that he finds disturbing and inexplicable: “Captain Titus 
Oates considered that time travel and Antarctic exploration were not 
dissimilar activities. In both, the traveler leaped out into the unknown, 
to master it or die” (Clough 2002: 198). Facing the future, the narra-
tive implies, requires at least as much courage as facing the Antarctic 
elements. 
 
 
4. The Ice Core: Time Future 
 
Thinking about future time in Antarctica brings a new perspective to 
the cryonic power of ice. While the preservation of historic huts and 
artefacts is welcome, the preservation of other materials – rubbish tips, 
human waste, discarded weather balloons – is an environmental haz-
ard. As Darrieussecq’s character Pete Tomson observes, picking up a 

Elizabeth Leane 
218
cigarette butt, “It takes five hundred years for a filter to degrade in a 
reasonably humid climate, so you can imagine that it will be preserved 
for all eternity here” (2005: 24). But this of course presumes that the 
ice itself will be preserved for all eternity. Fictions which figure Ant-
arctica as frozen in time refuse to acknowledge that the continent, like 
the rest of the world, is subject to change, and that humanity’s own ac-
tions could be rapidly accelerating this change. 
In this context, it is important to realise that the Antarctic ice, 
which in some narratives is a means of collapsing the distance be-
tween present and past, can also act as a way to materially represent 
the plodding years. In John Wyndham’s collection of science fiction 
short stories, The Seeds of Time, an analogy is drawn between the 
freezing of the sea and the passage of time: “The present was repre-
sented by the leading edge of the ice, gradually building up and ad-
vancing. Behind it was the solid ice that represented the past: in front, 
the still fluid water represented the future” (1959: 128). If time could 
have a physical representation, ice, it seems, would come closest. 
Tipped sideways, so that the accumulation of ice is vertical rather than 
horizontal, Wyndham’s analogy takes on scientific as well as poetic 
meaning. As paleoclimatologist Richard Alley explains in his aptly ti-
tled book The Two Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores, Abrupt Climate 
Change, and Our Future, glaciers and ice sheets contain chemicals 
that can be analysed to understand past climatic conditions; they be-
come, in Alley’s phrase, “icy archives”. Like the rings of a tree trunk, 
but on a far greater scale, a vertical cross-section of Antarctica’s kilo-
metres of ice provides scientists with a systematic record of the events 
of past aeons. Millions of years are spatially represented in its layers. 
This massive volume of data is compressed by scientists into the more 
manageable form of ice cores – narrow cylinders of ice drilled up 
from the continent and stored in sections for analysis: “long tubes of 
raw, blue, deep-frozen time”, to borrow a phrase from Darrieussecq’s 
White (2005: 89). And while the ice core solidifies time past, it also 
reflects on what is to come, enabling scientists to contextualize current 
climate change and make more accurate predictions. 
Thus, cryonics makes Antarctica a space about time future as 
well as time past: a literal futurescape. Global miner’s canaries, its 
melting ice shelves foretell catastrophes ahead. The disaster film The 
Day After Tomorrow (2004), the title of which evokes both urgency 
and indefiniteness, focuses on an ice-core researcher, paleoclimatolo-

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
219
gist Jack Hall. The movie opens with Hall and his colleagues drilling 
on the Larsen B ice shelf in the Antarctic Peninsula, which dramati-
cally breaks off while they are at work. This confirms what Hall’s ice-
core data has been indicating – a new ice age – but his warnings come 
too late to reverse the trend of global warming and prevent catastro-
phe. Scott’s expeditioners at the start of the twentieth century antici-
pated this kind of narrative: one creative piece in the South Polar 
Times – a science-fictional twist on the much-beloved “old manu-
script” genre – warns of the dangers of ignoring signs of climate 
change. Entitled “Fragments of a Manuscript Found by the People of 
Sirius When They Visited the Earth During the Exploration of the So-
lar System” and written by the expedition meteorologist George 
Simpson, it records in retrospect the catastrophic downfall of human-
kind. The twentieth century, according to the manuscript’s now-dead 
narrator, was characterized by “luxury and self-indulgence”, low birth 
rates and an increasing emphasis on life-prolonging technologies 
(Simpson 1914: 76f). With the discovery of an elixir of life, the pro-
duction of which required the low temperatures of Antarctica, 
McMurdo Sound (the location of Scott’s base) became the “centre of 
the world” (77). Eventually, however, rising temperatures and melting 
ice sheets meant the elixir became unavailable. The humans of the fu-
ture consulted the records of Scott’s expedition, and learned that “The 
greatest authority, the Physiographer [Griffith Taylor] […] took for 
granted that ice age succeeded tropical age, and tropical age suc-
ceeded ice age”. They realised, too late, that climate does not remain 
stable; the narrator’s dying thoughts are of “the folly which neglected 
the teachings of the Scientists of the British Antarctic Expedition 
1910-1912” (78). Like the other ‘ancient manuscripts’ in the South 
Polar Times, the article is comic and affectionately mocking, but if its 
dire climate predictions had little serious edge at the time, they appear 
considerably more sobering a hundred years later. 
Antarctica, then, provides the first warning of impending disas-
ter in dystopian visions of future ecological devastation; but it also 
frequently acts as a last refuge in these scenarios. In the Japanese film 
Fukkatsu No Hi (1980) – released in English as Virus – a biological 
weapon is accidentally unleashed on the world. The only survivors 
(aside from one British submarine) are the staff of Antarctic stations, 
due to their isolation and the fact that the virus cannot withstand cold 
temperatures. They converge on a single base with the aim of regener-

Elizabeth Leane 
220
ating the human race. Kevin Brockmeier’s novel The Brief History of 
the Dead (2006) presents a pared-down version of the same scenario: 
it focuses on the one remaining member of the human race – a woman 
working at a remote Antarctic station – left alive after a virus has 
struck. Tess Williams’ Map of Power (1996) describes another post-
apocalyptic future: an Earth in which nuclear fallout and global warm-
ing have driven survivors down to the far south, now warm enough to 
sustain a marginal, nomadic, tribal society. These visions of the conti-
nent as a place of final resort are not limited to novelists and film-
makers. When, in 2006, Stephen Hawking suggested that humanity 
needed to colonise space in case the Earth were rendered uninhabit-
able, fellow cosmologist Alan Guth proposed the more straightfor-
ward solution of an underground hideout beneath Antarctica 
(O’Malley 2006). For climatologists, cosmologists and novelists alike, 
the weight of the future presses down the Antarctic continent like 
countless tonnes of ice. 
 
 
*** 
 
The texts discussed here are united in their representation of Antarc-
tica as a place offering an alternative to everyday, socialised clock-
time. This quality is central to its attraction as both a wilderness re-
serve and a tourist destination. But the form of Antarctica’s alternative 
time-sense mutates along with the continent. Some Antarctic tempo-
ralities are closely tied to the preoccupation of a historical period, as 
in the lost-world narratives of the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries; others persist across a range of texts over hundreds of years. 
It is better, then, to speak of a cluster of related and intersecting Ant-
arctic chronotopes than to demand that the continent tie together space 
and time in a consistent, singular manner. Ultimately, perhaps, the 
fascination of Antarctica lies in its contradictions: it is a place of com-
pressed time and extended time; haunted by monsters from the past 
and threatened by its own prophesies of the future; ancient and prime-
val, but forever young, pristine and wrinkle-free. 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
221
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Banks, David (1993). Iceberg (The New Doctor Who Adventures 18). London: Doc-
tor Who Books. 
Barrie, J. M. (s.d.). Courage. London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
Bisbee, Eugene (1898). Treasure of the Ice. New York: F. Tennyson Neely. 
Bouvé, Edward (1894). Centuries Apart. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Brockmeier, Kevin (2006). The Brief History of the Dead. London: John Murray. 
Browning, Scott (2001). Searchers. Los Angeles: Cougar. 
Burroughs, Edgar Rice (1918/1973). The Land that Time Forgot. New York: Ace. 
Camfield, Douglas (dir.) (1976). “The Seeds of Doom”. Dr Who (BBC, 31 Jan.-6 
Mar.). 
Campbell, John W. [as Don A. Stuart] (1938). “Who Goes There?”, in: Astounding 
Science-Fiction (Aug. 1938): 60-97. 
Clough, Brenda (2001). “May Be Some Time”, in: Analog Science Fiction and Fact 
(Apr. 2001): 10-41. 
— (2002). “Tiptoe, on a Fence Post”, in: Analog Science Fiction and Fact (July/Aug. 
2002): 196-227. 
Cowan, Frank (ca.1880/1978). Revi-Lona: A Romance of Love in a Marvellous Land. 
New York: Arno. 
Dake, Charles Romyn (1899). A Strange Discovery. New York: Ingalls Kimball. 
Darrieussecq, Marie (2005). White (tr. Ian Monk). London: Faber. 
Debenham, Frank (1952). In the Antarctic: Stories of Scott’s Last Expedition. Lon-
don: John Murray. 
Emmerich, Roland (dir.) (2004). The Day After Tomorrow (20th Century Fox). 
Falckh. R. C. F. (1987). “The Death of Petty Officer Evans”, in: Polar Record 23: 
397-403. 
Fukasaku, Kinji (dir.) (1980). Fukkatsu No Hi (Haruki Kadokawa Films and Tokyo 
Broadcasting System). 
Lovecraft, H. P. (1936/2005). At the Mountains of Madness. New York: Modern Li-
brary. 
Marshall, Edison (1935/1966). Dian of the Lost Land. Philadelphia: Chilton. 
Martinus, Derek (dir.) (1966). “The Tenth Planet”. Dr Who (BBC, 8-29 Oct.). 
Mawson, Douglas (1915). The Home of the Blizzard: Being the Story of the Austral-
asian Antarctic Expedition, 1911-1914. Vol. 1. London: Heinemann.  
— (1988). Mawson’s Antarctic Diaries. Sydney: Allen and Unwin. 
McIver, George (1894).  Neuroomia: A New Continent. London: George Robertson. 
Moyes, Morton, Commander; as told to George Dovers and D’Arcy Niland (1964). 
“Season in Solitary”, in: Walkabout 30.10: 20-23. 
Murray, Les (1990). Dog Fox Field. North Ryde: Collins/Angus & Robertson. 
Nelson, Victoria (1997). “Symmes Hole, or the South Polar Romance”, in: Raritan: A 
Quarterly Review 17.2: 136-66. 
Russell, William Clark (1887/s.d.). The Frozen Pirate. Rockville: Wildside. 

Elizabeth Leane 
222
Scott, Robert F. (1913/1973). Scott’s Last Expedition: The Personal Journals of Cap-
tain R. F. Scott, C.V.O., R.N., on His Journey to the South Pole. London: Tan-
dem. 
Shackleton, Ernest (1919/1999). South: The Endurance Expedition. London: Penguin. 
Simpson, George (1914). “Fragments of a Manuscript Found by the People of Sirius 
When They Visited the Earth During the Exploration of the Solar System”, in: 
Apsley Cherry-Garrard (ed.). South Polar Times. Vol. 3. London: Smith, 
Elder, 75-78. 
Spotswood, Christopher (1888). The Voyage of Will Rogers to the South Pole. 
Launceston: The Examiner and Tasmanian Office. 
Stilson, Charles B. (1915/1965). Polaris of the Snows. New York: Avalon. 
Taine, John (1929). The Greatest Adventure. New York: E. P. Dutton. 
Twain, Mark (1889/1982). A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court. New York: 
Norton. 
— (1898/1995). “From the London Times of 1904”, in: H. Bruce Franklin (ed.). Fu-
ture Perfect: American Science Fiction of the Nineteenth Century: An Anthol-
ogy. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 376-85. 
Wheeler, Sara (2002). Cherry: A Life of Apsley Cherry-Garrard. London: Vintage. 
Williams, Tess (1996). Map of Power. Sydney: Random House. 
Wilson, Edward M. and P. Rickard. “Frozen Words”, in: Polar Record 8: 95-108. 
Wyndham, John. (1956/1959). The Seeds of Time. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Yolen, Jane and Robert J. Harris (2000). “Requiem Antarctica”, in: Isaac Asimov’s 
Science Fiction Magazine (May 2000): 44-61. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Alley, Richard (2000). The Two Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores, Abrupt Climate 
Change, and Our Future. Princeton: Princeton UP. 
Anderson, Benedict (1983). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso. 
Anon. (2005). “Glacial Beauty”, in: Who (6 June 2005): 78. 
“Antarctilyne – Cosmetic Collagen Alternative”. Skin Doctors Cosmeceuticals web-
site. [http://www.skindoctors.com.au/]. 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays (tr. Caryl Emerson 
and Michael Holquist). Austin: U of Texas P. 
Block, W. (1984). “Terrestrial Microbiology, Invertebrates and Ecosystems”, in: R. 
M. Laws (ed.). Antarctic Ecology. Vol. 1. London: Academic, 163-236. 
Burleson, Donald R. (1983). H. P. Lovecraft: A Critical Study. Westport: Greenwood. 
Burns, Robin (2001). Just Tell Them I Survived! Women in Antarctica. Crows Nest: 
Allen and Unwin. 
Chapman, Paul (2002). “Anthrax Find Could Solve Antarctic Death Mystery”, in: The 
Age (26 July 2002): 12. 
Clute, John and Peter Nicholls (1995). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New 
York: St Martin’s Griffin. 
Dodds, Klaus J. (1997). “Antarctica and the Modern Geographical Imagination (1918-
1960)”, in: Polar Record 33: 47-62. 

Fictions of Antarctic Temporality 
223
Fabian, Johannes (1983). Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes its Object. 
New York: Columbia UP. 
Foote, Bud (1991). The Connecticut Yankee in the Twentieth Century: Travel to the 
Past in Science Fiction. Westport: Greenwood. 
Girouard, Mark (1981). The Return to Camelot: Chivalry and the English Gentleman. 
New Haven: Yale UP. 
Glasberg, Elena (2002). “Refusing History at the End of the Earth: Ursula Le Guin’s 
‘Sur’ and the 2000-01 Women’s Antarctic Crossing”, in: Tulsa Studies in 
Women’s Literature 21.1: 99-121. 
Harvey, David (1989). The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins 
of Cultural Change. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Jones, Max (2003). The Last Great Quest: Captain Scott’s Antarctic Sacrifice. Ox-
ford: Oxford UP. 
Joughin, Sheena (2005). Review of Darrieussecq (2005), in: New Statesman (30 May 
2005): 54. 
Leane, Elizabeth (2004). “Romancing the Pole: A Survey of Nineteenth-Century An-
tarctic Utopias”, in: ACH: The Journal of the History of Culture in Australia 
23: 161-84.  
— (2005a). “Locating the Thing: The Antarctic as Alien Space in John W. Camp-
bell’s ‘Who Goes There?’”, in: Science Fiction Studies 32.2: 225-39.  
— (2005b). “Polar Newspapers as Colonising Fictions: The Frontier Journalism of the 
Australasian Antarctic Expedition”, in: new literatures review 42: 24-43. 
Lopez, Barry (1989). “Our Frail Planet in Cold, Clear View: The South Pole as Global 
Laboratory”, in: Harper’s Magazine (May 1989): 43-49. 
McGregor, Russell (1997). Imagined Destinies: Aboriginal Australians and the 
Doomed Race Theory, 1880-1939. Carlton South: Melbourne UP. 
McLean, Archibald (ed.) (1913). Adelie Blizzard. Vol. 1. Ts 184AAE/1. Mawson Col-
lection, South Australian Museum, Adelaide. 
Miéville, China (2005). “Introduction”, in: Lovecraft, xi-xxv. 
Nicholls, Peter (1995). “Lost Worlds”, in: Clute and Nicholls, 735. 
O’Malley, Martin (2006). “Back to the Caves We Go”, in: CBS News: Analysis and 
Viewpoint. [http://www.cbc.ca/ news/viewpoint/vp_omalley/20060620.html]. 
Pyne, Stephen (1986). The Ice: A Journey to Antarctica. Iowa City: U of Iowa P. 
Simpson-Housley, P. (1992). Antarctica: Exploration, Perception, Metaphor. Lon-
don: Routledge. 
Stableford, Brian (1995a). “Cryonics”, in: Clute and Nicholls, 283. 
— (1995b). “Suspended Animation”, in: Clute and Nicholls, 1189. 


 
 
 
 
“The Tower of Babble”?1 The Role and Function 
of Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
 
Dunja M. Mohr 
 
 
Abstract: The problematic nexus of language, thought, and reality perception has been 
at the centre of speculation in utopian, dystopian, and science fiction from the begin-
ning. Starting from a Judaeo-Christian background, early utopias speculated about the 
retrieval of the imaginary and idealized protolanguage, envisioning a perfect language 
everyone can understand. In contrast, modern science fiction (sf) novels foreground 
alien languages or modes of non-verbal communication and the inherent problems of 
translation. Novels using linguistics as a major plot device draw heavily on either the 
weak or the strong form of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis and its premise that speaking a 
different language precludes seeing another culture’s reality. Examples dealt with in 
this essay are Jack Vance’s dystopia The Languages of Pao (1958), Samuel R. De-
lany’s sf novel Babel-17 (1966), Ian Watson’s sf novel The Embedding (1973), and 
especially Suzette Haden Elgin’s transgressive utopian dystopian Native Tongue se-
ries (1984-1994). 
 
Key names and concepts: Hélène Cixous – Samuel R. Delany – Suzette Haden Elgin –
Julia Kristeva – Jacques Lacan – linguistics – Marge Piercy – Edward Sapir – Sapir-
Whorf hypothesis – Joan Slonczewski – transgressive utopian dystopias – Jack Vance 
– Ian Watson 
 
 
“When I use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said in a rather scorn-
ful tone, “it means just what I choose it to mean—neither 
more nor less.” 
Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass (1871) 
 
 
                                                      
1  
One of the characters in Suzette Haden Elgin’s Native Tongue disrespectfully 
recalls the “Tower of Babble” (NT 215), Elgin’s ironic allusion to the early 
utopian hunt for the perfect language. References to the three books of the 
trilogy are given in the text in parentheses with the following abbreviations: 
Native Tongue (NT), The Judas Rose (JR), and Earthsong (ES). 

Dunja Mohr 
226
“Don’t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the 
range of thought? In the end we shall make Thoughtcrime im-
possible because there will be no words in which to express it.” 
George Orwell, Nineteen-Eighty-Four (1949) 
 
“I promise you, you can do magic with words […]. 
You can change the world with words.” 
Kate Wilhelm, Juniper Time (1979) 
 
 
1. Language in Fictive Worlds: “The Tower of Babble” 
 
Any act of communication, whether spoken or written, naturally de-
pends on verbal or non-verbal language as a means of mediation, and 
it is thus hardly surprising that language in particular is a key element 
in the literature of the future. The problematic nexus of language, 
thought, action and reality perception has been at the centre of specu-
lation within the genre of utopia, dystopia, and science fiction (sf) 
from the beginning. After all, the language of this genre immerses us 
in a doubly unfamiliar fictive and future world. The topic of language 
also has had a long tradition within postmodern and feminist theories, 
discourse analysis, and critical linguistics.2 
As signified by the neologism ‘utopia’, linguistics has been a 
key means by which this genre expresses new emancipatory concepts 
and phenomena, gadgets,3 and alternative future realities and places, 
and allows speculation about the construction of alien and human (ar-
tificial or fictional) languages, about the power of language in politics 
and psycholinguistics, and ultimately about future (and by implication 
the author’s present) English. 
                                                      
2  
See, for example, Kress and Hodge 1979, and for a discussion of the intersec-
tion of language and thought in terms of the categories race, sex, and class, 
see Bolinger 1980, Eschholz, Rosa and Clark 1982, and Boltz and Seyler 
1982. Linked to the structural turn in the late 1960s and 1970s, language and 
linguistics were briefly not only a major focus in sf, utopian, and dystopian 
literature but also an academic focus. See also Barnes 1975, Delany 1977, and 
Meyers 1980. 
3  
For a concise summary of how words invented by utopian/sf authors – for ex-
ample, astronaut, robot, and spaceship – have entered mainstream language, 
see Bailey 1991: 221ff. Neologisms as well as versions of initially fictitious 
gadgets or sciences have entered real life, e.g. cyborgs, cyberspace, and Cap-
tain Kirk’s misquoted catchphrase “Beam me up, Scotty”. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
227
In his cultural history of English, Images of English: A Cultural 
History of the Language (1991), Richard W. Bailey traces the English 
language’s (colonial) aspirations towards becoming a world language 
and gives a brief survey of the idealized view of imaginary English in 
utopian literature.4 Up to the eighteenth century, early utopias focused 
on the retrieval of the imaginary and idealized protolanguage erased in 
the biblical Babylonian confusion, envisioning that the different lan-
guages symbolically originating at the Tower of Babel coalesced into 
one language of linguistic excellence everyone can understand. With 
this Judaeo-Christian origin in the background, early notions of a lin-
gua franca therefore privileged those languages then considered 
‘holy’ – Latin, Hebrew, and Greek, which today we think of as classi-
cal languages. Looked at from this angle, language history is a long 
sad story of constant decline and deterioration. Thomas More’s Uto-
pia, first published in Latin in 1516, captures both these notions in that 
the utopian text is written in the “holy” lingua franca of his time and 
valorises a secular language (the isolated ideal islanders of Utopia use 
their native tongue which, again, seems similar to Greek). 
This literary treatment of language and its (ab)use in meaning-
ful discourse has been of particular interest in the twentieth century 
which witnessed the rise of the dystopian novel in response to the cen-
tury’s history of atrocities, propaganda, and totalitarianism.5 As 
Meyers has rightly pointed out in his seminal study Aliens and Lin-
guistics: Language Study and Science Fiction (1980), there is a long 
tradition in utopian fiction that, on the one hand, involves elements of 
an ideal language (eutopia) – a language that serves a perfected human 
communication – and, on the other hand, centres on the abuse of lan-
guage (dystopia). For Meyers, texts conventionally considered as uto-
pias – works such as B. F. Skinner’s controversial Walden Two (1948) 
and Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed (1974, originally subtitled 
                                                      
4  
See Bailey 1991: 215-36. 
5  
Mainstream literature also occasionally explores linguistics and the potential 
of language as an appropriate tool for communication. In William Burroughs’ 
Nova Express (1964), for instance, language evaporates into word dust; John 
Barth’s Giles Goat-boy (1966) contemplates the irrelevance of language; and 
Kurt Vonnegut’s Galapagos (1985) blatantly considers language and the con-
cept of lying as the ultimate source of human evil and failure. In general, 
postmodern literature as such is highly critical of language and its inherent 
discourse of power.  

Dunja Mohr 
228
‘An Ambiguous Utopia’)6 – therefore verge on the dystopian because 
they suggest the control of language, even if this is initially for benign 
purposes (e. g. the perfection of communication).7 
Most dystopian texts anticipate either the (mis)communication 
between humans or humans and aliens or a deliberate manipulation of 
language and thought. These texts warn us of the cataclysmic (self-) 
damage that can be caused by the absence of the recognition and ac-
knowledgement of the multiplicity of language(s) and its discourses 
and the subsequent silencing of first the other and then the self. Be-
cause language and communication indeed seem to make us human, 
such a failure of understanding, the occurrence of unanimous mis-
communication, dehumanises us and makes us monstrous, as Mary 
Shelley’s monster in Frankenstein (1818) painfully experiences. 
While some authors of dystopian fiction foreground the dangers of 
manipulating language, others view both language itself and its rheto-
ric as essentially corrupt. 
In many dystopian fictions the standardised state-obliging lan-
guage reflects the future’s totalitarian system. Manipulated language 
                                                      
6  
On Le Guin’s Annares, the colonial settlers speak a language called Annaresti, 
which is designed to express equality and basically expresses anarchist think-
ing. For example, the Annaresti language has no word for possession. 
7  
Meyers’ discomfort with the potentially dystopian content of utopias stems as 
much from the narrative alternation between utopian and dystopian strands in 
some utopias of the twentieth century as from the reader’s varying interpreta-
tive readings of the same text as either a utopia or a dystopia. Kumar, for in-
stance, uses The Dispossessed as an example of contemporary utopia as 
“fragmented, both in its form and in its audience” (1987: 420), since utopia 
can no longer address or even wish to provide a blueprint for everyone or for 
society at large. This juxtaposition of utopia and dystopia within the same 
text, as, for example, in Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time (1976) or 
in Joanna Russ’ The Female Man (1975), leads to the contemporary subgenre 
of what I have termed ‘transgressive utopian dystopias’ (cf. Mohr 2005). Con-
trary to several critics’ claims that the belief in utopia has diminished since 
utopia’s heyday in the second half of the 19th century and its temporary re-
surgence as feminist utopia in the 1970s, it is my belief that utopia is very 
much alive. It has reappeared in the disguise of novels initially set as dysto-
pias, predominantly in the contemporary feminist dystopias of the past thirty 
years. These ‘transgressive utopian dystopias’ resist neat categorisations of 
utopia/dystopia; rather, they present utopian strategies as an integral part of 
the dystopian narrative. While the described dystopian societies described are 
riven by manifold dualisms, the suggested utopian impulses aim at their trans-
gression. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
229
allows the state to control the citizens’ thinking. Certain words are de-
clared taboo, the choice of words and expressions is reduced, atroci-
ties or injustices are euphemistically renamed for propaganda pur-
poses, and the totalitarian state uses numbers to render its citizens 
anonymous, erasing their names and thus their individuality. More-
over, anything expressed in writing – history in general – or any eve-
ryday verbal exchange is censored or standardised by the dystopian 
system. In classical dystopias language helps to level thought and 
emotions according to the totalitarian system’s needs; individuality 
and intimacy are Public Enemy Number One. 
David Sisk arguably identifies the use of a fictional language as 
“a generic structural element” of dystopia: “without its inclusion, a 
fiction cannot be considered a dystopia” (1997: 174). Sisk’s assertion, 
however, remains hypothetical, as he fails to prove his point. Indubi-
tably, many dystopian novels contain elements of a fictional language 
or neologisms – an example being George Orwell’s classical dystopia 
Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949) – but very few actually construct a fic-
tional language or an entire communication system. A large number of 
dystopias simultaneously designate language as both a locus of op-
pression or thought control and of resistance. In her book Linguistics 
and Languages in Science Fiction-Fantasy (1971), Myra Barnes was 
among the first to identify this focus on language as the instrument of 
both thought control and of resistance, particularly in the paradigmatic 
dystopian classics, Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, Aldous Huxley’s 
Brave New World (1932), Yevgeny Zamyatin’s We (1921, English 
trans. 1924), and Ayn Rand’s Anthem (1938). In Zamyatin’s We, the 
mechanistic, formulaic language mirrors the mechanical dystopian so-
ciety; Huxley focuses on the editing of history, the erasure of the cul-
tural memories and archives; and Orwell’s fictional language New-
speak is the Party’s rigid instrument geared towards controlling peo-
ple, inducing social conformity, eradicating any notion of difference, 
and eventually creating human automata. Similar to Delany’s Babel-
17, the future language of Rand’s Anthem edits out any sense of sub-
jectivity and individuality, as the personal pronoun, the unspeakable 
‘I’, has been eliminated. 
This instrumentalisation of language is also at the centre of con-
temporary dystopias, for instance, in Margaret Atwood’s transgressive 
utopian dystopia The Handmaid’s Tale (1985). As Ildney Cavalcanti 
claims, however, in male classical dystopias “[l]inguistic control and 

Dunja Mohr 
230
the enforcement of strict linguistic normativity symbolically stand in 
for other forms of social (ideological, political, institutional) control”, 
whereas contemporary female dystopias foreground “the linguistic 
construction of gender domination by telling stories about language as 
an instrument of both (men’s) domination and (women’s) liberation” 
(2000: 152). Many female dystopias thus appear as literary versions of 
the long history of women’s exclusion from official historiography 
and the effective silencing of women in public discourse. In female 
dystopias, for instance, women are excluded from the public sphere. 
Speech is prohibited to women or reduced to formulaic phrases. Al-
ternatively, women are subjected to a supervised (private) speech, 
their access to reading and writing is limited (e.g. in The Handmaid’s 
Tale), or, in an extreme version, they are literally silenced by having 
their tongues cut off (e.g. in Suzy McKee Charnas’ The Walk to the 
End of the World). 
While utopian and dystopian fiction explores from different an-
gles how humans might speak and communicate in an imagined future 
and what role language might play in this, sf novels frequently fore-
ground alien languages or modes of non-verbal communication and 
the inherent problems of translation. The best-known fictional alien 
language in sf is probably Star Trek’s Klingon, developed by the lin-
guist Marc Orkrand.8 With the series’ focus on inter-alien communica-
tion and contact, it is perhaps not surprising that Star Trek also toys 
with such amusing spoofs as the Ferengi language, a sexually explicit 
language without taboos, or versions of contemporary sub-cultural 
language (no form of greetings, but a direct addressing of the inter-
locutor; focus on action). Matthew Farrell’s (aka Stephen Leigh) in 
many ways flawed ‘first’ novel, the first contact story Thunder Rift 
                                                      
8  
Klingon is in fact a fully developed fictional language. The American linguist 
Marc Orkrand, a specialist in Native American languages, partly based Klin-
gon on indigenous languages and phonetics. The inverse positioning of object 
– predicate – subject and Klingon’s exotic sound derived from its phonetics 
and its construction as an agglutinated language are all used to defamiliarise 
the audience. Orkrand also developed the more rudimentary Vulcan language 
for Star Trek. Similar to Elgin’s Láadan, Klingon has many practising speak-
ers around the world. The Klingon Language Institute, founded in Pennsyl-
vania in 1992, publishes the linguistic journal HolQeD and is involved in the 
project 
of 
translating 
Shakespeare’s 
works 
into 
Klingon. 
See 
[http://www.kli.org]. A number of books and audiotapes deal with Klingon 
phrases and culture. See also Orkrand 1985. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
231
(2001), again differentiates between various tones of language, such 
as the Language-of-Intimacy and the Language-of-Command. In 
Thunder Rift the alien culture of the linguistically gifted “Blues” uses 
a web of resonances for communication and privileges hearing/sound. 
Thus the Blues call themselves “The-Children-of-She-Who-Sang-the-
World” in their own language, while the humans focus on what they 
see: blue-skinned bipeds. 
 
 
2. The Utopian World According to the Word 
 
Surprisingly few authors of utopias and dystopias have actually con-
structed a whole new language. As Carl Malmgren points out, “in a 
relatively few science fictions, an invented language becomes the nar-
rative dominant, informing the plot, the themes, and the discourse of 
the fiction” (1993: 6). Most utopias instead offer, at most, glimpses of 
a perfected language according to the respective author’s viewpoint. A 
number of utopias contain hints about new communication devices or 
a few neologisms, while in truth this simply adds an exotic spice to the 
imagined worlds. Yet other writers describe in rather plain English the 
invented future society or, like Russell Hobban in Riddley Walker 
(1980), write in a fictive English dialect of the future.  
Among the novels using linguistics as a major plot device are 
Jack Vance’s dystopia The Languages of Pao (1958), Samuel R. De-
lany’s sf novel Babel-17 (1966), Ian Watson’s sf novel The Embed-
ding (1973), and Suzette Haden Elgin’s transgressive utopian dysto-
pian Native Tongue series (1984-1994). All these novels draw heavily 
on either the weak or the strong form of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 
i.e., the deconstructionist theory of linguistic relativity – formulated in 
the 1930s by the US-American anthropological linguist Edward Sapir 
and his student Benjamin Lee Whorf9 – and its premise that speaking 
                                                      
9  
Sapir and Whorf never actually defined an exact formulation of the hypothe-
sis. According to Sapir, language and thought influence one another – “lan-
guage is [...] a prepared road” (Sapir 1921: 15; cf. also 12-17) – while Whorf’s 
more narrow approach claims that words determine the concepts conceived: 
“We dissect nature along lines laid down by our native language” (Whorf 
1956: 213). Other linguists argue against the hypothesis that ideas are inde-
pendent of language and rather shape language; Hudson reformulates Whorf: 
“We dissect the universe along lines laid down by nature and by our commu-
nicative and cognitive needs, rather than by our language” (1984: 105). And 

Dunja Mohr 
232
a different language precludes seeing another culture’s reality, or, in 
reverse, presupposes “that language does become a mechanism for so-
cial change” (Elgin 1987: 178). In George W. Grace’s words, the cor-
relation between language, thought, and culture determines “reality 
construction […] [as] the primary function of human language” (1987: 
139). Indeed, language functions as a linguistic filter of what we per-
ceive of reality, and as language organizes thought and speech, all 
verbal communication depends on our linguistic concepts and is lim-
ited by the available vocabulary and its contained cultural codes. The 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis has been much debated, and its strong forms 
of linguistic determinism (language constitutes reality) and linguistic 
relativism (each language encodes concepts differently and constructs 
its own worldview) have been rejected in favour of the notion that 
language plays a considerable role in the construction of reality and 
the predisposition of a person’s worldview. Far from being neutral, the 
discourse of any language describes one encoded vision of a particular 
social reality. 
Watson’s The Embedding (1973) perhaps illustrates this con-
cept most explicitly. The novel’s key tenets are, as the title indicates, 
the syntactic theory with its linguistic concepts of centre-embedding 
and self-embedding. Watson merges Chomsky’s theory of Universal 
Grammar – here (mis)understood as truly universal – with the strong 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. The interstellar alien linguist and communi-
cator culture of the Sp’thra, the proverbial ‘Signal Traders’, are lan-
guage typologists who seek to “superimpos[e] all languages” (137) by 
using language machines and to “explor[e] the syntax of reality [...] to 
get beyond this reality” (137). As one of the crew members of the 
Sp’thra spaceship explains: 
 
“‘Their-Reality’, ‘Our-Reality’, ‘Your-Reality’– the mind’s concepts 
of reality based on the environment it has evolved in – all are slightly 
different. Yet all are a part of ‘This-Reality’ – the overall totality of 
the present universe –” [...]  
                                                                                                                  
Hockett argues that human history proves a constant struggle against limita-
tions of language: “Speech habits were revised to accommodate those [cul-
tural] changes. [...] The causality is in all probability from ‘philosophy of life’ 
to language, rather than vice versa” (1968: 132f). For a further discussion of 
the hypothesis, see Brown 1958: 229-63, Carroll 1964: chap. 7, Slobin 1971; 
for a historical grounding, see Penn 1972. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
233
“There are so many ways of seeing This-Reality, from so 
many viewpoints. It is these viewpoints that we trade for. You might 
say we trade in realities –” [...]  
“We mean to put all these different viewpoints together, to de-
duce the entire signature of This-Reality. From this knowledge we 
shall deduce the reality modes external to it – grasp the Other-Reality, 
communicate with it, control it!” (137) 
 
Ultimately, the Sp’thra seek to totalize reality and in doing so resem-
ble in frightful fashion Orwell’s Party and their Newspeak. 
In The Languages of Pao Jack Vance also showcases language 
as the shaper of reality and as a tool for social engineering. The in-
habitants of the pastoral planet Pao are a docile non-competitive peo-
ple without any career ambitions, ruled by the Panarch: 
 
The Paonese sentence did not so much describe an act as it presented a 
picture of a situation. There were no verbs, no adjectives; no formal 
word comparison such as good, better, best. The typical Paonese saw 
himself as a cork on a sea of a million waves, lofted, lowered, thrust 
aside by incomprehensible forces – if he thought of himself as a dis-
crete personality at all. He held his ruler in awe, gave unquestioning 
obedience, for on Pao nothing must vary, nothing must change. (3) 
 
Their language is contrasted with that of the inhabitants of the trading 
planet Mercantile who speak a radically different language and per-
ceive the world accordingly:  
 
Each language is a special tool with a particular capability. It is more 
than a means of communication, it is a system of thought […] Think 
of a language as the contour of a watershed, stopping flow in certain 
directions, channelling it into others. Language controls the mecha-
nism of your mind. When people speak different languages, their 
minds work differently and they act differently. (70) 
 
To introduce ways of thinking and abilities Pao lacks, the linguist elite 
creates three new languages to mould socially isolated groups from in-
fancy for the mentality necessary for specific occupations. ‘Valiant’ 
turns passive and obedient Paonese into warriors, ‘Technicant’ pro-
duces technicians, and ‘Cogitant’ churns out the scientists Pao lacks. 
With the changed languages, the formerly peaceful monarchy turns 
into a segregated capitalist society where everyone is a prisoner of his 
or her one-dimensional reality-cum-language. Simultaneously, the 

Dunja Mohr 
234
Paonese linguists secretly create the language ‘Pastiche’ – an amal-
gam of Valiant, Technicant, Cogitant, and Paonese – and thus achieve 
a much greater flexibility of thinking and perceiving reality than offi-
cially desired. The ensuing upheavals can only be pacified when all 
Paonese learn Pastiche and thus acquire a greater linguistic variety and 
a more complex reality. Foreign or multiple language acquisition, 
Vance seems to suggest, allows the incorporation of different world-
views and therefore a more multidimensional outlook on reality.  
Samuel R. Delany’s Babel-17 also focuses on the (ab)use of 
language as a weapon. He introduces a female protagonist, the highly 
gifted poet-heroine Rydra Wong (ambiguously a pun on ‘right or 
wrong’), “[t]his age’s voice” (4), who is called upon by the Alliance 
(earth and other planets) to crack a mysterious alien language, Babel-
17, suspected of giving instructions for sabotaging earth’s military in-
dustry. Wong, who intuitively cracks any cryptographics, has “total 
verbal recall” (9) and also a knack for “muscle-reading” (20), meaning 
that she can ‘read’, almost telepathically, her interlocutors’ body lan-
guage or muscular tensions and thus their thoughts, which she then ar-
ticulates in her poetry.10 In a way, she becomes a ventriloquist and 
truly “this age’s voice”. Simultaneously, she is an expert at communi-
cation, verbally and mentally reaching out to her interlocutor and en-
couraging him/her to open up and connect. 
Initially, she is fascinated by Babel-17, because since “language 
is thought” (23) learning Babel-17 means that Wong can enter a whole 
new, seemingly higher reality: “most of its words carry more informa-
tion about the things they refer to than any four, five languages I know 
put together – and in less space” (69). Words become “intrinsically 
meaningful units”, allowing the “human mind to receive, process, and 
transmit with much greater speed and precision than does English” 
(Collings 1986: 64). Trying to decode the alien language, Wong 
moves inside the language and marvels at its complexity: “Thinking in 
Babel-17 was like suddenly seeing all the way down through water to 
the bottom of a well that a moment ago you’d thought was only a few 
                                                      
10  
As Malmgren convincingly maintains, Wong symbolically represents “the 
Imagination” (1993: 11) in her starship’s bizarre crew which is composed of 
characters that personify various parts of a strangely assembled human being. 
As the artist is the only one who can get beyond Babel-17, it seems that De-
lany assigns the faculty of the imagination an exceptional function in language 
and the formation of thought patterns as well as in the perception of reality. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
235
feet deep” (113). However, here words do indeed “define, fix, [and] 
identify” (115) reality; and as Wong comes under Babel-17’s influ-
ence – which literally translates the word Alliance into “one-who-has-
invaded” (215) – she unwittingly turns into a saboteur because think-
ing in Babel-17 diabolically “‘programs’ a self-contained schizoid 
personality into the mind of whoever learns it, reinforced by self-
hypnosis” (215). Additionally, the very absence of an “I” in Babel-17 
“precludes any self-critical process” (214), blotting out any symbolic 
process and therefore any sense of identity and turning the speaker 
into an automaton of this “impersonal language” (Weedman 1982: 
41): “If there is no word for it, how do you think about it” (111)?  
Wong almost gets lost in Babel-17; she can extract herself by 
recognising the differences between herself and the objects surround-
ing her: 
 
What’s your name? she thought in a round warm blue room […] “My 
name is Rydra!” An individual, a thing apart from its environment, 
and apart from all things in that environment, an individual was a type 
of thing for which symbols were inadequate, and so names were in-
vented. I am an invented. I am not a round warm blue room. I am 
someone in that room; I am — (111f) 
 
Without the process of subjectivity, the speaker of Babel-17 cannot 
recognize the self and the other and acts beyond all morality. Only af-
ter Wong has teamed up with the ex-convict Butcher on a shadow ship 
(in a shadow reality), who has also mastered Babel-17 and functions 
as Wong’s shadow self/other in the novel, can she become ‘whole’, 
“but what whole man is not of two minds on any matter of moment” 
(123). Only when in a libidinous archetypical and telepathic union11 
“the conscious and informing mind of the poet” meets physically 
(sexually) and mentally “the inarticulate and brute power of the un-
conscious” (Malmgren 1993: 13) – or, in Freudian terms, when ego 
and id are coupled – does Wong acquire the necessary ruthlessness to 
master Babel-17 completely and recognize its built-in destructive 
structures. At the same time, she finally acquires an original voice and 
no longer needs to channel others’ experiences and ideas into her po-
etry. As Wong claims in the end: “I can pretty much talk my way out 
                                                      
11  
As Wong enters Butcher’s mind, this is presented as a mental sexual act: “She 
had entered him in some bewildering reversed sexuality” (181). 

Dunja Mohr 
236
of anything” (219), thus pointing towards language’s manipulative as 
well as healing potential. 
The novel concludes with Babel-17 being neutralized to Babel-
18 through insertion of the missing pronouns. Babel-18 turns into “the 
best tool conceivable to build it toward truth” (218), a language cor-
rected so that it now includes, apart from the missing personal ele-
ments, ambiguities and thus a happier and more integrative reality. 
Babel-18 will presumably help to bridge the miscommunication and 
silent gaps between isolated and alienated groups and individuals. Be-
cause Delany’s artificial language “enforces meaning within the user’s 
mind by identifying key words with key ideas” (Collings 1986: 64), it 
conflates meaning as signifier and signified are presented as intrinsi-
cally related. Without a linguistic sense of the other, however, the self 
becomes obliterated. Delany’s warning seems to be that the inability 
to communicate with each other threatens to destroy the self along 
with the other. A perfected communication that does not erase but 
multiplies perceptions is then ultimately his utopian goal.  
 
 
3. The Utopian World According to Her Word 
 
Increasingly, women writers have explored gender-specific elements 
of language in utopian fiction. This exploration ranges from classical 
feminist strategies, such as renaming, feminine speech, and the re-
appropriation of signs, to a reconstruction of existing language and the 
invention of a new language for women. However, the use of feminist 
linguistics does always involve an experimental narrative structure. 
For instance, in Maerlande Chronicles (1992) Elizabeth Vonarburg 
uses the feminine as her future language’s basis, while Ursula K. Le 
Guin introduces gender-free neologisms such as ‘ammar’ in The Left 
Hand of Darkness.12 In Joan Slonczewski’s A Door Into Ocean (1986) 
the Shoran society is structured according to egalitarian principles, 
                                                      
12  
Le Guin, however, falls back into phallogocentrism. Le Guin has defended the 
consistent use of the generic pronoun ‘he’: “I call Gethenians [the fictional 
alien people] ‘he,’ because I utterly refuse to mangle English by inventing a 
pronoun for ‘he/she.’ ‘He’ is the generic pronoun […] in English” (1979: 
168), a position for which she has been lambasted and that she revoked years 
later in an annotation to the same essay contained in the reprinted 1989 edi-
tion. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
237
and the Sharers’ lyrical language reflects the connectivity and spiritual 
union of the all-female inhabitants of the ocean moon Shora. The 
Shara language obliterates the subject/object differentiation as it con-
flates both. As for a speaker of Shara, there exists no difference be-
tween subject and object; all actions, for instance, are understood as 
reciprocal acts. Consequently, the Shara language consists of words of 
sharing, which not only emphasise the Sharers’ incomprehension of 
ownership or possession, but rather express this unique worldview of 
a dissolved subject-object polarity. Spinel, a male visitor to their 
planet, struggles with the inherent two-way meaning of the Shara 
verbs: 
 
“What the devil is ‘wordsharing’? Does the word for ‘speak’ mean 
‘listen’ just as well? If I said, ‘Listen to me!’ you might talk, instead.” 
[…]  
Spinel thought over the list of ‘share-forms’: learnsharing, 
worksharing, lovesharing. “Do you say ‘hitsharing,’ too? If I hit a rock 
with a chisel, does the rock hit me?” (36f) 
 
In the utopian society of Mattapoisett set in the year 2137 in Woman 
on the Edge of Time, Marge Piercy changes the gender-specific pro-
nouns ‘he/she’ to ‘per’, derived from ‘person’, to highlight the failings 
of the (English) language used in the protagonist’s dystopian society. 
Piercy uses the “egalitarian linguistics” (Foster 1983: 49) of Mattapoi-
sett to indicate the intricate and asymmetrical power relations of lan-
guage and class. The female visitor to utopia, a poor Chicana, grapples 
less with an understanding of neologisms than with the utopian lan-
guage’s reflection of social relations and the lack of a hierarchy. Con-
versely, the alternative dystopian future’s jargon and euphemisms pre-
clude any meaningful communication. 
With the artificial female language called Láadan,13 Elgin’s Na-
tive Tongue trilogy introduces a novelty in so far as she combines “a 
                                                      
13  
Láadan means literally “the language of those who perceive” (Elgin 1994: 17). 
Elgin first came across the hypothesis “that existing human languages are not 
adequate to express the perceptions of women” (1987: 177) when reviewing 
Kramarae’s book Women and Men Speaking (1981). The Native Tongue tril-
ogy also features communication with aliens without actually giving examples 
of alien languages. While many first contact stories often feature elaborate 
scientific devices that simply translate, here the highly trained caste of lin-
guists functions as translators.  

Dunja Mohr 
238
representation of female experiences in a male-dominated culture with 
linguistics as a central speculative concept” (Bray 1986: 49)14 and also 
presents readers and critics with a full-fledged real artificial lan-
guage.15 In the first two books of the series, Elgin thus proposes a 
slow linguistic subversion of the dystopian Terran dichotomy that pos-
its men at the centre and marginalizes women to discover the biased 
cultural structures and inscriptions in the seemingly natural structures 
of language.16 According to Elgin, a mental decolonisation process, a 
transgression of psychological boundaries, can be achieved with 
Láadan which threatens socio-cultural norms and codes expressed in 
phallogocentric language, and, consequently, undermines patriarchal 
discourse.17 
Elgin’s approach to the bias of language corresponds with what 
Julia Penelope has so aptly defined as a “patriarchal universe of dis-
course” and a “cultural model of reality” (1990: 36) or a “consensus 
reality” imposed by men that is accepted as an “accurate description” 
of reality, even if “its assumptions and predictions override contradic-
                                                      
14  
For a discussion of the (in)consistencies of the linguistics, see Klarer 1993, 
esp. 98-104, Anderson for a thorough historical approach to the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis (1992, 1991), Armitt 1991, Fitting 1989, Bray 1986, and Shinn 
1985. Penelope discusses Láadan from a lesbian perspective (1990, esp. 
223ff). Murphy (1992) provides a selective bibliography on female languages 
within the genre. 
15  
Although Elgin has developed an artificial language for real use complete 
with a dictionary and grammar books, the novels give only very few examples 
of Láadan (morphemes, Encodings, passages of the King James Bible). This 
lack of actual Láadan words, however, is quite consistent with the content; af-
ter all, Láadan is initially a secret language. 
16  
In fact, Elgin embeds two utopian projects – aimed at the transgression of bi-
nary logic as the root of dystopia – in her dystopian trilogy: the counter-dis-
cursive Láadan and Audiosynthesis, a non-violent musical nourishing process. 
17  
The way patriarchal discourse categorizes cognition and its semantic media-
tion and vice versa, passing its subjective bias off as objective/scientific 
monolithic truth, intersects with Lyotard’s concept of the différend and Der-
rida’s différance. Lyotard argues that a speaker can be silenced, because the 
language both speakers use restricts what s/he perceives as différend, whereas 
Derrida locates différance in the very construction of language. By imposing 
their perceptions on language, the dominant speakers hence restrict any dis-
course. Láadan tackles this problem by adding the différend in terms of a new 
language discourse that addresses the concepts and idioms previously lacking, 
and by reconstructing language formation. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
239
tory evidence” (1990: 37).18 Language then does not describe all of 
reality; it distorts, limits, and partially (pre)determines our thoughts 
and, therefore, restricts our range of conceptual exploration. Unless 
we unlearn this static pre-cognition, we modify people and situations 
to meet our thought/reality model. For Elgin, who is predominantly 
concerned with this “inadequacy of words, seeking communication 
that comes from inside, that is not fooled by sensual perceptions, 
communication that goes beyond the lies” (Shinn 1985: 221), the 
closed system of human languages is therefore essentially paradoxical:  
 
[P]erhaps for any language there are certain perceptions that it cannot 
express because they would result in its self-destruction [...] you might 
hypothesize that the reason contemporary English does not express the 
perceptions of women is that [...] it would self-destruct” (Elgin 1987: 
177).19 
 
Elgin aligns women’s use of language with dynamic growth, change, 
and life, whereas phallogocentric discourse is equated with stasis, de-
struction, and death. She advocates a slow displacement of exclusively 
masculine values by feminine ones and, consequently, an incorpora-
tion of feminine perception into masculine reality. Láadan does not 
replace and dominate all other languages and perceptions, but disrupts 
the status quo and adds to existing languages, eventually transforming 
                                                      
18  
Elgin takes an oppositional stance to Deborah Tannen’s position in You Just 
Don’t Understand (1990), where Tannen claims that gender-based language 
constitutes the root of gender difference. For Elgin, power-linked language is 
expressed in “two kinds of English”, “dominant English” and “subordinate 
English”, and “both sexes know both of those styles of language” (cf. Mohr 
2000: 25). Nor does she support gender-specific writing in terms of a feminine 
or masculine style; for her, writing is power-linked. Rather, Elgin diagnoses a 
“metaphor split” (usage of same words but connoted with different meanings), 
“shifting scripts”, and “difference in voice” (both behavioural expectations) as 
relevant factors for a communication breakdown between the sexes (cf. Elgin 
1993). 
19  
This view coincides with the ‘muted group theory’ that, as Kramerae argues, 
applies when “[t]he language of a particular culture does not serve all its 
speakers equally. [...] Women (and members of other subordinate groups) are 
not as free [...] as men are to say what they wish [...] because the words and 
the norms [...] have been formulated by the dominant group, men” (1981: 1). 
Since Láadan has not been embraced by women at large in reality, Elgin has 
drawn the conclusion that “the muted group theory does not hold for English-
speaking women” (1994: 18). 

Dunja Mohr 
240
the cultural values and “produc[ing] a radically different world” 
(Kramarae 1987: 185) of shared multiple concepts and perceptions of 
reality. 
In fact, the trilogy illustrates in how far the Sapir-Whorf hy-
pothesis intersects with Homi Bhabha’s postcolonial understanding of 
language theories, i.e. Bhabha’s claim that the process of communica-
tion involves a gap between what is said and what is heard. Effec-
tively, the women linguists practice postcolonial code-switching be-
tween Láadan (analogous to english) and the privileged mascu-
line/colonial standard discourse of ‘Panglish’ (analogous to English), 
used for translating alien perceptions in the novels. Elgin, however, 
seeks not only the gaps within the master-discourse, but grounds the 
women linguists’ oppositional discourse in a new language supposedly 
free of the bias of dominant languages.20 According to Elgin, an inver-
sion – the construction of a new language – will help to avoid the cul-
tural codes embedded in standard discourse. Eventually, women too 
will experience the world according to words, but in words created by 
women. 
Elgin takes the subversion one step further by showing a literal 
‘voyage in’, and respectively a voyage “out into the void” (NT 254). 
To bridge gender segregation boys and girls alike are taught Láadan, 
and hence for both sexes the perception of reality and of one another 
will change. This is the prerequisite for a rejection of violence, coloni-
sation, and imperial and sexually-biased attitudes. Here, as Mario 
Klarer notes (1993: 101f), the primacy of language acquisition during 
subject formation converges with Lacanian psychoanalysis and its ad-
aptation for feminism by Julia Kristeva. Lacan places language acqui-
sition within the patriarchal realm of the Symbolic Order, the Law of 
the Father, and categorizes the Imaginary Order as pre-Oedipal and 
ruled by the mother. In the Imaginary Order, the infant experiences a 
dyadic unity with the mother; upon the entry into the Symbolic Order 
this changes into the Oedipal shock of difference and disparity. Re-
placing Lacan’s Imaginary Order with ‘semiotic chora’ (Greek for en-
                                                      
20  
Feminists and linguists have extensively discussed the gender bias of the Eng-
lish language and the question whether women need to reform the existing 
language or even create a new one. For a good introduction to feminism and 
linguistics, see Spender 1980, Cameron 1985, 1990, Ehrlich 1995; from a les-
bian angle, see Daly and Caputi 1987 and Penelope 1990. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
241
closed space or womb), Kristeva argues for a coexistence of the semi-
otic and the symbolic without abolishing the initial dualism of the 
mother/father realm, and Klarer concludes that Láadan replaces the 
Symbolic Order of a patriarchal language and world. Yet, clearly, El-
gin takes this a step further with the suggestion that these children – 
speaking Láadan and multiple other languages – will enter full subjec-
tivity, since words and concepts (Encodings) derived from the semi-
otic chora, which make up the content difference of Láadan, add to the 
Symbolic Order. This double-voiced language acquisition transgresses 
the polarities of orders without abolishing them. Instead of losing the 
realm of the chora and entering the world as fragmented speaking sub-
jects, the new language constructs new subjects supposedly moving 
fluidly between realms. Given the revision of the aforementioned 
theoretical standpoints of Lacan and Kristeva by Sandra Gilbert and 
Susan Gubar, who have argued that “verbal signification arises […] 
from a confrontation with the lure and lore of the mother” (1985: 537) 
before the father breaks up the dyadic unity, Láadan might even be 
seen as an expression of the retrieved materna lingua existing along-
side the patrius sermo. 
Yet the pivotal question remains, where do oppositional ideas 
emanate from in this patriarchal society? Elgin suggests three major 
components. First, linguistic socialisation has trained the women lin-
guists to probe (alien) languages for the very concepts they hold, and 
it has taught the women linguists to be sensitive to ideological traps 
codified by languages. Second, on a life-long daily basis the women 
linguists are confronted with other, alien cultural worldviews. After 
all, interpreting is a twofold process. On the one hand, interpretation 
“necessitates a significant understanding of one culture’s set of struc-
tural principles in order to reconstruct another’s through language” 
(Armitt 1991: 131). On the other hand, interpretation involves a fluc-
tuation between one’s own and the alien culture as well as a confron-
tation and questioning of cultural structures and modes in general. 
Thirdly, the women linguists live in large all-female communities. 
This separate physical and mental space allows female linguists to 
start a process of disengaging from internalised masculine thinking. 
As a result, they possess hybrid, dual consciousnesses and live hybrid-
ised lives, outwardly complying with the dominant language but also 
speaking the language of resistance. They access what Cixous has 
called the ‘Realm of the Gift’, the otherwise oppressed creative vision 

Dunja Mohr 
242
of alternatives (cf. Cixous and Clement 1986). Temporarily outside of 
phallogocentrism, they perceive the gaps and ‘lack’ of the appropriat-
ing language of the masculine ‘Realm of the Proper’ with its barked 
commands and a grammar based on patriarchal ideology. Because 
“the only mechanism available to women for explaining this situation 
[that language lacks women’s expressions] [...] was the very language 
that was inadequate” (Elgin 1987: 177), the women linguists construct 
Láadan to escape this paradox and fill these very gaps. 
As an artificial language, Láadan is constructed to be easily 
pronounced and universally accessible for everyone,21 in contrast to 
constructed languages that are defined as mostly restricted to private 
use or limited to a certain era.22 On the other hand, Láadan shares the 
developmental characteristics of contact languages that eventually 
transmogrify from pidgin and creole into a native tongue (cf. NT 216f, 
266f). Yet while pidgin takes phrases from and simplifies other lan-
guages, Láadan evolves with every new major or minor Encoding into 
a more differentiated language. Unlike real contact languages that 
have developed out of trading necessities, Láadan emerges from emo-
tional and psychic necessity. In correlation to marginalised people of 
colour, women perceive a discrepancy between language and reality, 
yet unlike colonial subjects, women never had a language of their 
own. 
As an auxiliary language Láadan constructs new linguistic and 
psychological modes of expression, stressing perceptual information 
and equalising the relation between speaker and listener. For Pene-
lope, the most notable innovation of Láadan is that “inner sensory in-
formation becomes as important as outwardly obvious material phe-
nomena if we have the words to describe it” (1990: 224). With a vari-
ety of required speech acts, repetition, evidence and state of con-
sciousness morphemes, degree markers and suffixes that indicate the 
emotional quality and attitude towards what is said as well as the 
source of the information, Láadan as a consequential linguistic transla-
                                                      
21  
To avoid dominance by pronunciation, Láadan is composed of eighteen 
sounds equally accessible to all speakers (cf. NT 160). 
22  
A constructed language is purposefully created by one or more persons either 
to link speakers of different languages (e.g. the international Esperanto created 
by L. L. Zamenhof in 1897), or to express concepts previously inexpressible 
(Gottfried Leibniz in the seventeenth century), or for fictional purposes (e.g. 
Tolkien’s Middle Earth languages in The Lord of the Rings). 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
243
tion of feminist standpoint theory dethrones the privileged speaking 
subject. The sentence structure forces the speaker to mark the reliabil-
ity of all utterances and her/his subjective standpoint, purpose, and 
emotive state; hence Láadan involves the listener on an emotional ba-
sis and draws positionality into the speech act. The artificial lan-
guage’s very structure transgresses the “subjective-objective divide 
between speaker and language, potentially a radical linguistic shift” 
(Florence 1990: 83). 
Nevertheless, the given choice of morphemes might serve to 
disguise a standpoint. In addition, although parts of the Láadan vo-
cabulary mirror a more differentiated perception of femininity –
Penelope lists, for example, eleven variations on the word love – it 
leaves conceptual patriarchal structures intact: “[t]here are words for 
jesus of nazareth, penis, and testicle, but none for clitoris or Lesbian” 
(Penelope 1990: 227). 
The dominant strata of reality expressed in language are lexical-
ised masculine concepts that blot out all other realities however dif-
fusely sensed. Far from providing a blueprint of the world, language, 
in fact, “foregrounds those aspects of experience deemed significant 
by a culture and, simultaneously, backgrounds concepts for which it 
provides no labels” (Penelope 1990: 203). In effect, Láadan answers 
Luce Irigaray’s question “How can women analyze their exploitation, 
inscribe their claims, within an order prescribed by the masculine?” 
(qtd. in Wiemer 1987: 163). Láadan adds experiences and realities 
otherwise excluded and inexpressible without denying those realities 
already conceptualised in other languages. If there are no words to ex-
press specific conditions, situations, emotions, and perceptions, they 
will remain “in the realm of the invisible, the unreal” (Penelope 1990: 
236). 
The Encodings, previously unlexicalised concepts, in fact origi-
nate in this non-verbal pre-conscious realm, and correspond with what 
Irigaray calls le parler femme, defined as spontaneous utterances re-
sisting existing forms, figures, and concepts. By definition, Encodings 
give “a name for a chunk of the world that [...] has never been chosen 
for naming before in any human language” (NT 22). Major Encodings 
are “truly newborn to the universe of discourse”, whereas minor En-
codings add “related concepts” (NT 158). We get two examples of En-
codings; one describes forms of behaviour: “[t]o refrain from asking, 

Dunja Mohr 
244
with evil intentions” (NT 29); another (re)constructs a new body 
space: 
 
Now, there is a continuous surface of the body, a space that begins 
with the inside flesh of the fingers and continues over the palm of the 
hand and upon the inner side of the arm to the bend of the elbow [...] I 
will name that the ‘athad’ of the person [...] Where there was no athad 
before, there will always be one now [...] And I have made the athad 
appear . . . now it exists. (NT 242) 
 
The Encodings are valuable both linguistically and also in terms of 
female historiography. The memorisation of the names of those 
“women of valor” who coined Encodings creates a consciousness of 
female history. In contradistinction to the written genealogy of the 
“begat” of the biblical OT that inscribes tradition, this oral secular ge-
nealogy of mothers and sisters celebrates innovation. 
Elgin also includes religious language as another locus of po-
tential subversion. The hybridised Láadan version of the “monumen-
tally male King James Bible” (JR 174) pictorially re-inscribes a trans-
gendered and transcultural divinity; thus the fifth verse from the 
Twenty-Third Psalm, “Thou anointest my head with oil”,23 reads in 
the Láadan version “Thou braidest my hair with Thine own hands” 
(JR 210). Such a feminine revelation of the original content decon-
structs the masculinist exegesis and androcentric discourse of the Bi-
ble, especially of the OT. The authoritative biblical ‘I’ of God/Jesus is 
met with a colloquially talkative ‘I’ in Native Tongue that is then re-
placed by the communal ‘we’ of three female narrators (the Marys) in 
The Judas Rose. Clearly, Elgin equates masculine language acquisi-
tion with power and with dystopia, as opposed to feminine language 
acquisition as a means of liberating resistance, empowerment, and in-
clusion. Language is thus the primary locus of colonialist and patriar-
chal domination and of transgressive resistance.24 
                                                      
23  
Originally, this holy cultic deed elevated the anointed, usually a priest or 
prophet or the king of Israel, to be the inviolable sacral representative of God 
– Messiah is Hebrew for ‘the Holy’ or ‘the anointed’ – and was later turned 
into a useful patriarchal gesture of profane secular power. 
24  
In the last book Earthsong, Elgin, however, revises her earlier universalist as-
sumption that Láadan is a language for all women. The women linguists admit 
that the “Láadan project failed” (ES 74), because their own interest in Láadan, 
in languages as such, was not necessarily shared by all women to the same ex-
tent. Contrary to Elgin’s earlier stance that language is power and “the only 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
245
4. Conclusion 
 
Language in utopian, dystopian, and sf literature has come a long way 
since the retrieval of the imaginary and idealized protolanguage in 
early utopias and the genre’s commitment to the questioning of lan-
guage as a tool of both oppression and liberation. Clearly, the shaping 
of utopia involves the (re)construction of language; the participation 
of language in the construction of past, present, and future reality; and 
language’s various discursive disguises such as religion, history, 
myth, literacy, and orality. Over the last thirty years, women writers 
especially have changed the genre’s focus in so far as they interrogate 
the inherent phallogocentrism of language and criticize the exclusion 
of women and women’s experiences from language. For some female 
writers such as Margaret Atwood, the phallogocentric and restrictive 
use of language informs the sexist/racist meaning of signs which, 
however, polysemic, polyvalent signs and metaphorical or poetic lan-
guage can disrupt. This approach perceives language as a heterogene-
ous process of constant permutations, where meaning is produced in 
relation to a specific context rather than through a fixed system of 
signs and signifiers. Others, like Elgin, view the structure of language 
as phallogocentric – a state that can only be changed by the creation of 
a language expressing the female perspective. By reminding us read-
ers of the potentials and dangers of language looked at creatively, uto-
pian and dystopian literature exposes the limits of our way of thinking. 
Even if the limits of language do not fully represent the limits of the 
world – to paraphrase Ludwig Wittgenstein – language and thinking 
are our filters, our means, to perceive the world. If language divides 
the world into different chunks, literature at its best aids us in perceiv-
ing alternative chunks, real or fictive, of various realities and in think-
ing beyond the confines of language. 
                                                                                                                  
real high technology” with linguistics as the “property of the elite” (1992: 45), 
the body turns out to be a more common denominator: “Hunger is a powerful 
motivator” (ES 75). 

Dunja Mohr 
246
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Carroll, Lewis (1865/1981). Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland & Through the Look-
ing-Glass. New York: Bantam. 
Delany, Samuel R. (1966/2001). Babel-17. New York: Vintage.  
Elgin, Suzette Haden (1984). Native Tongue. New York: Daw. 
— (1987). The Judas Rose. New York: Daw. 
— (1994). Earthsong. New York: Daw. 
Slonczewski, Joan (1986). A Door Into Ocean. New York: Avon. 
Vance, Jack (1958/1989). The Languages of Pao. New York: Tor. 
Watson, Ian (1973). The Embedding. London: Gollancz. 
Wilhelm, Kate (1979). Juniper Time. New York: Pocket. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Anderson, Kristine J. (1991). “To Utopia via the Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis: Elgin’s 
Láadan”, in: Michael S. Cummings and Nicholas D. Smith (eds.). Utopian 
Studies III. Lanham, MD: UP of America, 92-98. 
— (1992). “Places Where A Woman Could Talk: Ursula K. Le Guin and the Feminist 
Linguistic Utopia”, in: Women and Language 15.1: 7-10. 
Armitt, Lucie (1991). “Your Word is My Command: The Structures of Language and 
Power in Women’s Science Fiction”, in: Lucie Armitt (ed.). Where No Man 
Has Gone Before: Women and Science Fiction. London: Routledge, 123-38. 
Bailey, Richard W. (1991). Images of English: A Cultural History of the Language. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Barnes, Myra Edwards (1975). Linguistics and Languages in Science Fiction-
Fantasy. New York: Arno. 
Bolinger, Dwight (1980). Language: The Loaded Weapon. London: Longman. 
Boltz, Carol J. and Dorothy U. Seyler (1982). Language Power. New York: Random. 
Booker, M. Keith (1994). Dystopian Literature: A Theory and Research Guide. West-
port, CT: Greenwood. 
Bray, Mary Kay (1986). “The Naming of Things: Men, Women, Language and Reali-
ty in Suzette Haden Elgin’s Native Tongue”, in: Extrapolation 27.1: 49-61. 
Brown, R. (1958). Words and Things. Glencoe, IL: Free. 
Cameron, Deborah (1985). Feminism and Linguistic Theory. London: Macmillan. 
— (ed.) (1990). The Feminist Critique of Language: A Reader. London: Routledge. 
Carroll, John B. (1964). Language and Thought. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Cavalcanti, Ildney (2000). “Utopias of/f Language in Contemporary Feminist Literary 
Dystopias”, in: Utopian Studies 11.2: 152-80. 
Chomsky, Noam (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Cixous, Hélène and Catherine Clement (1986). The Newly Born Woman (tr. Betsy 
Wing). Manchester: Manchester UP. 

Fictive Languages in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
247
Collings, Michael R. (1986). “Samuel R. Delany and John Wilkins: Artificial Lan-
guages, Science, and Science Fiction”, in: Michael R. Collings (ed.). Reflec-
tions on the Fantastic: Selected Essays from the fourth International Confer-
ence of the Fantastic in the Arts. Westport, CT.: Greenwood, 61-68. 
Daly, Mary and Jane Caputi (1987). Webster’s First New Intergalactic Wickedary of 
the English Language. Boston: Beacon. 
Delany, Samuel R. (1977). The Jewel-Hinged Jaw: Notes on the Language of Science 
Fiction. Elizabethtown, NY: Dragon. 
Ehrlich, Susan (1995). “Critical Linguistics as Feminist Methodology”, in: Sandra 
Burt and Lorraine Code (eds.). Changing Methods: Feminists Transforming 
Practice. Peterborough: Broadview, 45-74. 
Elgin, Suzette Haden (1987). “Women’s Language and Near Future Science Fiction: 
A Reply”, in: Women’s Studies 14: 175-81. 
— (1992). “Washing Utopian Dishes; Scrubbing Utopian Floors”, in: Women and 
Language 17.1: 43-47. 
— (1993). Genderspeak: Men, Women and the Gentle Art of Verbal Self-Defense. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
— (1994). “Report on a Thought Experiment”, in: Linguistics & Science Fiction 13.9: 
17-20. 
Eschholz, Paul, Alfred Rosa and Virginia Clark (eds.) (1982). Language Awareness. 
New York: St. Martin’s. 
Fitting, Peter (1989). “Recent Feminist Utopias: World Building and Strategies for 
Social Change”, in: George E. Slusser and Eric S. Rabkin (eds.). Mindscapes: 
The Geographies of Imagined Worlds. Carbondale/Edwardsville, IL: Southern 
Illinois UP, 155-63. 
Florence, Penny (1990). “The Liberation of Utopia or Note Why Feminist Science 
Fiction is a Means to the End of the Possibility that Feminist SF is the Ideal 
Literary Form”, in: Linda Anderson (ed.). Plotting Change: Contemporary 
Women’s Fiction. Linda Anderson (ed.). London: Edward Arnold, 64-83. 
Foster, David L. (1983). “Woman on the Edge of Narrative: Language in Marge 
Piercy’s Utopia”, in: Donald M. Hassler (ed.). Patterns of the Fantastic. Mer-
cer Island, WA: Starmont House, 47-56. 
Gilbert, Sandra M. and Susan Gubar (1985). “Sexual Linguistics: Gender, Language, 
Sexuality”, in: New Literary History 16: 515-43. 
Grace, George W. (1987). The Linguistic Construction of Reality. London: Croom 
Helm. 
Hockett, Charles F. (1968). “Chinese Versus English: An Exploration of the Whorfian 
Theses (II)”, in: Patrick Gleeson and Nancy Wakefield (eds.). Language and 
Culture: A Reader. Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill, 120-42.  
Hudson, Richard A. (1984). Sociolinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Klarer, Mario (1993). Frau und Utopie: Feministische Literaturtheorie und utopi-
scher Diskurs im anglo-amerikanischen Roman. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftli-
che Buchgesellschaft. 
Kramarae, Cheris (1981). Women and Men Speaking. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
— (1987). “Present Problems with the Language of the Future”, in: Women’s Studies 
14: 183-86. 
Kress, Gunther and Robert Hodge (1979). Language as Ideology. London: Routledge. 

Dunja Mohr 
248
Kumar, Krishan (1987). Utopia and Anti-Utopia in Modern Times. Oxford: Black-
well. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. (1979). “Is Gender Necessary?”, in: Susan Wood (ed.). The Lan-
guage of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction. New York: Put-
nam, 161-69. 
Malmgren, Carl (1993). “The Languages of Science Fiction: Samuel Delany’s Babel-
17”, in: Extrapolation 34.1: 5-17. 
Meyers, Walter E. (1980). Aliens and Linguistics: Language Study and Science Fic-
tion. Athens, GA: U of Georgia P. 
Mohr, Dunja M. (2000). “The Profession of Science Fiction, 53: Towards a Society of 
Non-Violence”, in: Foundation 79: 15-34. 
— (2005). Worlds Apart? Dualism and Transgression in Contemporary Female Dys-
topias. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 
Murphy, M. Lynne (1992). “Introduction: Women and Linguistic Innovation: An An-
notated Bibliography”, in: Women and Language 151: 3-5. 
Orkrand, Marc (1985). The Klingon Dictionary. New York: Pocket. 
Penelope, Julia (1990). Speaking Freely: Unlearning the Lies of the Father’s Ton-
gues. New York: Pergamon. 
Penn, Julia M. (1972). Linguistic Relativity versus Innate Idea: The Origins of the Sa-
pir-Whorf-Hypothesis in German Thought. Den Haag: Mouton. 
Sapir, Edward (1921). Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York: 
Harcourt. 
Shinn, Thelma J. (1985). “Worlds of Words and Swords: Suzette Haden Elgin and Jo-
anna Russ at Work”, in: Jane B. Weedman (ed.). Women World-Walkers: New 
Dimensions of SF and Fantasy. Lubbock, TX: Texas Tech, 207-22. 
Sisk, David W. (1997). Transformations of Languages in Modern Dystopias. West-
port, CT: Greenwood. 
Slobin, D.I. (1971). Psycholinguistics. London: Scott & Foresman. 
Spender, Dale (1980). Man Made Language. London: Routledge. 
Tannen, Deborah (1990). You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversa-
tion. New York: Morrow. 
Weedman, Jane B. (1982). Samuel R. Delany. Starmount Reader’s Guide 10. Mercer 
Island, WA: Starmount House. 
Whorf, Benjamin Lee (1956). Language, Thought and Reality: Selected Writings of 
Benjamin Lee Whorf (ed. John B. Carroll). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Wiemer, Annegret J. (1987). “Foreign L(anguish), Mother Tongue: Concepts of Lan-
guage in Contemporary Feminist Science Fiction”, in: Women’s Studies 14: 
163-73. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
WORLDS BEYOND WORLDS – 
THE LIMITS OF GEOGRAPHICAL 
AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE 
 


 
 
 
 
Rethinking Deterritorialization: Utopian and 
Apocalyptic Space in Recent American Fiction1 
 
Martina Mittag 
 
 
Abstract: The paper will focus on recent approaches to utopian narrative and its power 
to represent the utopian. Major shifts in utopian as well as apocalyptic thinking have 
been triggered by limited resources, global decentralization, and recent developments 
in literature, theory and media technologies; new representational strategies open up 
fresh views of the past and the future. What role does the utopian play in a context 
that has questioned its basic theoretical assumptions of time and space, subject and 
object? Conceived as process, productivity, energeia – as Jameson would, following 
Marin more than 20 years ago – utopian discourse seems averse to ‘utopia’ as a liter-
ary genre in the traditional sense. Based on the work of Thomas Pynchon, Marge 
Piercy, William Gibson and others, I will approach various reformulations of the uto-
pian in recent American fiction, using the Deleuzian term ‘deterritorialization’ to refer 
to the nomadic transgression of textual, spatial and ontological boundaries. 
 
Key names and concepts: Margaret Atwood – Italo Calvino – Jacques Derrida – deter-
ritorialization – William Gibson – heterotopia – Ursula Le Guin – Marge Piercy – 
Thomas Pynchon – Second Life – utopia 
 
 
What a cheat utopias are, no wonder people hate them. Engineer  
some fresh start, an island, a new continent, dispossess them, give  
them a planet sure! So they don’t have to deal with our history.  
Ever since More they’ve been doing it: rupture, clean cut, fresh start. 
Kim Stanley Robinson, Pacific Edge 
 
I never did like smartass utopians. Always so much healthier  
and saner.… People who have the answers are boring. 
Ursula Le Guin, Always Coming Home 
 
                                                      
1  
I would like to thank Tom Moylan and Mary B. Campbell for helpful com-
ments on an earlier version of this paper, Bettina Wahrig for many inspiring 
thoughts on utopia and Kurt Ozment for proof-reading. 

Martina Mittag 
252
1. Introduction 
 
In the Orwell year 1984 Louis Marin published his book Utopics: 
Spatial Play, which contains an interesting chapter on “degenerate 
utopia”, defined as ideology changed into the form of myth. Ironi-
cally, this is not a dystopia in the Orwellian sense, but a utopic space 
entirely co-opted by the dominant system of ideas and values: Disney-
land. 
Roughly twenty years later a comparable phenomenon – this 
time utterly immaterial, lacking locus – emerges with Secondlife.com, 
a virtual space which has long been foreshadowed in literature and 
film, which replicates the real world rather than opposing it, but insists 
on its alternative status in offering a playground, a resting place from 
the real. In providing a new (empty) space for humans to inhabit and 
colonize, Second Life would have been an ideal candidate for Utopics 
– except the emptiness proves illusionary: What we encounter there is 
the familiar world of bank customers, concert goers, child molesters, 
hackers – the economized space we know from everyday life. Second 
Life is not an ideal world as the utopian tradition would have it, but 
rather an extension of late capitalism2 and a reformulation of one’s 
own position within existing capitalist structures, realities shaped by 
Global Players in the mode of high-tech, democratic hyper-liberalism. 
If Second Life offers an excellent example of how the real and 
the virtual, same and other, converge in new ways – and thus material-
izes what authors like Neal Stephenson or William Gibson had de-
signed in their fiction as Metaverse or cyberspace – it also seems to 
affirm a re-territorialization of familiar structures in virtual reality as 
well as a neo-liberal end of history as famously propagated by Fuku-
yama in 1992. 
Is this then the end of the utopian, the answer to limited re-
sources, global decentralization and new modes of communication 
with its concomitant modes of perception? Whereto has the utopian 
(as opposed to utopia as ideal society) wandered off in an age that has 
become so suspicious of homogenous space, so aware of the affinity 
between utopia and apocalypse, and so pressed by increasingly practi-
cal rather than theoretical necessities? An age in which closed territo-
                                                      
2  
See Hamann and Uehlecke 2007: 24. 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
253
ries abound once more and access as the magic word has replaced 
property as the key to Utopia (Rifkin 2000).  
Keeping in mind the historical role of the United States as pro-
moter and performer of both utopia and apocalypse, I shall, in the fol-
lowing, trace the reformulations of the utopian in recent American fic-
tion and move toward a Calvinoesque stance where the utopian has 
changed its state from solid and stable to gaseous and dispersed, in-
fecting the dystopian as much as it is infected by it. Less feasible, less 
confrontational – and more polluted, of course – it resists economiza-
tion and survives as “scheme on the horizon”, as Marin (1984) had it, 
or as “process, energeia, enunciation” (Jameson), negating the more 
traditional view of utopia as ideal society.3  
Presupposing that utopian energeia is not separable from narra-
tive form, the question will not be: what IS utopia, but: how can the 
utopian be written? How does the destabilizing of texts and (hi)stories 
in terms of multiplicity, intertextuality and intermediality produce 
utopianisms that turn against the stasis and uniformity of the utopias 
of perfection and reintegrate those monstrous Others of modernity that 
were outside the boundaries of traditional utopia, be they women, 
slaves, mutants, cyborgs, golems, and the like? Embedded in recon-
ceptualizations of essentially modern territorial notions of history, 
identity, and text, these approaches offer alternatives to a linear pro-
gressivist utopian tradition as well as to the end of history often pro-
claimed by radical postmodern literature. A major shift in utopian as 
well as apocalyptic thinking, both in terms of recent media develop-
ments and fresh views of the past and the future, is reflected more or 
less explicitly in the writing of authors as different as Pynchon, De-
Lillo, Gibson, Atwood, Auster or Piercy and others. To approach these 
various reformulations of traditional categories, I will use the term 
“deterritorialization” as coined by Deleuze (1983) as a counterforce to 
the syntagmatic effects of what he calls the “territorial machine” cod-
ing political, economic and psychological flows and formations. I will 
widen this term to include the becoming-nomad of semantic, textual, 
epistemological or ontological categories, referring to the dissolution 
                                                      
3  
Recent definitions of the utopian like Sargent’s or Levitas’ follow Jameson in 
that energeia is at the center rather than an ideal state. Sargent speaks of “so-
cial dreaming” (1994: 3), Levitas of “the desire for different (and better) ways 
of being” (1990: passim). 

Martina Mittag 
254
of boundaries of subject and object, body and mind, but also to the 
nomadic transgression of generic, media and textual boundaries. The 
example of Marge Piercy’s Body of Glass will point to a post-utopian 
quality based on the affinity between hitherto separate spaces – histor-
ical, real, virtual, individual, and collective – and thus on alternative 
modes of conceptualizing and experiencing space. Constantly chal-
lenged by re-territorialization (as exemplified by Disneyland or 
Second Life or the multinational corporations in Piercy’s scenario), the 
post-utopian I have in mind – as opposed to the post-utopian as a loss 
of utopia – is a reformulation of not just the utopian, but also of the 
apocalyptic genre, complicit with a zone of Derridean post-apocalypse 
or Calvinoesque dispersion. 
 
 
2. Deterritorialization, or: the “map is not the thing mapped” 
 
If we view modern categories of the subject, of identity, of textuality 
as territorial notions, as entities relying on fixed boundaries, these 
concepts have been questioned by the cultural, technological and soci-
opolitical developments of the last 40 years, whether in discussions of 
globalization, postmodernism or the worldwide web. While many ef-
forts in the 60s were either obsessed with ends or with utopia as abso-
lute Other from the real – and thus reproduced territorial notions in 
negating them – the focus has now shifted toward new modes of arti-
culation that open up new fields of meaning. In terms of generic crite-
ria, deterritorializations have become so obvious that there are hardly 
any “clean” categories left: subversions, hybridizations, or extensions 
of genre take place in science fiction and cyberpunk as much as in 
Gothic and horror fiction, in romance or the university novel. The 
same holds true for stylistic conventions: What seems to have been a 
turn towards a new realism in the 80s, as reflected in Julian Barnes’ 
Flaubert’s Parrot or Paul Auster’s New York Trilogy, actually sub-
verts realist conventions by articulating new and rather indeterminate 
modes of handling meaning.  
At the same time, it can hardly be overlooked to what extent 
historical themes have moved into the center of literary activity; not as 
linear chain of events but as networks of meaning framing the present. 
If early postmodernism seemed to rely on radical breaks with both the 
past and the future, the comprehensive rewriting of history – from 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
255
John Fowles’ The French Lieutenant’s Woman (1969) and Kurt Von-
negut’s Slaughterhouse Five (1969) to Susan Sontag’s The Volcano 
Lover (1988), Marge Piercy’s City of Darkness, City of Light (1997) 
or – in Britain – Antonia Byatt’s Possession (1990), Jeanette Winter-
son’s Sexing the Cherry and Barnes’ Flaubert’s Parrot (1990) – re-
volves around the recapturing of forgotten possibilities between and 
under the web of history as it came down to us. Linear time here be-
comes subject to those playful alterations reflected in the temporal re-
lativity of Alan Lightman’s Einstein’s Dreams (1992); spatial con-
cepts, taken for granted due to the representational power of  maps, 
are denaturalized: the awareness that “the map is not the thing 
mapped” (E. T. Bell, quoted in Korzybski 1948: 34) is accompanied 
by fresh ways of telling stories and histories, thus not just questioning 
“the whole Western/analytic/‘linear’/alienated shtick”, as Pynchon 
called it,4 but providing new readings and writings. The very process 
of producing meaning – utopian or not – has shifted towards the web-
metaphoricity triggered by new media developments. Networks of 
meaning are reflected in intertextual ventures, decentering both author 
and text, while pointing at new configurations of in-between and hybr-
id zones. A beautiful example is Italo Calvino’s If on a Winter’s Night 
a Traveller (1989), where the territories of author and reader, real and 
false, fact and fiction are undone, and meaning is multiplied without 
deleting the story. The novel turns into a network of novels, a hyper-
novel that all but reflects the multiplicity of things to be narrated. Oth-
er narratives integrate elements from different media such as film, 
photography, or music, as in the merging of linguistic and musical 
structures in Toni Morrison’s Jazz (1992), which evades a confronta-
tional pose through a dialogized network drawn from the varying 
moods of a jazz song. The integration of the reader in the process of 
producing meaning within this dialogic web also works against post-
modernist skepticism by shifting an infinite deferral of meaning to-
wards constant creation. 
Not entirely new, but newly situated in terms of media envi-
ronments, textual deterritorialization decenters writing towards the 
kind of open text that proves in a lot of ways to be related to the best 
of modernism of Gertrude Stein, William Carlos Williams, James 
Joyce and Marcel Proust. The web-metaphor can manifest itself as 
                                                      
4  
Pynchon in his 1969 letter to Thomas F. Hirsch, quoted in Seed 1988: 242. 

Martina Mittag 
256
both apocalyptic or utopian or remain outside those categories: In Wil-
liam Gaddis’ Carpenter’s Gothic (1987) a deterritorialized subject 
linked to the world through telecommunication cannot make sense of 
the world and life remains outside, while the sense of apocalypse in 
DeLillo’s White Noise (1986), triggered by the airborne toxic event, is 
at times warded off by the realization that “the world is full of aban-
doned meanings” (DeLillo 1987: 184). In Flaubert’s Parrot (1990) 
further relocations might center on the idea that biography like history 
is “merely another literary genre: the past is autobiographical fiction 
pretending to be a parliamentary report” (Barnes 1990: 184). The 
web-metaphor might also focus on books the author hasn’t written, 
but remains outside the binarism of the apocalyptic and the utopian. In 
Auster’s “City of Glass” (1990, incl. in his New York Trilogy), a se-
venteenth-century author and his text are invented while the actual au-
thor oscillates between the embodiments of Quinn, William Wilson 
and Paul Auster. An all-pervasive sense of deterritorialization here 
seizes the very core of writing: words themselves, conceived of as 
“monads that never change”, are seen in their nomadic force that mo-
tivates utopianism. Further transgressions of boundaries in recent lite-
rature comprise those of gender or race, as in the writing of the Chica-
na lesbian Gloria Anzaldúa: she might serve as a prime example of a 
cultural nomadism transgressing the boundaries of politics and fiction, 
theory and poetry to depict an ambiguous and wandering mestiza-
consciousness.5 On a more psychological level, the boundaries be-
tween the real and a phantasmatic unconscious are questioned in writ-
ings such as Joyce Carol Oates’ “The Doll” (cf. Oates 1995), a chill-
ing account of anti-utopian meaning warded off through conventional 
categories of reason, ‘reality’ and class, while at the same time de-
realizing those categories. In terms of media technologies, Kathy 
Acker and William Gibson exemplify how traditional binaries of body 
vs. machine, material vs. immaterial, give way to the play with those 
cyborg-like entities that have come to pervade science fiction from 
Blade Runner and Star Trek to Johnny Mnemonic and Lawn Mower 
Man. 
                                                      
5  
See the both cultural and geographical deterritorializations in her book Bor-
derlands / La Frontera: The New Mestiza (San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 
1987). 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
257
If, with these major deterritorializations in mind, we reflect on 
new trends in utopian writing since the 1960s, it is obvious that indeed 
major shifts have taken place. The either/or version of early postmo-
dernism that seemed to inform the 60s break with the past and its re-
sulting binarism of utter exhaustion or utter liberation, the absurd or 
the polymorphous perverse,6 fixed territories or free play, has been 
dampened down to produce a far wider playground for utopianism. 
 
 
3. Schemes on the Horizon: Spatial Play or Cooptation? 
 
Wo die utopischen Oasen austrocknen, breitet 
sich eine Wüste von Banalität und Ratlosigkeit aus. 
Jürgen Habermas 
 
In contrast to the clear spatial and temporal boundaries that informed 
conventional utopian narrative, fiction since the late 60s has ap-
proached difference – and boundaries in general – in new ways. In 
terms of spatial play, Thomas Pynchon’s narratives of the 60s and 
early 70s, in spite of their apocalyptic drive, suggest a break with the 
past in that traditional territories of meaning have come to be ques-
tioned within new communicational structures – as Oedipa Maas’ re-
flections in The Crying of Lot 49 testify: 
 
For it was now like walking among matrices of a great digital com-
puter, the zeroes and ones twinned above, hanging like balanced mo-
biles right and left, ahead, thick, maybe endless. Behind the hiero-
glyphic streets there would either be a transcendent meaning, or only 
the earth. (125) 
 
Pynchon’s later novel Mason and Dixon (1998) goes a step further 
and participates in the historical turn of the late 80s and 90s, undoing 
modern mappings of word and world by going back to the site of their 
production, where alternative meanings were still present, undisturbed 
by later readings of history. The strong focus on mapping, utopian or 
                                                      
6  
In the 60s Leslie Fiedler noted that there was maybe nothing contradictory in 
that: “where there is orgasm, there is limitation and exhaustion”, as he put it 
(1964: 161). 

Martina Mittag 
258
dystopian, mapping as utopia7 or mapping as business,8 reflects some 
of the current obsession with space, but extends to the mapping of 
meaning. By denaturalizing categories that are actually the result of a 
specific historical era with its own specific interests, Pynchon reminds 
us of the link between textscapes and landscapes. Both are subject to 
different readings and manipulations, religious, cabbalistic, political or 
economic. Even if the major thrust of the novel is towards the finite 
world of mathesis and analysis, a pluralization of meaning is implicit 
in the fabulist approach to history, where fact and fiction merge. The 
utopian drive lies here in the revealing of forgotten possibilities, 
thereby disarticulating the spatial and temporal perspectives moder-
nity was based on and uncovering the indefinite insights that are in-
herent in stories like the one of Vaucanson’s duck – a cyborg-creature 
that assumes a life of her own in the middle of a mechanist world view 
and reflects Pynchon’s central concern, the denaturalizing of history:  
 
History is tir’d, or coerc’d, only in Interests that must ever prove base. 
She is too innocent, to be left within the reach of anyone in Power, – 
who need but touch her and all her Credit is in the instant vanished, as 
if it had never been. She needs rather to be tended lovingly and hon-
orably by fabulists and counterfeiters, Ballad-Mongers and Cranks of 
ev’ry Radius, Masters of Disguise to provide her the Costume, Toi-
lette and Bearing, and Speech nimble enough to keep her beyond the 
Desires, or even the Curiosity, of Government. (350)  
 
If history – and in analogy: the unified story – is endlessly displaced, 
it is not, as some postmodernists would have it, a conglomerate of lo-
                                                      
7  
“He must, if one day call’d upon, produce an overhead view of a World that 
never was, in truth-like detail, one he’d begun in silence to contrive, – a Map 
entirely within his mind, of a World he could escape to, if he had to. If he had 
to, he would enter it entirely but never get lost, for he would have this Map, 
and in it, spread below, would lie ev’rything, – Mountain of Glass, Sea of 
Sand, miraculous Springs, Volcanoes, Sacred Cities, mile-deep Chasm, Ser-
pent’s Cave, endless Prairie ... another Chapbook-Fancy with each Deviation 
and Dip of the Needle.” (Pynchon 1998: 242) 
8  
“Philosophick Work, to proceed at all smartly, wouldn’t you agree, requires a 
controll’d working-space. Charter’d Companies are the ideal Agents to pro-
vide that, be it the Shore Sumatran or Levantine, or wherever globally, what 
matter? – Control of the Company Perimeter is ever implicit.” – “In any case, 
... both Pennsylvania and Maryland are Charter’d Companies as well, if it 
comes to that. Charter’d Companies may indeed be the form the World has 
now increasingly begun to take.” (Pynchon 1998: 252) 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
259
cal meanings denying a universal framework. We rather have to deal 
with local manifestations, disguises – trying to make sense, however 
indefinite. The utopianist uncovering of possible meanings in history 
corresponds to deterritorializations in a more literal sense, to the de-
naturalizing of America. Basic to Pynchon’s enterprise is a technique 
that might be paraphrased with his term of lamination, as a multiplica-
tory effect that applies to baking as well as to steel-making, gold-
beating and printing (cf. Pynchon 1998: 389f). 
Whereas Pynchon here is obviously only indirectly concerned 
with the future, his fabulist approach to history is shared by other au-
thors of the nineties, whose concerns are clearly more futuristic. If 
utopia as a literary genre has lost its vitality, utopianism is present 
precisely where the borders of the genre as well as those between past 
and future dissolve and rewritings of both reach beyond the traditional 
binarism of utopia/dystopia. Thus, Margaret Atwood’s Handmaid’s 
Tale can be read as a post-apocalyptic tale about a more than realistic 
scenario of right-wing fundamentalism and seventeenth-century Puri-
tanism, which, however, draws utopian energies from the telling of 
past memories. This sense of history becomes the more significant in a 
society trying to obliterate its past by brainwashing its citizens and de-
stroying its own written records and computers. Here, as in other more 
affirmative narratives, it is the subversive use of technology, the re-
vealing of hidden possibilities, that leads to hope – and to story-
telling, however fragmentary. With all the horrors of Gilead, At-
wood’s tale is characteristic of the unsettling of the static dualism of 
utopia/dystopia, as the language of feminist utopia here provides the 
material for constructing a powerful patriarchal system that oppresses 
women on a far larger scale than ever before. It is through the open-
endedness and the self-reflexivity of the text that Atwood resists pure-
ly dystopian categories, thus providing the framework for new ways 
of thinking the utopian as well as the apocalyptic.9 Within the non-
                                                      
9  
See also Jenny Wolmark’s discussion of Atwood, which concludes: “As a 
critical dystopia, The Handmaid’s Tale is not concerned to portray the inevi-
tability and awfulness of a future in which patriarchy has become fully totali-
tarian. Instead, the kind of extrapolation used in the novel alerts us to the ne-
cessity to rethink the forms which contemporary gender relations take. The 
metaphor of the narrative as a series of reconstructions indicates the provi-
sionality of those relations, not their permanence.” (1994: 107) On gender, 
utopia and postmodernity, see Barr 1999.  

Martina Mittag 
260
confrontational outlook there cannot be any glorious liberation; the 
utopian moment is not to finish the story or ultimately define a new 
identity, but the overcoming of the différend in Lyotard’s sense, as 
that which doesn’t speak; it’s the breaking out of silence of unheard 
voices in an oppressive system, the hint of love in hell.  
In similar terms, this is true of Paul Auster’s bleak vision in In 
the Country of Last Things (1987), which depicts a society after the 
catastrophe, where bodies turn into resources and the ‘post-human’ 
denotes the disappearance of human values altogether. But even here 
there are zones of the livable breaking through the apocalyptic vision: 
the love relationship between Sam and Anna Blume, the unexpected 
discovery of the past, of the Jewish library, the expectation of a child, 
the memory of a better world, as a basis for living the future. The 
post-nuclear setting in Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984), made clear 
through occasional references to the obliteration of the reader’s famil-
iar surroundings (like the “ruins in the radioactive core of old Bonn”, 
120), equally does not depict a purely utopian or dystopian world. In-
stead, it presents somewhat livable areas – at least for the social group 
that his protagonist stands for – within what seems a totalitarian world 
ruled by multinational corporations, where power has become invisi-
ble in the shape of data banks and Orwellian control systems. Bodies 
are subject to cyborgization, displacing the categories of real and vir-
tual. Re-definitions or re-metaphorizations may lead, similar to Kathy 
Acker’s Empire of the Senseless (1988), to a changed balance between 
the utopian and the dystopian, when a dreaded machine-identity is 
aestheticized against traditional images of the natural body. Likewise, 
Marge Piercy’s He, She, and It (1991), Doris Lessing’s Memoirs of a 
Survivor (1974) and Ursula Le Guin’s The Dispossessed (1974) share 
a concept of local utopia, of livable zones within an otherwise often 
bleak or even absurd universe. In all of these authors, the moment of 
deterritorialization works against the representation of a unified reality 
or an idealized space. They collapse the boundaries between dream-
world and reality, utopia and dystopia, by redefining one through the 
other in their constant search for the livable. Long before the Berlin 
Wall came down, Le Guin’s hero nomadizes between two worlds 
which both aspire to their own utopian ideas, capitalist or socialist – 
and in the process deconstructs the sharp dividing line separating their 
realities.  

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
261
Where conventional utopia and apocalypse are complicit in 
their desire for a better world – in this world or beyond – post-
apocalypse seems to converge with post-utopia, the difference being 
one of tone or focus.10 A good example might be Don DeLillo’s White 
Noise, where no final solution is presented, where circular structures 
imply the move from chaos towards new order and where the negen-
tropic force of writing counterbalances the entropic factual reality. 
Signs of apocalypse, like the UFO-invasion of Disney World, or the 
ghost of Elvis walking around Graceland, are revealed as media ef-
fects to a similar extent as the characters themselves. As in CNN-
versions of the Gulf-War, the subject has become part of the “public 
stuff of media disaster” (DeLillo 1986: 146). Given all the televised 
presence, the novel is largely concerned with the invisible, the un-
heard, the secret of subjects, technology and death, which no rational 
response can make sense of, which speaks in waves and radiation, 
networks and circuits rather than in representable positions and oppo-
sitions. It is no coincidence that a radically new approach to the act of 
naming is as central to DeLillo’s novel as to Auster’s or Pynchon’s. If 
White Noise represents an open dystopia, Ursula Le Guin’s The Dis-
possessed points to an open utopia and thus to a shift in both utopian 
and apocalyptic thinking, one that emphasizes process and the livable, 
displacing the static binarism of communist and capitalist systems. Li-
vability in the sense of not closing off possibilities, as going beyond 
the binary economy of ‘same’ and ‘other’, is at the core of this kind of 
utopianism, coined by a late postmodern consciousness which Nealon 
characterizes as follows: “Living on in the postmodern is living 
beyond […] the oppositions or hierarchies that have allowed and vali-
dated the horrors of the twentieth century” (Nealon 1993: 83). 
Against Lessing’s and Le Guin’s concerns, which locate uto-
pian qualities in the gaps between determinate ideological or psycho-
logical territories, Marge Piercy’s is a utopian account informed by a 
deterritorialized history as part of a renewed search for common 
ground. In its concern for new media environments, Piercy’s He, She, 
                                                      
10  
Thus, Freese’s account of the postapocalyptic is close to what I have in mind, 
even though his example, Bernard Malamud’s God’s Grace, might not be very 
convincing: “God’s Grace”, he says, “is no traditional apocalyptic novel which 
climaxes in the evocation of doom, but a post-apocalyptic tale which examines 
what would come after the cataclysm, a story that begins with the very end and 
tries to sound out the possibility of a new beginning.” (Freese 1997: 51) 

Martina Mittag 
262
and It participates in the tradition of cyberpunk and science fiction 
without sharing the bleak visions promoted by its main proponents 
both on a narrative as on a phenomenal level. William Gibson’s highly 
popular high-tech cyberworld of Neuromancer is adopted in Piercy’s 
novel, but invested with the comprehensive utopian energies that it 
lacks in Gibson’s text. Whereas he remains in the realm of media 
technologies and their concomitant redefinitions of body, mind and 
reality, Piercy draws on the dystopian tradition of Brave New World as 
well as on earlier media revolutions and Jewish mysticism, producing 
a highly intertextual narrative of multiple writings that break through 
apocalyptic linearity by relating temporal and spatial zones on the ba-
sis of affinity. History is thus neither denied nor depicted as linear 
progression of events; instead, historical continuity is established 
through the affinity of characters and events. Interwoven in the main 
narrative of a post-apocalyptic world in 2053 is a parallel plot, situated 
in the Jewish ghetto of Prague around 1600. Narrated by Malkah – the 
main protagonist – as part of her personal history, historical ‘fact’ as 
part of the great master narratives is turned into local narrative, reach-
ing out for more universal significance for its characters as well as for 
the reader. If author, knowledge and history are thus refigured in 
terms of localized, nomadic concepts, so is the organization of differ-
ence in general: rather than participating in a unified – Marxist, femin-
ist, Jewish, or artistic – vision, Piercy’s novel constantly works from 
margin to center, turning exile into reality, and pressing towards an 
economy of difference that opens up a new potential for meaning by 
constantly resetting boundaries. 
The world in 2053 is like Gibson’s universe devastated by war, 
environmental disaster, plagues and famines. The “privileged” classes 
live in cities governed by large multi-national corporations and pro-
tected by glass domes. The masses inhabit the Glop, a violent, dirty, 
and crime-ridden megalopolis, the equivalent of Gibson’s “sprawl”, 
spreading from what once was Boston to what once was Atlanta. Out-
side the centers of power and poverty, there are free towns that have to 
defend their status against the omnipresent power of the ‘multis’ but 
carry utopian hope within this Orwellian landscape. One such free 
town is Tikva (= hope) where the protagonists of the novel live: Mal-
kah, the story-teller who works with virtual defense systems in the 
town’s Base; Shira, her grand-daughter, who returns to Tikva after 
having worked for the giant corporation of Y-S; Avram who after 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
263
various unsuccessful attempts has constructed the cyborg Yod, which 
is further improved on by Malkah and Shira. Between Yod and Shira a 
relationship develops which reformulates the difference between hu-
man and machine in ways reminiscent of Donna Haraway’s “Mani-
festo for Cyborgs” (1985). As an artificial creation Yod corresponds 
to Joseph, the Golem of the Prague plot, through whom the distinction 
between creator and artifice is further problematized within a different 
media environment. Yod, as a product of the binary logic of com-
puters, and Joseph, as a product of cabbalistic magic, share a common 
origin in language in its performative rather than referential quality. 
As such they add to and supplement Piercy’s redefinition of the au-
thor-text relationship, where the performing narrative voice wanders, 
fabulates, nomadizes between narrative spaces, playing with Huxley, 
Gibson and the Cabbala alike, rather than constructing a unitary tex-
tual and phenomenal space. Malkah’s fictionalization of fact, her ac-
count of the Golem-story is not legitimized from an objective narra-
tive point of view but grounded in the principle of affinity: like Judah 
Loew she is convinced of being a bad parent, like the Rabbi she is try-
ing to protect a niche of survival, like him she creates “fictions and 
monsters” (Piercy 1991: 34). 
If both Yod and Joseph are designed to protect the marginal ha-
bitation of the protagonists against the center of power and as such 
share a deeply masculinist purpose, they are also transformed through 
the reprogramming of Shira and Chava respectively, who teach them 
human qualities to the extent that difference itself becomes questiona-
ble. If being is performance, as both Heidegger and Derrida would 
emphasize, the utopian quality of an extended present is widened here 
to include the artifact and ultimately the text itself. The dissolution of 
traditional concepts of difference, in the beginning still pervasive in 
Shira’s naive world view, encompasses the dualisms of spirit and mat-
ter, self and other, male and female. The textual practice of conven-
tional utopia is thus questioned in a similar way, as semantic territo-
ries multiply through re-metaphorization and hybridization, made 
concrete in the Bakhtinian heteroglossia of the Glop whose inhabitants 
speak their own “patois, language rich and gamy with constantly 
changing slang” (Piercy 1991: 308). The play with traditional catego-

Martina Mittag 
264
ries of identity and difference only serves the destruction of monadic 
subject positions in favor of nomadic ones.11 
Deterritorialization further affects basic categories of matter and 
spirit: Malkah, the magician and creator of chimeras, who hides a 
“real” virtual reality behind a “false” one, strongly resists the opposi-
tion between embodied matter and immaterial space.12 Other than the 
cyberpunk tradition of Gibson, where the autonomization of artificial 
intelligence marks the end of humanity13 and narrative strategies re-
main conventional, Piercy’s destabilization of boundaries transcends 
those categories and celebrates the emergence of new meaning, how-
ever evanescent and temporary. In the narrative web, cyberspace loses 
its threatening autonomy and merges with cabbalistic planes, recon-
necting the radically new within a larger view of history. As in Le 
Guin, polysemous meaning is produced through analogies, correspon-
dences, and affinities and is supported by the historical tale of the Go-
lem, told via email. 
The utopianism of He, She, and It thus turns against organicist 
ideals and perfect paradise as they have shaped Marxism as well as 
psychoanalysis and eco-feminism and tends towards a cyborg-
perspective of “partiality, irony, intimacy, and perversity” (Haraway 
1985: 67) within a technological polis, where the modern division be-
tween public and private has simply become irrelevant. In the vein of 
Haraway’s theoretical formulations, Piercy’s protagonists fight for lo-
cal rather than universal purposes; in a similar way, they appropriate 
the tools of a dominant culture, the very tools that effected their exclu-
sion: writing, computer language, and technology. As such they stand 
against the loss of responsibility, which in Gibson’s tale is brought 
about through the subject’s loss of autonomy – as Molly’s wondering 
statement: “I guess it’s just the way I’m wired” (Gibson 1995: 37) 
                                                      
11  
Thus, Yod’s identity, e.g., continually in flux and corresponding to a constant re-
programming, remains open-ended, even if his initial blue-print is overdetermi-
nate both in terms of gender and his non-humanness: “Avram made him male – 
entirely so. Avram thought that was the ideal: pure reason, pure logic, pure vi-
olence.” (Piercy 1991: 192) 
12  
Her attack in the Base shows clearly the physical effects of virtual activity: “The 
mind could be forced into a catatonic loop. A program could be launched that 
froze the ability to breathe. The brain could be simply shocked to death like an 
electrocuted rat.” (Piercy 1991: 194) 
13  
On the essentially dystopian effect of cyberpunk, see, e.g., Ross 1991. 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
265
makes clear. They also stand for a complex interplay between the hu-
man and the technological – in contrast to Gibson’s technological 
view of nature, triggered by a one-sided exchange of metaphor, as in 
the familiar opening sentence: “The sky above the port was the color 
of television, tuned to a dead channel” (Gibson 1995: 9). Against the 
fragmented images of cyberpunk, bodies are reconstituted, not as ideal 
bodies and signifiers of ‘nature’, but under the very sign of hybridity 
and multiplicity brought about by technological change. And in con-
trast to cyberpunk, there remains a utopian vision after the apocalypse 
has taken place: utopia not as a distant place in the future or a no-place 
but as a space which is as related to the present of the novel as to the 
reader’s present. If Piercy’s universe seems like a – at times fearfully 
realistic – extension of our own political and social realities today, 
utopianism is possible exactly in the same vein: as extension of a 
present aware of its history, not as teleological vision or apocalyptic 
pattern but as an open-ended enterprise manifesting itself in livable 
zones or, to speak with Jürgen Habermas, as utopian oases. 
 
 
4. The Utopian as Post-utopia 
 
Heute ist die Utopie, die ich suche, gasförmig; es ist eine 
pulverisierte, teilchenhaft schwebende Utopie. 
Italo Calvino, Kybernetik und Gespenster 
 
If ‘utopia’ in the traditional sense is inextricably intertwined with a te-
leological frame of thought and the enclosed territory of the book, re-
cent fiction tends to exceed the genre by pointing to a utopian poten-
tial through deterritorializing narrative as well as spatial and temporal 
concepts, while at the same time engaging in a renewed search for 
common ground. The awareness of boundaries that nourished the idea 
of an ideal ‘no-place’ outside reality (or beyond history) has turned in-
to a questioning of these very boundaries. The evolutionary theories 
which informed not just narrative patterns but the very distinction be-
tween modernism and postmodernism itself have given way to a de-
constructive potential that counters utopia as a genre in its very core. 
Utopianism in our time seems to go along with different ways of expe-
riencing space and time – including the divide between modernity and 
postmodernity – with the impact of new media and with a testing of 

Martina Mittag 
266
traditional boundaries between hitherto stable territories. Not entirely 
new but newly situated in terms of media environment and interaction, 
textual deterritorialization in its various forms decenters writing to-
wards the kind of open text that modernism experimented with in a far 
more enclosed aesthetical sphere. Where early postmodernism was 
still ‘modern’ in its gesture of radical rupture, late postmodernism 
picks up traces of both only to re-employ them in a wider network of 
meaning. The texts discussed here exemplify in very different ways 
how the postmodern revolt against closure and its concern with the 
processual merge with an awareness of continuity – intersubjective, 
intertextual, historical. Linking up with the reader’s reality, utopia is 
transformed from a compensatory or at least separate place of perfec-
tion into a fuzzy-logic experience of worlds to be imagined. Narrative 
strategies, by playing with multiple forms of closure, might, as in 
Pynchon, simulate a multidimensionality that runs counter to the very 
entropic processes described in the text14 or they might, as in Piercy, 
open up meaning through family resemblances that create livable 
zones within a dystopian context and thus maintain an economy of 
difference (and desire) that keeps the utopian alive. This is far beyond 
the 60s divide between arcadia and technophilia, its ‘prisonhouse of 
language’ that either provoked a Beckettian sense of the absurd or an 
extra-linguistic celebration of what’s other to the text, whether in Bur-
rough’s or Mailer’s visionary worlds of drugs and sex or the body-
oriented experiments of performance theater.15 In contrast to this, new 
fabulist approaches provide a concept of story-telling as a means for 
miracle, as a constant search for new codes and new vocabularies. If 
utopia as a genre furthermore merges with science fiction, cyberpunk, 
dystopia or media theory, the semiotic at large is situated anew, blur-
ring the boundaries between soma and sema with a new focus on the 
materiality of the word bearing the traces of non-western story-telling. 
Reconfigurations of genre are mirrored in those of the somatic; the 
cyborg-figure so familiar in postmodern culture emerges in the text as 
cyborg (see Mittag 2000b) which turns its compensatory and sealed 
existence into an open “narrative engine.”16 New reciprocal relation-
                                                      
14  
On Thomas Pynchon, see Gabriele Schwab 1987. 
15  
See my article “Paradise Now or Apokalypse Now” (Mittag 2000a). 
16  
The term was created by Michael Wutz; see Tabbi and Wutz 1996: 450. 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
267
ships with other media forms17 culminate in the endless textuality of 
the hypernovel, as Calvino might perceive it, produced by a Warhol-
like author as machine, subject to constant interpretation and reinter-
pretation, moving from sense to senses, from aesthetics to aesthesis 
(Calvino 1984: 7-26).  
Central to utopianism in an affirmative sense, then, is a search 
for new collective modes as well as a moment anticipating the livable 
rooted in narrative space itself – an anticipation which does not work 
through negation, but rather finds affirmative zones through dissolv-
ing internalized perspectives, rewriting and redefining present, past 
and future realities. Historical continuity as spatial continuity, not as 
an essentialist, but as a deconstructive project, serves as the basis for 
unfolding utopian energeia, the unrepresentable ‘trunk’ that functions 
as the material for reinscriptions. As Pynchon and Piercy in particular 
have made clear, deterritorialization in this sense points to history as 
multiple venture, to a reactivation of historical moments of decision, 
not leading to the permanent undecidabilities of Baudrillard’s night-
mares,18 but – on the contrary – to decision-making which remains 
aware of compromise and contingency.19 
Moving away from the ruptures of early postmodernism, uto-
pian narratives draw on modernist conceptions of time like Henri 
Bergson’s or William James’, or on what Bloch perceived to be a 
                                                      
17  
See Luhmann’s dictum that through the advent of new media forms a different 
ecology is formed based on new reciprocal relationships (Luhmann 1985). On 
the transformation of the literary text in new media contexts, see, e.g., Gum-
brecht and Pfeiffer 1995, Hayles 1984, and Paulson 1988. 
18  
“All the great humanist criteria of value, all the values of a civilization of 
moral, aesthetic, and practical judgment, vanish in our system of images and 
signs.” (Baudrillard 1988: 128) 
19  
Cf. Laclau’s comments on Derrida, which would unhinge Baudrillard’s view: 
“Undecidability should be literally taken as that condition from which no 
course of action necessarily follows. This means that we should not make it 
the necessary source of any concrete decision in the ethical or political sphere. 
In a first movement deconstruction extends undecidability […] to deeper and 
larger areas of social relations. The role of deconstruction is, from that per-
spective, to reactivate the moment of decision that underlies any sedimented 
set of social relations. The political and ethical significance of this first 
movement is that, by enlarging the area of structural undecidability, it also 
enlarges the area of responsibility – that is of the decision.” (Laclau 1996: 78) 

Martina Mittag 
268
“forward dawning” or “Not Yet” (Bloch 1986: passim).20 As active 
anticipation, translated into textual praxis, they interact with other 
texts and times, while being conscious of different media environ-
ments. Rather than defining a future world, this kind of utopianism 
could be described as anticipation of different modes of existence 
within representation, where utopian thought opens space, voicing the 
(im)possible,21 while remaining aware of its profound complicity with 
the “Real”. Unlike the closed nihilisms or optimisms of the period 
from the 60s to the 80s, this is easily compatible with a poststructural-
ist variant insisting on engagement, critical function and creative po-
tential. 
Following the potential of an endless process of (re)conceptua-
lization, a discursive space is created where utopian desire remains 
possible as continuous formulation of an anticipatory moment in the 
present. In this respect, Derrida’s re-evaluation of difference can be 
linked to the new sensibility towards the unheard, the différend22 in 
Lyotard’s sense, the ex-centric in Linda Hutcheon’s terms (1988) or 
the “alterity” proposed by Levinas (1961) as prior to the self and to be 
approached with wonder. If Derrida provides a utopian model without 
utopia, “a certain emancipatory promise” or “a waiting without hori-
zon of expectation” (Derrida 1994: 89, 168), it is an attempt to live 
utopian hope without metaphysical determination, without the order-
ing of history into determinate narrative patterns.23 
This becomes feasible within an engagé version of deconstruc-
tion. In the face of the general drift towards the fragmentary effects of 
a pluralism of identity politics and interested aesthetics, the renewed 
interest in the struggle over common ground has become obvious 
since the early 90s, whether manifest in the realist turn of narrative 
style, the rewriting of history, or collective identities in terms of gend-
                                                      
20  
On Bloch, see Daniel and Moylan 1997. 
21  
Cf. Derrida’s frequent allusion to the ‘(im)possible’ and Bourdieu’s allusion 
to Bloch as the thinker of the ‘possible’, “der aufgrund seiner Witterung für 
die objektive Tendenz ein ‘Real-Mögliches’ psychisch vorausnimmt.” 
(Bourdieu 1998: 45) 
22  
Understood as the “inability to articulate one’s cause in the same idiom or 
language.” (Lyotard 1993: 9) 
23  
And thus reminds us of Adorno’s “Sein, sonst nichts, ohne alle weitere Bestim-
mung und Erfüllung.” (Adorno 1985: 208) 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
269
er or race. The euphoric embrace of postmodernist clichés of ‘any-
thing goes’ were averse to this tendency, as they leave little room for 
those collective values which have come to represent a new necessity 
within the universalized – and heavily economized – structures of me-
dia culture. What is at stake here is also the repositioning of the local 
and the global, the individual and the collective – or, in Jameson’s 
terms, the totalizing and totalization.24 As a utopian praxis, this could 
save utopia from its modern entanglements in narrative, hermeneutic 
and spatial terms of telos and origin, and at the same time point to-
ward a (post)postmodernist world characterized by extreme aversion 
to totalizing explanations. While the resistance to formulations of the 
“universal” seems to conflict with the necessary collective dimension 
of the utopian, a mode of ‘as if’ pervades approaches like Piercy’s 
within changing coalitions, taking Marxism, feminism etc. as an 
“empty signifier” (Laclau 1996: passim) whose affirmative content 
derives from the interplay of the particularities involved. There will 
thus be no stable feminist, Marxist utopia; but through the opening of 
semantic systems, particular texts, images, or subjects resume more 
universal significance in and through the interaction with others. Uto-
pia here moves away from mere theory: with the acute threats of cli-
matic change and environmental disaster that our real spaces are fac-
ing at the moment, utopian thought tends to be less theoretical, aware 
of the fact that some of the realities we took for granted in the last 
century might well turn into utopias themselves. 
Central to this remains the production of meaning – and the 
reading of it. As Teresa de Lauretis has pointed out with respect to 
science fiction, utopian energy only realizes itself when translated into 
language, reorganizing semantic space (1980: 170).25 The semantiza-
tion and aestheticization of utopian Sein poses a problem within a 
                                                      
24   
Whereas totalizing would refer to an act of interpretation which remains dynamic 
and processual, totalization points at closed systems of meaning. A totalizing ap-
proach, which with Jameson (1991) of course is applied to the cultural logic of 
late capitalism from a Marxist point of view, remains an option for an academia 
faced with the fact that the impulse towards totalization has moved into the area 
of reproductive and information technology, shaping material and virtual struc-
tures that give birth to future meaning. 
25  
“The science fictional construction of a possible world […] entails a concep-
tual reorganization of semantic space and therefore of material and social rela-
tions, and makes for an expanded cognitive horizon, an epic vision of our pre-
sent social reality.” (De Lauretis 1980: 170) 

Martina Mittag 
270
postmodern frame of mind that came to be governed by the mega-
metaphor of a digitalis universalis, succeeding the logic of mathesis 
universalis. If utopianism is based on the faith that escape from the 
‘prisonhouse of language’ is possible indeed, this implies that we must 
escape the interior logic of our tools of communication which tend to 
obscure this very logic. Against the emptiness of signifiers that in Ja-
meson’s account are coupled with the “disappearance of a sense of 
history” (Jameson 1991: 125), history seems to have its comeback to 
save meaning: history, not as linear chain of events, but as other(s) to 
be approached instead of appropriated, allows us to step outside the 
logic of our own linguistic and semantic systems, of our discourses of 
knowledge, of science, and of bodies. This is where Derrida tells us to 
think of an “other historicity”, of “another opening of event-ness as 
historicity that permitted one not to renounce, but on the contrary to 
open access to an affirmative thinking of the messianic and emancipa-
tory promise as promise: as promise and not as onto-theological or te-
leo-eschatological programme or design” (Derrida 1994: 74f). Trans-
lated into the spatial dimensions discussed here, this links up with 
what Marin’s concept of utopia as “scheme on the horizon” and his 
utopian praxis of the “empty space” hinted at: “To live utopia means 
constructing the representation which will speak its impossibility and 
simultaneously indicate it as that which it excludes. It is the empty 
space bordering and framing representation. This is the space of bles-
sedness in representation, the permanent instant of happiness, all in 
one moment loss, limit and the neutral” (Marin 1984: xxvi). What is 
implied here is a deterritorialized version of space itself: utopia can 
only be utopian as an other spatiality, a spatiality defined by its links 
to other spatialities, past and present, real and virtual, here and there – 
the other of any (territorialized) space in the modern sense. 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
271
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Auster, Paul (1994). New York Trilogy. Los Angeles: Sun & Moon Press. 
— (1987). In the Country of Last Things. London: Faber & Faber. 
Atwood, Margaret (1985). The Handmaid’s Tale. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. 
Barnes, Julian (1990). Flaubert’s Parrot. London: Jonathan Cape.  
Barth, John (1967). The End of the Road. New York: Bantam Books. 
DeLillo, Don (1986). White Noise. London: Picador.  
Fiedler, Leslie (1964). Waiting for the End. New York: Stein & Day. 
Gibson, William (1995). Neuromancer. London: Harper Collins. 
Le Guin, Ursula (1974). The Dispossessed. New York: Harper & Row. 
— (1986). Always Coming Home. New York: Bantam Books. 
Piercy, Marge (1991). He, She, and It. New York: Alfred Knopf. 
Pynchon, Thomas (1973). Gravity’s Rainbow. New York: Viking Press. 
— (1966/1991). The Crying of Lot 49. London: Virago. 
— (1998). Mason and Dixon. New York: Henry Holt. 
Oates, Joyce Carol (1995). Haunted: Tales of the Grotesque. New York: Dutton. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. (1985). Minima Moralia. Reflexionen aus einem beschädigten 
Leben. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
Barr, Marlene (ed.) (1999). Future Females, The Next Generation: New Voices and 
Velocities in Feminist Science Fiction. Boston: Rowman and Littlefield. 
Baudrillard, Jean (1988). Selected Writings (ed. Mark Poster). Cambridge: Polity 
Press, Basil Blackwell. 
Bernstein, Michael A. (1994). Forgone Conclusions: Against Apocalyptic History. 
Berkeley: U of California P. 
Bloch, Ernst (1986). The Principle of Hope. 3 vols. (tr. N. Plaice, S. Plaice and P. 
Knight). Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Bourdieu, Pierre (1998). “Kapitalismus als konservative Restauration”, in: DIE ZEIT 
(22.1.1998): 45. 
Braidotti, Rosi (1994). Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in 
Contemporary Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia UP. 
Calvino, Italo (1984). Kybernetik und Gespenster. Überlegungen zu Literatur und Ge-
sellschaft. München and Wien: Hanser. 
Daniel, Jamie Owen and Tom Moylan (eds.) (1997). Not Yet: Reconsidering Ernst 
Bloch. London and New York: Verso. 
De Lauretis, Teresa (1980). “Signs of Wo/ander”, in: Andreas Huyssen, Teresa de 
Lauretis and Kathleen Woodward (eds.). The Technological Imagination. 
Madison: Coda Press, 151-74. 
Deleuze, Gilles (1983). Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: U 
of Minnesota P. 

Martina Mittag 
272
Derrida, Jacques (1984). “Of an Apocalyptic Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy”, 
in: Oxford Literary Review 6: 3-37. 
— (1994). Spectres of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, and the 
New International. New York and London: Routledge. 
Engel, Gisela (1998). “Ende der Geschichte? Ende der Utopie?”, in: Gisela Engel and 
Birgit Marx (eds.). Utopische Perspektiven. Dettelbach: Roell, 11-30. 
Foucault, Michel (1966). Les Mots et les Choses. Paris: Gallimard. 
Freese, Peter (1997). From Apocalypse to Entropy and Beyond: The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics in Post-War American Fiction. Essen: Blaue Eule. 
Fukuyama, Francis (1992). The End of History and the Last Man. New York: Free 
Press. 
Gumbrecht, Hans-Ullrich and Karl Ludwig Pfeiffer (eds.) (1995). Materialität der 
Kommunikation. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
Hamann, Götz and Jens Uehlecke (2007). “Secondlife: Die nächste Kolonie des Kapi-
talismus”, in: DIE ZEIT (4.1.2007): 24. 
Haraway, Donna (1985). “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and 
Socialist Feminism in the 1980s”, in: Socialist Review 15: 65-107. 
Hayles, N. Katherine (1984). The Cosmic Web: Scientific Field Models and Literary 
Strategies in the Twentieth Century. Ithaca: Cornell UP. 
Hutcheon, Linda (1988). A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, Fiction. New 
York: Routledge.  
Huyssen, Andreas (1986). After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Post-
modernism. Bloomington: Indiana UP. 
— (1995). “Memories of Utopia”, in: Twilight Memories: Marking Time in a Culture 
of Amnesia. New York and London: Routledge, 85-104. 
Jameson, Fredric (1991). Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 
Durham: Duke UP. 
— (1977). “Of Islands and Trenches: Neutralization and the Production of Utopian 
Discourse”, in: Diacritics 7.2: 2-21. 
— (1994). The Seeds of Time. New York: Columbia UP. 
Korzybski, Alfred (1958). Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian 
Systems and General Semantics. Lakeville: International Non-Aristotelian Li-
brary Pub. Co. 
Laclau, Ernesto (1996). Emancipation(s). London and New York: Verso. 
Levinas, Emanuel (1961). Totality and Infinity. Pittsburgh: Duquesne UP. 
Levitas, Ruth (1990). The Concept of Utopia. Syracuse: Syracuse UP. 
Luhmann, Niklas (1985). “Das Problem der Epochenbildung und die Evolutionstheo-
rie”, in: Hans-Ullrich Gumbrecht and Ursula Link-Heer (eds.). Epochen-
schwellen und Epochenstrukturen im Diskurs der Literatur- und Sprachhisto-
rie. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 11-33. 
Lyotard, Jean-Francois (1993). Political Writings. London: UCLP. 
Marin, Louis (1984). Utopics: Spatial Play (tr. Robert A. Vollrath). Atlantic High-
lands: Humanities Press. 
Mittag, Martina (2000a). “Paradise Now oder Apokalypse Now: Utopie, Apokalypse 
und das Absurde im amerikanischen Drama der 60er Jahre”, in: Amerikastu-
dien / American Studies 45.2: 251-62. 
— (2000b). “Mutierte Körper – Der Cyborg im Text und der Text als Cyborg”, in: 
Barbara Becker and Irmela Schneider (eds.). Was vom Körper übrig bleibt: 

Rethinking Deterritorialization 
273
Körperlichkeit – Identität – Medien. Frankfurt and New York: Campus, 209-
34. 
Nealon, Jeffrey T. (1993). Double Reading: Postmodernism after Deconstruction. 
Ithaca: Cornell UP. 
Paulson, William (1988). The Noise of Culture: Literary Texts in a World of Informa-
tion. Ithaca: Cornell UP. 
Rifkin, Jeremy (2000). The Age of Access: The New Culture of Hypercapitalism. New 
York: Tarcher/Putnam. 
Ross, Andrew (1991). Strange Weather: Culture, Science and Technology in the Age 
of Limits. London and New York: Verso. 
Sargent, Lyman Tower (1994). “The Three Faces of Utopianism Revisited”, in: Uto-
pian Studies 5.1: 1-38. 
Sargisson, Lucy (1996). Contemporary Feminist Utopianism. London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Schwab, Gabriele (1987). “Die Ökologie des Textes: Zu Thomas Pynchons Gravity’s 
Rainbow”, in: Amerikastudien / American Studies 32.4: 345-56. 
Seed, David (1988). The Fictional Labyrinths of Thomas Pynchon. Houndmills: Mac-
millan. 
Tabbi, Joseph and Michael Wutz (1996). “Narrative in the New Media Ecology”, in: 
Amerikastudien / American Studies 41. 3: 445-64. 
Vattimo, Gianni (1992). “From Utopia to Heterotopia”, in: The Transparent Society. 
Cambridge: Polity Press, 62-75. 
Wolmark, Jenny (1994). Aliens and Others: Science Fiction, Feminism and Postmo-
dernism. Iowa City: U of Iowa P. 


 
 
 
 
Space Construction as Cultural Practice: 
Reading William Gibson’s Neuromancer with Respect  
to Postmodern Concepts of Space 
 
Doreen Hartmann 
 
 
Abstract: In Neuromancer (1984), William Gibson elaborated a principal model of 
cyberspace and thus has contributed to the formation, establishment, and acceptance 
of the cultural concept of the electronic, virtual space. This essay will shed light on 
how Michel Foucault’s heterotopology and Michel de Certeau’s spatial practices can 
serve as models for an analysis of the peculiar aesthetic construction of Gibson’s su-
perimposing spatial concept. The fictitious worlds of Neuromancer raise questions of 
identity, authenticity, and the possible functionality of the depicted places/spaces. In 
dealing with these issues, the essay positions illusion and compensation alongside 
movement as pillars of the novel. 
 
Key names and concepts: Michel de Certeau – cyberpunk – cyberspace – dataspace – 
everyday practices – Michel Foucault – William Gibson – heterotopology – Matrix – 
Neuromancer – popular culture – postmodernism – spatial practices – spatial stories – 
spatial trajectories – urban space – virtual space  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
It is generally accepted in the human sciences that space is not an in-
ert, pre-existing given but a set of culturally influenced and histori-
cally changeable spatial relations.1 Hence, altered structures of society 
and new ways of perception have changed spatial concepts. And more 
recent developments in science and technology – for instance the in-
vention of the telephone, a space- and time-transcending medium – 
have influenced human cognition. Changes in man’s spatial and tem-
poral conception do not primarily come along with the digital era, but 
                                                      
1 
Not the first, but certainly an outstanding example of research in the field is 
Henri Léfèbvre’s The Production of Space (Léfèbvre 1974/1991). Addition-
ally, see Dünne (2004). 

Doreen Hartmann 
276
the growth of electronic space in the last third of the twentieth century 
– such as the emergence of video games or the proliferation of the 
internet – has challenged the categories of space and time. 
When William Gibson wrote Neuromancer, everyday real life 
was undergoing a radical transformation. The pervasiveness of media 
in the postmodern world shifted man’s ways of perception and led to 
the absence of a binding world view. Human beings struggled with 
acknowledging the changes resulting from intellectual and technologi-
cal innovations. Certainly, the emergence of numerous theories of 
space around this time must be seen as a response to these phenom-
ena. However, it is a moot question whether these theories can help to 
establish understanding and if they can reach large parts of society at 
all. Artistic formats (literature, film, video games, etc.) may offer 
more valuable insights in this respect. Our conceptions of the world 
and of literary texts influence each other to a certain degree: apart 
from representing the fears and anxieties arising from the present cri-
sis in space-time-conception, literature may also provide a starting 
point for dealing creatively with such cultural phenomena. The aes-
thetic exploration of cultural upheavals in science fiction literature, 
e.g., can be substituted for academic research addressing issues of 
space and culture without needing to provide all-embracing explana-
tions (see Featherstone and Burrows 1995b: 8). “Science fiction con-
structs a space of accommodation[,] [...] [where] the shock of the new 
is aestheticized and examined” (Bukatman 1993: 10).2 
Since Neuromancer was written at a time when electronic, vir-
tual space was still nascent, the urban environment it depicts played a 
central role for the reader in learning to cope with the upheavals de-
scribed above and – based on that – in gradually accepting Gibson’s 
concept of the matrix, the cyberspace: “[a] consensual hallucination[,] 
[...] [a] graphic representation of data [...]. Unthinkable complexity. 
Lines of light ranged in the non-space of the mind, clusters and con-
stellations of data” (Gibson 1984: 51). This research essay will thus 
not make use of recent theories of virtual space but will rather investi-
gate the applicability of postmodern space concepts to the novel – 
more precisely those put forward in Michel Foucault’s “Of Other 
Spaces” (1967/1986) and Michel de Certeau’s The Practice of Every-
                                                      
2 
See also Caviola 1991, who points out how postmodernist literature can serve 
readers as a means of orientation in their electronically permeated world. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
277
day Life (1980/1984). Their theories do not deal with issues of cyber-
space, but with matters of urban space, which also govern Gibson’s 
fictitious worlds: the ubiquity of information and communication 
technologies and the plethora of images, problems of identity and au-
thenticity as well as the role of movement and speed for the formation 
of urban structures. 
It is on account of the interaction of Gibson’s own reality with 
the fictitious urban space in his novel as well as the dependency of the 
novel’s urban environment on the depiction of the electronic data-
space that Neuromancer and thus the concept of cyberspace has 
gained such widespread acceptance. A thorough analysis will there-
fore have to take into account the interdependence of the dataspace 
and the fictitious real-world spaces, as well as the peculiar aesthetic 
characteristics of Gibson’s fictitious spaces. After all, Neuromancer is 
not only the result of the previously mentioned upheavals, but also the 
origin of another one, since Gibson’s principal model of cyberspace 
has contributed to the formation, establishment and acceptance of the 
cultural concept of virtual space. 
 
 
2. The ‘Real World’ as Starting Point 
 
In the 1980s, postmodern approaches marked many domains of cul-
tural life such as art, architecture, fashion, or popular culture. Gener-
ally speaking, postmodern literature does not only not give priority to 
the content of a fictional narrative, but even refuses its linearity. It is 
often related to the author’s and reader’s material world and even 
seeks to integrate the reader’s interpretative activity in order to con-
cretise the depicted fictional universe (see Müller 2001: 449f). But 
this is not to say that the physical space provides a solid basis for ei-
ther author or reader. On the contrary, “this shared notion of the ter-
restrial sphere has crumbled” (Caviola 1991: 4). In eroding consoli-
dated notions of what the world is, postmodern novels often establish 
temporary and fragmentary models of knowledge (see Mayer 2001: 
522) and “question received notions of orientation” (Caviola 1991: 1). 
As a (dystopic) sub-genre of postmodern3 science fiction literature, 
                                                      
3 
It was none other than Fredric Jameson who established a close relation be-
tween cyberpunk literature and postmodernism in Postmodernism, or, The 
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism: “This is the place to regret the absence 

Doreen Hartmann 
278
cyberpunk novels like Neuromancer4 comprise most of these disrup-
tions and instabilities. The challenge to established notions of space 
and time are inscribed in the Gibsonian spaces as leaps between and 
overlappings of spaces. A postmodern reading of the novel thus has to 
“take into account the interaction of various literary spatialities”, more 
precisely the “interaction between the fictional universe, the typo-
graphical ‘image’ on the page, and the reader’s/writer’s physical 
spaces” (Caviola 1991: 4f).5 
In what follows, the discussion will focus on how postmoder-
nity changed received notions of space. It can be taken for granted that 
one main effect was that literature had already started to deal with cy-
berspace before it became an important topic in society. Hence, the 
discourse on the subject of virtual, electronic space endeavoured to 
make comprehensible what was immaterial. Gibson could accomplish 
this only by using his impressions of the ‘real world’ as sources of in-
spiration. For, although postmodernism has challenged traditional as-
sumptions of reality and identity, these impressions still present a col-
lective basis for the description of cyberspace on the part of the author 
as well as for its decoding on the part of the reader. 
 
 
2.1. Escape from Everyday Life 
 
Although literary exaggeration is a popular stylistic device to accentu-
ate referential meanings, the unreal scenarios of science fiction novels 
are often misleadingly assumed to be based on the Fantastic alone (see 
Kneale 1999: 208). Gibson’s ironic diction – another stylistic device 
of postmodern writing – has repeatedly been misunderstood, even 
though it reveals the tension between real-world structures and their 
                                                                                                                  
from this book of a chapter on cyberpunk, [...] the supreme literary expression 
if not of postmodernism, then of late capitalism itself” (Jameson 1991: 419).  
4 
Although the term ‘cyberpunk’ had already been used by Bruce Bethke in his 
1980 short story of the same title, it was Gibson’s use of the term in a novel 
that really established the term. 
5 
Unfortunately, the scope of this essay does not allow for a consideration of the 
structure and typography of the novel, although an analysis of such a spatial 
reading experience would be highly illuminative. A promising starting-point 
has been offered by Karin Wenz in her formative study Raum, Raumsprache 
und Sprachräume (1997). 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
279
fictitious transformation in admirable clarity. “The gap between the 
worlds of cyberpunk and of the reader may not be very wide, [...] uto-
pian or dystopian fiction draws its strength from its movement be-
tween the known and the unknown” (Kitchin and Kneale 2002b: 10). 
The reader feels comfortable in Gibson’s world as it evokes familiar 
images: “Friday night in Ninsei. He passed yakitori stands and mas-
sage parlor, a franchised coffee shop called Beautiful Girl, the elec-
tronic thunder of an arcade” (Gibson 1984: 10). On the basis of these 
urban depictions, Gibson creates the unknown cyberspace. He does 
not contrive a dystopic future, but rather deals with the present social, 
cultural, economic and political conditions of his environment. Into 
the glittering, affluent high-tech cities linked to ideas of liberty, 
boundless mobility, wealth, and power erupts the frightening view of 
poverty, wretchedness, and unemployment in the slums, comprising 
feelings of human uprootedness and alienation (see Dodge and 
Kitchin 2001: 196f). This dual spatiality is a central topic of Gibson’s 
novel, where such ambivalences structure society, organise cities, and 
generate a need for ‘other spaces’. In Neuromancer, the cyberspace is 
such an alternative space. And since arcologies,6 theme parks, and 
malls already obeyed the pattern of neutralising space and time and of 
negating the outside world by enclosing it within their own halls, cy-
berspace merely appeared to be a recent transformation of this concept 
(see Bukatman 1993: 121ff and Rötzer 1998: 213). 
If one considers science fiction worlds as a refuge, it is neces-
sary to differentiate between two points of view: first, the novel’s ori-
gins lie in Gibson’s own sense of reality. The author uses the process 
of writing as a means of escape from his everyday life circumstances, 
insofar as he actively creates another space as a way out. Gibson once 
described the attraction science fiction literature has always had for 
him: “One of the liberating effects of SF [...] was precisely its ability 
to tune me in to all sorts of strange data and make me realize that I 
wasn’t as totally isolated in perceiving the world as being monstrous 
and crazy” (McCaffery 1991b: 276). The second aspect is the escape 
into the matrix as experienced by the protagonist. Travelling through 
                                                      
6 
See Gibson 1984: 6 and 39. A portmanteau word of ‘architecture’ and ‘ecol-
ogy’ going back to the work of architect Paolo Soleri. In the face of overpopu-
lation and sprawling urbanisation accompanied by ecological destruction, he 
developed a design principle for environmentally sound habitats, self-
contained cities of high population density enclosed in a single building. 

Doreen Hartmann 
280
the unconventional vastness of the virtual space counterbalances the 
oppressive narrowness of the “coffin hotels” (Gibson 1984: 5) and the 
cruelty on the streets of Tokyo and the Sprawl. The significance of the 
matrix space is reflected in its colour code. While the matrix is de-
picted as a shiny and colourful (“pink structure”, “emerald arches”; 
Gibson 1984: 168, 204), bright place (“lines of light”, “lattices of 
light”; Gibson 1984: 51, 115) structured by distinct shapes (“simple 
cube of white light”; Gibson 1984: 115), the real-world cities are char-
acterised by a dull drabness: “Beyond the neon shudder of Ninsei, the 
sky was that mean shade of gray. The air had gotten worse; it seemed 
to have teeth tonight, and half the crowd wore filtration masks” (Gib-
son 1984: 15). Gibson uses the word “gray” more than forty times as a 
means of describing subjects, places, or situations of the urban envi-
ronment. Depicting its well-organised, regular electronic beauty 
(“bright lattices of logic”; Gibson 1984: 5), Gibson credits the data-
space with a much more aesthetically appealing architecture than the 
inordinate sprawling space which hems in its inhabitants (“the over-
heated darkness of a coffin”; Gibson 1984: 9) and is permanently on 
the verge of being suffocated by the “drifting shoals of waste” (Gibson 
1984: 39; for a similar example see 72). The Chiba City arcades fulfil 
a similar purpose as the matrix: the video games provide the possibil-
ity “to escape for an alternative environment without the daily pres-
sure of life in ‘the real world’” (Bukatman 1993: 200). The player’s 
burden of everyday life and the sense of being abandoned can disap-
pear while playing. 
Just like Gibson and his characters, then, the readers can escape 
into an alternative space by projecting themselves into the novel, 
which provides a basis in search of new schemes of identity and real-
ity. According to Caviola, this is 
 
the specific postmodernist presentation of space, involving the au-
thor’s and reader’s role. [...] The reader is both aware of the artificial-
ity of the fictional world and yet half-immersed in it through identifi-
cation. Caught in this double-bind, he is admitted into a secret com-
munion with the author who created this world. (Caviola 1991: 3) 
 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
281
2.2. References to Phenomena of Popular Culture 
 
Gibson’s fictitious worlds are cluttered with media. Being asked how 
much influence other media than literature had on his novel, Gibson 
once responded:  
 
Probably more than fiction. [...] I’ve been influenced by Lou Reed, for 
instance, as much as I’ve been by any ‘fiction’ writer. I was going to 
use a quote from an old Velvet Underground song – “Watch out for 
worlds behind you” (from ‘Sunday Morning’) – as an epigraph for 
Neuromancer. (McCaffery 1991b: 265) 
 
Neuromancer is a collage of medial references: there is the constant 
stream of “dub”-music, “a sensuous mosaic cooked from vast libraries 
of digitalized pop” (Gibson 1984: 104); some places are filled with 
television- and computer monitors, books, and magazines and thus 
appear like museums or archives and even the protagonists themselves 
look like they were generated from the media: “It was like the culmi-
nation of a life-time’s observation of martial arts tapes […]. For a few 
seconds […] she was every bad-ass hero, Sony Mao in the old Shaw 
videos, Mickey Chiba, the whole lineage back to Lee and Eastwood” 
(Gibson 1984: 213). For Csicsery-Ronay, cyberpunk in itself is a way 
of writing heavily influenced by popular culture: “[A] literature com-
peting and allied with video games, MTV and new wave rock” 
(Csicsery-Ronay 1991: 183). 
Gibson, for example, was guided by the Film Noir and images 
of Heavy Metal magazines.7 In the introduction to the Graphic Novel 
of Neuromancer, he writes: “So it’s entirely fair to say, and I’ve said it 
before, that the way Neuromancer-the-novel ‘looks’ was influenced in 
large part by some of the artwork I saw in Heavy Metal” (Gibson 
1989b: 5). In quite a similar fashion, the depiction of the matrix space 
in Neuromancer seems to have been influenced by Lisberger’s film 
TRON (1982). The film Blade Runner (1982) also left a mark on Gib-
son. On the occasion of Blade Runner’s tenth anniversary, he re-
marked: 
 
                                                      
7 
English title of the French science fiction and horror comic magazine Métal 
Hurlant. 

Doreen Hartmann 
282
About ten minutes into Blade Runner, I reeled out of the theater in 
complete despair over its visual brilliance and its similarity to the 
‘look’ of Neuromancer, my [then] largely unwritten first novel. Not 
only had I been beaten to the semiotic punch, but this damned movie 
looked better than the images in my head! (Loud 1992) 
 
In addition to these sources of inspiration for the fictitious living envi-
ronment of the cyberpunks, the virtuality of the materials, and the ar-
chitecture of the corporate arcologies, the peculiar depiction of the vir-
tual matrix space in Neuromancer at least has two further sources: 
Lisberger’s film TRON (1982) and video games: “‘The Matrix has its 
roots in primitive arcade games’, [...] ‘in early graphics programs’” 
(Gibson 1984: 51). In an interview, the author explained that he found 
great inspiration in gaming youngsters. 
 
I was walking down Granville Street [...] and I looked into one of the 
video arcades. I could see in the physical intensity of their postures 
how rapt the kids inside were. It was like one of those closed systems 
out of a Pynchon novel: a feedback loop with photons coming off the 
screens into the kid’s eyes, neurons moving through their bodies, and 
electrons moving through the video game. These kids clearly believed 
in the space games projected. Everyone I know who works with com-
puters seems to develop a belief that there’s some kind of actual space 
behind the screen, someplace you can’t see but you know is there. 
(McCaffery 1991b: 272) 
 
It was mainly the presence of space in this setting which left a perma-
nent impression on Gibson. The heyday of cyberpunk literature and 
the proliferation of video games8 took place simultaneously. Without 
wanting to claim that one emanated from the other, we can see that 
both truly share aesthetic concepts such as the presentation of space. 
However, by asserting this dependency Gibson minimizes how much 
he himself anticipated. The major settings in Neuromancer are the 
“rich fields of data” (Gibson 1984: 5). Since these sites can be com-
pared neither to the virtual spaces of video games nor to data networks 
such as the internet, Gibson depicts a perfectly new idea,9 which was 
                                                      
8 
Although video games had existed before, they only became popular in the 
early 1980s due to technical developments and graphical enhancements. 
9 
The visual idea of the abstract dataspace was established principally by the 
depictions in Gibson’s novel. To give just a few examples that show how 
relevant Gibson’s concept of cyberspace still is: nearly all theories broaching 
the issue of cyberspace refer to Gibson as a source of inspiration. His influ-

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
283
labelled Gibsonian cyberspace by Featherstone and Burrows (1995b: 
6). It is, above all, the interlacing of disparate spatial concepts10 that 
characterises Gibson’s novel. 
This becomes especially clear when spaces interfere with each 
other. Shortly after Commodore launched the C64 at the end of 1982 – 
one of the first affordable home computers – computers and screens 
became ubiquitous. The already existing mass of images and sounds 
increased and technology became more dominant in “the postmodern 
city whose arteries circulate information” (Hollinger 1991: 205). In 
Neuromancer, protagonist Case falls victim to this plethora of images. 
Rambling through the streets of Tokyo, he becomes aware of how 
technology and the physical urban space interfere with each other. For 
Case, wandering around feels like 
 
a run in the matrix. [...] it was possible to see Ninsei as a field of 
data[:] [...] you could throw yourself into a high-speed drift and skid, 
totally engaged but set apart from it all, and all around you the dance 
of biz, information interacting, data made flesh in the mazes of the 
black market… (Gibson 1984: 116) 
 
It must be attributed to the interplay of physical space and cyberspace 
that Gibson can paint such a vivid picture in his novel: “Urban space 
and cyberspace become reciprocal metaphors – each enables an un-
derstanding and negotiation of the other” (Bukatman 1993: 145). 
 
 
                                                                                                                  
ence on approaches to both research in cyberspace and practical implementa-
tions of electronic spaces in cartography is irrefutable (see Tomas 1992: 46). 
The young science of cybergeography partly finds answers and modes of rep-
resentation in Gibson’s space concept (see Dodge and Kitchin 2001: 185); and 
the influence of Neuromancer on the Wachowski brothers is highly visible in 
their film The Matrix (1999). 
10 
Certainly the diverse spatialities in Neuromancer have to be distinguished 
analytically. For instance the space in video games is Euclidean and three-
dimensional (projected onto the two dimensions of the screen), whereas the 
Internet (in today’s sense of the word) is not. 

Doreen Hartmann 
284
3. Fictitious Spaces and Spatial Concepts 
3.1. The Interplay of Spaces 
 
Although important features distinguish the physical world from cy-
berspace, these are not autonomous but mutually dependent.11 Virtual 
space is based upon the artificially created urban space insofar as cit-
ies anticipate structures of the dataspace: According to Florian Rötzer, 
cities are “in Stein gebildete[r] Cyberspace” (Rötzer 1998: 210). Simi-
larly, Gibson continuously suggests this connection, for instance when 
he characterises the matrix as “landscape simulation” (Gibson 1984: 
51), compares a pattern to “microcircuits, or a city map” (Gibson 
1984: 9; emphasis added), or depicts cyberspace with the help of im-
ages taken from urban life: “the horizonless fields of the Tessier-
Ashpool cores, an endless neon cityscape […]. The Kuang program 
dived past the gleaming spires of a dozen identical towers of data, 
each one a blue neon replica of the Manhattan skyscraper.” (Gibson 
1984: 256f) 
In Neuromancer, Gibson combines the depiction of at least two 
ontologically different spaces: the physical space – appearing futuris-
tic due to its technical innovations – and the electronic space of the 
matrix. The cyberspace as described in the novel refers to both the 
protagonist’s physical world and, most notably, to the author’s sense 
of reality inasmuch as Gibson incorporates his impressions of the ‘real 
world’ into the novel. The author makes use of the materiality of ur-
ban space in order to deal with the immateriality of the matrix, of 
which he tries to give his readers a visual idea. Gibson thus manages 
to represent the abstract concept of cyberspace, which otherwise 
would threaten to exceed the reader’s imagination. His depictions of 
virtual and urban space invite the utilisation of established space theo-
ries in order to analyse spatiality in Neuromancer. 
Michel Foucault’s and Michel de Certeau’s thoughts on space 
as presented below are part of a new, postmodern space concept, 
which stems from the notion that political, social, and cultural condi-
tions have enormously changed; for this reason, both consider space 
as socially produced. Investigating to what extent they can be fruitful 
                                                      
11 
These dependencies have been sufficiently discussed. For further reading, see 
Dodge and Kitchin 2001, Rötzer 1998, and Geyh 2001. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
285
for an analysis of the Gibsonian spaces appears to be very promising, 
insofar as they all originate from similar sources. 
 
 
3.2. Fictitious Heterotopias 
 
In the spring of 1967, Michel Foucault gave a lecture in Paris entitled 
“Des Espaces Autres” (“Of Other Spaces”). He discussed patterns of 
analysing space that transcend the mere description of the physical 
facts of places and called this new discipline ‘heterotopology’. Fou-
cault’s basic assumption for his preoccupation with space is that 
 
[t]he present epoch will perhaps be above all the epoch of space. We 
are in the epoch of simultaneity: we are in the epoch of juxtaposition, 
the epoch of the near and far, of the side-by-side, of the dispersed. We 
are at a moment, I believe, when our experience of the world is less 
that of a long life developing through time than that of a network that 
connects points and intersects with its own skein. (Foucault 1986: 22) 
 
Hence, the predominant model of our time is the network; the world is 
defined by “relations of proximity” (Foucault 1986: 23). Obviously, 
this non-linear network structure puts Foucault’s concept close to Gib-
son’s matrix space, as he writes: “The site is defined by relations of 
proximity between points or elements; formally, we can describe these 
relations as series, trees, or grids” (Foucault 1986: 23). 
Foucault examines certain sites “that have the curious property 
of being in relation with all the other sites, but in such a way as to 
suspect, neutralize, or invent the set of relations that they happen to 
designate, mirror, or reflect” (Foucault 1986: 24). He divides these 
ambivalent spaces into ‘utopias’, which are “sites with no real place”, 
sites that “present society itself in a perfected form, or else society 
turned upside down, but in any case these utopias are fundamentally 
unreal spaces” (Foucault 1986: 24). As a contrast, Foucault establishes 
the concept of ‘heterotopias’, which he describes as 
 
real places – places that do exist and that are formed in the very 
founding of society – which are something like counter-sites, a kind of 
effectively enacted utopia in which the real sites, all the other real 
sites that can be found within the culture, are simultaneously repre-
sented, contested, and inverted. Places of this kind are outside of all 

Doreen Hartmann 
286
places, even though it may be possible to indicate their location in re-
ality. (Foucault 1986: 24) 
 
Exemplarily, Foucault mentions hospitals, retirement homes, cemeter-
ies, gardens, museums, libraries, and theatres. Thus, heterotopias are 
often institutions with restricted access and spatially demarcated 
places in society. Opposed to the disorderliness of the (postmodern) 
environment, heterotopias are subjected to well-defined rules. Adams’ 
description of the cyberspace as “geschlossenes System projizierten 
Raums” (Adams 1996: 192) suggests a consideration of it as a het-
erotopia. 
Intuitively, one might think of cyberspace as a utopia situated in 
one’s imagination only. But in Neuromancer, Gibson maps out a com-
pletely different concept of such futuristic, immaterial spaces as hav-
ing a severe impact on the protagonists. Their influence on the mate-
rial world makes the novel’s non-physical places appear to be ‘real 
places’ or heterotopic sites. When the protagonist Case jacks into the 
matrix – that is, strapping an electrode interface across his forehead in 
order to enter the matrix –, he bodily experiences the cyberspace, al-
though his physical body remains in the ‘real world’. Pulling the 
trodes off his head after a trip through the matrix, he is “drenched with 
sweat” (Gibson 1984: 65) and, being connected to Molly’s sensorium 
via an unedited ‘simstim’ unit (a machine to simulate stimuli; it en-
ables a person to see through another one’s eyes and feel his/her feel-
ings), he suffers her pain: “Case hit the Sim-Stim switch. And flipped 
into the agony of broken bone” (Gibson 1984: 64). Gibson does not 
explain how the emotion transfer takes place, but even if Case only 
imagines the pain, at least the sweat is an undeniable physical experi-
ence and reveals the “nonspace of the mind” (Gibson 1984: 51) as be-
ing real. And, as mentioned above, if one regards the Gibsonian cy-
berspace as a complement to reality based upon physical space, this 
furthermore puts it in relation to the concept of heterotopia. 
In the following, three of the six principles that Foucault names 
in order to describe heterotopias will be illustrated by adducing exam-
ples from Neuromancer. The overall aim is to find out to what extent 
Gibson’s spaces can be regarded as heterotopias. One of these princi-
ples is that heterotopias unite contrasts: “The heterotopia is capable of 
juxtaposing in a single real place several spaces, several sites that are 
in themselves incompatible” (Foucault 1986: 25). Moreover, heteroto-

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
287
pias are imbued with a sense of time that differs from our ordinary 
temporal conception, for they “are most often linked to slices in time – 
which is to say that they open onto what might be termed, for the sake 
of symmetry, heterochronies” (Foucault 1986: 26). These differences 
do not simply arise in the matrix; five hours in cyberspace correspond 
to five hours in the ‘real world’. The peculiar sense of time of the ma-
trix becomes manifest when the artificial intelligence (AI) Wintermute 
outflanks Case, so that the latter makes mistakes when jacking in or 
out and finally suffers brain death. When Wintermute wants to take 
Case for a ‘ride’ to the Villa Straylight, the AI argues against Case’s 
doubts: “You aren’t missing anything, back there. An hour here’ll 
only take you a couple of seconds” (Gibson 1984: 169). After several 
pages of description of their exploration of the TA-Clan domicile, 
Dixie explains: “You were braindead again, five seconds” (Gibson 
1984: 175; for a similar example, see 236). Referring to museums or 
libraries, Foucault exemplifies the “heterotopias of indefinitely accu-
mulating time” as those 
 
in which time never stops building up and topping its own summit 
[...]. [...] [It is the idea] of establishing a sort of general archive, the 
will to enclose in one place all times, all epochs, all forms, all tastes, 
the idea of constituting a place of all times[,] [...] a sort of perpetual 
and indefinite accumulation of time in an immobile place [...]. (Fou-
cault 1986: 26) 
 
Thus, Gibson’s depiction of the Villa Straylight seems to be a het-
erotopia par excellence: an “accumulation of time” (Foucault 1986: 
26). Its rooms are filled with artefacts from diverse, former epochs 
that do not match: 
 
The low, vaulted hallway was lined with dozens of museum cases, ar-
chaic-looking glass-fronted boxes made of brown wood. They looked 
awkward there, [...] as though they’d been brought in and set up in a 
line for some forgotten purpose. (Gibson 1984: 176) 
He wondered vaguely if Tessier-Ashpool had selected each 
piece of Straylight individually, or if they’d purchased it in bulk from 
some vast European equivalent of Metro Holografix. (Gibson 1984: 
232) 
 
If the composition of the showcases was “the expression of an indi-
vidual choice” (Foucault 1986: 26), the Villa can only be considered a 

Doreen Hartmann 
288
collection of seventeenth century objects. However, insofar as it once 
answered a purpose that in the course of time was merely forgotten, 
the Villa can be read as a heterotopic place. The impression of inco-
herency given by the various accumulated objects is even intensified 
by the fact that Freeside and the Villa are artificially constructed 
places without any historical background. The integration of so many 
epochs seems like an effort to charge these sites with history. Another 
one of Foucault’s principles has to do with transit: 
 
Heterotopias always presuppose a system of opening and closing that 
both isolates them and makes them penetrable. In general, the het-
erotopic site is not freely accessible like a public place. Either the en-
try is compulsory [...] or else the individual has to submit to rites and 
purifications. To get in one must have a certain permission and make 
certain gestures. (Foucault 1986: 26) 
 
Neuromancer’s most frequent form of transit is Case’s entering the 
matrix: “He settled the black terry sweatband across his forehead, 
careful not to disturb the flat Sendai dermatrodes. [...] Found the 
ridged face of the power stud” (Gibson 1984: 52). A meticulous ritual 
in the beginning, ‘jacking in’ more and more turns into a routine 
throughout the novel. Likewise, the Finn’s dwelling emerges as a het-
erotopic site accessible only through special rites. When Molly and 
Case visit the Finn, Molly has to perform a set of gestures in front of 
his door in order to get it open: “The door was a sheet of corrugated 
roofing. In front of it, Molly’s hands flowed through an intricate se-
quence of jive that he couldn’t follow. [...] The door swung inward 
and she led him into the smell of dust” (Gibson 1984: 47f). 
Linked to these transits, Foucault writes (1986: 26), are hetero-
topias “that seem to be pure and simple openings, but that generally 
hide curious exclusions”, and he refers to the odd functionality of the 
American motels where “illicit sex is both absolutely sheltered and 
absolutely hidden, kept isolated without however being allowed out in 
the open” (Foucault 1986: 27). Obviously, the one-sidedness of sim-
stim contains such an ambiguity as well. Even though he is intimately 
connected to Molly’s sensorium, Case cannot overcome the distance 
between himself and her: “For a few frightened seconds he fought 
helplessly to control her body. Then he willed himself into passivity, 
became the passenger behind her eyes. [...] But the link was one-way. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
289
He had no way to reply” (Gibson 1984: 56). He is, thus, simultane-
ously admitted and excluded. 
According to Foucault, even though their role may change dur-
ing the history of mankind, heterotopias always serve either as an illu-
sion or as a compensation with regard to given social structures. 
 
Either their role is to create a space of illusion that exposes every real 
space, all the sites inside of which human life is partitioned, as still 
more illusory [...]. Or else, on the contrary, their role is to create a 
space that is other, another real space, as perfect, as meticulous, as 
well arranged as ours is messy, ill constructed, and jumbled. This lat-
ter type would be the heterotopia, not of illusion, but of compensation 
[...] (Foucault 1986: 27). 
 
It has already been explained how the alternate (cyber)space functions 
as a refuge for the protagonist. Cyberspace is based on a “well ar-
ranged” grid. It compensates the disorder of everyday life as the “col-
orless void” (Gibson 1984: 5) offers a perfect site for the projection of 
the participants’ fantasies. Apart from that, Gibson’s spaces also cause 
illusions in many ways: they disguise themselves in order to appear as 
something they are not; they adopt another identity in order to conceal 
their fictitiousness. Klepper refers to the Sprawl as well as to cyber-
space when he states: “Beide Realitäten verdecken etwas, beide 
decken etwas auf. Das Zwischenland der Cyberspace-Romane ist in 
sich gedoppelt, weil die Welt, die es fingiert, selbst zunehmend fin-
giert ist” (Klepper 2002: 79). 
 
 
3.3. Movement as Spatial Practice 
 
In The Practice of Everyday Life, de Certeau traces “everyday prac-
tices” (de Certeau 1984: xii), ways of operating, such as speaking, 
writing, reading, or travelling, which all, to some degree, comprise 
movement. In order to characterise these practices as a means of the 
social construction of space, de Certeau introduces the terms strategy 
and tactic: the former relates to places and ‘strong’ institutions, the 
latter is connected with space and ‘weak’ individuals. In the following 
discussion, these terms will be explained step by step, in order to ex-
amine systematically the extent to which de Certeau’s conceptual con-
struct is applicable to the spaces in Neuromancer. 

Doreen Hartmann 
290
De Certeau defines a place (lieu) as 
 
the order (of whatever kind) in accord with which elements are dis-
tributed in relationships of coexistence. It thus excludes the possibility 
of two things being in the same location (place). The law of the 
“proper” rules in the place: the elements taken into consideration are 
beside one another, each situated in its own proper and distinct loca-
tion, a location it defines. A place is thus an instantaneous configura-
tion of positions. It implies an indication of stability. (De Certeau 
1984: 117) 
 
Thus, a place consists of a rigid structure. However, a place is always 
interrelated to the outside world, as it serves as a basis for all practices 
and the individual’s relation to his/her environment. No matter how 
stable its inner structure may be, a place is nevertheless vulnerable. 
The significance of a place is by no means static, but to a large extent 
determined by the way it is used. Gibson presents the structure of the 
cities and the cyberspace in Neuromancer as being maintained by such 
places – for instance, Wintermute’s power and complexity materialise 
as a “simple cube of white light” (Gibson 1984: 115) – but above all, 
the protagonist’s movement is reflected in the fictitious space of ac-
tion and shapes it. The Artificial Intelligence’s place gains in impor-
tance whenever Case is within reach. According to de Certeau, it is 
not until places are vitalized by their user’s movement that space can 
emerge. 
 
A space exists when one takes into consideration vectors of direction, 
velocities, and time variables. Thus space is composed of intersections 
of mobile elements. It is in a sense actuated by the ensembles of 
movements deployed within it. Space occurs as the effect produced by 
the operations that orient it, situate it, temporalize it [...]. In contradis-
tinction to the place, it has thus none of the univocity or stability of a 
“proper.” (De Certeau 1984: 117) 
 
Thus, space is defined in contrast to place: permanent mutability is 
opposed to a geometrical shape, movement is opposed to a fixed con-
dition. However, space cannot exist without places. It is bound to ma-
teriality: the specific places and the user’s movement through them. 
Movement connects place and space. As de Certeau puts it: “In short, 
space is a practiced place. Thus the street geometrically defined by 
urban planning is transformed into a space by walkers” (1984: 117). 
Places are the material used by the inhabitants to create space. The 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
291
space of action in Neuromancer evolves from a steady to and fro 
movement. Armitage’s team is constantly travelling; the action 
switches from Tokyo’s Chiba City to BAMA, Paris, Istanbul, Freeside 
and simultaneously to cyberspace and back. 
In his discussion of questions concerning narration, de Certeau 
states: “Stories [...] traverse and organize places; they select and link 
them together; they make sentences and itineraries out of them. They 
are spatial trajectories” (1984: 115). Astonishingly, he argues that sto-
ries traverse places as well as spaces. At first sight, it seems as if he 
uses these terms synonymously and has suspended their previously 
specified dependency. This discrepancy disappears when one regards 
de Certeau’s remarks first from the position of the author and then 
from that of the reader. At first, writing creates a place or rather trav-
erse sites and (consecutively) strings them together in the text. Once 
the text is written, it is the reader’s turn to pace out the sentences and 
form his/her notion of spatiality based on the presented places. In de 
Certeau’s words: “an act of reading is the space produced by the prac-
tice of a particular place: a written text, i.e., a place constituted by a 
system of signs” (1984: 117). 
In Neuromancer, the urban structures of the metropolises as 
well as the matrix grid are conceptualised as spaces of action, be they 
the Ninsei in Chiba City or the visual representation of objects in the 
matrix. This is due to the fact that the matrix is in itself a blank space: 
“the infinite neuroelectronic void of the matrix” (Gibson 1984: 115). 
Reading the textual descriptions of how the protagonists experience 
places, the reader can bodily perceive their spatial journeys. Putting 
together these impressions, he receives a picture of the whole. Touch-
ing on the importance of movement in these spaces, James Kneale re-
fers to Brosseau, who calls this method of writing “‘kinetic descrip-
tion’” (quoted in Kneale 1999: 209). The mere depiction of sites is 
thus diminished in favour of the multilayered representation of spatial 
action: “cyberspace is too fantastic a space to be comprehensively de-
tailed and thickened in the style associated with realistic fiction” 
(quoted in Kneale 1999: 209). Jacked into the matrix, Case explores 
space by pacing out different itineraries in the network. Gibson does 
not describe places and objects separately; he literally navigates the 
readers along the route in order to give them an idea of the space of 
action. De Certeau says that “[e]very story is a travel story – a spatial 
practice” (1984: 115). Insofar as the detailed descriptions in Neuro-

Doreen Hartmann 
292
mancer make the reader fathom space and thus “produc[e] geo-
graphies of action” (de Certeau 1984: 116), they can be understood as 
“spatial stories” (de Certeau 1984: 115) that “organize walks. They 
make the journey, before or during the time the feet perform it” (de 
Certeau 1984: 116). 
What de Certeau calls ‘strategies’ is reserved for the ‘strong’ of 
society, as only they are in possession of the necessary places. Since 
they rely on their material property, the ‘strong’ try to shield them-
selves from intrusions from the outside world. Strategic action per-
petually aims to set up conglomerates of power; the importance of a 
place thus results from its being invested with power (see de Certeau 
1984: xix). In Neuromancer, the big concern Sense/Net resembles 
such a powerful institution and its “intrusion countermeasures elec-
tronics” (ICE) (Gibson 1984: 28) represent its precaution against 
hackers like Case. 
De Certeau’s ‘tactics’ are based on this fixed order of the places 
as “clever tricks of the ‘weak’ within the order established by the 
‘strong’” (de Certeau 1984: 40). He identifies the tactic as 
 
a calculus which cannot count on a “proper” (a spatial or institutional 
localization), nor thus on a borderline distinguishing the other as a 
visible totality. The place of a tactic belongs to the other. A tactic in-
sinuates itself into the other’s place, fragmentarily, without taking it 
over in its entirety, without being able to keep it at a distance. It has at 
its disposal no base where it can capitalize on its advantages, prepare 
its expansions, and secure independence with respect to circum-
stances. The “proper” is as victory of space [sic]12 over time. On the 
contrary, because it does not have a place, a tactic depends on time – it 
is always on the watch for opportunities that must be seized “on the 
wing”. (De Certeau 1984: xix) 
 
De Certeau’s tactics offer an appropriate model for describing the cy-
berspace cowboy’s actions in the unsecured corporate networks (see 
Bukatman 1993: 210-13). It is exactly this kind of action that is re-
sponsible for the conception of space which Neuromancer conveys. 
Case takes advantage of the controlled territory belonging to powerful 
corporations when he, for example, risks accessing the Sense/Net data 
network in order to collect information. “A thief, he’d worked for 
                                                      
12 
The French original of de Certeau’s text here says “lieu” (= place), which in-
deed makes more sense. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
293
other, wealthier thieves, employers who provided the exotic software 
required to penetrate the bright walls of corporate systems, opening 
windows into rich fields of data” (Gibson 1984: 5). His cyberspace 
trips mostly last just a few seconds: “on the wing”, he collects the 
relevant data before swiftly leaving “the other’s place”. Case makes 
use of the deficiencies of the system being attacked, which allows him 
to subvert the laws of that system “from within” (de Certeau 1984: 
32). “Ice patterns formed and reformed on the screen as he probed for 
gaps, skirted the most obvious traps, and mapped the route he’d take 
through Sense/Net’s ice” (Gibson 1984: 59). When Case enters the 
networks of the ‘strong’, power relations between the involved parties 
change. The shapes representing Case’s teammates (“[t]he module’s 
central screen displayed a fixed red square that represented the Stray-
light dock. Garvey was a larger square, green”; Gibson 1984: 222) 
transform under his tactical manoeuvres into another spatial arrange-
ment: “He tapped a final sequence into the module and grabbed the 
worn pink handholds on either side of the navigation board. Case saw 
the green square shrink a final few millimeters to overlap the red 
square” (Gibson 1984: 223). 
Tactics or – in particular – movements understood as action in 
space “give their shape to spaces. They weave places together” (de 
Certeau 1984: 97). Gibson’s ‘Sprawl’ as well as the matrix are em-
bodiments of such a ‘weaving together’: they are based on places but 
become what they are at large only through the user’s movements. 
The movement of the city’s inhabitants and of the actors in the matrix 
in Neuromancer structures space as something fluid. Through their 
movements, they appropriate the topographical material and thus 
transform place into space (see de Certeau 1984: 97f). Night City thus 
becomes a “playground” (Gibson 1984: 11) only because its inhabi-
tants vitalize it. 
 
Night City was like a deranged experiment in social Darwinism, de-
signed by a bored researcher who kept one thumb permanently on the 
fast-forward button. Stop hustling and you sank without a trace, but 
move a little too swiftly and you’d break the fragile surface tension of 
the black market. (Gibson 1984: 7) 
 
Action and movement on the streets refresh and transform the spatial 
order: 
 

Doreen Hartmann 
294
The walker transforms each spatial signifier into something else. And 
if on the one hand he actualizes only a few of the possibilities fixed by 
the constructed order (he goes only here and not there), on the other 
hand he increases the number of possibilities (for example, by creating 
shortcuts and detours). (De Certeau 1984: 98) 
 
Thus, the selection of itineraries and frequent movement around these 
places determines their degree of significance. Cyberspace in Neuro-
mancer is a spatial structure formed by such a practice of interlinkage 
and appropriation of different places. The matrix is unfolded primarily 
by the protagonist’s navigation through it. It is on account of this pro-
cess of selection that space itself remains manageable and vivid action 
is possible at all. 
The connection between de Certeau’s remarks on walking in the 
city and Gibson’s matrix space is reflected in the association of large 
city structures with data networks in current scholarly debates. Cities 
are characterized by a hierarchy of places: “zentrale [sind] von peri-
pheren Bereichen zuverlässig und intuitiv zu unterscheiden […]. Das 
System also lebt von einer Hierarchisierung des topologischen Mate-
rials” (Winkler 1994: 233). These processes – “Verdrängungspro-
zesse”, as Hartmut Winkler calls them (1994: 233) – are the result of 
the user’s movement. In our new mediatised metropolises, like Gib-
son’s BAMA, this hierarchy of places becomes apparent in their par-
ticular circulation of data: 
 
Program a map to display frequency of data exchange, every thousand 
megabytes a single pixel on a very large screen. Manhattan and At-
lanta burn solid white. Then they start to pulse, the rate of traffic 
threatening to overload your simulation. Your map is about to go 
nova. Cool it down. Up your scale. Each pixel a million megabytes. At 
a hundred million megabytes per second, you begin to make out cer-
tain blocks in midtown Manhattan, outlines of hundred-year-old in-
dustrial parks ringing the old core of Atlanta... (Gibson 1984: 43). 
 
Places of the highest frequency provide useful means of orientation 
from which new centres of power may emerge. Gibson describes these 
central points mostly as simple geometrical shapes in fundamental 
colours: “Call up a graphics display that grossly simplifies the ex-
change of data in the L-5 archipelago. One segment clicks in as red 
solid, a massive rectangle dominating your screen” (Gibson 1984: 
101). Cyberspace presents itself as a “Konstruktion aus Bewegung 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
295
und Information” (Adams 1996: 199). Thus, space does not emerge 
from within itself, but it is shaped by spatial practices, by the user’s 
dealing with the conditions of a fixed order. The assumed stability of 
places is effectively destroyed by the fluidity of the user’s trajectories. 
It is precisely his emphasis on the significance of movement as an 
element that constitutes space that makes de Certeau’s concept rele-
vant for the issue this paper addresses. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
In contrast to what was assumed at the outset, Gibson not only pre-
sents two spatialities – the physical space and the electronic dataspace 
– but a multitude of superimposing spatial concepts which all have a 
peculiar aesthetic composition. The physical world and the virtual 
space can be subdivided into different kinds of spaces, not all of 
which can be clearly assigned to either of these two. On the level of 
the material world, there are the fictional urban spaces (Tokyo, 
BAMA, Paris, Istanbul) and the outer space (Freeside, Villa Stray-
light, Rue Jules Verne) which are physical insofar as the bodies of the 
protagonists are really situated within these spaces. However, defining 
the urban space as physical becomes problematic, for instance, when 
one thinks about the impact the AI has on the ‘real world’ – these ex-
ceptions are but another indication of Gibson’s superimposing spatial 
structures. 
The electronic or virtual space comprises not only the matrix 
but is also related to the experiences of undergoing simstim and being 
braindead. Here, connections with the physical space exist as well, but 
all these virtual spaces are characterised by the absence of the prota-
gonist’s body. The different spatial concepts are thus blurred in the 
novel but have to be distinguished for analytical purposes. 
No matter whether Gibson depicts the urban space or the virtual 
world: all spaces in Neuromancer are opened up by means of move-
ment. Walking and travelling are but two of de Certeau’s everyday 
practices that create space. In Neuromancer, the space of action 
emerges from the protagonists’ constant switching between diverse 
spatialities – movement thus plays a central role. This constant 
movement as well as the superimposing of the different spatialities en-
tails the blurring of boundaries. Thus, the reader cannot always clearly 

Doreen Hartmann 
296
say if the depicted scenario is part of the ‘real world’ or simply an il-
lusion. In order to make a decision on this point – if it is possible at all 
– the peculiar role of the body would need to be further discussed. 
The Villa Straylight can be regarded as a heterotopic site as de-
fined by Michel Foucault insofar as its in fact faceless rooms are filled 
with old artefacts that accumulate time and thus let the Villa look like 
a traditional place. Its identity seems artificial and its history bought. 
It is merely an illusion, a simulation “that exposes every real space, all 
the sites inside of which human life is partitioned, as still more illu-
sory” (Foucault 1986: 27). Originating from the need to have a last 
anchor in an ever-changing world, Straylight can also be seen as a 
heterotopia of compensation whose “role is to create a space that is 
other, another real space, as perfect, as meticulous, as well arranged as 
ours is messy, ill constructed, and jumbled” (Foucault 1986: 27). 
One can assume that in the near future such models will gain 
more and more relevance, since ‘actual’ places are increasingly char-
acterised by a loss of identity and history.13 On the other hand, it is 
this very lack of authenticity that many “cyberspace cowboys” appre-
ciate while navigating in the matrix. For Case, and for all those af-
fected by the power relations between the ‘weak’ and the ‘strong’ as 
outlined by de Certeau, cyberspace can offer compensation for the 
troubles of everyday life and grant freedom of action in a way the ‘real 
world’ cannot. It was probably this general need for a “counter-site” 
(Foucault 1986: 24) which helped establish Gibson’s model of the cy-
berspace as a heterotopic site. As an “effectively enacted utopia” 
(Foucault 1986: 24), Gibson’s spaces countervail the pressures of 
modern life – no matter if he writes about the urban transit spaces or 
‘other spaces’ like Freeside or the matrix. 
The coexistence of the spatialities described above is repre-
sented in the novel’s structure, through a constant interlacing of fic-
tional layers, and in its content, through the blurring of the boundaries 
of those layers. The interlacing itself adds up to a circular motion: 
based on his real-world environment, Gibson first develops the fic-
tional urban space, which becomes the basis of all the virtual spaces. 
Finally, the mechanisms of illusion connected with these spaces refer 
                                                      
13 
In this context, Augé’s concept of the non-place might also have been fruitful 
for an analysis of Neuromancer’s spaces. Unfortunately, this cannot be dis-
cussed within the limits of this essay. For further reading, see Augé 1995. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
297
us back to the real world. As a circle has no beginning and no end, this 
structure prompts the question as to what ‘reality’ actually is. 

Doreen Hartmann 
298
Works Cited 
 
Primary Reference 
 
Gibson, William (1984). Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Adams, Jon-K (1996). “Wohin nun? Räumlichkeit in interaktiven Computerspielen 
und im Cyberspace-Roman”, in: Klepper (1996a), 192-201. 
Augé, Marc (1995). Non-places: Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity 
(tr. John Howe). London: Verso. 
Bukatman, Scott (1993). Terminal Identity: The Virtual Subject in Postmodern 
Science Fiction. Durham, NC, and London: Duke UP. 
Cavallaro, Dani (2000). Cyberpunk and Cyberculture: Science Fiction and the Work 
of William Gibson. London and New Brunswick, NY: Athlone Press. 
Caviola, Hugo (1991). In the Zone: Perception and Presentation of Space in German 
and American Postmodernism. Basel: Birkhäuser. 
Crang, Mike, Phil Crang and Jon May (eds.) (1999). Virtual Geographies: Bodies, 
Spaces and Relations. London and New York: Routledge. 
Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan, Jr. (1991). “Cyberpunk and Neuromanticism”, in: McCaffery 
(1991a), 182-93. 
De Certeau, Michel (1980/1984). The Practice of Everyday Life (tr. Steven F. 
Rendall). Berkeley, CA, and London: U of California P. 
Dodge, Martin and Rob Kitchin (2001). Mapping Cyberspace. London and New 
York: Routledge. 
Dünne, Jörg (2004). “Forschungsüberblick Raumtheorie”. [http://www. raum-
theorie.lmu.de/Forschungsbericht4.pdf]. 
Featherstone, Mike and Roger Burrows (eds.) (1995a). Cyberspace / Cyberbodies / 
Cyberpunk. London: Sage. 
— (1995b). “Cultures of Technological Embodiment: An Introduction”, in: Feather-
stone and Burrows (1995a), 1-19. 
Foucault, Michel (1967/1986). “Of Other Spaces” (tr. Jay Miskowiec), in: Diacritics 
16.1: 22-27. Lecture “Des Espaces Autres”, given by Michel Foucault at the 
Cercle d’Etudes Architecturales in Paris, March 14, 1967. 
Geyh, Paula E. (2001). “The Fortress and the Polis: From the Postmodern City to Cy-
berspace and Back”, in: Munt (2001a), 99-112. 
Gibson, William (1989a). “High Tech High Life: William Gibson and Timothy Leary 
in Conversation”, in: Mondo 2000 7: 58-64. 
–– (1989b). “Introduction”, in: Tom de Haven and Bruce Jensen (eds.). William 
Gibson’s Neuromancer: The Graphic Novel. Vol. 1. New York: Berkley 
Books, Epic Comics, 5. 
Hollinger, Veronica (1991). “Cybernetic Deconstructions: Cyberpunk and Postmod-
ernism”, in: McCaffery (1991a), 203-18. 
Jameson, Fredric (1991). Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 

Space Construction as Cultural Practice 
299
London and New York: Verso. 
Kitchin, Rob and James Kneale (eds.) (2002a). Lost in Space: Geographies of Science 
Fiction. London and New York: Continuum. 
–– (2002b). “Lost in Space”, in: Kitchin and Kneale (2002a), 1-16. 
Klepper, Martin (ed.) (1996a). Hyperkultur: Zur Fiktion des Computerzeitalters. Ber-
lin and New York: Walter de Gruyter. 
–– (1996b). “‘Zwischenland’: William Gibsons Cyberspace-Trilogie und Marge 
Piercys He, She And It”, in: Klepper (1996a), 202-20. 
–– (2002). “Virtuelle Welten: Die phantastischen Räume der Postmoderne und des 
Cyberspace”, in: Jörg Glasenapp (ed.) (2002). Cyberfiktionen: Neue Beiträge. 
München: Fischer, 57-83. 
Kneale, James (1999). “The Virtual Realities of Technology and Fiction: Reading 
William Gibson’s Cyberspace”, in: Crang, Crang and May, 205-21. 
Léfèbvre, Henri (1974/1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Light, Jennifer S. (1999). “From City Space to Cyberspace”, in: Crang, Crang and 
May, 109-30.  
Loud, Lance (1992). “Blade Runner”, in: Details Magazine, Oct. 1992: 110-15. 
[http://www.videoverite.tv/pages/llwritingbladerunner.html]. 
Mayer, Ruth (2001). “Postmoderne/Postmodernismus”, in: Nünning, 522-23. 
McCaffery, Larry (ed.) (1991a). Storming the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyber-
punk and Postmodern Science Fiction. Durham, NC, and London: Duke UP. 
–– (1991b). “An Interview with William Gibson”, in: McCaffery (1991a), 263-85. 
Müller, Klaus Peter (2001). “Moderne”, in: Nünning, 449-50. 
Munt, Sally R. (ed.) (2001a). Technospaces: Inside the New Media. London and New 
York: Continuum. 
–– (2001b). “Technospaces: Inside the New Media”, in: Munt (2001a), 1-17. 
Nünning, Ansgar (ed.) (2001). Metzler-Lexikon Literatur- und Kulturtheorie: Ansätze 
– Personen – Grundbegriffe. 2nd, rev. ed. Stuttgart: Metzler. 
Rötzer, Florian (1998). Digitale Weltentwürfe: Streifzüge durch die Netzkultur. 
München and Wien: Hanser. 
Wenz, Karin (1997). Raum, Raumsprache und Sprachräume: Zur Textsemiotik der 
Raumbeschreibung. Tübingen: Gunter Narr. 
Winkler, Hartmut (1994). “Songlines. Landschaft und Architektur als Modell für den 
Datenraum”, in: Martin Warnke, Wolfgang Coy and Georg Christoph Tholen 
(eds.) (1997). HyperKult: Geschichte, Theorie und Kontext digitaler Medien. 
Basel and Frankfurt: Stroemfeld et al., 227-39. 


 
 
 
 
Peripheral Cosmopolitans: Caribbeanness as  
Transnational Utopia? 
 
Saskia Schabio 
 
 
Abstract: If the genre’s inaugurating moment was the nation state as a singularly 
modern formation, utopia has recently turned transnational. The epistemology of car-
tographic space figures prominently in those recent emanations of the utopian spirit. 
Exile, migration and the diaspora are identified with the figuration of something new 
that is coming into being and that displaces the cartographic domination of physical 
space. Yet space may have become an overdiscussed critical topos. In some instances 
the privilege of space as a conceptual metaphor may sponsor an unhelpful confluence 
of celebratory or dystopian descriptions of (inevitable and naturalized) global inter-
connectivity, political analysis and the formulation of ethical and aesthetic positions. 
In order to dynamize what some critics describe as a tendency towards ossification, I 
feel it is necessary to retain a generic and historical perspective. Caribbeanness, I will 
argue, presents a particularly pervasive case in point. The concept has come to some 
prominence in recent times, not least as a sponsor of the booming field of Black At-
lantic studies, while embeddedness in debates of French anti-colonial struggle, above 
all pan-Africanism and Martinician independence, is virtually eroded. Read conse-
quently through the lens of utopian thinking, Caribbeanness does not justify the pre-
sent almost mandatory relegation of the utopian imagination to a transnational topog-
raphy. Instead, the case may indeed be taken to highlight the perseverance of the Or-
wellian moment in recent figurations of social and political space.  
 
Key names and concepts: Theodor Adorno – Black Atlantic – Walter Benjamin – 
Homi Bhabha – Ernst Bloch – Caribbeanness – concrete utopia – cosmopolitanism 
and transnationalism – creolization – Frantz Fanon – Paul Gilroy – Edouard Glissant – 
Wilson Harris – imaginary community – rhizomatic thought – Derek Walcott 
 
 
1. Utopia and the Spatialization of History 
 
What, then, is the relation between utopia and the representation of 
space? It is an original one, Phillip Wegner suggests in Utopia, the 
Nation and the Spatial Histories of Modernity. The “narrative utopia”, 
he argues, “plays a crucial role in the constitution of the nation-state 
as an original spatial, social, and cultural form” (Wegner 2002: xvi). 

Saskia Schabio 
302
Catalyzed by the experience of the “estranging deterritorialization of 
late feudal culture” (Wegner 2002: 25f), the brilliance of More’s inau-
gurating piece lies in registering the tension between universalizing 
tendencies and “particularization”, between the production of a “ho-
mogenous empty space” (i.e. “capital”, “the money form”, “the juri-
dico-political subject”) (Wegner 2002: xxii) on the one hand and the 
formation of “particular shapes and boundaries” on the other (Wegner 
2002: xvi), characteristic not only of the emergent narrative genre, but 
of modernity itself. It is in this tension between modernity’s universal-
izing and particularizing tendencies that the nation-state as a “radi-
cally new and deeply spatialized kind of political, social, and cultural 
formation” emerged (Wegner 2002: xxii).1  
In a time experienced by many as an era of unprecedented glob-
alization – to some a substantial shift, if not a radical break with mod-
ernity’s spatial practices – utopia has turned transnational. Liberal phi-
losophy has, with some verve, advanced cosmopolitanism as a unify-
ing vision of a better global future in the last two decades. Yet, critics 
observe, such readings of culture all too easily lend themselves to the 
homogenizing tendencies of a (residual) liberal humanist tradition that 
ultimately affirms neo-imperialist tendencies.2 However, one also no-
tices the relegation of the utopian spirit to the transnational in influen-
tial leftist and postcolonial positions,3 as if it was to supplement 
propositions of a firm universalist perspective necessary to the formu-
lation of both utopian and cosmopolitan ideals. The epistemology of 
(cartographic) space and its ‘beyond’ figure prominently in those re-
cent emanations of the utopian spirit, thus substantiating Wegner’s 
claim about the deep relationship between utopia and space. Exile, 
migration and the diaspora are identified with the figuration of some-
thing new, something that is incomplete and coming into being, a 
moving beyond or displacement of the cartographic (Cartesian) domi-
                                                      
1  
Wegner (2001: xxii) expands Louis Marin’s influential thesis of utopia as re-
sisting reduction to any particular historical and geographic space (see Marin 
1984). 
2  
In the space available it is impossible to survey this debate and the numerous 
attempts to refine and modify notions of cosmopolitanism that recent critiques 
engendered; e.g. Benhabib 2006. For one of the most thorough critiques of the 
new cosmopolitanism, see Brennan 1997. 
3  
See e.g. Hardt and Negri 2000, Gilroy 1993 and Hall 1993. For an entirely 
disenchanted view of utopia, see Wallerstein 1998.  

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
303
nation of physical space. To the optimistically minded, the spatial 
concept of global interconnectivity allegorizes descriptions of an un-
precedented flow of capital and communication as almost inevitably 
sponsoring new cognitive mappings and conceptual alternatives. If the 
globalized world is a product of the geographical patterns of European 
imperialism (Said 1993), the hope of the present focus on space is to 
envisage the coeval relationships between different global sites and to 
cancel the inscription of the world’s space in a geography of devel-
opment and underdevelopment that followed the colonial rationale of 
administration (see Harvey 1989 and Parry 2004: 114). Following 
Soja’s “spatial critique of historicism” (Soja 1996: 164), transnational 
perspectives have become the repository of a counter-history to the 
dystopian development of Western modernity.  
However, as I wish to argue in the following discussion, if this 
conceptual move is reminiscent of the Benjaminian critique of nine-
teenth-century ideologies of progress, ironically, history, in the guise 
of the inevitability of capitalist globalization, seems to have taken 
precedence over politics, so that the transnational, as both ethos and 
method, has come almost exclusively to occupy the horizon of non-
identity that constitutes utopian thinking. Operating on the assumption 
of an inevitable increase of structural uniformity in modernized socie-
ties, some critics argue, the privilege of space as a conceptual meta-
phor may underwrite the interpretation global interconnectivity pres-
ently receives as a hitherto unprecedented and inevitable historical 
formation and affirm, rather than challenge, convergence theories of 
modernity. What is lost on the way is the historical evolution and situ-
atedness of distinct sites of anti-colonial struggles with national inde-
pendence as an indispensable prerequisite to an alternative future.  
Caribbeanness, a concept developed in the 1980s by the Mar-
tinician writer and critic Edouard Glissant from notions of ‘créolité’,4 
is a pervasive case in point. The title of this paper, “Peripheral Cos-
mopolitans”,5 reflects the idea that the particular Caribbean historical 
                                                      
4  
In the English version of Glissant’s Discours antillais the term antillanité has 
been translated as “Caribbeanness” (Glissant 1989: 261; translator’s note). 
5  
‘Cosmopolitanism’ and ‘transnation’ have quite different, if oscillating conno-
tations. While the former is often perceived as an elitist concept, associated 
with people who “can afford to experiment” (Hannerz 1996: 106), the term 
“transnational” extends to notions of “transnational cultures, and the networks 
and institutions which provide their social frameworks” (Hannerz 1996: 6). 

Saskia Schabio 
304
and geographical situation, with its extensive mixing of cultures, has 
produced an alternative cosmopolitanism capable of evading the pit-
falls of a Western homogenizing perspective. At the same time it 
evokes charges of elitism and of an uncritical emulation of financial 
and economic transnationalism which recent appraisals of (liberal) 
cosmopolitanism have received.6 Caribbeanness has come to some 
prominence in recent times, not least as a sponsor of the booming field 
of (Anglophone) transnational studies, while embeddedness in debates 
of (French) anti-colonial struggle, above all pan-Africanism and Mar-
tinician independence, is virtually eroded. However, if one looks more 
closely at the post-war origins of the concept, one may find that Car-
ibbeanness does not necessarily preclude a consideration of the bene-
ficial effects of the nation as a unifying focus and enables, much as 
Fanon’s better known thoughts on national culture, a reconsideration 
of the sustained role of the independent nation as the utopian trajec-
tory of social desire.  
Part of the problem, as far as I can see, lies with the conjunction 
of a hermetic and static space and the nation that, pace dystopian per-
spectives on twentieth-century European history, occludes more posi-
tive and dynamic imaginings of the nation and has sponsored some in-
fluential critical topoi. These rely on the spatialized perception of the 
universal and the particular in terms of the local and the global, geog-
raphy and history, a perspective which either leads to a hypostasis of 
the ‘beyond’ or, at times, the (exclusive) relegation of resistance to the 
particular and the different in some strands of postcolonial studies. 
Hence, the particular geographical layout of the Caribbean with its 
dispersed islands has come to allegorize the way in which the cultural 
and linguistic heterogeneity of the Caribbean is cited against the pro-
longed political and cultural predominance of French statism as the 
“annihilation of fake universality, of monolinguism, and of purity” 
(Bernabé et al. 1993: 28).  
‘Space’ may have become an overdiscussed topos (as if indeed 
affirming the propensity of thought to spatialize into schemes and ex-
tended metaphors suggested by the rhetorical origins of the term). In 
                                                                                                                  
The tension between these two terms throws into relief the problem of de-
scribing present forms of global interconnectivity. 
6  
See Wardle 2000 as an example of studies which seek to challenge the opposi-
tion between nativism and an assimilative cosmopolitanism.  

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
305
order to situate some of the topoi prevalent in current perceptions of 
global interconnectivity and question what some critics describe as a 
tendency towards ossification,7 I feel that it is helpful to retain a ge-
neric and historical perspective, as the present volume proposes.  
It is my contention that the amalgamation of utopia and the 
transnational may be partly due to the antinomy between utopian and 
anti-/or dystopian visions within the Western utopian tradition,8 a 
claim substantiated by Ralph Pordzik’s seminal comparative study of 
Anglophone postcolonial utopian fiction. Across a wide range of dif-
ferent locales, postcolonial literature offers analyses of what the influ-
ential Guyanese writer and critic Wilson Harris termed “Orwellian 
nemesis” in reference to the paradigmatic significance of Orwell’s 
Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949). As Pordzik demonstrates,9 
 
[the] preoccupation of many writers with the forms and functions of 
the utopian mode in a postcolonial context has resulted in a wide 
range of literary responses both to established utopian patterns, which 
operate coercively in the implementation of a homogeneous system of 
surveillance and perfection, and to their dystopian counter-images, 
which figure as templates of a blocked imagination incapable of forg-
ing new modes of interaction and creativity out of the nightmare of 
manipulation and conformity. (Pordzik 2001: 170) 
 
In similar ways, I propose to read ‘Caribbeanness’ as a considered re-
sponse to the Western utopian tradition, its ambivalences and its po-
tentialities. Although not sui generis ‘utopian’, the evolution of the 
concept displays a deep awareness of the “constant movement” be-
tween “universalization” and “particularization” in terms of the “re-
and deterritorialization of social desire”. This Wegner describes as a 
                                                      
7  
See among others Lippuner and Lossau (2004: 48) for a critique of the amal-
gamation of physical space and social space which depoliticizes the contin-
gencies of social realities. See also Bachmann-Medick 2006, who observes a 
weakening of evolutionist perspectives in favour of spatial ones. 
8  
This is in keeping with Klaus-Peter Müller’s findings that Caribbean writers 
(e.g. Walcott and Harris) question the antinomy between purely utopian and 
dystopian visions (2002: 248, 255). 
9  
Pordzik traces the paradigmatic significance of Wilson Harris’ critique of 
“Orwellian nemesis” (Harris 1983: xv) as the epitome of a “claustrophobic 
imagination” which engenders the latter’s notion of the “cross-cultural” 
imagination (Pordzik 2002: 7). Taking this cue, I set out to explore the extent 
to which this perspective may be extended to alternative views of the nation. 

Saskia Schabio 
306
constitutive moment of utopian narrative from its early modern begin-
nings and contemplates, in particular ways, the shift in spatial prac-
tices that led to the formation of the modern nation state (Wegner 
2002: xxii; see above). In the case of Caribbeanness this particular 
awareness may have been catalyzed by the synchronicity of post-war 
independence movements on the one hand, and dystopian views of the 
(Western) nation-state in the post-war era on the other.10 I hope to 
show that a reconsideration of these inflections may serve not only to 
question dystopian visions of the nation, but also to refocus some of 
the quasi-utopian investments in the transnation that animate the theo-
rization of the present moment of global interconnectivity. 
 
 
2. Utopia as Transnation 
 
Let me begin by turning to a classic example from the early nineties: 
Homi Bhabha’s key postcolonial study The Location of Culture starts 
out with a reflection on the “realm of the beyond” as the “trope of our 
times” (“BORDER LIVES: THE ART OF THE PRESENT”).11 This 
is also a meditation on the fin de siècle as the moment of writing, a 
moment of transit, which interprets a distinct mode of temporal per-
ception in the spatial terms of the beyond, a moment, that is, “where 
space and time cross to produce complex figures of difference and 
identity, past and present, inside and outside, inclusion and exclusion” 
(Bhabha 1994: 1). Such “crossing”, Bhabha’s rhetoric – the finality of 
the infinitive construction – insinuates, occurs (almost) purposefully, 
as if following a hidden utopian agenda. “Disorientation”, that “dis-
turbance of direction” he observes in the ‘beyond’, is captured, and, 
                                                      
10  
The postcolonial inflections of Utopia hence remind us that space discourses 
have their own complex story to tell from within the different force-fields of 
European imperial history. Although a supporter of Indian independence and a 
fierce critic of nationalism, Orwell, in his defense of patriotism, actually re-
vives the myth of the English nation and ultimately arrives at an elitist and 
aestheticist “reassertion of Englishness”, a position which “equates the na-
tional liberation struggles on the horizon with a broader tendency of political 
fanaticism and dishonesty, and an accompanying corruption of literary taste” 
(Brennan 1997: 144). See Brennan (1997: 142f) for a further exploration of 
Orwell’s ambivalences.  
11  
See Bhabha 1994: 1. I have no space to explore the significance of the Hei-
deggerian references invoked in the epigraph which frames his undertaking. 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
307
one should add, compensated for, analogous to the spatial (synchro-
nous) and temporal (diachronic) dimension of the structuralist model. 
In so postulating he is able to temporalize the spatially conceived no-
tion of (homogeneous) ‘contemporaneity’ and inscribe into it a per-
spective of lack, that is, a perspective that is ‘utopian’ in as much as it 
registers what is missing (Bhabha 1994: 4). In other words, the disori-
entation he observes holds out the promise of a release from the ide-
ologies of its moment, in apprehension of some radically other future 
which is only to be captured in terms of discontinuities, inequalities, 
and the peripheral. ‘Utopia’ does not appear in the index of Bhabha’s 
influential book, but, I should like to suggest, Bhabha’s rhetoric here 
performs precisely the manoeuvres of utopian narratives. Its “deepest 
vocation”, as Fredric Jameson has it, is “to bring home, in local and 
determinate ways, and with a fullness of concrete detail, our constitu-
tional inability to imagine utopia itself, and this, not owing to any in-
dividual failure of imagination but as the result of the systemic, cul-
tural, and ideological closure of which we are all in one way or an-
other prisoners” (Jameson 1984: 247). Bhabha writes:  
 
The imaginary of spatial distance – to live somehow beyond the bor-
der of our times – throws into relief the temporal, social differences 
that interrupt our collusive sense of cultural contemporaneity. The 
present can no longer be simply envisaged as a break or a bonding 
with the past and the future, no longer a synchronic presence: our 
proximate self-presence, our public image, comes to be revealed for 
its discontinuities, its inequalities, its minorities. Unlike the dead hand 
of history that tells the beads of sequential time like a rosary, seeking 
to establish serial, causal connections, we are now confronted with 
what Walter Benjamin describes as the blasting of a monadic moment 
from the homogenous course of history, “establishing a conception of 
the present as the ‘time of the now’”. (Bhabha 1994: 4) 
 
As Bhabha’s quotation expressly invokes Benjamin’s “messianic” 
holes in time (from his “Theses on the Philosophy of History”), he 
situates his own approach within the practices of materialist historio-
graphy. This is a perspective Benjamin sets off against the historicist 
positivism of the 19th century and its belief in ‘progress’.12 
                                                      
12  
One would need to look more closely at the connection to lines of thought 
proffered by the Frankfurt School tradition but already instilled by Walter 
Benjamin. On the continuities of Benjaminian thought in Frankfurt School 
aesthetic theory, see Nägele 1990 and Bahri 2003: 258.   

Saskia Schabio 
308
Bhabha hence casts postcolonial migration (“the narratives of 
cultural and political diaspora, the major social displacements of peas-
ant and aboriginal communities, the poetics of exile, the grim prose of 
political and economic refugees”) in terms of that real, that is, revolu-
tionary state of emergency and inscribes what he calls the “new inter-
nationalism” into Walter Benjamin’s history of the oppressed: “It is”, 
Bhabha writes, “in this sense that the boundary becomes the place 
from which something begins its presencing in a movement not dis-
similar to the ambulant, ambivalent articulation of the beyond that I 
have drawn out” (Bhabha 1994: 5). Calling into question empty ho-
mogeneous time, that is, cancelling the evolutionary perspective on 
modernity as progress, the formation of globalization he describes is 
then interpreted as following the constructive principle Benjamin sug-
gests in his “Theses on the Philosophy of History”: 
 
A historical materialist approaches a historical subject only where he 
encounters it as a monad. In this structure he recognizes the sign of a 
Messianic cessation of happening, or, put differently, a revolutionary 
chance in the fight for the oppressed past.  (Benjamin 1968: 261) 
 
If this ultimately involves an identification of the historian with the 
revolutionary classes, this for Bhabha is now undertaken by the mi-
grating “new international”. Writing from the experience of Serbian 
nationalism, The Location of Culture calls on the “international intel-
lectual community to meditate on the unequal, asymmetrical worlds 
that exist elsewhere” and extols the “migrant’s double vision” to 
whom may now belong “the truest eye” (with reference to Rushdie; 
Bhabha 1994: 5). It is, in other words, also the attempt to position the 
intellectual (cosmopolitan) writer as much as the critic side by side 
with the oppressed classes in this quasi-utopian project where the 
transnational comes to occupy the place of both aesthetics and ethics. 
What does this leave us with? The utopian, I wish to suggest, 
has emanated as submerged discourse in this transfiguration of the 
“international” into a “new international” that effectively elides differ-
ences between the cosmopolitan traveller and the victim of forced mi-
gration: in other words, criticism takes on the voice of the utopian, 
which, from Bhabha’s contemporary experience of (Serbian) state 
brutality, dislocates the nation-state as the space of utopia’s imaginary 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
309
community.13 While gesturing towards the material and the empirical, 
the somewhat pathetically invoked description of transnational move-
ments (“The testimony of my examples represents a radical revision in 
the concept of human community itself”) ultimately correlates with an 
aesthetic concept of disruption and disjunction. This, however, as has 
been noted, following the language model, does not necessarily corre-
late with real life disjunctions and social conflict (Parry 2004: 55-74) 
and is, as also has been noted, not necessarily counter-hegemonic.14  
This is certainly a rather truncated reading of Bhabha’s complex 
project, and I do not want to rehearse engagements with his argument 
that have already been proffered with sufficient critical scrutiny. My 
intention was merely to retrace how the ‘beyond’ comes to supple-
ment the tension between art and society – the formal and the thematic 
rendition of the utopian spirit – in ways that, to me, seem to be exem-
plary. The ‘transnation’ is invoked as if to evade the epistemological 
impasse Jameson described as a common feature of twentieth-century 
narrative utopias and that prompted the culturalist conclusions at 
which some strands of Critical Theory arrived (if not the relegation of 
the utopian to the negativity of art alone). And it has come to exoner-
ate criticism from the task of engaging with the impasse of taking a 
universalist position when imagining a global future. 
 
 
 
                                                      
13  
I adopt Wegner’s modulation of Benedict Anderson’s concept of the “imag-
ined” nature of the modern nation-state’s community. Wegner argues that 
there “has been a continuous exchange of energies between the imaginary 
communities of the narrative utopia and the imagined communities of the na-
tion-state, the former providing one of the first spaces for working out the par-
ticular shapes and boundaries of the latter.” (Wegner 2001: xvi) 
14  
Bhabha does not entirely exclude the nation-state, but envisages national cul-
tures from the perspective of disenfranchised minorities (see Bhabha 1990). 
Yet see Parry (2004: 71) for a critique of the predominance of the transna-
tional paradigm that Bhabha’s theory engendered and Khan for a recent case 
study of how the experience of transnationalism may instill the desire to “seek 
to recapture a lost sense of belonging by underlining cultural and political 
connections to the nation of origin.” (Khan 2005: 40)  

Saskia Schabio 
310
3. ‘Utopia Station’, Bloch, and the Creolization of the World 
 
I now briefly turn my attention to the recent ‘Utopia Station’ exhibi-
tion which was set up in 2004 in Munich (but premised at the Venice 
Biennale of Art in 2003). Renowned artists and, in particular, re-
nowned cultural analysts such as Edouard Glissant and Stuart Hall 
participated in this.15 The project was announced as a deliberate return 
to utopian thinking after a phase of disillusionment. In their explana-
tory statement the curators designate their take-off-point as a debate 
between Theodor W. Adorno and Ernst Bloch in 1964, invoking the 
former’s famous verdict about the end of utopia. Utopia, Adorno 
stated, had degenerated into the mere fulfillment of needs structured 
by the capitalist present. To an imagination colonized by consumer 
capitalism, utopia cannot transcend the present, yet insinuates a long-
ing for the new (Adorno 1997: 252). As if in affirmation of Bloch’s 
somewhat more optimistic counter-position,16 the station as a physical 
and conceptual space alike seeks to reinstate the dialectic relation be-
tween the material and the aesthetic which acquires utopian dimen-
sion, in as much as it foreshadows emergent aspects of a radically 
other future where the desires structured by capitalism are displaced 
by the hope that only concrete utopia engenders:  
 
But what is its [art’s] place? The discussion of this question has been 
opened again by Jacques Rancière, in his book Le partage du sensible, 
which in French has the advantage of having a partition and a sharing 
occupy the same word. What is sectioned off and exchanged? It is 
more than an idea. Rancière takes his departure from Plato, pointedly, 
in order to remind us of the inevitable relation between the arts and 
the rest of social activity, the inevitable relations, it should be said, 
that together distribute value and give hierarchy, that govern, that both 
materially and conceptually establish their politics. This theatre of 
relations wraps itself around visions of worlds, each of them islands, 
each of them forms, but all of them concrete realities replete with 
matter and force. This is a philosophical understanding of aesthetic 
activity; it extends materialist aesthetics into the conditions of our 
                                                      
15  
See [http://www.kunstaspekte.de/index.php?tid=4217&action=termin]. 
16  
Again, for the purposes of this paper, it is not possible to fully draw out the 
implications. But moving from Adorno and Bloch to Rancière’s (re-)distri-
bution of the “sensible” the curators expressly place themselves within a tradi-
tion of Marxism that highly values the transformative potential of the aesthetic 
dimension. 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
311
present; it is a book to bring to a Station. As we have. But, once 
released, a book too leaves its island. [...] 
Think of the Station as a field of starting points, many starting 
points being brought and offered by many different people. Some will 
bring objects now, others later.17 
 
My point is that by suggesting dis-location and unsystematic, unfore-
seeable relations associated with travel, migration or exile, the particu-
lar spatial outline of ‘Utopia Station’ responds to the dilemma of rep-
resenting utopia as an inconceivable horizon (“Utopia Station pro-
duces images, even as it does not start with one”). While the ‘station’ 
may involve the metrical and mathematical spaces of the administered 
world, with its teleologies and destinations, where the rationale of 
‘form’ (measurement) is imposed on matter, the emphasis on ‘pas-
sages’, on the nomadic and transient, on continuous variation and free 
action, constantly changing orientation, resists any cartographic bent 
of mind and is endowed with a utopian dimension.18 As described, the 
participants almost come to figure as Deleuze’s and Guattari’s nomads 
whose “primary determination” is to “occupy and hold smooth space”, 
where “materials signal forces and serve as symptoms for them”, a 
concept the curators do not invoke (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 410, 
528). Instead, they expand on their alternative spatial concept in a ref-
erence to Edouard Glissant:  
 
Edouard Glissant came. He spoke of the desire for the perfect shape, 
he spoke his language of landscapes. Only by passing through the in-
extricable of the world, he told us, can we save our imaginaire. In that 
passing there would come the tremblement, the tremor being funda-
mental to the passage.  
 
This is an extremely condensed presentation of Glissant’s political and 
poetic oeuvre (the distinction is difficult to sustain in all instances) re-
plete with a whole geographic and historical palimpsest developed on 
Caribbeanness over a span of more than fifty years. “Passage” almost 
inevitably invokes what has come to be known as the trauma of the 
middle passage, and more broadly, the complex patterns of (forced) 
migration the Caribbean islands show. It is the trauma of a ‘history’ of 
                                                      
17  
[http://www.e-flux.com/projects/utopia/about.html]. 
18  
The station is an open and overdetermined concept. It generates an excess of 
possible ‘determinations’.  

Saskia Schabio 
312
violent dislocation and enslavement which Glissant rewrites in his no-
tion of Caribbeanness (understood in the following as Glissant’s par-
ticular inflection of creolization). There it becomes the source, the 
blueprint  of  a truly “cross-cultural imagination”: “We are the roots of 
a cross-cultural relationship”, Glissant wrote in Caribbean Discourse, 
“[s]ubmarine roots: that is floating free, not fixed in one position, but 
extending in all directions in our world through its network of 
branches” (Glissant 1989: 66f). This history of oppression does not 
figure in the curators’ explanatory statement but is wholly immersed 
in their ambition of eclectically presenting recent emanations of the 
utopian spirit. To my knowledge Glissant makes no explicit reference 
to the utopian genre in his theoretical work and his fictional writing 
does not, to my mind, affiliate, at least not ostentatiously, with this 
particular generic tradition. The way Glissant is presented, however, 
suggests a strong connection to Bloch (which the curators do not spell 
out) in as much as his notion of the imaginaire hinges on an epistemo-
logical impasse, that by dint of its existential negativity enables “pas-
sage”. It is the negativity of the real that inhibits the closing in of the 
present, and the ‘sub-limity’ of abysmal suffering that instigates, as 
Glissant has it in his later Poetics of Relation, “[not] just a specific 
knowledge, appetite, suffering, and delight of one particular people, 
not only that, but knowledge of the Whole, greater from having been 
at the abyss and freeing knowledge of Relation within the Whole” 
(Glissant 1997: 8). If for Bloch “concrete utopia stands on the horizon 
of every reality; real possibility surrounds the open dialectical tenden-
cies and latencies to the very last” (Bloch 1986: 223), it can only be 
apprehended in “disruptive traces”, without reducing the dialectical 
complexity of the historical process. In much the same way as for 
Bloch concrete utopia embraces the “complexity of systems found in 
the chaos theory” (Wegner 2002: 21), for Glissant ‘Relation’ attains 
such power. Glissant introduces ‘Relation’ to stem the force of stan-
dardization, what he calls the “danger of being bogged down, diluted, 
or ‘arrested’ in undifferentiated conglomerations” (Glissant 1997: 
142). This perspective is important because it complicates notions of 
the different and the particular as the quasi-utopian expression of spe-
cific local desires and politics. A mere dedication to difference is inef-
fective because these categories ultimately reproduce notions of 
“rooted” identity and, if sponsoring relativism, remain caught in a sys-
tem of binaries and hierarchies: “Acknowledging differences does not 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
313
compel one to be involved in the dialectics of their totality” (Glissant 
1997: 17). 
Taking the curators’ cue, one may then consider Caribbeanness 
as emerging from an impasse, which parallels Bloch’s engagement 
with the problematic relation between utopia and (capitalist) moder-
nity and that for Glissant incites the need to transcend “specific 
knowledge, appetite, suffering, and delight of one particular people” 
(see above). It is at this point that Glissant embraces the rhizome as 
the possibility of a non-relational understanding of difference (that is 
the radically singular), which, along the way, the Caribbean comes to 
epitomize.19 For Glissant the Caribbean exemplifies the cross-ferti-
lization of different languages and collision of cultures that the accel-
erated globalization of communication enabled and that resists the ra-
tionality of exchange value (Glissant 1997: 89). As such, Caribbean-
ness suggests, in the Blochian sense, a genuinely utopian process 
“wherein change in any one element will have dramatic and unpre-
dictable consequences for the whole” (on Bloch, see Wegner 2002: 
21). Its unpredictable results belie any convergence theory of moder-
nity as ‘embodied’ utopia (to be associated in Blochian terms with the 
fulfillment of “specific needs”). It is at this point that we seem inevi-
tably to arrive at an exclusively trans-national conclusion where the 
particular cultural sphere, the struggle for Martinician independence in 
the context of which Glissant first developed his concept, is no longer 
of avail. As such, however, Caribbeanness may be easily absorbed by 
a metropolitan rhetoric of the transnational as the now worn-out and 
exhausted harbinger of that longing for the ‘new’ which in one way or 
another infuses contemporary evocations of global interconnectivity. 
 
 
4. The Caribbean and the Black Atlantic 
 
The 2004 Black Atlantic exhibition held in the Berlin House of Cul-
tures introduced Edouard Glissant along with Paul Gilroy as “the most 
prominent” proponent of Black Atlanticism. Gilroy in his foreword to 
the exhibition catalogue invokes the concept of diaspora as an alterna-
tive to the metaphysics of space and nation. This rereading of geogra-
phy paves the way for an alternative genealogy of (a largely dysto-
                                                      
19  
For an analysis of Glissant’s notion of singularity, see Hallward 2001: 66ff. 

Saskia Schabio 
314
pian) Western modernity. Diasporic dislocation turns the problem of 
identity or origin, that is, the system of racialized hierarchies and es-
sences formative of the nation-state system, into potentiality and 
power, enabling the transformation of a traumatic history epitomized 
in the middle passage and slavery. The “multidimensional and trans-
cultural space” of the Atlantic Ocean is invoked as a “negative conti-
nent”, hence endowed with an ou-topian aura sponsoring a new meth-
odology which, as the curators have it, “makes it possible to trace 
lines of social, historical and cultural connection between the Ameri-
cas, Africa and Western Europe”.20 While the project acknowledges 
the need to “bring ideals of the transnational into contact with particu-
lar historical sites to trigger [quasi-utopian] counter-memories and ac-
knowledge the suppression of colonial history in the genealogies of 
modernity”, according to the curators, “Black Atlantic refers not to a 
clearly defined region or specific period”, but to “movement and net-
working” rather than “particular sites”. However, the evolving meth-
odological tool is far from neutral or truly ‘trans-’, or even ‘suprana-
tional’, as Laura Chrisman and others have demonstrated. In as much 
as Gilroy’s inaugurating study emerges from the Anglo-American tra-
dition of Black transnational movements, such a perspective may 
amount to an “uncritical emulation of Black America” (Chrisman 
2006: 29; Diawara 1998: 117).21  
Caribbeanness seems to present a case in point. While its influ-
ence on Black Atlantic studies seems to be acknowledged by implica-
tion – following suit in the catalogue is a text by Edouard Glissant, 
whom Gilroy also invokes in an epigraph to his introduction “Black 
Atlantic” – what is lost is the careful exploration of the significance of 
space and place in Glissant’s thinking on national self-liberation, 
which, as I will argue below, needs to be considered as a reply to 
French statism. As a result the immersion of Caribbeanness into Black 
Atlantic Studies is (almost) blind to the more positive, or even uto-
pian, role the independent nation has received in anti-colonial struggle 
and Caribbean liberation theory. This, however, means to neglect at-
                                                      
20  
[http://archiv.hkw.de/en/programm/programm2004/blackatlantic/c_index.html]. 
21  
Hallward emphasizes a radical break between Caribbean Discourse and The 
Poetics of Relation while I stress continuities. Yet this is not to deny a strong 
tendency towards the “newly global post-national reconciliation” and the risk 
of affirming “dispossession” (Hallward 2001: 120). 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
315
tempts to sever utopia’s imaginary community from unhelpfully rigid 
dystopian views of the nation and to overlook the particularly critical 
inflection utopian desire has received in Caribbean writing. 
 
 
5. Caribbean Inflections of Utopian Desire 
 
The Caribbean faces the predicament of the ‘non-place’ in two ways. 
On the one hand it grapples with its relegation to ‘non-history’: the 
“claustrophobic” view (Harris 1983: xv) that “nothing could ever be 
built among these rotting shacks, barefooted backyards and moulting 
shingles” (Walcott 1970: 4). On the other hand there is the urge to 
annul colonial utopias of the locus amoenus, that is, the tradition of 
the Paradise Islands, an impasse Glissant diagnoses when he tellingly 
lists the “lure of the Caribbean” (“the outer edge of space and time”) 
among other items in the form of a “litany” as one of the “facts of our 
quest for identity” (Glissant 1989: 231). The Caribbean and utopia 
hence share the idea that any eu-topos needs to be an ou-topos – has to 
inaugurate locales by challenging the terms advanced from European 
history. 
This was also true when attempting to imagine the independent 
nation. Glissant contributed to this revisionary project in ways compa-
rable to his fellow-Martinician Frantz Fanon, whose thoughts on na-
tional culture and independence are, however, much more familiar to 
the Anglophone world than Glissant’s. It is important to bear in mind 
that Martinique has never become independent, but was granted the 
status of a département outre mer in 1946. Both thinkers were in-
volved in the island’s struggle for independence, yet reluctant to 
ground independence on the blind adherence to a generalizing univer-
sal, be it anchored in an African past, or the ethnocentric nation state. 
At a point where disenchantment with the course of European moder-
nity had prompted Critical Theory to embrace the negativity of art to 
evade the paradoxes of a utopian desire caught within the inhibiting 
conditions of the present, both engaged with this epistemological im-
passe in terms of an alternative figuration of social space which did 
not exclude the independent nation. Let me briefly glance at Fanon’s 
chapter “On National Culture” as the better known example and then 
turn to Glissant to point out parallels:  
 

Saskia Schabio 
316
The colonial world is a world cut in two [...] The zone where the na-
tives live is not complementary to the zone inhabited by the settlers. 
The two zones are opposed, but not in the service of a higher unity. 
No conciliation is possible, for of the two terms one is superfluous. 
The settlers’ town is a strongly built town, all made of stone and steel. 
[...] The town belonging to the colonized people, or at least the native 
town, the Negro village, the medina, the reservation, is a place of ill 
fame, peopled by men of evil repute. They are born there, it matters 
little where or how; they die there, it matters not where, nor how. 
(Fanon 1963: 38f) 
 
Against the claustrophobic view of the “colonial world as a world cut 
in two”, Fanon’s strategy is to locate cultural newness in the native 
town. In so doing he can render it the space of a new concept of the 
nation involving a poetic and communal “seeking out of new patterns, 
that is to say national patterns” (Fanon 1963: 240f). “Let there be no 
mistake about it”, Fanon writes, “it is to this zone of occult instability 
where the people dwell that we must come” (Fanon 1963: 226).22 For 
Fanon it is in precisely such “abject spaces that a colonial culture 
comes to ‘modernize’” itself (Baucom 2006: 67; Fanon 1963: 240). 
‘Modernization’ here takes on a utopian meaning quite different from 
liberal humanism’s monological view of modernity, “which expects a 
common modernity as the universal future of global history and so 
holds out modernity to the un- or under-developed world as no more 
than a distant promise, a not-yet-crossed horizon” (Baucom 2006: 70). 
Fanon understood that to wrench utopian desire from colonial 
structures must involve the radical re- and deterritorialization of social 
desire.  
Glissant engages in a similar way with the colonial figuration of 
utopian space. Like Fanon, Glissant critiques metropolitan inflections 
of utopian desire when he states the need to transcend “the intellectual 
pretensions dominated by the learned elite”. Instead Caribbeanness 
needs to be grounded in “collective affirmation, supported by the ac-
tivism of the people” (Glissant 1989: 222). Hence, the search for a 
“Caribbean identity” which would find expression in a “federation” is 
held inseparable from the aim of each separate community coming 
                                                      
22  
Fanon develops a view discussed broadly within the West Indian debate on 
social realism, most memorably so perhaps by C. L. R. James, who insists on 
the portrayal of the “hidden resources” and the vivid life of “the hedged-in 
people of the yard” which is set against the standardization of social desire in 
the ascending middle-classes. (Ramchand 1971: 12, 13, 14f)  

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
317
into its own. The hesitancy of submitting a “political program, no mat-
ter how radical”, in the face of choosing a Caribbean identity, Glissant 
reads as the “hidden desire to be restrained by the limits imposed by 
nonhistory, by a more or less shameful alignment with (metropolitan) 
values” (Glissant 1989: 223).  
It is against the background of the divergent policies of the dif-
ferent Caribbean nation states within the force field of international re-
lations that the unifying geography of the Caribbean assumes the 
‘pedagogic’ function of utopia as the open space of a cultural newness 
that resists the standardization of social desire.23 Glissant invokes the 
“distant, uncertain emergence of the Caribbean [which] is nonetheless 
capable of carrying forward our people to self-renewal and of provid-
ing them with renewed ambition” (Glissant 1989: 223f). As suggested 
above, Caribbeanness, much like Pan-Africanism, and unlike “Atlan-
tis”, the “oldest dream in Western culture” (Glissant 1989: 224), must 
evade escapism, which can only be a detour from independence: “One 
is not Martinican because of wanting to be Caribbean. Rather, one is 
really Caribbean because of wanting to become Martinician” (Glissant 
1989: 224). The alleged, if (potentially) transient, political and cultural 
trajectory in his early writings as much as in the later Caribbean Dis-
course, is the independent nation. This is perhaps most poignantly 
staged in his fictional work La Lézarde (The Ripening). 
The book, written in 1958 at the time when Glissant formed the 
Front Antillo-Guyanais together with Paul Niger, centres on four 
young students engaged in nation-building in the post-war era (Hall-
ward 2001: 81f). All along, their success hinges on a new mode of re-
lating to Caribbean geography. “‘This is the place’ said Thaël. ‘And 
we discovered it. We can say we have made it ours. Yesterday, it had 
the blood of our forefathers, today it has our voice’” (Glissant 1985: 
185). Attention to topographical particulars enables transcendence of 
the very terms of the colonial enterprise (“discovered”). Such a view 
depends on consciousness of the phenomenology of  ‘place’ which 
will also acknowledge the particularities of different mindsets: and yet 
Glissant endorses neither particularism, nor the nostalgia of a mystical 
ecology, a concept he critiques with reference to Pétain (Glissant 
1997: 147), but convergence of “these various communities” as “elec-
                                                      
23  
On the material, pedagogical, and political effects of utopian narratives, see 
Balibar 1991. 

Saskia Schabio 
318
torate”, as nation. Neither is there the (North-American) modernist an-
tinomy between cosmopolitan detachment from locality and the focus 
on the local. If cosmopolitan, this perspective is inextricably tied to 
the great hopes of establishing “the tender ideal of brotherly love, so 
long repressed and futile” (Glissant 1985: 146). Relating anew to 
landscape hinges on an altogether novel way of relating to time and 
space. “I think I have always known you [...] you were always 
there”:24 Only then will things fall into place, will human relate to 
human in a language not laced with empire and the attendant logic of 
progress and consumption. Note how Glissant wrenches the world-
making nature of vision coming into its own from its (Adamic) es-
chatological frame (“You make mistakes, but they are your mistakes, 
you correct them”): 
 
[a]nd you begin to emerge from the confusion, you begin to see things 
in their proper places, you see the sea, the houses, the sands, the vege-
tables, you begin to sort things out, each in its place and each one’s 
place in relation to the other. [...] You learn the power and the signifi-
cance of words. You first stumble among the words, but each time you 
get up. You make mistakes, but they are your mistakes, you correct 
them. [...] We knew little to begin with, but we soon learnt to use our 
eyes. And finally we managed to become fully aware and to name our 
world (Glissant 1985: 185).25 
 
Glissant’s style seeks the poetic ‘figuration’ of an immediate rather 
than a mediated relation to nature that would endorse the (romantic) 
ambition of healing the rift between nature and human, perception and 
projection. Operating at the boundary between the visible and the in-
visible, trees figure the unknown and unknowable, positing that irre-
ducible self-identity of the physical and experiential particular that 
transcends the arbitrariness of the letter and belies the alienating 
worldview of cartographic abstraction.26 The emergence of the new 
nation can only be imagined in terms of this utopian process. 
                                                      
24  
See Glissant (1989: 108) on the function of landscape as a way of “retrieving 
the people’s collective memory”. 
25  
On the coherence between territory and narrative structure, see Hallward 
2001: 84. 
26  
The desire for such a moment also pervades Wilson Harris’ writing on land-
scape: “The landscape possessed a life, because, the landscape, for me, is like 
an open book, and the alphabet with which one worked was all around me. 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
319
Looking towards Glissant’s more recent work, national inde-
pendence seems to figure less prominently. And yet his now strongly 
Deleuzian understanding of the spatial does, as far as I can see, neither 
exclude the nation state as an immediate political telos nor renounce 
the project of Martinician independence. What this entails is revealed 
in his fully fledged redefinition of the “city” in terms of the ‘rhizome’, 
operating on the assumption that “each and every identity is extended 
through a relationship with the Other” (Glissant 1997: 11): “A city 
represents a region in the Nation, and a nation in the world system, but 
it comes back to its particular roots when it accepts the special nature 
of an ‘Other’” (Glissant 1997b). What Glissant grapples with is terri-
torialism that grounds itself on “identity” as the “sacred mystery of the 
root” and as such prolongs dependency: “whenever it proves hard to 
define or impossible to maintain, [it] leads inexorably to the refuges of 
generalization provided by the universal as value” (Glissant 1997: 
141f). Therefore “instances of independence” need to be “defined as 
closely as possible”:  
 
Gradually premonitions of the interdependence at work in the world 
today have replaced the ideologies of national independence that 
drove the struggles for decolonization. But the absolute presupposition 
of this interdependence is that instances of independence will be de-
fined as closely as possible and acutally won or sustained. Because it 
is only beneficial to all (it only stops being a pretext or ruse) at the 
point at which it governs the distancings that are determinant (Glissant 
1997: 143). 
 
As this paragraph’s presentation of global interconnectivity moves 
from a dystopian view (“premonition”) to a more positive vision (“ab-
solute presupposition of this interdependence [...] no longer a pretext 
or ruse”), it circumscribes again the problem of utopia in the face of 
the present global “speeding up of relationships” (Glissant 1997: 141) 
in ways that recall the Blochian parallels pointed out earlier. The stan-
dardization of social desires is apparent in the obstructive influence of 
French statism (“the French technocratic elites”), which comes from 
“having to consume the world without participating in it, without even 
the least idea of it” (Glissant 1997: 145). 
                                                                                                                  
[...] Is there a language akin to music threaded into space and time which is 
prior to human discourse?” (Harris 1999: 40-46; qtd. in Müller 2002: 247).  

Saskia Schabio 
320
In particular in the case of Martinician culture, which, having 
no “solid rootstock in any sacred territory or filiation”, is “fragile in 
the extreme”, such are the forces of “masked colonization” (Glissant 
1997: 144) that it will be difficult to muster up political resistance. 
“This, indeed, is a case in which specificity is a strict requirement and 
must be defined as closely as possible” (Glissant 1997: 144). How-
ever, merely “[p]ronouncing one’s specificity is not enough if one is 
to escape the lethal, indistinct confusion of assimilations; this specific-
ity still has to be put into action before consenting to any outcome” 
(Glissant 1997: 147). And it is in this context that, again, Glissant 
ponders the “need for poor countries to exercise self-sufficiency that is 
economically and physically sustaining. Such as the definition of how 
forms of independence are experienced or hoped for” (Glissant 1997: 
148). Again, with an eye on Martinique, Glissant asserts: “Here, as 
elsewhere, one must figure out [...] how much we should push for in-
vention and a new sensibility in association with ‘national’ products”.  
But how is one to stem the force of the “planetary evolution to-
ward standardization of consumer products” (Glissant 1997: 149)? As 
suggested earlier, Glissant’s is a stridently poetic world view: the 
“world’s poetic force (its energy) kept alive within us, fastens itself by 
fleeting, delicate shivers, onto the rambling prescience of poetry in the 
depths of our being” (Glissant 1997: 159). While hindered by the “ac-
tive violence in reality” it is “everpresent”, it will not “dry up”, as if to 
interrupt that consumer logic of the ‘new’ that animates the speed of 
globalization: “It will be a long time before we finally recognize it as 
the newness of the world not setting itself up as anything new” (Glis-
sant 1997: 160). The “expression of this force” is “Relation” (Glissant 
1997: 160). Relation thrives on traditional utopian narratives in that 
creolization is accelerated by the collision of cultures prompted by the 
new communication technologies.27 The verve of Glissant’s ‘defense’ 
of poetry bespeaks with an almost Shelleyan enthusiasm an aesthetic 
position (which, again, would deserve much more careful exploration, 
both in relation to romanticist and modernist aesthetics). Captured in 
the broadest terms, as far as I can see, Relation is invoked as counter-
ing the shrinking autonomy of art. The hope is to unsettle that deaden-
                                                      
27  
This affirms Pordzik’s description of postcolonial utopias which “reconceptu-
alize technology as a staging ground or contact zone for intercultural action.” 
(Pordzik 2006: 186) 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
321
ing standardization of taste Glissant observes as an effect of enduring 
colonization: “To oppose the disturbing affective standardization of 
peoples, whose affect has been diverted by the processes and products 
of international exchange, either consented to or imposed, it is neces-
sary to renew the visions and aesthetics of relating to the earth” (Glis-
sant 1997: 148). We see this poetic relation to space emerge from an 
impasse which recalls Bloch’s engagement with the problematic rela-
tion between utopia and the standardization of desire in capitalist 
modernity.28 Yet if so, Glissant’s Deleuzian concept of Relation may 
be taken to punctuate the difficulties of postcolonial approaches which 
answer that impasse by referring to relational difference and particu-
larity as the expression of specific local desires and politics, arriving 
at the “transcendence of relations with or between specific individu-
als” (Hallward 2001: 67). Having said that, and by the same token, 
this impasse also prompts us to readdress the problematic issue of 
Caribbeanness as a “singular figuration” that, “like any singular con-
figuration”, implies a “univocity beyond mere integration” and hin-
ders “its own interruption” (Hallward 2001: 332).29 
As an aesthetic experiment – it is, after all, a poetics of relation 
he envisages – Glissant’s writing leaves us with the problem of  how 
to judge culturalist approaches, as any culturalist approach to the 
problem of utopia begs the question of the pedagogic effects of utopia, 
and the need to distinguish between its aesthetic and political dimen-
sions. And yet, if the reception of ‘Caribbeanness’ prompts us to cau-
tion against confusing the modes of celebratory or dystopian main-
stream descriptions of inevitable and naturalized global interconnec-
tivity, political analysis and the formulation of ethical and aesthetic 
positions, this is not entirely to dismiss transnational perspectives as a 
useful methodological tool. It is, however, to critique a (now almost 
prescriptive) symbolic topography, which is not an equivalent to po-
litical action, and that might sponsor unhelpfully dogmatic positions. 
 
 
                                                      
28  
See Müller (2002: 257) on potential parallels between Caribbean notions of 
survival and Bloch’s principle of hope. 
29  
At stake is some form of ‘universalist’ claim – glimpses perhaps of what Wil-
son Harris also seeks in his aesthetic experiments – “a shared anatomy that 
has its roots in all creatures and in everything” (Harris 1999: 44; quoted in 
Müller 2002: 248) and that may only be poetically perceived. 

Saskia Schabio 
322
6. Conclusion 
 
Glissant’s work, I have been suggesting, may be taken as an example 
of the critical inflection utopian desire has received in Caribbean writ-
ing. Although not ostensibly or sui generis utopian, inflections of uto-
pian thinking inform Caribbean aesthetic experiments which in places 
invite comparisons to Critical Theory. At times such a perspective 
may seem like forcing Glissant’s complex work into too restricted a 
focus. There is an obvious friction between concepts emerging from 
historical and geographical origins as diverse as Critical Theory and 
Caribbean liberation theory. If so, this mirrors a tendency to be found 
in some strands of postcolonial studies and prompts us to pause over 
the conceptual transfer of culturally charged paradigms.30 At the same 
time the affinity may be taken to reveal the impact of the Orwellian 
moment on present figurations of political and social space: for the na-
tion-state’s Orwellian crisis may be taken not only to register para-
digmatically dystopian apprehensions of modernity, but instead actu-
ally to foreshadow the prevalence of the “antinomies of a homogenous 
global mass-media and commodity culture and the violent particular-
isms of the new nationalisms emergent in the post cold war era up to 
the present date” (Wegner 2002: xxv, xxvi). These are not at all irrele-
vant, it seems, to recent apprehensions of the transnation.  
 
 
                                                      
30  
See Weigel who insists on the historical origin of space-discourses so that 
they may not evolve into “neutral tools” (2002: 151). She argues that we need 
to retain the differences between Anglo-American Cultural Theory and Euro-
pean Culture Studies. 

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
323
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Glissant, Édouard (1989). Caribbean Discourse: Selected Essays (tr. J.M. Dash). 
Charlottesville: UP of Virginia. 
— (1985). The Ripening (tr. Michael Dash). London and Kingston: Heinemann. 
— (1997). Poetics of Relation (tr. Betsy Wing). Ann Arbor: The U of Michigan P. 
— (1997b). “Opening remarks at the Cities of Asylum Congress of the International 
Parliament of Writers made at the Palais de l’Europe in Strasbourg” (March 
26-28, 1997) (tr. Christopher Mott). [http://www.autodafe.org/ipw/textes/ 
glissant.htm]. 
James, C. L. R. (1971). Minty Alley. London and Port of Spain: New Beacon Books. 
Walcott, Derek (1970). Dream on Monkey Mountain and Other Plays. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. (1997). Aesthetic Theory (tr. Robert Hullot-Kentor; ed. Gretal 
Adorno and Rolf Tiedeman). Minneapolis:  U of Minnesota P.  
— (1973). Negative Dialectics (tr. E. B. Ashton). New York: Seabury.  
Bachmann-Medick, Doris (2006). “Spatial Turn”, in: Doris Bachmann-Medick (ed.). 
Cultural Turns: Neuorientierungen in den Kulturwissenschaften. Reinbek bei 
Hamburg: Rowohlt, 284-328. 
Bahri, Deepika (2003). Native Intelligence: Aesthetics, Politics and Postcolonial Lit-
erature. Minneapolis and London: U of Minnesota P. 
Balibar, Etienne (1991). “The Nation Form: History and Ideology”, in: Etienne Bali-
bar and Imannuel Wallerstein (eds.). Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous Identi-
ties (tr. Chris Turner). New York: Verso, 86-106. 
Bartolovich, Crystal and Neil Lazarus (2002). Marxism, Modernity, and Postcolonial 
Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.  
Baucom, Ian (2006). “Township Modernism”, in: Walter Goebel and Saskia Schabio 
(eds.). Beyond the Black Atlantic: Relocating Modernization and Technology. 
London and New York: Routledge, 63-76. 
Benhabib, Seyla et al. (2006). Another Cosmopolitanism. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
Benjamin, Walter (1968). “Theses on the Philosophy of History”, in: Illuminations: 
Essays and Reflections (tr. Harry Zohn). New York: Schocken Books, 253-64. 
Bernabé, Jean, Patrick Chamoiseau and Raphaël Confiant (1993). Éloge de la Créoli-
té. Paris: Gallimard.  
Bhabha, Homi K. (1990). Nation and Narration. London and New York: Routledge.  
— (1994). The Location of Culture. London and New York: Routledge. 
Bloch, Ernst (1986). The Principle of Hope (tr. Neville Plaice, Stephen Plaice and 
Paul Knight). Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

Saskia Schabio 
324
Brennan, Timothy (1997). At Home in the World: Cosmopolitanism Now. Cambridge, 
MA, and London: Harvard UP. 
Chrisman, Laura (2006). “Black Modernity, Nationalism and Transnationalism: The 
Challenge of Black South African Poetry”, in: Walter Goebel and Saskia 
Schabio (eds.). Beyond the Black Atlantic: Relocating Modernization and 
Technology. London and New York: Routledge, 29-46.  
Dash, J. Michael (1989). “Introduction”, in: Édouard Glissant. Caribbean Discourse 
(tr. M. Dash). Charlottesville: U of Virginia P, xi-xlv. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1987). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia (tr. Brian Massumi). Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P. 
Diawara, Manthia (1998). In Search of Africa. London: Harvard UP. 
Fanon, Frantz (1963). The Wretched of the Earth (tr. Constance Farrington). New 
York: Grove Press. 
Gilroy, Paul (1993). The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cam-
bridge, MA, and London: Verso.  
Hall, Stuart (1993). “Cultural Identity and Diaspora”, in: Patrick Williams and Laura 
Chrisman (eds.). Colonial Discourse and Post-colonial Theory: A Reader. 
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester, 392-403. 
Hallward, Peter (2001). Absolutely Postcolonial: Writing between the Singular and 
the Specific. Manchester: Manchester UP. 
Hannerz, Ulf (1996). Transnational Connections: Culture, People, Places. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri (2000). Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP.  
Harris, Wilson (1983). The Womb of Space: The Cross-Cultural Imagination. West-
port, Conn., and London: Greenwood. 
— (1999). Selected Essays of Wilson Harris: The Unfinished Genesis of the Imagina-
tion (ed. A. J. M. Bundy). London: Routledge. 
Harvey, David (1989). The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins 
of Cultural Change. Oxford: Blackwell.  
Jameson, Fredric (1984). “Progresss versus Utopia; or Can we Imagine the Future?”, 
in: Brian Wallis (ed.). Art after Modernism: Rethinking Representation. New 
York: New Museum of Contemporary Art, 238-52. 
Khan, Nyla Ali (2005). The Fiction of Nationality in an Era of Transnationalism. 
New York and London: Routledge. 
Lippuner, Roland and Julia Lossau (2004). “In der Raumfalle: Eine Kritik des Spatial 
Turn in den Sozialwissenschaften”, in: Georg Mein and Markus Rieger-
Ladich (eds.). Soziale Räume und Kulturelle Praktiken: Über den strategi-
schen Gebrauch von Medien. Bielefeld: transcript, 47-64.  
Marin, Louis (1984). Utopics: The Semiological Play of Textual Spaces (tr. Robert A. 
Vollrath). Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International. 
Müller, Klaus Peter (2002). “Utopische und dystopische Elemente in der eng-
lischsprachigen Literatur der Karibik: Hybridität, Imagination und kreative 
Konstruktionen konkreter Lebenswelten”, in: Ralph Pordzik and Hans Ulrich 
Seeber (eds.). Utopie und Dystopie in den Neuen Englischen Literaturen. Hei-
delberg: Universitätsverlag Winter, 233-59. 
Nägele, Rainer (1990). “The Eyes of the Skull: Walter Benjamin’s Aesthetics”, in: 
Ronald Roblin (ed.). The Aesthetics of the Critical Theorists: Studies on Ben-

Peripheral Cosmopolitans 
325
jamin, Adorno, Marcuse, and Habermas. Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen, 206-
43.  
Nesbit, Molly, Hans Ulrich Obrist and Rirkrit Tiravanija. “What is a Station?” 
[http://www.e-flux.com/projects/utopia/about.html]. 
Parry, Benita (2004). Postcolonial Studies: A Materialist Critique. London and New 
York: Routledge.  
Pordzik, Ralph (2001). The Quest for Postcolonial Utopia: A Comparative Introduc-
tion to the Utopian Novel in the New English Literatures. New York: Peter 
Lang.  
— (2002). “Utopischer und post-utopischer Diskurs in den neuen englischsprachigen 
Literaturen”, in: Ralph Pordzik and Hans Ulrich Seeber (eds.). Utopie und 
Dystopie in den Neuen Englischen Literaturen. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag 
Winter, 9-26. 
— (2006). “Travels in Technotopia: Modernization and Technology in Postcolonial 
Utopian and Dystopian Writing”, in: Walter Goebel and Saskia Schabio 
(eds.). Beyond the Black Atlantic: Relocating Modernization and Technology. 
London and New York: Routledge, 184-97. 
Ramchand, Kenneth (1971). “Introduction”, in: C. L. R. James. Minty Alley. London 
and Port of Spain: New Beacon Books, 5-15.  
Rancière, Jacques (2000). Le Partage du Sensible. L’ Ésthetique et Politique. Paris: 
La Fabrique. 
Said, Edward (1993). Culture and Imperialism. London: Chatto & Windus.  
Soja, Edward W. (1989). Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in 
Critical Social Theory. London: Verso.  
— (1996). Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real-and-Imagined 
Places. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Wallerstein, Immanuel (1998). Utopistics: Or, Historical Choices of the Twenty-first 
Century. New York: The New Press.  
Wardle, Huon (2000). An Ethnography of Cosmopolitanism in Kingston, Jamaica. 
Lewiston, N.Y: Edwin Mellen.  
Wegner, Phillip E. (2002). Imagining Community: Utopia, The Nation and the Spatial 
Histories of Modernity. Berkeley and Los Angeles: The U of California P.  
Weigel, Sigrid (2002). “Zum ‘topographical turn’. Kartographie, Topographie und 
Raumkonzepte in den Kulturwissenschaften”, in: KulturPoetik 2.2: 151-65. 


 
 
 
 
“Utopian and Cynical Elements”:  
Chaplin, Cinema, and Weimar Critical Theory 
 
Antonis Balasopoulos 
 
 
Abstract: This essay seeks to challenge the postwar marginalization of Charlie Chap-
lin’s films within the canon of film theory by arguing for their crucial significance as 
complex meditations on the precariousness of utopian desire. I suggest, first, that 
Chaplin’s corpus was vital in the gestation of the ambivalent approach to mass culture 
that characterized Weimar Critical Theory; secondly, that the juncture between Chap-
lin and Weimar thought owed much to a shared tendency to view the utopian poten-
tial of modernity as something that rebounds from within the very forces of capitalist 
reification; and lastly, that in both Chaplin and Weimar thought, the volatile interplay 
between reification and utopia is exponentially complicated by being processed 
through the relay of affective cynicism and its own ambivalent functions. These three 
premises are explored through the demonstration of the close interdependence be-
tween the theory of reification and the conception of the modernity of the cinematic 
gaze; the examination of the role of Chaplin’s affective and gestural milieu in creating 
possibilities of utopian fulfillment out of the re-presentation of reification; and the 
anatomy of the theoretical problems introduced by the ambivalent hermeneutic and 
political function of cynicism/kynicism as both anti-utopian and anti-reifying strat-
egy. I conclude with a reading of Chaplin’s The Kid (1921) as a paradigmatic instance 
of Chaplin’s function as the exponent of an abyssal dialectic wherein the conflicting 
forces of utopia/reification and cynicism/kynicism are kept in permanent suspension, 
“at a standstill.” 
 
Key names and concepts: Theodor Adorno – aesthetics and politics – avant-garde – 
Walter Benjamin – Charlie Chaplin – cynicism – Siegfried Kracauer – modernity – 
reification – utopia – Weimar Germany 
 
 
There may be no more dramatic illustration of the rift that divides us 
from the cultural moment of high modernity than the drastic devalua-
tion of the artist who dominated the critical and popular milieu of the 
period between the outbreak of the First World War and the advent of 
the Second. Chaplin, “the national hero of the world” in the enthusias-
tic words of Weimar critic Hans Siemsen, the actor, producer and di-

Antonis Balasopoulos 
328
rector who was to shape both the aesthetics of the Parisian avant-garde 
in the teens and twenties and the Critical Theory of the German left 
and liberal intelligentsia in the thirties, has been all but incidental to 
the inquiries of cultural and film studies theory in the second half of 
the twentieth century.1 Falling prey, it would seem, to the very zest 
with which he had been singled out as the towering figure of the new 
art of the cinema before the war, Chaplin’s cult status as harbinger of 
the promise of modernity had faded by the time Monsieur Verdoux 
was released in 1947. 
Chaplin’s highly visible yet ultimately elusive political status in 
the years before 1940 did little to help his rapid decline in critical 
status.2 Badly damaged by the HUAC-orchestrated Cold War offen-
sive in the United States, Chaplin’s political image was ironically 
equally compromised in the circles of the postwar European left, 
largely due to its own disillusion with the optimistic appraisal of the 
emerging milieu of technologically mediated mass entertainment. The 
French long sixties, after all, trace one of their foundational moments 
in the agitationist disruption of the Paris premier of Chaplin’s Lime-
light in 1952, an event that led to the formation of Guy Debord’s Let-
trist International, and, a few years later, of the Situationist movement. 
In the eyes of the Situationists, the Switzerland-residing, politically 
neutralized Chaplin of the postwar years was no longer thinkable as a 
manifesto hero as he had been for their avant-garde predecessors in 
the thirties;3 he was rather a manifesto villain, “a fascist insect” (Berna 
et al. 1952: n. p.), “marked with infamy in the eyes of all those who 
had believed in the subversive nature of his work and who had ac-
corded him all their affection, as to no other great artist” (Bédouin 
                                                           
1  
Siemsen, as quoted in Hake 1990: 88. The generally adulatory response to 
Chaplin in the Parisian literary avant-garde is discussed in Abel 1976: 84-
109. 
2  
In a 1931 review of Chaplin, Kracauer contended that “Chaplin succeeds in 
asserting himself in a realm beyond the political” (1997: 118). On the ideo-
logical ambiguities informing the German reception of Chaplin’s off-screen 
and on-screen persona, see Hake 1990: 93-97, 101f, 106f. For a discussion of 
similar ambiguities emerging during Chaplin’s last years in the US (1947-
1952), see Wranovics 2005: 14f, 54, 126f. 
3  
In 1927, the Surrealist Group published its passionate defense of Chaplin 
from charges of sexual immorality, “Hands off Love” (2000: 173-80). 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
329
2000: 181).4 Like virtually everyone else in European left and liberal 
culture between the wars, including his numerous admirers in avant-
garde circles, Chaplin seemed unable to fill his own, larger-than-life 
shoes. The image of a mass culture messiah who could single-
handedly reeducate collective affect and perception in a progressive 
political direction now appeared utopian in the worst sense, the prod-
uct of the starry-eyed political naiveté of a generation that had been 
duped by charismatic vanguardism and swept away by its catastrophic 
incarnation in Fascism. Even from the standpoint of a more tradition-
ally aesthetic criticism, Chaplin’s earlier critical association with what 
was most vital in the milieu of cinematic modernity seemed like so 
much misguided enthusiasm, a signal failure to perceive the fact that 
his work actually lagged behind the formal complexity, cinematic re-
flexivity, or technical virtuosity of contemporaries like D.W. Griffith, 
Sergei Eisenstein, or, closer to Chaplin’s own comic milieu, Buster 
Keaton.5 
Yet there is something unreflectively tautological about Chap-
lin’s postwar critical devaluation. For the dismissal of the significance 
of Chaplin’s work involves an amnesic elision of the political and aes-
thetic configuration which critically defined this significance in the 
first place: more than any other artist of the period, “Chaplin” was a 
sign, a name for the tense and volatile embodiment, within the same 
cultural text, of vanguardist iconoclasm and mass cultural appeal, 
critical demystification and visceral pleasure, post-human transmogri-
fication and humanist affirmation, the anticipation of a transformed 
future and the affirmation of survival in what is. Watching his early 
films today is a profoundly instructive lesson in the historical ineluc-
tability of our distance from such a horizon of interpretation. What 
appears ‘timeless’ in the figure of the Tramp is ironically never quite 
identical to what it signaled in the cultural moment that Chaplin 
                                                           
4  
For a brief discussion of the broader context of the Lettrist sabotage of Chap-
lin’s premiere in Paris, see Marcus 1990: 340ff. 
5  
Though many of Chaplin’s prewar critics were conscious of the comparative 
aesthetic technical simplicity of his work, they tended to read its implications 
in a more positive manner than their postwar counterparts; among these are 
reviews and responses by Delluc (1988: 138), Balázs (2006: 53), Arnheim 
(1996: 313f), and, in his retrospective evaluations, Adorno (2001b: 94 and 
2001c: 180). On the aesthetic devaluation of Chaplin in postwar Europe and 
the more recent efforts to revitalize interest in his work, see Macnab 2003. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
330
helped shape. Something is missing: namely, the dialectical entangle-
ment of the laughter and pathos inspired by this figure with the critical 
awareness of the forces that made defeat and catastrophe a real, eco-
nomically and politically resonant, dimension of daily life. No subse-
quent era can be said to have walked the tightrope that dominated the 
aesthetic and political horizon of Europe between the late teens and 
the late thirties, not least because the postwar normalization of liberal 
capitalist parliamentarianism and the contamination of all prospects of 
dialogue between mass entertainment and mass political self-
definition by the specter of Fascism have foreclosed hermeneutic pos-
sibilities that once seemed not merely open but of compelling signifi-
cance for the study of film. 
But it may also be said that it is precisely because of its dogged 
resistance to a ‘revisionist’ accommodation to contemporary critical 
sensibilities that Chaplin’s work retains a measure of theoretical pro-
ductivity for us. For in its apparent recalcitrance to late modern critical 
paradigms (semiotics, structuralism, Lacanian psychoanalysis, decon-
struction), it forces upon us the task of reconstructing the import for 
its intelligibility of the volatile and now hardly imaginable terrain 
wherein the utopian desire for a radical, culturally engineered trans-
formation of social existence is situated in high modernity. The pro-
found resonance of Chaplin’s cinematic work on its European con-
temporaries, I would like to argue, is inconceivable outside the pa-
rameters of its articulation of an experience dominated by the relent-
less shift of positions between utopian desire, capitalist reification and 
affective cynicism, one which signals less a dialectical relation proper 
than the turning of dialectic itself into an abyssal, vertiginous struc-
ture, its putting en abyme.6 The volatile threshold that opens between 
utopia, reification, and cynicism therefore constitutes both a vital as-
pect of the evolution of Chaplin’s comic vision and a crucial constitu-
ent of his original reception; if, as Miriam Hansen remarks, what was 
radically new and different in twentieth-century modernity was “the 
liberatory appeal of the ‘modern’ for a mass public”, it is also the case 
that Chaplin’s function within this configuration was to both assert the 
“appeal of a utopian humanity” and its “impossibility”, the hope that 
the world could be different and the knowledge that it is not.7 The col-
                                                           
6  
On the notion of an abyssal dialectic, see Hansen 1999: 311f. 
7  
See Hansen 1997: 365, 374. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
331
lapse, in films like the brutally cynical Monsieur Verdoux (1947) and 
the politically incoherent A King in New York (1957), of the tension 
that held utopianism and its reifying and cynical inversions in balance 
in Chaplin’s work attests to the intractable difficulties such dialectical 
indecision faced in the wake of the catastrophic lessons of war and the 
Holocaust. Yet, in furnishing the grounds for a thoroughgoing investi-
gation of the possibilities and limits of utopian transformation under 
the rule of capitalist everyday life, the dialogue between a specific 
filmic corpus and the project of modern cultural critique remains vital 
to materialist and politically oriented criticism in the present. It is 
some of the important fragments of this dialogue that I would like to 
excavate here. 
 
 
Between Reification and Utopia: The Cinematic Gaze 
 
It is well known that reification, the cognitive symptom of the global 
triumph of commodity culture in the age of modern industrial capital-
ism, receives its foundational cultural exposition in Georg Lukács’ 
History and Class Consciousness (1920). Yet it needs also be said that 
what constitutes the significance of this work for the Weimar theoriza-
tion of the culture of modernity is not its offer of some sort of portable 
definition of the concept. For Lukács, indulgence in “petrified factual-
ity” – the illusory transmutation of interlaced historical and social 
processes into isolated, thing-like facts (1990: 184) – insinuates itself 
in the very desire to define such a thing as reification in the first place. 
Since “the nature of history is precisely that every definition degener-
ates into an illusion” (186), confronting the fundamental implications 
of the concept requires an active labor of reassembly, a thought that 
would trace its concrete and thus necessarily diverse manifestations 
within a series of apparently discrete realms. 
The initial context in which Lukács witnesses the emergence of 
reification as a “necessary, immediate reality” (197) of consciousness 
under capitalist relations of production is production itself, a realm 
whose rationalization bestows upon human labor and its products a 
“phantom objectivity” (83) that detaches them from the experience 
and consciousness of the social subject. This unassailably “objective” 
status, Lukács observes, reinforces the fracturing of the formerly uni-
fied processes of work and life, the fragmentation of which, in turn, 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
332
furnishes the groundwork for the seemingly neutral belief that these 
now partial elements ought to be rationally and independently cali-
brated and re-organized. 
It is not adequate, however, to view Lukácsian reification as a 
cognitive development that governs the fragmenting perception of the 
subject’s activities and surroundings without also realizing that it ef-
fectively constitutes the subject itself as a separable and separate cate-
gory: science and post-classical philosophy, the two epistemological-
ideological realms whose development Lukács examines, are indebted 
to precisely this effect of a division between subject and object. In 
turn, they reproduce this division by isolating a field of “objective” 
data from their underlying social reality or by postulating the auton-
omy of subjective consciousness from a world it now simply observes 
(cf. 103-31). 
Observation, “the contemplative stance” (89), indeed something 
like a specular reorganization of a now fully objectified zone of ex-
perience, appear here as the par excellence signs of reification, for vi-
sion is implicitly viewed as the sense that most ‘immediately’ corre-
sponds to the topology of the subject-object split. In Susan Buck-
Morss’ terms, an older, synaesthetic apprehension of experience is re-
placed by one wherein bodily and cognitive experience are split, so 
that “an uncanny sense of self-alienation” dominates the organization 
of perception itself (1992: 31). “In terms of his consciousness,” 
Lukács notes, the bourgeois individual is “a perceiving subject con-
fronting the overwhelming objective necessities imposed by society of 
which only minute fragments can be comprehended,” even if “in real-
ity” it is his own conscious activity “that is to be found in the object-
side of the process” (165; emphasis added). Inevitably, capitalism 
splits the subject “into an [object-like] element of the movement of 
commodities and (an objective and impotent) observer of that move-
ment” (166; emphasis added). 
The implications of such remarks for a theorization of the struc-
tural function of cinema as the cultural dominant of high modernity 
were both manifold and complex. From a heuristically materialist 
standpoint, cinema offered itself up as the emblematic instance of the 
impact of reification both at the level of the economic structure and 
that of the cultural superstructure: “film rehearses in the realm of re-
ception what the conveyor belt imposes upon human beings in the 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
333
realm of production”, in Miriam Hansen’s succinct synopsis of that 
position (1987: 184). On the one hand, cinema was a component of 
capitalist industry, one so thoroughly dominated by the organizational 
models of Fordist production as to be structurally indistinguishable 
from its non-artistic counterparts.8 On the other hand, the mental and 
cognitive position engendered by the recording and projection appara-
tuses echoed what Lukács described as the simultaneously “impotent” 
and “objective” situation of the alienated producer-cum-“observer.” 
The phenomena of the “autonomization of sight, of the new ideology 
of the image” and of the “objective fragmentation of the outside word, 
or of the objects of perception” appear as “rigorously identical”, since 
the transformation of the world into images implied “the reunification 
of data which were originally chaotic or fragmentary” (Jameson 1981: 
232f). Given the fact that the reduction of the world into a repertoire 
of deracinated pictures redoubles as reduction of the subject to a mere 
“point of view”, it is not surprising that film, that “hegemonic formal 
expression of late capitalist society” (Jameson 1981: 160), was also to 
be viewed as the ultimate phenomenological expression of reified sen-
sibility, the most crystalline articulation of the subject-object split. 
With few exceptions, French and German film criticism be-
tween the wars testifies to the significance of Lukács’ analysis, even if 
it evades its grounding in a moralistic denunciation of reification jux-
taposed to the orthoscopic vision of proletarian class consciousness.9 
In France, essays like Aragon’s “On Décor” (1918), Cocteau’s “Carte 
Blanche” (1919), Epstein’s “The Senses” and “Magnification” (1921), 
Léger’s “La Roue” (1922) and “Painting and Cinema” (1925), Ar-
taud’s “Cinema and Reality” (1927) and Pagnol’s “The Talkie” (1930) 
tend to describe the essence of the cinematic in terms of its sensitivity 
to the world of alienated things, its penchant for breaking down the 
visual field, its affinity to the partial, the dislocated, the fragmented.10 
Weimar film criticism retains this emphasis while attempting to elabo-
rate further on the interface between the phenomenological conscious-
                                                           
8  
From the perspective of the entrepreneurs who brought it into the world, Fon-
dane remarked in 1930, film was no different than “the automobile or the air-
plane” (1988: 50). 
9  
For a critical reference to the limits of Lukács’ normative and moralistic ap-
proach to reification, see Jameson 1981: 63, 227, 234. 
10  
See Abel 1988, vol. 1: 166, 172f, 235, 242, 272ff, 412; and 1988, vol. 2: 57. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
334
ness specific to the cinematic mode and the mode of production spe-
cific to capitalism. In “Photography” (1927), an essay of crucial im-
port for his later understanding of film,11 Siegfried Kracauer suggested 
that the photographic capture of the world was “a secretion of the 
capitalist mode of production” (1995: 61) that assembled in effigy the 
remnants of a nature that had become “alienated in meaning.” The 
world confronting the camera had, socio-economically speaking, al-
ready put on “a photographic face” (59); having “disintegrated into its 
elements”, it offered itself to consciousness “to deal with as it pleases” 
(62). As for film itself, Kracauer would later argue that it carried the 
principle of photographic fragmentation further, since “the construc-
tion of film from shots of minute phases of movement favors […] the 
tendency toward decomposing given wholes” (1960: 50). 
The modernity of the new medium was thus unambiguously re-
lated to its far greater responsiveness to the structures of feeling en-
gendered by reification; in the terms of Benjamin’s famous “The 
Work of Art in the Era of its Technological Reproducibility”, film jux-
taposed to older arts like painting the image of a “piecemeal”, “mani-
fold” and provisionally “assembled” world that had come to replace 
the “total image” offered by the technologically unmediated arts of 
yesteryear (2002: 116). 
Arguing that cinema engenders a profoundly materialistic spe-
cies of perception,12 one for which “physical reality” becomes astutely 
visible and perceptible precisely to the extent that it dissolves into the 
fragmented multiplicity of estranged and orphaned matter, Chaplin’s 
European contemporaries paid considerable attention to the series of 
ways through which cinematic practice could be said to re-present the 
process of reification: first, through highlighting the isolation of mate-
rial details from their heretofore ‘natural’ context, now submitted to 
uncanny re-vision through magnification, slow and accelerated mo-
                                                           
11  
See Schlüpmann 1987: 102. 
12  
This insight spans the gamut between Artaud’s visionary proclamation that 
“[c]inema exalts matter and reveals it to us in its profound spirituality” (1988: 
412) and Benjamin’s more politically inflected suggestion that film, as “the 
first artistic medium which is able to show how matter plays havoc with hu-
man beings”, constitutes “an excellent means of materialist exposition” (2003: 
277). 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
335
tion, or separation from the familiarizing rituals of everyday life;13 
secondly, through the destruction of the organic unity of the actor’s 
body, which, broken down by a multiplicity of camera angles and the 
discontinuities of editing, now became “a fragment of the matter of 
the world”, an “object among objects” (Kracauer 1960: 45, 97);14 and 
lastly, through the corresponding segmentation of the cinema actor’s 
relation to the film, given that from the actor’s own perspective, the 
aesthetic image of the whole is as elusive as its social counterpart is 
for the factory or office workers who filled the cinema houses in 
search of distraction. 
Yet, in re-presenting the reification of the human sensorium, 
film could simultaneously be grasped as the medium best equipped to 
engender an emancipated political consciousness: thanks to its “frac-
turing, alienating techniques”, it was less the blind mirror of “a given 
world” than a Gnostic eye that for the first time made this world visi-
ble, available for scrutiny to the “sensoria of a spectating collective” 
(Hansen 1999: 339). A utopian counterforce to reification thus begins 
to assert itself in the conceptualization of cinematic modernity through 
the prism of Brechtian Verfremdung; in presenting us with the frac-
tured images of a detotalized world, cinema was said to make con-
scious our estrangement from it and, in so doing, allow for an at least 
minimal form of cognitive emancipation from our experience under 
the capitalist mode of production. French surrealist critics and film-
makers had already begun theorizing the cinematic experience in re-
lated terms after World War I, when they credited cinema, particularly 
its American products, with the ability to stage “a revolution against 
things as we ordinarily see them” (Abel 1976: 109). “The cinemato-
graphic revolution”, Léger remarked in “La Roue”, “is to make us see 
everything that has merely been noticed” (1988: 273). 
Weimar Critical Theory, on the other hand, was able to explore 
such flashes of utopian insight with greater theoretical rigor and sys-
                                                           
13  
See Benjamin 1999e: 510ff; 2002c: 103, 117; Kracauer 1960: 46-58. 
14  
Kracauer quotes the first of these two phrases from Delluc. The argument is 
largely prefigured in “The Mass Ornament”, where Kracauer dwells upon the 
corporeal phenomenology of the Taylorite regime of modern dancing troupes 
like the Tiller girls (1995: 83f). Benjamin discusses the import of film on the 
image of the actor’s body along similar lines in the 1939 version of his Art-
work essay (2003: 259ff). 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
336
tematicity. At some distance from Lukács’ economically centered ana-
lysis of reification, Kracauer suggested that science and technology 
had paradoxically both disengaged the material dimension from the 
organic experience of the world as totality and deprived this dimen-
sion of qualitative concreteness, thus veiling physical reality from sub-
jective consciousness (1960: 298ff). The utopian task of film therefore 
was the redemption of reality from “its state of virtual nonexistence”, 
its emancipation from the traditional aesthetic insistence on wholeness 
that ideologically perpetuated “the continued existence of beliefs 
which ‘cover’ physical reality in both senses of the word” (1960: 
300f). Benjamin’s Artwork essay similarly (if in more overtly political 
tones) credited cinema with the ability to confront the working classes 
with the illusory nature of any notion of “immediate reality” given the 
rationalization and technological mediation of experience under capi-
talism (2002c: 113). Since, as Adorno was to put it in “On the Fetish 
Character of Music” (1938), the sense of immediacy or intimacy under 
such conditions came to signal nothing but the redoubled, ideological 
triumph of reification itself (2001a: 42), it was precisely in the expo-
sure to the “second nature” of technology that a transformative politi-
cal relationship to the present could be expected to take hold. Benja-
min’s attempt to theorize the aesthetico-political function of cinema 
registered this counter-factually hopeful response with particular po-
etic force: 
 
film furthers insight into the necessities governing our lives by its use 
of close-ups, by its accentuation of hidden details in familiar objects, 
and by its exploration of commonplace milieux through the ingenious 
guidance of the camera; on the other hand, it manages to assure us of 
a vast and unsuspected field of action. Our bars and city streets, our 
offices and furnished rooms, our railroad stations and our factories 
seemed to close relentlessly around us. Then came film and exploded 
this prison-world with the dynamite of the split second, so that now 
we can set off calmly on journeys of adventure among its far-flung 
debris (2003: 265).15 
 
Though Benjamin’s image of a technologically mediated “demiurgical 
eye” that “explodes the prevailing world into rubble” (Koch 1994: 
                                                           
15  
Kracauer echoes this famous formulation in his Theory of Film (1960: 48), 
though he also resists the blend of Marxism and messianism that so marked 
Benjamin’s own vision.  

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
337
210) is heavily tinted by the language of revolutionary messianism, 
the impact of the emphasis on estrangement as a means of resistance 
to the capitalist rationalization of subject and world remained primar-
ily aesthetic. Like surrealism, whose fantastic assemblies of the ex-
ploded detritus of a reified world forged startling forms of uncanny 
connection to aspects of everyday experience that were threatening to 
disappear into sheer abstraction, cinema was understood as a means of 
inducing states of disorientation and shock that in fact worked as 
means of countering the affective atrophy and impoverishment of in-
dividual and collective experience.16 In a world that has been thor-
oughly reorganized by considerations “of calculation, measurement, 
profit, and the like”, Jameson has aptly remarked, “the very activity of 
sense perception” has nowhere left to go; the result is an “unused sur-
plus capacity” toward which distracted spectatorship must be taken to 
provide something like a “Utopian compensation”, a means of restor-
ing to mass urban experience a qualitative, libidinally charged core 
(1981: 229, 236). 
This is the import of the constellation of “innervation” and the 
mimetic principle that is so central to Benjamin’s “techno-utopian” 
(Hansen 1999: 313) vision of cinema: whereas mimetic defense, in its 
reflex attempt to parry modern shock, has led to an anaesthetic state 
that effectively “cheats” the masses out of experience (Buck-Morss 
1992: 18), “innervation” is read as capable of mobilizing the “utopian 
excess” (Hansen 1999: 321) of stimulus-triggered sensation in the in-
terest or recapturing “traces of social experience in the ostensibly dead 
world of things” (Hansen 1999: 339). Re-presented, the reified image 
of the world obtains a utopian surplus of aesthetic and affective inten-
sity which, in overwhelming and breaking down the anaesthetizing de-
fenses of the subject paradoxically suspends its separation from the 
object, restoring, at a collective level, the active mimetic possibilities 
of play.17 
 
                                                           
16  
See, indicatively, Benjamin 1986: 181f, 189f, 192; Hansen 1987: 192, 218f; 
and Foster 1995: 157-91. 
17  
On Benjamin’s complex weaving together of the mimetic impulse to both the 
transformative dynamics of play and to “the second nature” of technological 
mediation, see (in the chronological order of their composition) 1999b: 101; 
1999c: 120; 1999e: 519; 1999f: 694-98; 1999g: 720; 2002c: 107, 126; and 
2002d: 134f. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
338
Affect and the Politics of the Cinematic Body 
 
It is within this broader theoretical context that the parameters of 
Chaplin’s comic persona were appraised by his European contempo-
raries. For one, this made the slapstick convention of portraying a 
comically antagonistic relationship between the human body, natural 
forces, and the banal objects of everyday life hermeneutically resonant 
in a historically specific sense. In certain ways, capitalism, as Kra-
cauer was to remark in “The Mass Ornament” (1927), had rationalized 
“not too much but rather too little” (1995: 81); because its class-bound 
Ratio “flees from reason and takes refuge in the abstract, uncontrolled 
nature proliferates under the guise of rational expression” – all the 
more intractable for having withstood the socio-historical liquidation 
of premodern irrationalities by Enlightenment thought (1995: 83f). 
Slapstick comedy was accordingly viewed as a genre that dramatized 
the subject’s violent confrontation with a world cluttered with mali-
cious and incomprehensibly self-willed objects, things like the 
emblematically modern and fitfully self-starting Model T or the recal-
citrant fold-up chair that loom large in the urban adventures of Chap-
lin’s A Day’s Pleasure (1919). 
Projected on the hallucinatory space of the screen, Louis 
Aragon observed, “objects that were a few moments ago sticks of fur-
niture or books of cloakroom tickets are transformed to the point 
where they take on menacing or enigmatic meanings” (1988: 166); re-
lentlessly exposed to a world that had been reduced to “décor”, Chap-
lin’s Tramp shed ludic light on the zone where normative relations be-
tween subject and object were submitted to constant disturbance. This 
principle of an ontological game of musical chairs, the young Aragon 
would contend, is what shapes Chaplin’s comic vision, haunting it “to 
such an extent that by an inversion of values each inanimate object 
becomes a living thing for him, each human person a dummy whose 
starting-handle must be found” (167). Chaplin’s comedy was in this 
respect another name for the re-presentation of “the imbrication of the 
mechanical and the living” (Hansen 1997: 373), one capable of mak-
ing the reciprocally damaging relations of subject and object the target 
of collective laughter. 
Such laughter appeared to Chaplin’s Weimar contemporaries as 
the instance of a thoroughly historical, rather than spontaneous or un-

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
339
mediated, species of affect: it was a response that was only one step 
removed from the psychic abjection to which it gave dialectical ex-
pression and which it apotropaically kept in abeyance. In his study on 
Hypnotic Neurosis (1881), Paul Louis Ladame had spoken of pre-
cinematic mass entertainment as a form that exploited “major neuro-
ses” for their “comic character”, imbuing the comic element itself with 
a “frightening and mysterious atmosphere” (Gordon 2001: 541). Ben-
jamin’s “Reply to Oscar Schmitz” (1928) would similarly observe that 
the laughter slapstick provokes “hovers over an abyss of horror” 
(1999: 17). It was not despite but because of its entanglement with 
such horror that the laughter Chaplin inspired could constitute, in Ben-
jamin’s famous phrase, “the most international and most revolutionary 
affect of the masses” (1996: 311). Providing a form of “innervation” 
capable of nurturing the subject’s politically progressive rather than 
pathologically regressive potential, Chaplin’s figure could afford the 
spectating collective a measure of free play that allowed it to work 
through the crippling effects of technological rationalization: 
 
If one considers the dangerous tensions which technology and its con-
sequences have engendered in the masses at large – tendencies which 
at critical stages take on a psychotic character – one also has to recog-
nize that this same technologization has created the possibility of psy-
chic immunization […] Collective laughter is one such preemptive 
and healing outbreak of mass psychosis. […] American slapstick 
comedies and Disney films trigger a therapeutic release of uncon-
scious energies. […] This is the context in which Chaplin takes on 
historical significance (Benjamin 2002c: 118).18 
 
The ability of Chaplin’s persona to inspire an affective response that 
oscillated between the registers of abject surrender to reification and 
its apotropaic deflection or overcoming depended on filmic embodi-
ment, the literal inscription of what one might call a “catastrophic 
                                                           
18  
Adorno is well known for his condemnation of mass laughter as the opposite 
of liberation, “a disease that has attacked happiness and is drawing it into its 
worthless totality” (1996: 141). Interestingly, however, his response to the 
laughter engendered by Chaplin’s comedies was far more compatible with 
Benjamin’s own approach; his brief portrait of Chaplin closes with the remark 
that it is precisely because of the “proximity” of the laughter Chaplin inspires 
“to cruelty” that cruelty finds “its legitimation and its element of the salva-
tional” (1996: 60f). 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
340
Utopia” upon the filmic image of the Tramp’s body.19 Chaplin’s 
socio-historical relevance, an awkward matter to decide on the 
grounds of his films’ plot themes or of the explicit class identity of his 
persona (which was to be quite uncertain and involve a singular com-
bination of petit-bourgeois, lumpenproletariat and déclassé aristo-
cratic elements), was above all a matter of an implicit, indeed literally 
silent, discourse on and of the body, its uses, its violations, its automa-
tisms and dispositions. Its first parameter was an emphasis on corpo-
real fragmentation and compartmentalization, the disarticulation of 
organic unities and boundaries and their reaggregation in new con-
figurations – a sort of corporeal analogue to filmic montage which, as 
Eisenstein would note, provided Chaplin’s technically ‘naïve’ films 
with their paradoxical modernity.20 In the neurological conception of 
bodies that spanned the discourses of mass entertainment, media sen-
sationalism, psychiatry, neurology and sociology from the late nine-
teenth century onwards, a symptomatology centered on mechanicism 
and automatism linked representations of the hysterical, neurasthenic 
or somnambulistic body to images of the overworked, self-alienated 
body of labor.21  
The famously jerky logistics of Chaplin’s gestural repertoire 
were accordingly interpreted as lying on interface between the regis-
ters of pathological dysfunction and mechanized labor. While an early 
Keystone film like Cruel, Cruel Love (1914) foregrounded Charlie’s 
grimacing, contorted and hysterical body, the famous “Charlot” se-
quences of Fernand Léger’s Charlot présente le ballet mécanique 
(1924) visualized him as a machinic ensemble that could be assembled 
and disassembled at will (fig. 1 and 2). And while Jean Epstein’s 
“Magnification” (1921) saw Chaplin’s Tramp as an “overwrought  
 
                                                           
19  
Buci-Gluckmann’s “Catastrophic Utopia” involves the co-presence of messi-
anic violence against the beautiful appearances that constitute illusion and of 
the affirmative faith in redemptive transformation; it is, in her own words, 
“the destructive tendency toward appearance and false totality” (1986: 221) – 
shared, in many ways, by Kracauer’s, Benjamin’s and Adorno’s otherwise 
distinct approaches to the phenomenology of the modern. 
20  
See Gunning 2005: n. p. 
21  
On this broader discursive conjuncture, see Singer 1995: 72-99; Gordon 2001: 
515-49; McCarren 1995: 748-74; McCabe 2001: 429-52; and Rabinbach 
1992, esp. chapters 4 and 6. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
341
Fig. 1. Charlie in hysterics. Still shot from Cruel, Cruel Love 
 
 
Fig. 2. Still shot from Ballet Mécanique 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
342
 
Fig. 3. Film print from Modern Times 
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
 
hero” whose “reflex actions” announced the advent of “photogenic 
neurasthenia” (238), Walter Benjamin’s fragment on “The Dialectical 
Structure of Film” suggested that Chaplin’s “unique significance” lay 
in the fact that he dissected “the expressive movements of human be-
ings into a series of minute innervations”, effectively applying “the 
law of the cinematic image sequence to human motorial functions” 
(2002b: 94). Chaplin’s Modern Times (1936), released a year after the 
composition of this fragment, gave Benjamin’s remarks quite a literal 
resonance (fig. 3).22 
In submitting itself to both Taylorite segmentation and hysteri-
cal automatism, however, Chaplin’s body allowed itself expression 
through a “malleable mechanics” (McCabe 2001: 448) that also car-
ried the promise of a “plastic ontology” (Gunning 2005: n. p.) – a ca-
pacity for transformation and mutation that could paradoxically be 
conceived as both post- or anti-human and as rebelliously humanizing. 
                                                           
22  
For an interesting reading of the sequence of Charlie gliding through the cogs 
as reflexive allegory of the cinematic mode of production itself, see Netto 
2003: 365-72. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
343
In either case, bodily transformation and transformability signaled a 
signifying excess, the refusal on the part of the body to submit to a re-
gime of productive efficiency and economic rationalization. “Rather 
than exclusively the sign of oppression”, Tom Gunning observes, 
Chaplin’s mechanical, repetitive and rhythmic movements “violated a 
certain understanding of the human body and thereby seemed to some 
viewers in the teens and twenties to open up new realms of acrobatic 
expression and even physical liberation” (2005: n. p.). 
Freed from the limits of the bounded corporeal image, the 
Tramp’s body took up the features of the mechanical or inorganic 
world in gags that saw him turn into a water faucet (in A Film 
Johnnie), a hybrid human-mechanical ensemble (in Behind the Screen; 
fig. 4), or a pair of disembodied hands taking command of another 
man’s actions (in A Dog’s Life). As physical and immediate dramati-
zations of bio-mechanical mutation, such comical gags exceeded the 
status of simple allegories of technological dehumanization, while also 
bypassing the retrogressive appeal to the fiction of an organic and co-
herent self. Transformability, rather, was restored to the utopian func-
tion of conveying a relationship to the world that reverted to the felici-
tous confusion of subject and object, of animate and inanimate enti-
ties, in the ludic experience of childhood: “Children’s play is every-
where permeated by mimetic modes of behavior”, Benjamin remarked 
in 1933; “its mode is by no means limited to what one person can imi-
tate in another. The child plays at being not only a shopkeeper or 
teacher, but also a windmill and a train.” (1999g: 720)23 
 
                                                           
23  
Importantly, Benjamin would suggest that the child’s ability to transform the 
world in play contains a valuable and educable political component: “[w]hat 
characterizes every child’s gesture is that creative innervation is exactly pro-
portioned to receptive innervation. The development of these gestures […] is 
the task of the different workshops [of a Proletarian Children’s Theater]” 
(1999d: 204). Eisenstein, by contrast, associates Chaplin’s child-like disposi-
tion toward the world with politically impotent regression, especially when 
looked at from the viewpoint of the demands of a revolutionary proletarian 
consciousness (1959: 167-97). 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
344
 
Fig. 4. Charlie oils his arm as if it were another mechanical lever. Still shot from Be-
hind the Screen 
 
An “existence that would be free of the burden of being-one’s self”: 
this is how Adorno, retrospectively revisiting his relation to Chaplin, 
defined the “utopia” of “incessant and spontaneous change” that 
Chaplin’s corporeal mutations allegedly embodied (1996: 60). It was a 
prospect that a certain kind of negative utopianism dominating Ger-
man critical thinking between the wars could grasp as humanizing 
precisely in its rejection of the all-too-human. Kracauer’s “Chaplin’s 
Triumph” (1931) would accordingly argue that what the universally 
recognizable figure of the Tramp ultimately represents is “nothing”, 
the nothing of a subject in abeyance, hardly distinguishable from 
dumb matter: a bare life that forces itself “through pores and cracks 
and settles, like dust off the street.” And yet, Kracauer continues, what 
remains behind once the falsely universal attributes of a privileged 
class subject are shed off like so many cocoons or winter skins, is the 
“person as such, or rather […] the person as he/she is to be realized” 
(1997: 117-18). That Kracauer stops short of any attempt to name the 
social or political conditions capable of bringing about such realiza-
tion is an indication of the political lassitude that dogged the vision of 
the Weimar left, compelling it to see in Chaplin’s chameleonic abili-

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
345
ties something like an allegory for the anticipation of a revolutionary 
transformation whose form remained permanently irreducible to prac-
tical political programs and politically orthodox terms.24 
 
 
The Cynical Relay 
 
What prevents the conflict between reification and utopia from reach-
ing dialectical resolution is a phenomenon we might normally be 
tempted to view as contaminated by temperamental and contingent 
factors to an extent that makes it analytically useless: cynicism. But 
cynicism, as Peter Sloterdijk shows, was not an indifferently private or 
apolitical affair for Weimar culture. It was, on the contrary, the “cul-
turally dominating” factor of Weimar intellectual life to such an extent 
that the latter can be considered “cynically disposed like scarcely any 
previous culture” (1987: 389, 4). Unsurprisingly, the cynical relay 
presents a number of complications to the configuration outlined 
above – complications that turn out to be central both to the Weimar 
reception of Chaplin’s work and to its own theoretical preoccupations. 
Most directly, because the diagnosis of cynicism effectively reverses 
the hermeneutic direction I have previously traced: instead of moving 
from an inventory of the impact of reification on cultural production 
to the hopeful appraisal of utopian counterforces, the cynical relay 
turns conceptual traffic in the opposite direction, from apparently uto-
pian epiphenomena to profoundly reifying underlying structures. In 
this sense, cynicism strikes at the heart of the utopian impulse, making 
it appear as a ruse whose ideological functionality is augmented pre-
cisely by its capacity to placate and neutralize collective demands for 
affectivity, relation, pleasure, or fulfillment. Though it is most promi-
nently Adorno who develops a draconically vigilant critique of all that 
promises utopian transcendence, including, emphatically, the products 
of the mass culture industry itself, Benjamin and Kracauer’s work is 
also at times prone to submit the affirmative content of mass culture to 
corrosive scrutiny. 
                                                           
24  
For a critical discussion of the political debilitation of German Marxism in the 
Weimar years, see Anderson 1979: 32ff, 49-55, 75f; and Sloterdijk 1987: 424-
30. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
346
This is the thrust behind Benjamin’s “Paris, the Capital of the 
Nineteenth Century” (1935), wherein the sensorial barrage of the 
world exhibitions is interpreted as a means of manipulation at the ser-
vice of global commodification, and where the resulting effect of sen-
sory and mental distraction is read as anything but politically progres-
sive or enabling: “the entertainment industry makes this [distraction] 
easier by elevating the person to the level of the commodity. He sur-
renders to its manipulations while enjoying his alienation from himself 
and others”, Benjamin notes in the “Paris” essay.25 It is in this context 
that he speaks of a split, within the corpus of Grandville’s venomous 
caricatures of Parisian life, between “utopian and cynical elements” 
(2002a: 35). This split must be taken to correspond to the content of 
the capitalist phantasmagoria itself, its twin status as both vehicles of 
utopian promise and of cynical, manipulative intent; yet it is also ex-
plicitly viewed as the property of a work that critically comments 
upon that split as an aspect of the social situation. The relationship be-
tween the cynical and the utopian, in other words, appears both in the 
self-representations of the socio-economic structure and in their criti-
cal dismantling from ‘the outside.’ Grandville’s sketches mimic, with 
satirical exaggeration, what they wish to expose: “Under Grandville’s 
pencil, the whole of nature is transformed into specialties. He presents 
them in the same spirit in which the advertisement […] begins to pre-
sent its articles” (2002a: 35; emphasis added). 
Yet such mimetic replication once again appears to introduce a 
crucial difference into the picture: if on the plane of the socioeco-
nomic organisation of industrial capitalism the “utopian” is what is be-
trayed by the cynical manipulations of commodity culture, on the 
plane of Grandville’s artistic project it is precisely the cynical unveil-
ing of such manipulations that sustains the spirit of emancipatory cri-
tique. The oscillation between reifying and utopian possibilities be-
comes exponentially compounded by the tendency of the cynical relay 
at once to enforce the commodification of utopian impulses within the 
                                                           
25  
Kracauer similarly wavers between the highly affirmative treatment of “The 
Cult of Distraction” and the bitter, cynical appraisals of (gendered) spectato-
rial naiveté in “Little Shopgirls go to the Movies” and “Film 1928” (all in 
Kracauer 1995). On Kracauer’s increasingly more pessimistic attitude toward 
the utopian potential of mass culture, see Hansen 1997: 379, 383; and Petro 
1987: 136f; for a contrastive account which suggests that Kracauer’s thought 
moved from skepticism toward utopianism, see Gualtieri 2007: 86ff. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
347
realm of social reality and to destroy the false appearances that sustain 
it through the activity of critical thought. Cynicism as at once the bane 
of utopian possibility and the weapon against its counterfeiting, the in-
strument of manipulation and of demystification, the calling card of a 
reified and reifying consciousness no less than the harbinger of the ef-
fective foregrounding of the grisly state of affairs that prevents genu-
ine change: this, truly, is “dialectics at a standstill.”26 
But this means that the “split within the cynical phenomenon it-
self”, which “pits the cynical reason of domination and self-domina-
tion against the kynic revolt of self-assertion and self-realization” 
(Huyssen 1987: xvii), becomes both structurally inevitable and her-
meneutically problematic. Peter Sloterdijk’s distinction between cyni-
cism and kynicism, the “cynical-defensive consciousness of the old 
bearers of power and the utopian-offensive consciousness of the new 
bearers” (1987: xxvii) resolves the problem of politically mapping 
Weimar thought at the cost of opening itself up to second-order confu-
sions and deformations almost in the same breath: “in the great hall of 
cynical knowledge”, Sloterdijk wryly observes, the “extremes” of ple-
beian, embodied, satirical and subversive kynicism and of the calcula-
tive cynicism of power “meet” (4). The catastrophic utopianism of 
Dada, for instance, involves a mingling of both “cynical” and “kyni-
cal” aspects into a “scintillating complex that evades simple evalua-
tions and uncomplicated emotional responses” (394f). But a similar 
ambiguity haunts the project of Weimar Critical Theory as well; for as 
Sloterdijk shows, the internal division of utopian and reifying dimen-
sions within the cynical phenomenon insinuates itself in the very ob-
jective of “ideology critique”, whose utopian pursuit of emancipation 
remains paradoxically dependent on ethically reifying discursive 
strategies: 
 
Every struggle leads necessarily to a reciprocal reification of subjects. 
Because enlightenment cannot give up its claim of imposing better in-
sights against a self-obstructing consciousness, it must basically ‘op-
erate’ behind the opponent’s consciousness. […] The radical reifica-
                                                           
26  
I am evoking Benjamin’s oft-quoted statement from the “Paris” expose of 
1935: “Ambiguity is the appearance of the dialectic in images, the law of dia-
lectics at a standstill” (2002a: 40). For an analysis of Benjamin’s notion of the 
dialectical image in conjunction with slapstick comedy, see McCall 2002: 74-
94. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
348
tion of the opponent is … characteristic of Marxian theory. […] It is 
here that a second offshoot of modern cynicism grows. […] [Yet] 
Marxism, in its origins, at least maintained an ambivalence between 
reifying and emancipative perspectives (Sloterdijk 1987: 15, 20). 
 
It should not come as a surprise, then, that in developing a sustained 
engagement with the treacherously slippery terrain limned by reifica-
tion, cynicism, kynicism and utopia (a modal conflict that is already 
anticipated, in a certain sense, in the generic interpenetration of utopia 
and satire),27 Chaplin’s work does not merely justify its prominent 
place among the intelligentsia of the Weimar left; it also, as it were, 
furnishes a meta-commentary on the very ambivalences the body of 
this criticism reveals, mirroring its fluctuating modalities of cruel de-
sublimation and utopian warmth, profound disillusion and the com-
mitment to social change, ironic distance and lyrical intensity. 
 
 
The Dialectic at a Standstill 
 
Take, for instance, the apparently autonomous sequence that unfolds 
near the end of Chaplin’s highly successful The Kid (1921): exhausted 
and frustrated by the vain search for his missing adoptee, Charlie falls 
asleep on the steps of his squalid tenement building. The intertitle 
“Dreamland” framing the beginning of the sequence introduces an 
abrupt transformation of the Tramp’s environs: garlands of white 
flowers have improbably transformed Charlie’s proletarian courtyard 
into a somewhat makeshift vision of heaven, and soon enough the 
missing child descends the stairs dressed in angelic garb, though visi-
bly still wearing his old, tattered clothes underneath. The happiness of 
the reunion is soon capped with a grotesque apparition: an angelically 
transformed, flying dog is shown gracefully descending on the scene 
(fig. 5). 
Puzzling as it might initially appear, this ephemeral visual mo-
ment is significant on a number of levels. Though it seems to come 
from nowhere, the angelic dog has quite a specific origin. Three years 
before the release of The Kid, Chaplin released A Dog’s Life. As its ti-
tle suggests, the earlier film focused on the cruelly subhuman living 
                                                           
27  
See Elliott 1963: 317-34. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
349
conditions of the Tramp and on the bond he develops with the animal 
world when he befriends a similarly outcast dog. The visual orchestra-
tion of the two films reinforces their intertextual connection through a 
number of meticulously constructed matching shots: while The Kid 
shows a puzzled Charlie holding the abandoned infant as he sits pon-
dering his prospects on the pavement, A Dog’s Life depicts him gently 
holding his adopted dog while sitting by the stairs of a similar tene-
ment street; the famous shot of the Kid peering mischievously behind 
a wall is almost identical to that featuring Charlie’s dog in the earlier 
film (fig. 6 and 7); a policeman (played by the same actor in both 
films) is shown staring suspiciously at Charlie’s unlikely partners in 
petty crime in both films; Charlie bumps his elbow onto a cop while 
attempting to avenge an insult by throwing a brick in A Dog’s Life, 
just as the Kid does while preparing to throw a stone at a neighbor-
hood window. And finally, the closing sequence of A Dog’s Life fea-
tures a felicitously gentrified Charlie and his sweetheart staring down 
at a baby cot which contains not a newborn baby like that featured in 
The Kid but Charlie’s pet dog. The Kid’s seraphic canine thus pre-
serves the textual trace of the earlier film. But in doing so, it helps 
Chaplin link intertextual interfaces to interspecies ones: Charlie’s own 
social reduction to bare, animal life on the one hand,28 the uncomfort-
able parallels between foundling and beast on the other. 
                                                           
28  
Among the well-known gags of A Dog’s Life is one which features Charlie 
sporting a quivering dog’s tail as a result of his effort to smuggle his dog in a 
bar unnoticed by the proprietors. On “bare life”, see Agamben 1998. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
350
 
Fig. 5. Still shot from The Kid 
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
 
 
Fig. 6. Still shot from The Kid 
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
351
 
Fig. 7. Still shot from A Dog’s Life 
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
 
Animalities, Sloterdijk remarks, “are for the kynic a part of his way of 
presenting himself, as well as a form of argumentation” (1987: 105). 
But what silent point does the dog help the film make? To the extent 
that it functions as a means of deflating the sentimental idealizations 
hiding the lived actuality of proletarian dehumanization from view, it 
serves as an appropriately embodied pun for the oppositional energies 
of kynicism, that “pantomimic materialism” which pits “practical em-
bodiment” against “the swindle of idealistic abstractions and the 
schizoid staleness of a thinking limited to the head” (Sloterdijk 1987: 
103, 102). A dog in wings: this may well be the most apt allegory of 
utopian kynicism, a threshold thought29 that insists on preserving the 
embodied reality utopian fantasy would forget, yet also dares dream 
up reconciliation between a dogged insistence on immanence and a 
redemptive vision of transcendence. Doesn’t the seraphic Kid, too, af-
ter all, oscillate between the bathetic image of angelic innocence and 
                                                           
29  
Interestingly, Charlie’s daydream begins and ends at the spatial threshold of 
the stairs, between, as it were, the privacy of the home and the publicity of the 
street. For a recent philosophical discussion of the redemptive or utopian di-
mensions of the human/animal threshold, see Agamben 2004: 1-12, 81f, 89f. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
352
the canny, cheeky one that insists on registering only a street urchin in 
awkward costume? From a dog’s-eye view, heaven is a partial, per-
manently conflicted affair, and “dreamland” contains the organs of its 
own historical awakening. 
Yet hardly has this all-too-precarious balance between redemp-
tive vision and its kynical de-idealization established itself than it is 
turned in the opposite direction: when the Tramp queries the Kid on 
where he obtained the wings, the latter takes him to a neighborhood 
store and the intertitle casts Charlie’s angelic transformation in the 
grotesquely materialist terms of “shopping”. The sequence hence 
moves from a kynical discourse on abject poverty to the cynical reifi-
cation of the very scenography of wish-fulfilment, retrospectively ex-
posing the latter’s proximity to consumerist banality. Challenging 
Kracauer’s assumption that it is intended as merely a playful digres-
sion from real-life action (1960: 86), “Dreamland” is then deeply con-
cerned with the dialectical interpenetration of utopian fantasy and 
“real life”, private and public experience, the utopian dynamic of 
kynical embodiment no less than the cynical deformation of utopian 
desire. But such interpenetration comes at an increasingly dear cost to 
utopian content, which begins to dissolve into ever greater doses of 
cynicism: Charlie, whose reaction to his new-found wings involves 
scratching at them with his leg like a dog, winds up chased by a 
winged version of the very cop who has haunted his waking life, and 
is eventually shot in front of his door, where the dream sequence be-
gan. The image of the cop, his badge fully visible, reaching into his 
pocket for his gun, marks a certain crescendo of cynical spleen (fig. 
8): when the “as if” of fantasy degenerates into mere prop and the co-
ercive principle of social law and order brutally asserts itself, the con-
ceit of reality-defying wish fulfilment is struck no less lethally than 
Charlie himself. 
 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
353
 
Fig. 8. Still shot from The Kid 
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
 
The film, however, does not end before giving another turn of the 
screw to the constant inversions and mutations to which “Dreamland” 
subjects the questions of utopian fantasy and of its sundry negations 
and betrayals. Startled, the Tramp discovers he is being woken up by 
the very cop who had appeared to shoot him. The cop, inexplicably 
angelic for all his current lack of wings, fondly asks Charlie to follow 
him, leading him to the home where a true reunion with the Kid be-
comes possible amidst general levity and jubilation. Trite as it may 
otherwise seem, the ending is highly effective in putting the entire 
structural framework of the “Dreamland” sequence en abyme: if the 
dramatization of a utopian daydream ended up with the demonstration 
of the cynical triumph of a commodified and violent social reality, the 
depiction of that social reality ends up reabsorbed into what appears as 
utopian day-dream. It is a testimony of the force of this abyssal chias-
mus that one finds it impossible to decide whether what Chaplin 
leaves us with is redemptive kynicism or hellish cynicism – the persis-
tence of a utopian impulse that learns to survive the knowledge of its 
own vulnerability or, on the contrary, the image of its utter trivializa-
tion and betrayal. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
354
Released a year after the outbreak of the Second World War, 
The Great Dictator would draw the curtain on the period and on the 
major creative phase of Chaplin’s career with a vertiginous escalation 
of the political implications of such abyssal dialectics. Charlie, posing 
as the Jewish barber posing as the Fascist Dictator, would close his 
first talking film by using his voice to defend a utopian humanism 
(fig. 9) that both impotently wished away Fascism’s political night-
mare and appeared as the latter’s fiendishly cynical joke, a cruel par-
ody of the Weimar left’s redemptive dreams.30 
 
 
Fig. 9. Still shot from The Great Dictator  
Chaplin Photographs © Roy Export Company Establishment 
                                                           
30  
In a moment of uncanny prescience, Benjamin wrote that “every inch of 
Chaplin can become the Führer” (1999h: 792) in 1934, six years before the re-
lease of Chaplin’s film.  

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
355
Works Cited 
 
Primary References 
 
Chaplin, Charles (dir.) (1916/2005). Behind the Screen (Mutual Film Corporation), in: 
Charlie Chaplin: 51 Features. St. Clair Vision DVD. 
— (1918/2004). A Dog’s Life (First National Pictures), in: The Chaplin Revue. 
MK2TV / Roy Export Company DVD. 
— (1921/2005). The Kid (First National Pictures), in: Charlie Chaplin: 51 Features. 
St. Clair Vision DVD. 
— (1936/2003). Modern Times (United Artists). MK2TV/Roy Export Company 
DVD. 
— (1940/2003). The Great Dictator (United Artists). MK2TV/Roy Export Company 
DVD. 
Léger, Fernand (dir.) (1924/2005). Charlot présente le ballet mécanique, in: Avant-
Garde: Experimental Cinema of the 1920s and 30s. Kino Video. 
Nichols, George and Mack Sennett (dir.) (1914/2005). Cruel, Cruel Love (Keystone), 
in: Charlie Chaplin: 51 Features. St. Clair Vision DVD. 
Sennett, Mack (dir.) (1914/2005). A Film Johnnie (Keystone), in: Charlie Chaplin: 51 
Features. St. Clair Vision DVD. 
 
 
Research Literature 
 
Abel, Richard (1976). “American Film and the French Literary Avant-Garde (1914-
1924)”, in: Contemporary Literature 17.1: 84-109. 
— (1988). French Film Theory and Criticism: A History/Anthology 1907-1939. 2 
vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP. 
Adorno, Theodor (1996). “Chaplin Times Two” (tr. John MacKay), in: The Yale 
Journal of Criticism 9.1: 57-61.  
— (2001a). “On the Fetish Character of Music and the Regression of Listening” (tr. 
Andrew Arato and Eike Gebhart), in: J. M. Bernstein (ed.). The Culture In-
dustry: Selected Essays on Mass Culture. London and New York: Routledge, 
29-60. 
— (2001b). “The Schema of Mass Culture” (tr. Nicholas Walker), in: Bernstein, 61-
97. 
— (2001c). “Transparencies on Film” (tr. Thomas Y. Levin), in: Bernstein, 187-97. 
Adorno, Theodor and Max Horkeimer (1991). Dialectic of Enlightenment (tr. John 
Cumming). New York: Continuum. 
Agamben, Giorgio (1998). Homo Sacer; Sovereign Power and Bare Life (tr. Daniel 
Heller-Roazen). Stanford, CA: Stanford UP. 
— (2004). The Open: Man and Animal (tr. Kevin Attell). Stanford, CA: Stanford UP. 
Anderson, Perry (1979). Considerations of Western Marxism. London: Verso. 
Aragon, Louis (1988). “On Décor” (tr. Paul Hammond), in: Abel 1988, vol. 1, 165-
68. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
356
Arnheim, Rudolph (1996). “Chaplin’s Early Films” (tr. John MacKay), in: The Yale 
Journal of Criticism 9.2: 311-14. 
Artaud, Antonin (1988). “Cinema and Reality” (tr. Helen Weaver.), in: Abel 1988, 
vol. 1, 410-12. 
Balázs, Béla (2006). “Chaplin, or the American Simpleton”, in: October 115: 53-54. 
Bédouin, Jean-Louis (2000). “Chaplin, the Copper’s Nark”, in: Paul Hammond (ed.). 
The Shadow and its Shadow: Surrealist Writings on the Cinema. San Fran-
cisco: City Lights Books, 181. 
Benjamin, Walter (1986). “Surrealism: The Last Snapshot of the European Intelli-
gentsia” (tr. Edmund Jephcott), in: Peter Demetz (ed.). Reflections: Essays, 
Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings. New York: Schocken Books, 177-92. 
— (1996). “A Look at Chaplin” (tr. John MacKay), in: The Yale Journal of Criticism 
9.2: 309-11. 
— (1999a). “Reply to Oscar A. H. Schmitz” (tr. Rodney Livingstone), in: Michael W. 
Jennings, Howard Eiland and Gary Smith (eds.). Walter Benjamin: Selected 
Writings. Vol. 2: 1927-1934. Cambridge, MA, and London: Belknap/Harvard 
UP, 16-19. 
— (1999b). “Old Toys” (tr. Rodney Livingstone), in: Jennings, Eiland and Smith, 98-
102. 
— (1999c). “Toys and Play: Marginal Notes on a Monumental Work” (tr. Rodney 
Livingstone), in: Jennings, Eiland and Smith, 117-21. 
— (1999d). “Program for a Proletarian Children’s Theater” (tr. Rodney Livingstone), 
in: Jennings, Eiland and Smith, 201-06. 
— (1999e). “Little History of Photography” (tr. Edmund Jephcott and Kingsley 
Shorter), in: Jennings, Eiland and Smith, 507-30. 
— (1999f). “Doctrine of the Similar” (tr. Michael Jennings), in: Jennings, Eiland and 
Smith, 694-98. 
— (1999g). “On the Mimetic Faculty” (tr. Edmund Jephcott), in: Jennings, Eiland and 
Smith, 720-22. 
— (1999h). “Hitler’s Diminished Masculinity” (tr. Howard Eiland), in: Jennings, 
Eiland and Smith, 792-93. 
— (2002a). “Paris, the Capital of the Nineteenth Century” (tr. Howard Eiland), in: 
Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (eds.). Walter Benjamin: Selected 
Writings. Vol. 3: 1935-1938. Cambridge, MA, and London: Belknap/Harvard 
UP, 32-49. 
— (2002b). “The Formula in Which the Dialectical Structure of Film Finds Expres-
sion” (tr. Edmund Jephcott), in: Eiland and Jennings, 94-95. 
— (2002c). “The Work of Art in the Era of its Technological Reproducibility” (tr. 
Edmund Jephcott and Harry Zohn), in: Eiland and Jennings, 101-33. 
— (2002d). “A Different Utopian Will” (tr. Edmund Jephcott), in: Eiland and 
Jennings, 134-36. 
— (2003). “The Work of Art in the Era of its Technological Reproducibility” (tr. 
Edmund Jephcott and Harry Zohn), in: Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jen-
nings (eds.). Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings. Vol. 4: 1938-1940. Cam-
bridge, MA, and London: Belknap/Harvard UP, 251-83. 
Berna, Serge et al. (1952). “No More Flat Feet!”, in: Internationale Lettriste 1.9 pars. 
[http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/presitu/flatfeet.html]. 

Utopian and Cynical Elements 
357
Bernstein, J. M. (ed.) (2001). The Culture Industry: Selected Essays on Mass Culture. 
London and New York: Routledge. 
Buci-Gluckmann, Christine (1986). “Catastrophic Utopia: The Feminine as Allegory 
of the Modern” (tr. Katharine Streip), in: Representations 14: 220-29. 
Buck-Morss, Susan (1992). “Aesthetics and Anaesthetics: Walter Benjamin’s Art-
work Essay Reconsidered”, in: October 62: 3-41. 
Charney, Leo and Vanessa R. Schwartz (eds.) (1997). Cinema and the Invention of 
Modern Life. Berkeley and London: U of California P. 
Delluc, Louis (1988). “Beauty in the Cinema”, in: Abel 1988, vol. 1, 137-39. 
Eisenstein, Sergei (1959). Notes of a Film Director (tr. X. Danko, ed. R. Yurenev). 
Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 
Elliott, Robert C. (1963). “The Shape of Utopia”, in: ELH 30.4: 317-34. 
Fondane, Benjamin (1988). “From Silent to Talkie: The Rise and Fall of the Cinema” 
(tr. Claudia Gorbman), in: Abel 1988, vol. 2, 45-55. 
Foster, Hal (1995). Compulsive Beauty. Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press. 
Gordon, Rae Beth (2001). “From Charcot to Charlot: Unconscious Imitation and 
Spectatorship in French Cabaret and Early Cinema”, in: Critical Inquiry 27.3: 
515-49. 
Gualtieri, Elena (2007). “The Territory of Photography: Between Modernity and Uto-
pia in Kracauer’s Thought”, in New Formations 61: 76-89. 
Gunning, Tom (2005). “Chaplin and the Body of Modernity.” Paper presented at the 
BFI Charles Chaplin Conference (London College of Communication, July 
2005). [http://chaplin.bfi.org.uk/programme/conference/pdf/tom-gunning.pdf]. 
Hake, Sabine (1990). “Chaplin Reception in Weimar Germany”, in: New German 
Critique 51: 87-111. 
Hammond, Paul (ed.) (2000). The Shadow and its Shadow: Surrealist Writings on the 
Cinema. San Francisco: City Lights Books. 
Hansen, Miriam Bratu (1987). “Benjamin, Cinema and Experience: ‘The Blue Flower 
in the Land of Technology’”, in: New German Critique 40: 179-224. 
— (1997). “America, Paris, the Alps: Kracauer (and Benjamin) on Cinema and Mod-
ernity”, in: Leo Charney and Vanessa R. Schwartz (eds.). Cinema and the In-
vention of Modern Life. Berkeley and London: U of California P, 362-402. 
— (1999). “Benjamin and Cinema: Not a One-Way Street”, in: Critical Inquiry 25.2: 
306-43. 
Huyssen, Andreas (1987). “Foreword: The Return of Diogenes as Postmodern Intel-
lectual”, in: Sloterdijk, ix-xxv. 
Jameson, Fredric (1981). The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Sym-
bolic Act. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP. 
Koch, Gertrud (1994). “Cosmos in Film: On the Concept of Space in Walter Benja-
min’s ‘Work of Art’ Essay” (tr. Nancy Nenno), in: Andrew Benjamin and Pe-
ter Osborne (eds.). Walter Benjamin’s Philosophy: Destruction and Experi-
ence. London and New York: Routledge, 205-15.  
Kracauer, Siegfried (1960). Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality. Ox-
ford and New York: Oxford UP. 
— (1995). The Mass Ornament: Weimar Essays (tr. and ed. Thomas Y. Levin). Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard UP. 

Antonis Balasopoulos 
358
— (1997). “Two Chaplin Sketches” (tr. John MacKay), in: The Yale Journal of Criti-
cism 10.1: 115-20. 
Léger, Fernand (1988). “La Roue: Its Plastic Quality” (tr. Alexandra Anderson), in: 
Abel 1988, vol. 1, 271-74. 
Lukács, Georg (1990). History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialec-
tics (tr. Rodney Livingstone). Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press. 
Macnab, Geoffrey (2003). “Charlie Chaplin Rides Again”, in: The Guardian, Friday, 
May 16th. [http: film.guardian.co.uk/cannes.story.0,956840,00.html]. 
Marcus, Greil (1990). Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP.  
McCabe, Susan (2001). “‘Delight in Dislocation’: The Cinematic Modernism of 
Stein, Chaplin, and Man Ray”, in: Modernism/Modernity 8.3: 429-52. 
McCall, Tom (2002). “‘The Dynamite of a Tenth of a Second’: Benjamin’s Revolu-
tionary Messianism in Silent Film Comedy”, in: Gerhard Richter (ed.). Ben-
jamin’s Ghosts. Stanford, CA: Stanford UP: 74-94. 
McCarren, Felicia (1995). “The Symptomatic Act: Hysteria, Hypnosis, Electricity, 
Dance”, in: Critical Inquiry 21.4: 748-74. 
Netto, Jeffrey (2002). “Chaplin and Méliès en Abyme”, in: Imaginaires 9: 365-73. 
Petro, Patrice (1987). “Modernity and Mass Culture in Weimar: Contours of a Dis-
course on Sexuality in Early Theories of Perception and Representation”, in: 
New German Critique 40: 115-46. 
Rabinbach, Anson (1992). The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of 
Modernity. Berkeley and Los Angeles: U of California P. 
Schlüpmann, Heide (1987). “Phenomenology of Film: On Siegfried Kracauer’s Writ-
ings of the 1920s” (tr. Thomas Y. Levin), in: New German Critique 40: 97-
114. 
Singer, Ben (1995). “Modernity, Hyperstimulus, and the Rise of Popular Sensational-
ism”, in: Charney and Schwartz, 72-99. 
Sloterdijk, Peter (1987). Critique of Cynical Reason (tr. Michael Eldred). Minneapo-
lis: U of Minnesota P. 
Surrealist Group, The (2000). “Hands off Love”, in: Hammond, 173-80. 
Wranovics, John (2005). Charlie Chaplin and James Agee: The Untold Story of the 
Tramp, the Writer, and the Lost Screenplay. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

 
 
 
 
 
Index 
 
 
Acker, Kathy 256, 260; Empire of the 
Senseless 260 
Adorno, Theodor 268, 310, 329, 336, 
339-340, 344-345 
Agamben, Giorgio 349, 351 
Akroyd, Edward 174 
allochronic fiction 199, 206-212 
Amundsen, Roald 202, 205, 208-209 
anarchism 58, 179-183, 188-190, 228 
Anderson, Benedict 203, 309 
Andreae, Johann 80; Christianopolis 
80 
Antarctica 199-220 
anti-utopia 18, 20, 66, 144, 172, 195, 
256, 327 
Anzaldúa, Gloria 256 
apocalypse 70-71, 251-265 
Appadurai, Arjun 19 
Aragon, Louis 333, 338 
Arcadia 133, 139, 141, 144, 155, 191, 
193, 266 
arcology 279, 282 
Aristotle 31, 80 
Artaud, Antonin 333-334 
Assmann, Jan 192 
Atwood, Margaret 229, 245, 253, 
259; The Handmaid’s Tale 
229-230, 259 
Augé, Marc 296 
Augustine of Hippo 75-76, 118, 122 
Austen, Katherine 133 
Auster, Paul 253-254, 256, 260-261; 
In the Country of Last Things 
260; New York Trilogy 254, 
256 
avant-garde 328-329 
 
Babel, Tower of 69, 227 
Bacon, Francis 46, 80; New Atlantis 
46, 66, 80 
Bakhtin, Mikhail 143, 200-201, 263 
Bal, Mieke 145-146 
Balasopoulos, Antonis 19 
Balibar, Étienne 317 
Barnes, Julian 254-256; Flaubert’s 
Parrot 254-256 
Barrie, J. M. 214-215 
Barth, John 227 
Baudrillard, Jean 267 
Bedford Park 180 
Bellamy, Edward 175; Looking 
Backward: 2000-1887 175 
Benjamin, Walter 144-145, 163-164, 
303, 307-308, 334-347, 354 
Benson, Robert Hugh 53, 57, 70-76; 
Lord of the World 53, 57, 70-
76 
Bergson, Henri 103, 267 
Bhabha, Homi 32, 143, 240, 306-309 
Bible 28, 115, 238, 244 
‘Big House’ (see Irish ‘Big House’) 
Black Atlantic 301, 313-314 
Blade Runner (Ridley Scott) 256, 
281-282 
Bloch, Ernst 132, 138, 140-141, 144-
145, 164, 267-268, 310, 312-
313, 319, 321 
Boer Wars 81 
Bourdieu, Pierre 268 
Bouvé, Edward 210; Centuries Apart 
210 
Bowen, Elizabeth 147-149, 155, 164 
Boym, Svetlana 141, 145-146 
Browning, Scott 216; Searchers 216 
Bruni, Leonardo 31-32 

Futurescapes 
360
Buchan, John 171, 179-180, 182, 
186-195; Mr Standfast 179-
180, 186-195 
Bukatman, Scott 276, 279-280, 283, 
292 
Bulwer-Lytton, Edward 81; The Com-
ing Race 81 
Burke, Edmund 149, 172 
Burroughs, Edgar Rice 209; The Land 
that Time Forgot 209 
Burroughs, William 227 
Burrows, Roger 276, 283 
Byatt, Antonia 255 
 
Cadbury, Edward 174 
Calvino, Italo 253-255, 265, 267; If 
on a Winter’s Night a Travel-
ler 255 
Campanella, Tommaso 80, 179; City 
of the Sun 80 
capitalism 65, 137, 172-173, 233, 
252, 260-261, 269, 277-278, 
303, 310, 313, 321, 327, 330-
338, 346 
Carew, Thomas 132 
Carey, Peter 55-56; The Unusual Life 
of Tristan Smith 55-56 
Caribbeanness 301-322 
Carlyle, Thomas 93 
Catholicism 57, 70-76, 114, 116, 149-
154, 157, 160-161, 182 
Cavendish, Margaret 46; The Blazing 
World 46 
Chaplin, Charlie 327-354 
Charles I 135-136, 139 
Charnas, Suzy McKee 230 
Chekhov, Anton 131 
Chesterton, G.K. 171, 179-190, 193-
195; The Man Who Was 
Thursday 179-188 
Chomsky, Noam 232 
Christianity 20, 54, 70-75, 90, 112-
123, 158, 225, 227 
chronotope 200-201, 220 
Cicero 32 
Cioran, Émile M. 172 
civitas Dei 75-76 
Cixous, Hélène 241-242 
Clough, Brenda 217; “May Be Some 
Time” 217; “Tiptoe, on a 
Fence Post” 217 
Cocteau, Jean 333 
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 141 
colonialism 20, 37, 39-40, 44, 53, 59, 
61, 76, 80, 99, 137, 148-150, 
157, 159-161, 207-208, 210, 
220, 227-228, 238-244, 252, 
301, 303-304, 310, 314-321; 
colonial gaze 61 
Columbus, Christopher 44, 54, 80-81 
commodity culture 322, 331, 346 
communism 71, 120, 261 
concrete utopia 310-312 
Conrad, Joseph 81 
containment 138, 173 
conversion narrative 111-125 
cosmopolitanism 34, 56-57, 71, 302-
304, 308, 318 
counter-utopia 171, 186, 193-195 
country house 57, 131-164 
creolisation 310-312, 320 
Cromwell, Oliver 148-152, 154, 157 
cryonic fiction 199, 212-218 
Crystal Palace 68 
Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan 281 
cultural transfer 33, 38-39 
cybergeography 283 
cyberpunk 19, 254, 262-266, 277-
279, 281-282 
cyberspace 226, 252, 264, 275-297 
cynicism 172, 327, 330-331, 345-348, 
352-354 
 
da Gama, Vasco 81 
Dada 347 
Darrieussecq, Marie 204-205, 217-
218; White 204, 218 
Darwin, Charles 79-80, 82, 85, 89, 
95, 97, 106, 209 
dataspace 277, 280, 282, 284, 295 
Day After Tomorrow, The (Roland 
Emmerich) 218 
de Certeau, Michel 18, 275-276, 284, 
289-296 
de Lauretis, Teresa 269 
Debord, Guy 328 

Index 
361
decadence 39, 57, 62, 93, 184 
Defoe, Daniel 80; Robinson Crusoe 
80 
degeneration 35, 39-40, 83, 93-94, 
102, 252, 310, 331, 352 
Delany, Samuel R. 225-226, 229, 
231, 234-236; Babel-17 225, 
229, 231, 234-236 
Deleuze, Gilles 146, 251, 253, 311, 
319, 321 
DeLillo, Don 256, 261; White Noise 
256, 261 
Derrida, Jacques 238, 254, 263, 267-
268, 270 
deterritorialisation 251-270, 302, 305, 
316 
diaspora 145-146, 301-302, 308, 313-
314 
Dog’s Life, A (Charlie Chaplin) 343, 
348-349, 351 
Dr Who 202, 213 
dystopia 18, 20, 72, 75, 111, 122-123, 
171, 173, 178-179, 190, 199, 
216, 219, 225-231, 237-238, 
244-245, 252-253, 258-262, 
264, 266, 279, 301, 303-306, 
315, 319, 321-322; female 
230 
 
eco-feminism 264 
ecology 63, 69, 219, 267, 279, 317 
Eden 37, 139, 142, 193 
Edgeworth, Maria 148, 151, 159 
Edwardian period 176, 181-184, 211 
Ehland, Christoph 17, 19 
Eisenstein, Sergei 329, 340, 343 
Elgin, Suzette Haden 225, 230-232, 
237-245; Native Tongue tril-
ogy 225, 231, 237-244 
Elizabeth I 149 
Elyot, Thomas 29 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 175 
empire 36, 53-54, 62, 73-74, 81, 83-
84, 99, 260, 318 
empiricism 112-113, 116, 118-119, 
122, 172, 309 
English Civil Wars 149 
Englishness 182, 185, 188, 193-195, 
306 
Epstein, Jean 333, 340 
Erasmus, Desiderius 30-31, 35, 48 
eroticism 61 
eugenics 19, 79, 86, 89-107 
euthanasia 71-72, 86, 107 
everyday practices 289, 295 
evolution 79-80, 82-83, 88-89, 95-99, 
134, 173, 209, 212, 217, 265, 
303, 305, 308, 320, 330 
 
Fanon, Frantz 304, 315-316 
Featherstone, Mike 276, 283 
female dystopia (see dystopia) 
feminism 18, 179, 226, 228, 236, 240, 
243, 259, 262, 264, 269 
Fiedler, Leslie 257 
Film Noir 281 
fin de siècle 183, 306 
Foucault, Michel 43, 47, 188, 275-
276, 284-289, 296 
Fowles, John 255 
French Revolution 172 
Freud, Sigmund 143, 235 
Fukuyama, Francis 252 
futurescape 20, 174-175, 181, 199, 
218 
futurology 65, 88, 106 
 
Gaddis, William 256; Carpenter’s 
Gothic 256 
Galton, Francis 79, 86, 89-96, 106-
107 
garden city 68, 171-195 
garden suburb 179-182, 185-186, 
188, 194 
Gibbon, Lewis Grassic (James Leslie 
Mitchell) 178 
Gibson, William 251-253, 256, 260, 
262-265, 275-297; Neuro-
mancer 260, 262, 275-297 
Gilbert, Sandra 241 
Gilroy, Paul 302, 313-314 
Glissant, Edouard 303, 310-322 
globalisation 17, 20, 53, 56, 60, 64-
65, 69, 71, 76, 136, 254, 302-
303, 308, 313, 320 

Futurescapes 
362
Golden Age 36-38, 44, 138-139, 142, 
144, 154, 178 
Gosse, Edmund 124 
graphic novel 281 
Great Dictator, The (Charlie Chaplin) 
354 
Great War (see World War I) 
Greenblatt, Stephen 43-45 
Griffith, D.W. 329 
Guattari, Félix 146, 311 
Gubar, Susan 241 
 
Habermas, Jürgen 257, 265 
Hall, Stuart 302, 310 
Haraway, Donna 263-264 
Harris, Robert J. 215-216; “Requiem 
Antarctica” 215-216 
Harris, Wilson 305, 315, 318-319, 
321 
Hartmann, Doreen 19 
Harvey, David 208, 303 
Hawking, Stephen 220 
Hegel, G. W. F. 144, 172 
Heidegger, Martin 263, 306 
Henry VII 210 
Henry VIII 133 
heritage industry 140, 143 
heterotopia 55, 285-289, 296 
heterotopology 275, 285 
Hibbard, G. R. 132-133 
Hirsch, Marianne 145-146 
Hollinger, Verena 283 
Homer 28 
Horace 133 
Horkheimer, Max 68 
Howard, Ebenezer 171, 174-180 
humanism 25-40, 45-47, 71-72, 90, 
111, 157, 267, 302, 316, 329, 
354 
Hutcheon, Linda 143, 268 
Huxley, Aldous 55, 57, 178, 229, 
263; Brave New World 55, 
229, 262 
Huxley, T. H. 80, 95-96, 98, 102 
Huyssen, Andreas 145, 347 
hybridisation 241, 244, 254, 263 
hybridity 59, 66, 76, 159, 241, 255, 
265, 343 
identity 18-21, 87, 114-115, 125, 141, 
143, 159, 204, 235, 253-254, 
260, 264, 268, 280, 303, 306, 
312, 314-319, 340; English 
191, 193; national 21, 56, 
132, 135, 143, 146, 148, 159; 
spatial 20, 275-278, 289, 296 
ideology 19-20, 54, 56-57, 71, 92, 
111, 131-132, 136-140, 143-
148, 157, 163, 172-173, 230, 
241-242, 252, 261, 303, 307, 
319, 328, 332-333, 336, 345, 
347 
Imaginary, the 112, 114, 240, 307 
imaginary community (Anderson) 55, 
138, 308-309, 315 
imperialism 60, 62, 66, 73-74, 81, 85, 
89-90, 93, 138, 140, 143-145, 
155, 157, 208, 240, 302-303, 
306 
Indian Mutiny 81 
individualism 65, 112, 114, 133 
individuality 76, 113, 229 
inward man 122, 124 
Irigaray, Luce 243 
Irish ‘Big House’ 147-154 
 
James I 135, 139, 149 
James, C. L. R. 316 
James, William 267 
Jameson, Fredric 19, 143, 148, 251, 
253, 269-270, 277-278, 307, 
309, 333, 337 
Jonson, Ben 131-138, 156; “To Pens-
hurst” 131-133, 138, 143 
Joyce, James 118, 255 
 
Kant, Immanuel 65, 142, 144 
Keaton, Buster 329 
Kermode, Frank 124 
Kid, The (Charlie Chaplin) 327, 348-
353 
Kidd, Benjamin 93-94 
King in New York, A (Charlie Chap-
lin) 331 
Klee, Paul 163 
Kracauer, Siegfried 328, 334-336, 
338, 340, 344-346, 352 

Index 
363
Kristeva, Julia 240-241 
kynicism 327, 347-348, 351-353 
 
Lacan, Jacques 112, 114, 118, 240-
241, 330 
Laclau, Ernesto 267, 269 
Lady Morgan (Sydney Owenson) 
148, 151, 159-163; The Wild 
Irish Girl 159-163 
“Lament for Kilcash” 152-153 
Lanyer, Aemilia 133 
Le Corbusier 68 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 227-228, 236, 
251, 260-261, 264; The Dis-
possessed 227-228, 260-261 
Leane, Elizabeth 19, 200, 204, 208 
Leapor, Mary 133 
Lefebvre, Henri 17, 275 
Léger, Fernand 333, 335, 340 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 242 
Lepenies, Wolf 173, 179, 195 
Lessing, Doris 260-261; Memoirs of a 
Survivor 260 
Letchworth Garden City 176-180 
Levinas, Emmanuel 268 
Levitas, Ruth 146, 164, 253 
Lord Leverhulme 174 
‘lost world’ romance 207-209, 220 
Lovecraft, H. P. 201, 213, 216; At the 
Mountains of Madness 201, 
213 
Luhmann, Niklas 267 
Lukács, Georg 331-333, 336 
Luther, Martin 115 
Lyotard, Jean-François 238, 260, 268 
 
Machiavelli, Niccolò 43, 54 
Mailer, Norman 266 
Malamud, Bernard 261 
Marin, Louis 25, 47, 251-253, 270, 
302 
Martial 133 
Marvell, Andrew 132 
Marx, Karl 75, 144, 348 
Marxism 262, 264, 269, 310, 336, 
345, 348 
matrix 275-297 
Matrix, The (Wachowski brothers) 
283 
Mawson, Douglas 203, 208, 211-212, 
217 
meta-utopia 65, 67, 76 
Mitchell, James Leslie (see Gibbon, 
Lewis Grassic) 
Mittag, Martina 19-20, 266 
modernisation 53-56, 59, 64-65, 69, 
76, 140, 155, 303, 316 
modernism 67, 72, 75, 93, 191, 201, 
255, 265-267, 318, 320 
modernity 18, 53, 58, 60, 62, 69, 71, 
73-74, 134, 145-146, 191-
192, 208, 253, 258, 265, 301-
303, 308, 313-316, 321-322, 
327-332, 334-335, 340 
Mohr, Dunja M. 20, 228, 239 
Monsieur Verdoux (Charlie Chaplin) 
328, 331 
More, Thomas 25-49, 54, 56-58, 66, 
80, 139, 171, 174, 179, 227, 
251, 302; Utopia 25-49, 58, 
66, 80, 174, 227 
Morris, William 97, 140, 144, 172, 
177-178; News from Nowhere 
97, 172, 177 
Morrison, Toni 255; Jazz 255 
Moylan, Tom 17, 147, 251, 268 
Mumford, Lewis 131, 136-138, 146 
 
Nate, Richard 19, 80 
nationalism 106, 151, 306, 308, 322 
neo-pastoral 136-140 
New Testament 115, 117, 121 
Newman, John H. 118 
Nietzsche, Friedrich 57-58, 89, 92-93, 
103, 144; Thus Spake 
Zarathustra 89 
nomadism 220, 251, 253-254, 256, 
260, 262-264, 311 
Nordau, Max 93 
nostalgia 38, 59, 63, 81, 131-164, 
182, 207, 317 
 
Oates, Joyce Carol 256; “The Doll” 
256 
Orkrand, Marc 230 

Futurescapes 
364
Orwell, George 111-125, 178-179, 
226, 229, 233, 252, 260, 262, 
301, 305-306, 322; Nineteen 
Eighty-Four 111-125, 179, 
226, 229, 305 
Owen, Robert 174-175 
Owenson, Sydney (see Lady Morgan) 
 
Pagnol, Marcel 333 
Palladianism 133-136, 154-155, 157 
Parry, Benita 303, 309 
pastoral 20, 137-142, 148, 192 (see 
also neo-pastoral) 
pastoralism 53, 58-60, 75-76, 82, 
100-101, 137-139, 148, 153-
154, 157, 192-193, 233 
Perec, Georges 141 
phallogocentrism 236, 238-239, 242, 
245 
Piercy, Marge 228, 237, 251, 253-
255, 260-267, 269; He, She, 
and It 260-264; Woman on 
the Edge of Time 228, 237 
place (de Certeau) 289-295 
Plato 33, 38-39, 55, 66, 80, 85, 174, 
310; Republic 38, 66, 80, 174 
Plutarch 212 
Pohl, Nicole 19, 133 
Pope, Alexander 132 
popular culture 277, 281 
Pordzik, Ralph 18-19, 123, 174, 305, 
320 
post-apocalypse 220, 254, 259, 261-
262 
post-utopia 254, 261 
postcolonialism 18, 20, 40, 44, 55, 59, 
66, 145, 240, 302, 304-308, 
320-322 
postmodernism 55, 201, 227, 253-
255, 257-258, 265-267, 269, 
276-278, 280 
postmodernity 20, 226, 259, 261, 
265-266, 270, 276-278, 283-
284, 286 
poststructuralism 73, 268 
Protestantism 70, 114, 123, 149-151, 
155, 173 
Proust, Marcel 142, 255 
Pynchon, Thomas 251, 253, 255, 257-
259, 261, 266-267, 282; The 
Crying of Lot 49 257; Mason 
and Dixon 257-259 
 
Queen Victoria 59, 175 
 
Rabelais, François 131, 212; History 
of Gargantua and Pantagruel 
212 
Rai, Alok 111-113, 115, 123-124 
Rancière, Jacques 310 
Rand, Ayn 229; Anthem 229 
realism 18, 54, 62, 76, 177, 189, 195, 
201, 254, 259, 265, 268, 291, 
316 
Reformation 114 
reification 134, 327, 330-337, 339, 
345, 347-348, 352 
rhizome 313, 319 
Ricoeur, Paul 143 
Rötzer, Florian 279, 284 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 101, 144, 172 
rural England 189-195 
Rushdie, Salman 308 
Ruskin, John 140, 144 
Russ, Joanna 228; The Female Man 
228 
 
Said, Edward 303 
Saint Augustine (see Augustine of 
Hippo) 
Saint Paul 111-125 
Salt, Titus 174 
Sandison, Alan 112, 114-116, 119 
Sapir, Edward 231 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 225, 231-
232, 238, 240 
Schabio, Saskia 20 
Schiller, Friedrich 142 
Schmidt, Gabriela 19 
science fiction 18, 20, 79, 88, 96, 106, 
178, 199-201, 215-219, 225-
227, 229-231, 245, 254, 256, 
262, 266, 269, 276-279, 281 
Scott, Robert Falcon 202-219 
‘scramble for Africa’ 81 
Second Life 252, 254 

Index 
365
Seeber, Hans Ulrich 20, 57, 174 
Semiotic, the 240-241, 266 
Shackleton, Ernest 211 
Shakespeare, William 30, 230 
Shaw, George Bernard 93-94, 104 
Shelley, Mary 228; Frankenstein 228 
Sidney, Philip 139; Arcadia 139 
simulacrum 66, 118, 185 
Skinner, B. F. 227; Walden Two 227 
Slonczewski, Joan 236; A Door Into 
Ocean 236-237 
Sloterdijk, Peter 345, 347-348, 351 
social Darwinism 83-87, 95, 98, 100, 
102, 207, 293 
socialism 57, 59, 65, 71-72, 74-75, 
83, 111, 145, 171, 175, 177-
178, 183, 260 
Soja, Edward W. 17, 303 
Soleri, Paolo 279 
Sontag, Susan 255 
space; cultural 20, 57-58, 60-61; nar-
rative 19, 184, 263, 267; po-
litical 54, 301, 322; religious 
74; sacred 74; social 54, 60-
61, 65, 67, 74, 284, 289, 301, 
305, 315, 322; transcultural 
314; urban 60, 74, 277, 283-
284, 295-296; virtual 252, 
254, 270, 275-284, 295-296 
Spark, Muriel 114 
spatial practices 17-18, 20, 75, 275, 
291, 295, 302, 306 
spatial stories 292 
spatial trajectories 291 
Spenser, Edmund 139, 150; The 
Faerie Queene 139; “The 
right honourable Thomas 
Earle of Ormond and Ossory” 
150; The Shepherd’s Calen-
dar 139 
spiritual autobiography 122 
Spitzer, Leo 145-146 
Star Trek 230, 256 
Statius, Publius Papinius 133 
Stein, Gertrude 255 
Strathern, Marilyn 145-146 
sublime 20, 68, 155 
Surrealism 328, 335, 337 
Swift, Jonathan 61, 65, 80, 104; Gul-
liver’s Travels 80, 104 
Symbolic, the 112-115, 120, 240-241 
Symbolism 57 
 
temporality 20, 79, 82, 87, 89, 97, 
135, 142, 192, 199-213, 220, 
255, 257-258, 262, 265, 275, 
287, 290, 306-307 
Thomas, Thomas 29, 48 
Tolkien, J. R. R. 242 
totalitarianism 92, 107, 111, 113, 125, 
227-229, 259-260 
tourism 61, 210, 220 
translatio studii 28, 38, 40 
translation 19, 25-49, 72, 93, 153, 
204, 206, 225, 230, 235, 237, 
240, 268-270, 303 
transnation 303, 306, 309, 322 
transnationalism 53, 56, 301-305, 
308-309, 313-314, 321 
TRON (Steven Lisberger) 281-282 
Twain, Mark 210; A Connecticut 
Yankee in King Arthur’s 
Court 210 
 
utopia; Caribbeanness 301-322; cin-
ema 327-354; country house 
131-164; eugenics 79-107; 
garden city 68, 171-195; gar-
den suburb 179-182, 185-186, 
188, 194; language 26-28, 38, 
85, 225-245, 259, 263, 269-
270, 313; melancholy 173, 
179; nation-state 53-76, 301-
309, 314-322; nostalgia 59, 
131-164, 192, 194; pastoral 
20, 137-142; pastoralism 53, 
59, 75, 100-101, 153; reifica-
tion 327, 330-337, 339, 345, 
347-348, 352; religion and 
theology 19, 39, 56, 64-65, 
69-75, 104, 111-125, 244-
245; transnation and transna-
tionalism 56, 301-322; world-
state 53, 57, 64-70, 85-86, 89, 
96-100 
‘Utopia Station’ exhibition 310-311 

Futurescapes 
366
Vance, Jack 225, 231, 233-234; The 
Languages of Pao 225, 231, 
233-234 
Vaughan, Henry 135; The Golden 
Grove 135 
Vergil 28, 32 
Verne, Jules 81, 295; De la terre à la 
lune 81 
Vespucci, Amerigo 44-45, 80-81 
Victorianism 68, 83, 93, 145, 171, 
175-176 
virtuality 47, 252, 254, 260, 262, 264, 
269-270, 275-284, 295-296 
Vonnegut, Kurt 227, 255 
 
Walcott, Derek 305, 315 
Waldseemüller, Martin 55 
Wallerstein, Immanuel 302 
Watson, Ian 225, 231-232; The Em-
bedding 225, 231-233 
Wegner, Phillip 56, 301-302, 305-
306, 309, 312-313, 322 
Weimar Critical Theory 327-354 
Wells, H. G. 53, 57, 64-70, 74, 76, 
79-107, 172, 178, 190; An-
ticipations 64, 79, 85-87, 94, 
99, 104; The Discovery of the 
Future 79, 87-89, 96, 105; 
Men Like Gods 79, 96, 99-
105; A Modern Utopia 53, 57, 
64-70, 76, 79, 87, 96-101, 
104-105; The Time Machine 
82, 85, 88-89, 172, 190; The 
War of the Worlds 83-86 
Whiteing, Richard 53, 57-65, 75-76; 
The Island 53, 57-63, 75-76 
Wilde, Oscar 171, 179 
Williams, Raymond 136-137, 140-
141, 143, 175, 192 
Williams, William Carlos 255 
Winkler, Hartmut 294 
Winterson, Jeanette 255 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 245 
World War I 106, 192-193 
World War II 124, 147, 354 
Wyndham, John 218; The Seeds of 
Time 218 
 
Yeats, William Butler 147-148, 152, 
155; “The Curse of Crom-
well” 152 
Yolen, Jane 215-216; “Requiem Ant-
arctica” 215-216 
 
Zamenhof, L. L. 242 
Zamyatin, Yevgeny 229; We 229 

