Galactic
      Encounters
William Sheehan 
Christopher J. Conselice
Our Majestic and
Evolving Star-System,
From the Big Bang
to Time’s End

Galactic Encounters

Frontispiece. Comet Lovejoy, projected against the southern Milky Way. Image by John Drummond at 
Gisborne, New Zealand, with a 20mm f2.8 Canon lens. Courtesy: John Drummond.

Galactic 
Encounters
Our Majestic and Evolving
Star-System, From the Big Bang 
to Time’s End
William Sheehan and
Christopher J. Conselice

 
  
ISBN 978-0-387-85347-5 (eBook) 
 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2014949181
 Printed on acid-free paper 
S pringer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)  
William Sheehan
ISBN 978-0-387-
DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5 
This work is subject to copyright. 
e or part of the 
material is concerned, specifically the r
printing, reuse of illustrations, recitation, bro
reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way
electronic adaptation, computer sof
methodology now known or hereafter 
developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly 
analysis or material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for 
exclusive use by the purchaser of the w
publication or parts th
the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s loc
always be obtained from S
may be obtained through R
Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not 
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that
ch names are exempt from the relevant protective laws 
and regulations and theref
While the advice and information in this
neither the authors nor the editors no
sibility for any errors or omissions 
that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained 
herein. 
Willmar, MN, USA
Nottingham, UK
Christopher J. Conselice
School of Physics and Astronomy
©  Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
All rights are reserved by the Publish
adcasting, 
ights of translation, re
tware, or by similar or dissimilar 
ork. Duplication of this 
ereof is permitted only under 
pringer. Permissions for use 
ightsLink at the Copyright 
ore free for general use. 
he date of publication, 
su
, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
er, whether the whol
ation, in its current version, and permission for use must 
r the publisher can accept any legal respon
 true and accurate at t
 book are believed to be
Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London 
University of Nottingham
85346-8   

to the brightest stars in our fi rmament,
Debb and Estelle.
*   *   *


Contents
vii
 
 Acknowledgments ............................................................ 
ix
 
 
Preface ............................................................................... xiii
 
1. Setting the Scene .............................................................. 
1
 
2. Catchpole of the Nebulae ................................................ 14
 
3. “I Have Looked Farther” ................................................. 28
 
4. Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy ............................ 54
 
5. Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists .......................... 79
 
6. Th e Various Twine of Light ............................................. 99
 
7. Fields of Glory .................................................................. 114
 
8. What Stuff  Stars Are Made Of ........................................ 145
 
9. Th e Nebula is Leaving the Solar System ........................ 174
 10. Th e “Galactocentric” Revolution.................................... 205
 11. From Olympus .................................................................. 233
 12. W.W. Morgan and the  Discovery of the Spiral Arms
of the Milky Way .............................................................. 264
 13. To Forge a Galaxy ............................................................. 291
 14. Over to the Dark Side: Dark Matter, Black Holes,
and the Origin of the Universe ....................................... 326
 15. Dark Energy ...................................................................... 354
16. Aft erglows ......................................................................... 367
Author Index ....................................................................
 
378
Subject Index ....................................................................
 
381


Acknowledgments
T
his book has been an eff ort spanning more than a decade. At the 
beginning, the authors never guessed that it would take that long. 
However, the fact that it did bears out the truth of something Dr. Johnson 
said in his “Life of Pope”:
“The distance is commonly very great between actual performances 
and speculative possibility. It is natural to suppose that as much as has 
been done to-day may be done to-morrow; but on the morrow some 
diﬃ  culty emerges, or some external impediment obstructs. Indolence, 
interruption, business, and pleasure, all take their turns of retardation; 
and every long work is lengthened by a thousand causes that can, and 
ten thousand that cannot, be recounted. Perhaps no extensive and mul-
tifarious performance was ever eﬀ ected within the term originally ﬁ xed 
in the undertaker’s mind. He that runs against Time has an antagonist 
not subject to casualties.”
Many people have contributed signifi cantly to the book, and with-
out their counsel and assistance it would have taken much longer to com-
plete than it did—if indeed it would have been written at all.
When W.S. embarked on his biography of E. E. Barnard, Th e Immor-
tal Fire Within, he found a tremendous mentor in the late Donald E. Oster-
brock, and much of what is best in the following pages are thanks to the 
assistance and counsel, freely and generously rendered, of “DEO.” Given that 
Barnard was the great pioneer of the wide-angle photography of the Milky 
Way and discoverer of the dark nebulae, work on Barnard began to lead to 
plans for further investigations of the Galaxy, and a Guggenheim Fellowship 
in 2001 for the “structure and evolution of the Galaxy” allowed time (and 
travel) away from professional commitments and a chance to begin work in 
earnest. Among those whose strong support at this stage was much appreci-
ated were Michael Crowe, Steven J. Dick, and Owen Gingerich. Also, look-
ix

ing back across decades, mention should be made of Robert Burnham, Jr. 
and Helen Horstman of the Lowell Observatory, who encouraged a fl edgling 
interest that could as easily have been quashed as encouraged.
In 2001, W.S. spent a productive six weeks at the Cosmic Dust Lab-
oratory at the University of the Witwatersrand with David Block, whose 
work on infrared imaging of galaxies is internationally known. He also 
learned much at the Conference on Galactic Bars, especially from David 
Block and Ken Freeman, held at the Pilanesberg Game Reserve in South 
Africa during the transit of Venus in 2004. At that time he began conversa-
tions with Chris Conselice, whom he had fi rst met when he was at Yerkes 
emulating E.E. Barnard’s feat of observing an eclipse of Iapetus by Saturn’s 
rings in 1993, and who was now a professional astronomer interested in 
galaxies in the early universe. It was as a result of that contact that Chris 
fi rst became involved in the project.
W.S. thanks Robert W. Smith, Michael Hoskin and Tony Simcock—
and above all the late Peter Hingley, of the Library of the Royal Astronomi-
cal Society—for help and advice with the Herschels; also the Herschel 
Society, for permission to use pictures taken at the William Herschel 
Museum at 19 New King Street, Bath; Andrew Stephens and Brendan, the 
seventh Earl of Rosse, for Lord Rosse; C. Robert O’Dell on Barnard and the 
Orion Nebula; Michael Sims, who helped with the Barnard papers at the 
Joseph Heard Library at Vanderbilt University; Alison Doane and Owen 
Gingerich with G.P. Bond and archives the Harvard College Observatory; 
Irene Osterbrock and Dorothy Schaumberg for helping to access manu-
scripts in the Mary Lea Shane archives of the Lick Observatory; Dimitri 
Mihalas, Bob Garrison, Richard Kron, and Lewis Hobbs on W.W. Morgan, 
and members of the Morgan family for granting me access to private Mor-
gan letters and notebooks; Eric Hillemann of Carleton College on Edward 
Fath; William Lowell Putnam, III, Kevin Schindler, Antoinette Beiser, 
Joe Tenn, and Deidre Hunter on V.M. Slipher and dwarf galaxies; the late 
Gale E. Christianson for his views on Edwin Hubble. An old physics lab 
partner (at University of Minnesota) Curtis Struck off ered excellent advice 
on galaxy collisions. Andy Young off ered astute insights on astronomical 
spectroscopy and galaxies. For insights into interstellar matter and French 
astronomy, thanks are due to James Lequeux and Françoise Launay.
For help with illustrations, Laurie Hatch, Rem Stone, Kyle Cud-
worth, Richard Dreiser, Judy Bausch, Tony Misch, John Drummond, Mari-
lyn Head, Tony Simcock, Mike Hatcher, Terry Dickinson, Klaus Brasch, 
and Stephen Leshin, John Grula of the Carnegie Observatories—Carnegie 
Institution for Science, Dan Lewis of the Huntington Library, San Marino, 
California, and Alar Toomre of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
All performed yeoman service. A special thanks to a special high school 
friend, Mike Conley, who has remained actively involved for forty years in 
 
x 
Galactic Encounters

 
Galactic Encounters 
xi
pursuit of astronomical “game” he helped get the small observatory at the North 
Fork of the Crow River up and running, and helped to obtain many of the images 
featured herein.
Draft s of the manuscript were improved immeasurably through the eff orts 
of Mary Cain Buzzell, Jan Millsapps, Carl Pennypacker, Lee T. Macdonald, Parke 
Kunkle, and above all Bob O’Dell and David Sellers. Not all of them were profes-
sional astronomers, but those who were not were intelligent and perceptive lay 
readers. Long ago W.S. learned to heed Priscilla Bok’s advice to her husband Bart, 
that it was wise to involve non-astronomers in reading manuscript materials, 
unless the book was meant for only experts (she mentioned Jan Oort). Heeding 
this advice, Bart and Priscilla produced the classic book Th e Milky Way, which set 
a standard all other books in the subject published since must heed and aspire to.
Th ere were many others who contributed to the book over many years. 
Th e editors at Springer were effi  cient and professional, but one person stood out 
for special recognition, Joe Piliero, master book-designer, who produced the 
design and with patient and gentle prodding helped us fully realize our vision in 
what can be the most harrowing stage of the process for authors (there are good 
reasons Dickens never looked at any of his books aft er they were published!). Not 
least deserving acknowledgement are the members of W.S.’s family: wife Debb, 
sons Brendan and Ryan, and Cavalier King Charles spaniels Brady and Ruby, all of 
whom graciously granted hours of solitude, allowing the concentration that such a 
work demands.
CC would like to thank Bill Sheehan for inviting him to collaborate on this 
book, and for his patience over the years while it was being written. He also thanks 
colleagues, staff  and students at the University of Nottingham, and especially 
Estelle Derclaye, for their support during the writing of this book. 
*   *   *
— William Sheehan, Willmar, Minnesota
— Christopher Conselice, Nottingham, U.K.
 
February 17, 2014


xiii
W
elcome to a masterful telling of a wonderful story. Man has a natu-
ral curiosity that extends to our place in the Universe. Satisfying 
that curiosity is the goal of this remarkable book by William Sheehan and 
Christopher Conselice.
Th eir historical approach to the tale is not only interesting in its 
own right, but also because it helps the reader to understand “why” we 
know what we do, not simply “what”. Th e enterprising Italian Galileo Gali-
lei’s exploitation of the development of the telescope is an appropriate place 
to start, because the story is about the modern view of the Universe and the 
modern picture only began with the telescope. 
Th ere are heroes aplenty—the driven brother-sister collaborators 
William and Caroline Herschel; the pioneer of large telescopes, William 
Parsons Earl of Rosse, the self-educated Edward Emerson Barnard; and the 
morphologist W. W. Morgan, to mention only a few. Th ere are entrepre-
neurs, con artists, and a considerable number of big egos. I’ll leave it to the 
reader to identify them.
Lead author Sheehan draws on his multiple talents and areas of 
expertise. From his lifelong interest in astronomy, he shows his pleasure in 
observing things himself, not simply using the results obtained by others. 
As a historian of considerable stature, he has studied the lives and work of 
astronomers from the seventeenth through twentieth centuries. He is also 
a Doctor of Medicine, specializing in psychiatry, which informs his depic-
tions of the personalities through the centuries in an insightful, informed, 
and wonderfully entertaining narrative.
Conselice is a practitioner of our shared craft , conducting original 
research on galaxy formation in the early universe. His description of the 
rapidly evolving picture of the large-scale Universe is told with remarkable 
clarity and an obvious depth of knowledge.
Th e last chapters delve into our totally unexpected present view, 
that we live in a Universe that defi es expectation in that it expands ever 
Preface

 xiv 
Galactic Encounters
faster through the action of mysterious dark energy and that our substance 
and everything that we see is but a few percent of all the material that is out 
there.
Solving today’s problems continues, and it is a wise scientist indeed who 
recognizes that what he is saying and what his contemporaries believe may 
not be true. We know from studying the past that understanding comes in 
jumps, oft en by pursuing new directions, and that the term “the fog of war” 
also applies when we are trying to advance the frontiers of science.
*   *   *
 
— Robert O’Dell
 
 
Distinguished Research Professor of Astrophysics
 
 
Vanderbilt University
 
 
Nashville, TN

 
 
1
The lowing herd wind slowly o’er the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
—Thomas Gray, “Elegy written in a country churchyard”
F
ar from city lights, the view of the night sky is dominated by stars. Th ey 
seem to be present in countless numbers. It comes as a surprise to learn 
that with the naked eye only about three thousand are visible at any given 
time. Most of these lie within a hundred, and all but a few within a thou-
sand, light years of the Earth.
Despite our tendency to regard ourselves as the acme of creation, 
the human eye, at least as an astronomical instrument, performs rather 
poorly. 
Th e human eye is the product of a long and complex evolutionary 
process that began billions of years ago with the eyespots of unicellular 
organisms. It has been molded by natural selection in response to the envi-
ronments frequented by ancestral forms over thousands of generations. 
Th us, the human eye is a typical vertebrate eye, neither the most complex 
nor the most highly developed. (Th e most complex eye in the animal 
kingdom appears to belong to invertebrates, i.e., mantis shrimp, or sto-
matopods, have compound eyes with 16 diff erent sorts of visual pigments, 
including 12 for color analysis in diff erent wavelengths, four are sensitive 
to ultraviolet light and four for analyzing polarized light). Th e human eye 
is not so specialized; it is instead a generalist, like a Swiss army knife. It has 
a lens that accommodates quickly to keep objects near and far in focus; its 
retina contains a fovea, with close-packed cones providing detailed images 
and color information under high-intensity lighting conditions, and rods, 
sensitive to low-intensity light. Clearly, the human eye has adapted mostly 
for daylight conditions, and has a marvelous ability to detect motion; for 
1.
Setting the Scene
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

this, it uses short “exposure times” for integrating an image, but at the 
expense of not being able to see very faint objects. It was clearly not fash-
ioned for pondering the night sky or for looking through telescopes.
Indeed, as a detector of low-intensity light, the human eye fares 
extremely poorly even compared to the eyes of other animals, like noctur-
nal animals or those that inhabit the gloomy regions of the deep ocean. Th e 
eye’s light sensitivity is a function of its ability to capture photons. Th is is 
determined by: 1) the pupil diameter (in humans, ranging from 4 to 9mm), 
2) the photoreceptor diameter, 3) the focal-length of the eye, where the 
shorter the focal-length, i.e., the “faster” the optics, just as in telescopes, the 
better, and 4) the fraction of light absorbed and converted into a signal, the 
quantum effi  ciency.
Th e photoreceptors of the human eyes have a quantum effi  ciency 
of about half, which means that about half of the photons received elicit 
a response. Th e superior sensitivity of nocturnal animals and benthic sea 
creatures does not have to do with the quantum effi  ciency of their photore-
ceptors but with the optimization of the other variables. Th ey dispense with 
cones and have only rod receptors, have much larger pupils, and have eyes 
with very short focal lengths. In this way giant isopods, for instance, which 
live at depths of over a mile below the surface of the ocean and have huge 
refl ective compound eyes, achieve a sensitivity of some 250 times that of 
the dark-adapted human eye. Of course, deep-sea creatures can never see 
the night-sky; among land animals, owls, tarsiers, and lemurs rate among 
the champions at seeing in the dark. Th ey would presumably enjoy an awe-
some view of the stars and the Milky Way.
Incidentally, dung beetles (the species Scarabaeus satyrus), which 
have compound eyes but small brains, appear to orient themselves on 
moonless nights by the Milky Way as they roll their balls of muck along 
the ground. Perhaps astronomers on Earth appear that way to the conde-
scending super-intelligent denizens of some vastly superior extraterrestrial 
civilization.
Th e point is that the human eye isn’t very sensitive, and shows only 
a relatively small part of the contents of the night-sky. Obviously, during 
full moonlight, or sitting around a campfi re, its space-penetrating power 
is even less. Th e naked (i.e., unassisted) eye can only nibble at the edge of 
the universe by revealing stars most of which are within a distance of 100 
light years of us. On a clear dark night, we see only a little way out into the 
universe. Most of it is invisible to us.
Enter Galileo Galilei. He was the most distinguished member of the Acad-
emy of the Lynx-eyed (Accademia dei Lincei), founded in Rome in 1603, 
and named for a diff erent kind of virtuouso of sight than owls or tarsiers: 
 
2 
Galactic Encounters

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
3
the lynx. Th e lynx and other cats are known for the sharpness or acuity (as 
opposed to the sensitivity) of their eyesight. When Galileo turned a tele-
scope to the sky over Padua in the winter of 1609-10, he enjoyed a marked 
enhancement both of acute (lynx-eyed) and sensitive (owl-eyed) vision. 
Th e fi rst allowed him to make out details on the Moon, such as craters 
and mountains, that had never been seen before; both the fi rst and second 
allowed him to make out the four largest satellites of Jupiter, while in the 
Milky Way itself—and in bits that appeared to be broken off  from it, such 
as Praesepe (the “manger”) in the constellation of Cancer—the increased 
sensitivity of his assisted vision revealed to him numerous stars “invisible 
to the unassisted sight.”  
He made sketches of two areas that seem rich in stars even with the 
naked eye. One was Pleiades, one of the most famous star-groups in the sky 
and named for the “seven sisters” of Atlas of Greek mythology. Curiously, 
the name is something of a misnomer, since the average person seems to 
see either six or eight stars (not seven). A person with an unusually sen-
sitive eye (including young persons with normal vision, who are able to 
enlarge the pupil to the full aperture of 9mm or so, and perhaps some indi-
viduals possessed of unusually shortened, or hyperopic, eyeballs) can see 
14 or more. Galileo’s drawing made with the telescope shows 36 stars. His 
telescope had a lens with a clear diameter of 40 mm, making it four times 
the diameter of the most dilated human eyeball, thus giving it the power 
to penetrate some four times deeper into space and to comprehend sixteen 
times the volume. Th e universe known to man thus expanded by a factor of 
sixteen. 
Larger and larger telescopes extended the empire of the eye even 
farther, until by the end of the 18th century William Herschel, by using the 
biggest telescopes built up to that time, could, briefl y, imagine he had seen 
clear to the edge of the Milky Way star-system in which we reside. But in 
fact, as we now know, he was seeing only about 1% of stars in our galaxy. 
Th e contrast between his ambition and his achievement had to do partly 
with the human eye’s poor performance as a detector of low-intensity light, 
but more so with the fact that large sections of the Galaxy were concealed 
from his view by clouds of interstellar dust. (as discussed in Chapter 3). In 
areas where he saw no stars, he did not suspect that they were being hid-
den as by a velvet curtain. In starless places, he thought he was seeing true 
voids—“holes” in the heavens. Th is was to be an oft -repeated mistake in 
the history of astronomy.
As noted above, the rods—the light-detectors in the retina—have a quan-
tum effi  ciency of about 50%, which is actually very good. When photogra-
phy, in the form of the gelatino-bromide dry plate, began to supplant the 

 
4 
Galactic Encounters
eye for the recording of faint stars and nebulae in the 1880s, it did so not 
by being more sensitive—in fact, it’s not; the photographic emulsions used 
by pioneering fi gures in astronomical photography probably had a quan-
tum effi  ciency of less than 1 percent of 1 percent. Photography’s advantage 
was rather in its ability to accumulate light over long periods of time. In 
March 1882, the pioneer astrophotographer Henry Draper was able to 
expose a gelatino-bromide dry plate for 137 minutes on the Great Nebula 
of Orion. From this image he recorded more detail than had been painstak-
ingly seen by visual observers who had worked for years drawing it with 
pencil and brush. Since the 1880s, technological improvements in photo-
graphic emulsions allowed fi lms to reach a quantum effi  ciency of about 1 
percent; though much poorer than the eye performs this means that only 
a few seconds’ exposure is enough to produce an image equal to what the 
eye can see. Photographic fi lms, in turn, have been rendered obsolete by 
solid-state detectors called Charge Coupled Devices (CCDs), arrays of tiny 
doped silicon pieces called pixels and which achieve a quantum effi  ciency 
of almost 100 percent. Th ey have now become ubiquitous, as essential ele-
ments in our digital cameras. Film is now an anachronism. Most astrono-
mers, amateur or professional, use CCDs to image stars and nebulae. With 
such instrumentation, an amateur observer with a quite small telescope can 
capture images that equal or exceed anything that was obtained in the pho-
tographic era at the great professional observatories like Lick, Mt. Wilson, 
and even Palomar. More of the universe is accessible to more people than 
ever before.
Personal Reﬂ ections on using a (relatively) small reﬂ ector
For the past several years one of the authors (W.S.) and his friend Mike 
Conley have operated a small observatory with such a CCD deployed on 
a 10-inch Ritchey-Chrétien telescope. Th e observatory is located in rural 
Minnesota, on the North Fork of the Crow River. Th e site is not the Canar-
ies or Chile or Mauna Kea, but it still has impressively dark skies on clear 
moonless nights. 
Both grew up in a city (Minneapolis) and from the mid-1960s 
onward, when dastardly mercury-vapor street lamps were put in, rarely 
caught more than a feeble glimpse of the Milky Way or the “little cloud” in 
Andromeda. For a long time we devoted ourselves to scrutinizing detail on 
the Moon and planets, since that was one domain where the eye’s ability to 
use short “exposure times” for integrating the image favored it over fi lm; so 
we could still do useful work (so we liked to imagine) even when equipped 
with nothing more than pencil and sketchpad. Moreover, dark skies weren’t 
really necessary for the Moon and planets, since steady air, oft en to be had 

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
5
in cities owing to the “heat dome” eff ect and even when the sky was slightly 
hazy, was the most important factor in “seeing.” With access to a dark site 
and the advent of CCD, we remain interested in the Moon and planets, but 
have also become inveterate “deep sky” enthusiasts.
On a typical night of observing, we would get together on a late 
Friday aft ernoon or early evening; a bit disheveled, feeling beaten up by 
the week’s occupations, we would slide open the glistening white clamshell 
dome, to reveal the telescope, soon silhouetted against the rosy sunset, and 
wait for darkness to fall so we could begin to see. 
Waiting, we drink in the beauty of the tranquil crepuscular time when the 
world seems to slide into a season of peace, and the last clouds in the west 
chase in vain aft er the sun. Th e line of trees along the river darkens, and 
with the gathering dusk, the swallows, half an hour before chasing swarms 
of gnats around the small bridge over the river, abandon their gustatory 
pursuits and retreat for the night. A bat or nighthawk makes an appear-
ance, while in the distance, unseen, an owl readies itself for a night of 
hunting. We will hear its melancholy cry in the early morning hours, while 
imaging the Great Nebula of Orion.
We begin our own night-work. Powering up, red lights fl ash on 
within the dome; reawakened from its coma, the clock drive begins to 
purr. It slews the telescope around the polar axis at just the rate needed to 
compensate for the Earth’s diurnal rotation. Th ere! A lovely planet glistens 
against the sky. Th en we see a star we think we know, Arcturus or Vega or 
Capella. We perform a three-star alignment to improve the accuracy of the 
guiding before beginning our night’s imaging run.
We follow a set protocol. It is not something we could have ever 
worked out from any guide book, and when we fi rst started trying to do 
this, we had more than our share of troubles and frustrations and were 
more than once on the verge of giving up and taking up an easier pastime. 
New technology always seems to bring in its wake a numerous train of 
applications of Murphy’s Law. We have progressed as far as we have mostly 
on the basis of false starts and the solution of unanticipated diffi  culties. It’s 
a sad fact: nothing works the way it’s supposed to according to the book, 
and all technical writers are apparently incompetents. Experience alone is a 
reliable teacher.
We make sure that the fi nder scope is still aligned and expose a 
test image at one of our guide stars. Sometimes the guide star itself is so 
lovely that we can’t resist getting an image, even though it is not in the way 
of our larger purposes for the night. Once we have the guide star in view, 
we know we are doing well enough for a rough pointing, but in this busi-
ness accurate guiding is everything. We will need to use stars closer to the 

 
6 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 1.2. (below left) Mike Conley, biding time observing the Sun with an H-alpha ﬁ lter telescope, before 
beginning a night of imaging. Photograph by William Sheehan.
Fig. 1.3. (below right) A mystical moment: sunset over Hollywood and Los Angeles, from the site where 
E.E. Barnard set up the Bruce telescope for imaging the Milky Way in 1905. Photograph by William Sheehan.
Fig. 1.1. Small dome on the North Fork of the Crow River, Minnesota, housing a 10-inch Ritchey-
Chrétien telescope. It awaits sunset so it can be unshuttered to the night skies. Photograph by 
William Sheehan.

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
7
objects we will target, and “synch” the drive on them. In the process we 
have learned the Arabic names of many stars, each sounding like some-
thing out of Aladdin or the Th ousand and One Nights: Almach (gamma 
Andromedae), Alphard (alpha Hydrae), Caph (Beta Cassiopeiae), Hamal 
(alpha Arietis), Mirfak (alpha Persei), reminding us that at one time Arabic 
astronomy was the envy of the western world, and Europe in the depths of 
its dark ages. 
We have had to put up with our share of daunting clouds sweeping 
in just as we have been zeroing in on our prey. In November of our fi rst 
imaging year, on three nights we were about to image the Great Nebula in 
Orion; each time—such was our poor luck—we obtained our fi rst image 
just to watch the screen go blank under a veil of fog. We have oft en had to 
deal with mists rising from the nearby river and, while operating close to 
the dew point, have had to press into duty one of our wives’ hair dryers to 
clear up fogged lenses. We have had to learn the intricacies of download-
ing images, to achieve mastery of protocols for stacking them, and fi gured 
out how to sort details of hue, saturation, and contrast. In the end, we have 
wasted many a night with nothing to show for it, giving up with the onset 
of clouds or the encroaching light of the dawn, cold, hungry, exhausted, 
defeated (but then even William Herschel, even Hubble must sometimes 
have felt that way). Each time the discouragement has been short-lived, 
and the enchantment has returned before long. It is in part the sheer beauty 
of the objects revealed to us, but in part also a human “fascination with 
what’s diffi  cult,” that keeps us at our task. In the end, through perseverance, 
we learn our way about the sky, and everything seems worthwhile.
With our CCD attached to our smallish telescope, we have reached out to 
remote star-systems, some so far away that the light from them reaching us 
now—traveling at 300,000 kilometers per second (186,300 miles per sec-
ond), year in and year out--left  them during the Earth’s Jurassic period. We 
owe it all to technology; but are unapologetic on that account. If it were not 
for technological advance, we should never have gathered just how splen-
did and dazzling the Earth appears looking down from space, nor guessed 
what worlds and suns and star systems exist above us far beyond the range 
of the unassisted sight but which are child’s play for our telescopes, CCDs, 
and computers.
We remember one night when we were imaging from dusk to dawn. It was 
early November, but the weather was unseasonably warm. It was the week-
end of the deer hunting opener in the Minnesota woods around us. We 
were not clad in orange blazers, we did not tramp the wood with guns; we 

 
8 
Galactic Encounters
would bring back no limp and bloodied trophy, no rack of antlers to display 
on our walls. Instead we were hunting a diff erent kind of game. Our tro-
phies were more cerebral, and consisted of a trove of images brought back 
from thousands,  millions, and even tens of millions of light years away: 
images of celebrated objects, mostly in the Messier catalog, such as M1, 
M31, M33, NGC 891, M77, and—our hitherto nemesis—the Great Nebula 
in Orion, M42. Not one of our images is a six-pointer; we are under no 
illusions, and we do not overestimate what we have accomplished. Our suc-
cesses are on a rather modest scale. We have not expected to rival the work 
of many an accomplished amateur, much less the professionals working at 
great observatories. We acknowledge that what we have accomplished is 
paltry compared to what can be downloaded off  the web page of the Hub-
ble Space Telescope or the other space observatories. It may not be much; 
but there is satisfaction, nevertheless, in that we have been participants 
rather than mere spectators. Th e results are our own, very own. Th e feeling 
of involvement is itself the source of satisfaction. It doesn’t matter that our 
image of Orion doesn’t show the detail of our friend Bob O’Dell’s Hubble 
Space Telescope image.
And this gets to the heart of what drives us. It is the desire to be involved—
to participate—in this vast (expanding) universe, in our own small way. We 
do not wish to sit back and let others do all the work; we refuse to be mere 
consumers of astronomical data, and to let the experts do everything for us.
Admittedly, we are living in an age in which the sheer quantity of 
knowledge—about every conceivable subject, but especially about science-
-is exploding. Once it was possible for a well-educated person to master, 
through the holdings of a small library of say a few thousand books, all 
the knowledge of the sages, saints, historians, poets and philosophers of 
the ages. But no more. Th e generalist—the jack of all trades—is today 
beleaguered as never before, and may no longer even be a viable species. 
Th e world increasingly belongs to the narrow specialist. Th is even applies 
within single scientifi c disciplines! George Rieke, University of Arizona 
infrared-astronomy researcher who worked to develop the infrared Spitzer 
Space Telescope—the infrared counterpart of Hubble—has written:
“The various ﬁ elds of space science—space physics, space biology, 
microgravity, astronomy, planetary studies—touch on nearly the entire 
range of science. Successful researchers need a high degree of focus 
and specialization. Few have any understanding or appreciation of the 
activities, aspirations, and potential scientiﬁ c importance of ﬁ elds far 
from their own. That is, the space science “community” is Balkanized into 
groups without a common language.”1

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
9
Fig. 1.4. A ﬁ rst success with the Orion Nebula, after many attempts., using an Orion Starshoot CCD on a 
10-inch Ritchey-Chrétien telescope, November 26, 2009. This image stacks up well against those taken 
with the 200-inch Hale reﬂ ector in the classic ﬁ lm era. Photograph by Michael Conley and William Sheehan.
But it is not only the explosion of knowledge that puts polymaths at 
a disadvantage, but also the vast increase in the number of specialists and 
experts—monomaths--in every fi eld. According to Edward Carr, “the very 
learning that creates would-be polymaths creates monomaths too and in 
overwhelming numbers. If you have a multitude who give their lives to a 
specialism, their combined knowledge will drown out even a gift ed non-
specialist. And while the polymath tries to take possession of second exper-
tise in some distant discipline, his or her fi rst expertise is being colonized 
by someone else.”2
Th e people who are doing really fi rst-class imaging work are techni-
cal monomaths, obsessive geniuses. For better or worse, we humble prac-
titioners of the arts of CCD imaging on the North Fork of the Crow River 
are not in a position to do that, and will likely never be. We lack the tech-
nical aptitude. We lack, and are not afraid to admit it, the sheer obsessive-
ness. Our purposes are anyway diff erent from theirs. We harvest  diff use 
nebulae,  planetary nebulae, open clusters, globular clusters, and galaxies 
rather in the fashion that Henry David Th oreau did the wild cranberries of 
the New England woods. We have made the harvesting of the wonders of 
the night sky our business—though not by any means our sole or exclusive 

 10 
Galactic Encounters
business. We realize that we are not one with the many of those around 
us (including those in the blaze orange that will be prowling these fi elds 
at dawn even as we are shuttering the dome aft er our night’s labor, or the 
farmers who will be out in these fi elds with tractors and ploughs) who see 
us as eccentrics. Th oreau advised:
If you would really take a position outside the street and daily life of 
men, you must have deliberately planned your course, you must have 
business which is not your neighbors’ business, which they cannot 
understand. For only absorbing employment prevails, succeeds, takes 
up space, occupies territory, determines the future of individuals and 
states… I have always reaped unexpected and incalculable advantages 
from carrying out at last, however tardily, any little enterprise which my 
genius suggested to me long ago as a thing to be done, some step to be 
taken, however slight, out of the usual course.3
We imagers of the wonder-world of stars on a November night have 
neither corn to take to market nor antlers to hang on the walls. We have, in 
Th oreau’s terms, been “cranberrying,” and each of us can say with him:
I enjoyed this cranberrying very much, notwithstanding the wet and 
cold, and the swamp seemed to be yielding its crop to me alone, for 
there are none else to pluck it or value it…. I am the only person in the 
township who regards them or knows of them, and I do not regard them 
in the light of their pecuniary value. I have no doubt I felt richer wading 
there with my two pockets full, treading on wonders at every step, than 
any farmer going to market with a hundred bushels which he has raked, 
or hired to be raked… I have not garnered any rye or oats, but I gathered 
the wild vine of the Assabet.4
What we have done  has required deliberately planning of our 
course, setting aside time to do some business which was not our neigh-
bors’ business and which—alas—for the most part they cannot (and need 
not) understand. It has taken up space –occupied territory—in our minds, 
busied our hands and gotten us out under the open sky, beneath the starry 
traces of the Milky Way and the shining stars. 
It has served as a needful respite from the worry and mental over-
strain of mundane and mostly diurnal responsibilities. It has provided a 
needed change, a hobby and diversion, a fl ight from familiar toils into a 
realm of existence in which, for at least a brief while, we have been allowed 
a respite from melancholy and achieved a temporary calm.
Imaging these celestial scenes has been for us what painting was 
for Winston Churchill. He advised: “To rest our psychic equilibrium we 

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
11
should call into use those parts of the mind which direct both eye and 
hand.”5 He took up painting at forty, when he left  the Admiralty at the 
end of May 1915. We have taken up imaging at forty—and then some. 
Churchill had never handled a brush or fi ddled with a pencil; we had 
never juggled a CCD camera or downloaded an image-processing pro-
gram. Yet the results were much the same. We found ourselves belatedly 
“plunged in the middle of a new and intense form of interest and action 
with paints and palettes and canvases” and “not … discouraged by our 
Fig. 1.5. Bob O’Dell’s image of Orion nebula. A billion pixel image obtained with the Hubble Space 
Telescope’s Advanced Camera for Surveys in 2006, showing the arcs, blobs, pillars, and rings of dust of the 
Orion Nebula, which appears to be a typical star-forming environment located 1500 light years from the 
Earth. Courtesy: C. Robert O’Dell and Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 12 
Galactic Encounters
results.”6 In part we have done so because we have not been too ambi-
tious. Th at would have spoiled it, made the result obtained more impor-
tant than the process of obtaining it. Yet “we may content ourselves with a 
joy ride in a paint-box.” An electronic paint-box, admittedly, but a paint-
box nevertheless.
We have seen many things under those dark Minnesota skies as they have 
appeared, one by one, on the display monitor of our computer. Th e images 
displayed there have thrown our electronically enhanced eyes and minds 
a good distance out into the universe, allowing us to grasp things of which 
we would otherwise be largely unsuspecting and unaware. 
Everything we see, we see because of the CCD detector’s ability 
to register the arrival of photons, which are messengers from the depths 
of space. As a photon enters the doped silicon of the CCD array, it cre-
ates a charge defi cit (hole) in that local area. During a time exposure these 
electronic holes build up in number in direct proportion to the number of 
photons coming in. Th e CCD array is wonderfully sensitive; its quantum 
effi  ciency approaches 1, which means that almost one charge hole is cre-
ated for every incoming photon. Admittedly, the trick to the CCD is not 
the array but the readout. What we have so far is only a potential image; 
somehow the series of charge holes in a two-dimensional array has to be 
converted into an electronic image that can be displayed as an image. But 
these are details.
Th ese photons are a form of electromagnetic radiation. Th ey are 
radiated from objects consisting of ordinary matter, the familiar kind that 
is made up of protons and neutrons and electrons. Th e photons visible 
to the eye, and to the photographic plate and the CCD, all lie in the so-
called visible range of the spectrum, which ranges from violet to red and 
is centered on the yellow-green, a refl ection of the fact that our cones were 
shaped by natural selection to be most sensitive to the region of the Sun’s 
radiation that is able to get through the Earth’s atmosphere. (Obviously, the 
photographic plate and the CCD are not direct products of natural selec-
tion; they are products of human design. However, humans, their makers 
and their masters, chose their properties so that they would correspond to 
what the eye sees.)  
Th e visible spectrum represents only a small segment of the entire 
electromagnetic spectrum. As was fi rst appreciated at the beginning of 
the 19th century, when the invisible infrared was discovered beyond the 
red, and ultraviolet beyond the violet, the spectrum extends both ways 
far beyond what we can see. Beyond the infrared, in turn, lie the micro-
wave and radio regions, beyond the ultraviolet the X-ray and gamma-ray 
regions. A large part of modern astronomy has concerned itself with devel-

 
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene 
13
oping detectors sensitive to and exploring the universe in these more exotic 
regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 
At the same time, the contents of the universe have come to be 
increasingly exotic. One of us remembers being an undergraduate in phys-
ics at a time when, aft er the introductory course in astrophysics, the only 
upper-level off erings in the department were: the astrophysics of diff use 
matter, and the astrophysics of condensed matter. Th e fi rst were masses of 
gas, the “diff use” nebulae; the second were stars, planets, satellites, comets, 
and the like, as well as such exotic objects as neutron stars and black holes. 
Between them, diff use matter and condensed matter seemed to cover 
everything. In the years since, we have discovered that matter accounts for 
about 5% of the total mass of the universe. Th e other 95% is something 
else—invisible and so far unaccounted for. 
Th e history of astronomy is about how humans—the product of 
natural selection, with their so-so eyes compensated for by their rather 
complicated brains—have come to see (or at least be aware) of more and 
more of the universe. Th e universe is expanding, and so is the human mind 
trying to take it in. Still it is strange to think that most of the universe con-
sists of what cannot be seen. 
At least astronomy has made it visible to our minds if not to our 
senses.
*   *   *
 1. George Rieke, Th e Last of the Great Observato-
ries: Spitzer and the era of faster, better, cheaper 
at NASA (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 
2006), 28.
 2. Edward Carr, “Th e Last Days of the Polymath,” 
Intelligent Life Magazine, August 2009.
 3. Henry David Th oreau, Wild Fruits, ed. Bradley 
P. Dean (New York and London: W. W. Norton, 
2000), 165.
 4. Ibid., 167-168.
 5. Winston S. Churchill, Painting as a Pastime 
(New York: Th e McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
Inc., 1950), 12.
 6. Ibid., 14.

14
The glory and the nothing of a name.
—George Gordon, Lord Byron
A
mong Galileo’s most momentous discoveries was his demonstration 
that Milky Way’s river of light consists of a host of small stars. It is a 
discovery that can be repeated by anyone with a dark sky site and an ordi-
nary pair of fi eld glasses.
Th ough most have been lost, one of Galileo’s lenses (though bro-
ken) has survived, and is preserved in the Museum of the History of Sci-
ence in Florence. Th e diameter is 60 mm, though in order to improve its 
performance Galileo seems to have used an aperture-stop to reduce the 
diameter to 40 mm. Th is can be compared to the diameter of the pupil of 
the dark-adapted human eye, which is at most about 9mm. Th is means, as 
we noted earlier, that Galileo’s lens was more than four times the diameter 
of the dilated human pupil, thus its area—or light-gathering power—was 
some sixteen times that of the eye. Instead of the 3,000 or so stars visible to 
the naked eye on a clear dark night, Galileo’s telescope might have shown, 
on the basis of these proportions, 50,000 or more, a staggering advance.
To demonstrate the power of his telescope, Galileo in 1610 noted a 
number of telescopic stars in the “Sword” of Orion, which consists of three 
stars hanging down like a scabbard from the belt of the Giant. But though 
his drawing shows many faint stars, there is not a trace of the nebula (from 
the Latin word for cloud) that invests the middle star—the nebula which 
will be a leading character in this book, and which is now known as the 
Great Nebula of Orion. 
Whatever the reason Galileo failed to make note of it—perhaps 
with the telescope he was using, he was so accustomed to seeing glare 
around all bright objects that he just assumed it was an optical eff ect, or 
perhaps, as astronomer Bob O’Dell has suggested,1 he had no commercial 
2.
Catchpole of the 
Nebulae
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_2, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
15
Fig. 2.1. The Milky Way, photographed with an 18mm wide angle lens from Chile by Terence Dickinson. 
Courtesy: Terence Dickinson.
Fig. 2.2. “A congeries of innumerable stars.” In Cygnus, we are looking along the direction of the Sun’s 
motion through the Galaxy, and seeing features in the so-called Orion arm: HII regions (including the 
North America Nebula) on the left, the bright star Deneb, the most distant of the 20 brightest naked-
eye stars, at 1400 light years away, and the great dust cloud known as the Northern Coal Sack dimming 
the light from more distant ﬁ elds of stars. Imaged by Klaus Brasch with a 50 mm f/3 lens. Courtesy: Klaus 
Brasch.

 16 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 2.3. Christiaan Huygens. Courtesy: Yerkes Obser-
vatory.
Fig. 2.4. Huygens’s drawing of the Orion Nebula, 
1659. The Trapezium is clearly shown. From: Huy-
gens, Oeuvres Complétes, vol. 15. 
interest in broadcasting that there were some cloudy objects in the heavens 
he could not resolve into individual stars—the Great Nebula was recorded 
only a year later by Nicolas de Peiresc at Marseilles, who didn’t publish, and 
then in 1618 by the Jesuit astronomer Johann Baptist Cysat, who described 
it as like a radiant white cloud. But it would be Christiaan Huygens of Hol-
land, one of the greatest scientists who ever lived, who made the fi rst really 
satisfactory observations of the Great Nebula, in 1655.
Unaware of either Peiresc’s or Cysat’s work, Huygens rediscovered it 
with a telescope whose lens was 50 mm in diameter and tube 12-feet long. 
His drawing shows the bright central part of the Orion Nebula (later called 
Regio Huygeniana—the Huygenian Region—in his honor). 
Th e Great Nebula of Orion was a member of what seemed to be a 
new class of celestial objects. It was, in the phrase of the early 18th century 
clergyman-astronomer William Derham, who observed it with one of Huy-
gens’s telescopes bequeathed to the Royal Society of London on Huygens’s 
death, like “a visible entrance to the empyrean.” Another similar object was 
the Great Nebula in Andromeda, an elongated hazy patch northwest of the 
Great Square of Pegasus recorded as the “little cloud” by the 10th century 
Persian astronomer Abd-al-Rahman Al-Sufi .
In succeeding centuries, these two objects—the Great Nebula of 
Orion and that of Andromeda--would prove among the most studied and 
discussed objects in astronomy. Gradually, a few more (but lesser) objects 
of the same type were discovered. Giovanni Hodierna, a Sicilian astrono-

 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
17
mer who died in 1660, added a few more, but his work remained unknown; 
in fact, it has been rediscovered only in recent times. Edmond Halley, 
famous for his comet, published a list of six in 1715. 
Th e reason for the slow progress was partly owing to the limita-
tions of 18th century telescopes. Chromatic aberration—the tendency of a 
simple lens like those used by Galileo, Peiresc, Cysat, and Huygens to act 
as a prism and to bring light of each color to a slightly diff erent focus, so 
as to produce a haze of unfocused purple or magenta light around bright 
objects such as the Moon or brilliant planets—was a serious problem. 
By making telescopes of great length, this haze could be subdued, and so 
some telescopes of this era were to be made very long indeed; Hevelius, 
for instance, a brewer-astronomer at Danzig (now Gdansk) on the Baltic, 
made a telescope that consisted of a monstrous tube slung from a mast 
towering 27 meters from the ground and raised or lowered by means of 
cranks, ropes, and pulleys. Another vexing problem was the very small fi eld 
of view enjoyed by such telescopes, which made them useful for studying 
the Moon and planets but atrocious for studying faint objects like nebulae. 
Finally, astronomers of the period were chiefl y concerned with such down-
to-Earth problems as creating tables of the Moon’s motions to help naviga-
tors calculate their longitude at sea, which had been the main purpose for 
which the great national observatories at Paris (established in 1667 by King 
Louis XIV) and Greenwich (founded by his not-to-be outdone cousin King 
Charles II in 1675) were founded. Preoccupied with such problems, they 
could hardly be bothered with the remote, indistinct, and seemingly unim-
portant nebulae.
Aft er the publication of the Principia of Isaac Newton, a professor 
of mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1687, introducing the 
theory of gravitation and showing how it could be applied to the detailed 
calculation of the intricate motions of the Moon and planets, astronomers 
preoccupied themselves almost exclusively with the Solar System, and 
would do so until the end of the 18th century. In terms of Newton’s world-
view, the stars were little more than a remote backdrop against which the 
Moon and planets moved. Th e great man scarcely concerned himself with 
their distribution or their arrangement in space. Rarely did he allow his 
powerful mind to wander among the distant stars. Once he made a crude 
attempt to measure the distance to Sirius, on another occasion he hazarded 
a guess as to how a system of stars might form through gravity acting upon 
diff erent kinds of “luminous” and “opaque” matter:
It seems to me that if the matter of our sun and planets and all the matter 
of the universe were evenly scattered throughout all the heavens, and 
every particle had an innate gravity toward all the rest, and the whole 
space through which this matter was scattered was ﬁ nite, the matter 

 18 
Galactic Encounters
would, by gravity, tend toward all the matter on the inside and, by con-
sequence, fall down into the middle of the whole space and there com-
pose one great spherical mass. But if the matter was evenly disposed 
throughout an inﬁ nite space, it could never convene into one mass; but 
some of it would convene into one mass and some into another, so as 
to make an inﬁ nite number of great masses…. And thus might the sun 
and ﬁ xed stars be formed…. But how … matter should divide itself into 
two sorts … part of which is ﬁ t to compose [shining bodies like stars 
and part ﬁ t to compose opaque bodies like the planets] … I do not think 
explicable by mere natural causes, but am forced to ascribe it to the 
counsel and contrivance of a voluntary Agent.
—Isaac Newton to Richard Bentley;
quoted in Charles A. Whitney, The Discovery of our Galaxy
(Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University, 1988), 52.
Not for the fi rst time, and certainly not for the last, did a thinker 
perplexed with the origins and structure of the cosmos invoke the “con-
trivance of a voluntary Agent,” though by the end of the 18th century at 
least some astronomers, such as Laplace, would regard it as the ultimate 
“hypothesis non fi ngo.”
Modest beginnings
Th e 18th century dominance of astronomy by Solar System studies partly 
explains how the fi rst reasonably complete catalog of nebulae—the famous 
Messier catalog—was produced more or less accidentally by an astronomer 
who was not even interested in them for their own sake. He was Charles 
Messier, and his catalog, published in installments in 1771, 1780, and 1784, 
consists of a disparate collection of 103 objects, of which only about a 
third were discovered by Messier himself.2 Messier was a celestial magpie 
who unapologetically appropriated the lists of earlier astronomers such as 
Halley, William Derham, Jean-Dominique Maraldi II, Chéseaux, Le Gen-
til, and especially Nicholas-Louis de Lacaille, a recently deceased French 
astronomer who had gone to the Cape of Good Hope to catalog south-
ern stars and nebulae, to expand his list. By type, about two-thirds of the 
objects in Messier’s catalogs are star clusters, open or globular, or diff use or 
gaseous nebulae associated with our own Milky Way Galaxy; the rest con-
sist of true “extra-galactic” systems (galaxies). Of course, neither Messier 
nor his contemporaries knew anything of their true nature. Other catalogs 
have appeared since, but his list will always be foundational. Because of 
his catalog, his name is well-known to every amateur astronomer smitten 
enough by the night-sky to acquire a small telescope and eager to see its 

 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
19
most notable objects, even if he or she knows nothing about the man him-
self or the circumstances in which he came to draw it up.
Messier was born in 1730 at Badonviller (near Nancy), the tenth of 
twelve children. His father was a catchpole--an offi  cial charged with fi nd-
ing and arresting people who were in debt—and since there have always 
been a lot of people in debt in every age, the family seems to have been 
moderately well to do. When Messier was 11, his father died. As a result, 
his older brother Hyacinthe, employed in the administration of the now-
forgotten Principality of Salm-Salm, assumed responsibility for him. Th is 
soon included educating the lad at home aft er he fell from a window while 
playing and broke his leg.
All the while Charles’s interest in astronomy was taking shape.
At the end of 1743, the magnifi cent six-tailed Chéseaux’ Comet appeared 
(so-called, although at least two other observers had seen it before Phillipe 
Loys de Chéseaux). If there was any doubt aft er this comet’s appearance as 
to his future direction in life, it was removed by his observation of an annu-
lar eclipse of the Sun, visible from Badonviller on July 25, 1748.
When Messier was 21, the Princes of Salm withdrew from Badon-
viller. Hyacinthe, deciding to remain in their service, moved to Senones. 
Charles went his separate way and hoped to fi nd his fortune in Paris. 
When he arrived in the “City of Light,” its population was 800,000, of 
whom 100,000 were servants and 20,000 were beggars. Most lived in slums, 
a lucky few in magnifi cent palaces. In 1742, some of the roads were paved 
with rolled stones, but most of the streets were plain dirt, or laid with cob-
blestones. Street lighting, provided by lanterns, began to appear in 1745. No 
other city in Europe—not even Rome—had street lighting at the time. Th e 
lanterns were lit only when there was no moonlight, which meant it was still 
possible to see the fainter stars and the Milky Way from within the great city.
One can imagine that young Messier’s fi rst impression of the daunt-
ing city might well have resembled that of Montesquieu’s Persian visitor: 
“Th e houses are so high that one would suppose they were inhabited only 
by astrologers.” He would soon have a room in one of the highest.
Obviously, it would have been diffi  cult for a young man without connec-
tions to make his way forward in such a place. But thanks to his brother, 
Messier had friends in high places. Hyacinthe, in consultation with a local 
abbé, found two possible positions for him: one was as curator of a pal-
ace, the other in service of an astronomer. One can guess what Messier’s 
own inclinations must have been, but Hyacinthe advocated for the latter 
as the better opportunity. So it was that young Messier came to knock at 
the door of the naval astronomer Joseph-Nicholas Delisle, at the Hôtel de 
Clugny (now Cluny). Built on the site of old Roman baths, the hotel had 

 20 
Galactic Encounters
served as the town house of the power-
ful Medieval abbots of Cluny, and had 
harbored within its spacious apartments 
such famous personages as the daughter 
of the English King Henry VII, Mary 
Tudor who was briefl y the Queen of 
France, and Cardinal Mazarin.
Within one of the hotel’s towers, 
Messier’s new boss had erected a small 
wooden observatory, housing a 4 ½-foot 
focal length Newtonian refl ector. Th is 
telescope used a mirror to collect light 
instead of a lens, as used in the refract-
ing telescopes of Galileo and Huygens. 
Until the latter part of the eighteenth 
century, refl ectors were very much out of fashion, partly due to the prob-
lem of speculum metal quickly tarnishing but also due to the fact that 
astronomy then was primarily a science of position, so there was little 
demand for the larger light-grasp of refl ectors.
Messier was not, at fi rst, an astronomer, but rather Delisle’s clerk. 
With a calligraphic hand, and with habits of system and order that were 
Fig. 2.6. The Tower at the Hôtel de Cluny in the West Bank area of Paris, where Messier had his small 
observatory and hunted for comets. Photograph by William Sheehan.
Fig. 2.7. Sundial at the Hôtel de Cluny. Photograph by William Sheehan.
Fig. 2.5. Charles Messier by Ansiaume. 
From: Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
21
extreme even by standards of the notoriously tidy French, Messier’s fi rst 
assignment was to copy a large map of China. Delisle himself was then 
preoccupied with the grand project of applying the method of Edmond 
Halley (whom Delisle had met in London in 1723) to measure the solar 
parallax from observations of the rare transits of Venus3—work that would 
lead, it was hoped, to a highly precise measurement of the all-important 
value of the astronomical unit, the distance from the Earth to the Sun. 
Messier began to assist him by making and recording observations with the 
telescope in the tower. As a warm-up for the forthcoming transit of Venus 
of 1761, Messier made his fi rst documented observations--of the transit of 
Mercury on May 6, 1753. (For various reasons that need not concern us 
here, transits of Mercury are not as useful as those of Venus in calculating 
the value of the astronomical unit.)
In other work, building on Halley’s foundations, Delisle had been 
immersed in trying to calculate the place in which the famous comet Hal-
ley had shown to be periodic would appear at its expected return in 1758-
59. Aft er four and a half years of calculating, he had his result, and assigned 
Messier to search for the comet. Th e eager young man set to work at once. 
Unfortunately, Delisle had made an error, so Messier spent many months 
looking in the wrong positions. Even so, his eff orts weren’t entirely in vain; 
he soon learned his way around the sky, and on August 14, 1758, he was 
rewarded with what he thought was the discovery of a new comet. He was 
disappointed, however. It turned out that the comet had already been seen 
at Bourbon Island, in the Indian Ocean, but as he tracked it across the sky, 
Messier encountered yet another comet-like patch, on August 28, 1758, “a 
nebulosity above the southern horn of Taurus… It contains no star; it is 
a whitish light, elongated like the fl ame of a taper.” Returning to measure 
it again on September 12, he found it had not moved in the interim as a 
comet would have. Th is observation would lead to the fi rst entry in what 
became his famous “Catalogue of Nebulae and Star Clusters”:
What caused me to undertake the catalog was the nebula I discov-
ered above the southern horn of Taurus on September 12, 1758, whilst 
observing the comet of that year. This nebula had such a resemblance 
to a comet in its form and brightness that I endeavored to ﬁ nd others, 
so that astronomers would no more confuse these same nebulae with 
comets just beginning to appear. I observed further with suitable tele-
scopes for the discovery of comets, and this is the purpose I had in mind 
in compiling the catalog.
Th is nebula, like many of the so-called Messier objects, had already 
been noted by an earlier astronomer, the now almost-forgotten English 
astronomer Dr. John Bevis, who discovered it around 1731. As the fi rst 

 22 
Galactic Encounters
object entered in Messier’s catalog, it became M1. Messier, of course, had 
no idea as to its nature, and could never have guessed that it would turn out 
to be one of the most singular objects in the sky, the object known today as 
the Crab Nebula, the most spectacular of the 100 or so known supernova 
remnants in our Galaxy and observed as a “new” star by Chinese and Japa-
nese astronomers in 1054 (but not, apparently, in Europe, where the Pope 
of Rome and the Patriarch of Constantinople were busy excommunicating 
one another, events which would led to the “Great Schism” between the 
Eastern and Western churches).
Resuming the quest for Halley’s Comet at its predicted return, 
Messier fi nally succeeded in fi nding it on January 21, 1759 (although unbe-
knownst to him, he had been beaten to it by a German amateur, Johann 
Palitzsch, a farmer at Prohlis, near Dresden, who spotted it on Christmas 
Night). Th ough Messier and Delisle kept it under observation as it sank 
into the evening sky, and re-observed it as it emerged before the dawn 
into the morning sky in April, only then did the secretive Delisle fi nally 
announce Messier’s independent discovery; other astronomers were skepti-
cal about this late announcement, and Messier got little credit for his work.
Finally, in January 1760, Messier made an undisputed comet dis-
covery. Th e fi rst “comet Messier” became bright enough to be seen with 
the naked-eye, and eventually developed a tail 10 degrees long. Henceforth 
Messier was hopelessly addicted to the excitement of comet discovery. He 
channeled all his energy into their single-minded pursuit, in the process 
covering himself in the gloire attached to their discovery. (Famously, Louis 
XV referred to him as the “ferret of comets.”) Between the fi rst in 1760, and 
his last in 1801, Messier discovered thirteen comets on his own, and was 
co-discoverer of another seven. His was easily the most brilliant record of 
comet-discovery of the 18th century.
All the while, in order to improve his chances and to optimize the 
time he spent searching for comets, Messier adapted a method of “double-
entry bookkeeping,” tallying not only actual comets but comet-masquer-
aders he came across that cost him valuable time (their signifi cance would 
emerge only later). Messier thus became a “catchpole” of nebulae. Aft er the 
M1 nebula in Taurus, the next object entered into Messier’s list was M2 in 
Aquarius, now known to be a globular cluster. It had been recorded already 
in 1746 by another French astronomer named Maraldi. Only in 1764 did he 
begin to make frequent entries to the catalog, beginning with M3, a fuzzy 
ball in Canes Venatici, which he spotted on May 3. Th is noble globular 
cluster is just visible to the naked eye from dark skies, but had never been 
recorded before.
By the end of 1764, Messier’s list had grown to 40, many of which 
were true comet-masqueraders—apt, when seen in a small telescope, to be 
mistaken for comets.

 
 
23
Fig. 2.8. The periodic comet Hartley 2, an object of the class that Messier sought so eagerly, moves past 
NGC 869 and 884, the Double Cluster (OB association) in Perseus, on October 9, 2010. These clusters, 
located at a distance of 7600 light years, are among the ﬁ nest objects in the northern skies, but for some 
reason Messier did not include them in his catalog. Imaged by Klaus Brasch with a TMB 92mm apochro-
matic refractor. Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.
Fig. 2.9. Messier no. 1: the Crab Nebula in Taurus. Image by Michael Conley and William Sheehan with a 
10-inch Ritchey-Chrétien telescope and an Orion Starshoot imaging system, October 2, 2010.
Fig. 2.10. M3, a globular cluster in Canes Venatici, one of the objects Messier actually discovered himself, 
imaged with an 85mm f/7 apochromatic refractor by Michael Conley and William Sheehan.

 24 
Galactic Encounters
Th e fi rst installment of “A Catalogue of Nebulae and Star Clusters” 
was published in the Histoire de l’Academie Royale des Sciences in 1771. It 
included all the objects in the 1764 list, with a few others tacked on, such as 
the Orion Nebula, Praesepe, and the Pleiades, to give a total of 45. 
In 1774, he met a younger astronomer, Pierre Méchain, who shared 
his enthusiasm for comet-seeking. Henceforth the two collaborated in 
their eff orts to add to the growing catalogue. An additional 23 objects were 
added in 1780, while the third and last installment, bringing the total to 
103 objects, appeared in 1784. 
Th e Messier catalog now accepted contains 110 entries, where an 
additional seven were added by later astronomical historians based on their 
review of the original observing records of Messier and Méchain. Th ough 
some of the objects are not signifi cant—i.e., M40 and M73 consist only 
of a few faint stars; a few others, M47, 48, 91, and 102, have gone “miss-
ing,” due to Messier’s errors in transcribing the positions of the objects 
he observed—as a whole the objects within are among the best known 
Fig. 2.11. Messier objects M8 (the Lagoon) and M20 (Triﬁ d), imaged by Klaus Brasch with a TMB-130 apo 
refractor at f/7. Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.

Fig. 2.12. HII region: The Swan Nebula, M17, in Sagittarius: 30 second exposure with a 10-inch Ritchey-
Chrétien telescope and an Orion Starshoot imaging system, June 27, 2009. Imaged by Michael Conley and 
William Sheehan.
and most sublime objects in the Northern heavens. Among Messier’s own 
discoveries are such standouts as M3, the globular cluster in Canes Venatici 
mentioned above; M27, the “Dumbbell” planetary nebula in Vulpecula; 
M33, the Great Spiral in Triangulum; M46, the fi ne open cluster in Puppis; 
M49, the fi rst Virgo Cluster galaxy discovered; M51, the famous spiral in 
Canes Venatici. 
Th e rest of Messier’s career can be summarized briefl y here. Aft er his 
“breakout year” of observing, 1764, his boss Delisle retired. Messier 
remained in residence at the Hôtel de Cluny, and continued to patrol the 
heavens with the small telescope in his tower. In 1771 he was appointed 
astronomer of the French Navy. With the increased security of that posi-
tion, he married Marie-Francoise de Vermauchampt, whom he had known 
for fi ft een years. However, she died in March 1772, eleven days aft er giving 
birth to a son, who also died, and he never married again. 
 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
25

 26 
Galactic Encounters
He was becoming famous now, and was elected to various Acad-
emies, including the Academy of Brussels and the Royal Academy of 
Hungary in 1772 and the Academy of St. Petersburg in 1777. Celebrity cut 
into his observing time. Most of the objects in the latter installments of his 
catalog were discovered by Méchain.
An even more serious setback occurred in 1781. Messier was walk-
ing in a park with a friend, the astronomer Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard Bochart 
de Saron, when he tripped, fell into an ice cellar, and was badly injured. 
Although he returned to his work as soon as he could, he was distracted 
not only by poor health, but also by the political upheaval of the French 
Revolution of 1789. (During the “Terror” of 1793-94 his friend Saron, 
president of the Parliament of Paris before the Fall of the Bastille, would be 
guillotined on April 20, 1794, soon aft er calculating the orbit of Messier’s 
latest comet.) 
As late as 1800-01, when Messier discovered the last “comet Mess-
ier,” a bookend to a career of comet discovery that had begun with the fi rst 
“comet Messier” four decades earlier, he continued to ponder revisions to 
his catalog, although by then new nebulae were turning up by the bushel-
full, thanks to the systematic surveys being conducted with large telescopes 
Fig. 2.13. The Leo Triplet of galaxies: M65 and M66 and, to the left, NGC 3628, which Messier missed. 
Imaged with a 10-inch Ritchey-Chrétien by Michael Conley and William Sheehan

 
Chapter 2: Catchpole of the Nebulae 
27
by William Herschel in England. When Herschel visited Paris in 1802, he 
sought out his great predecessor in the study of the nebulae, who was still 
in his lodgings at the Hôtel de Cluny. Herschel recorded in his journal: “He 
complained of having suff ered much from his accident… He is still very 
assiduous in observing, and regretted that he had not interest enough to get 
the windows mended in [the] tower where his instruments are.”4 Messier 
observed the Great Comet of 1807. By then, his eyesight badly failing, he 
shuttered up the observatory for the last time. Suff ering a paralytic stroke 
in 1815, he lingered on for two more years. On April 12, 1817, he expired 
in the Hôtel de Cluny; by then it had served as his residence for almost 
seventy years. 
Th e irony of Messier’s career is that the stone that was rejected 
became the cornerstone of his fame. Messier’s interest was single-minded. 
As strange as it now must seem, he appears to have had no curiosity 
about his nebulae; he regarded them rather as orphan stepchildren, as 
nuisances to be avoided by the comet-seeker. In his defense, it is diffi  cult 
to imagine how he could have made much progress toward understand-
ing the nature of the nebulae, which as we now know, were a disparate set 
of objects, some inside the Milky Way galaxy, others consisting of remote 
star systems far beyond it. To understand the nature of the disparate 
objects classed together as “nebulae” and their role in the universe itself 
would take another two centuries, and is discussed in the remainder of 
this book.
If Messier could somehow be summoned in a séance from the Great 
Beyond, he would undoubtedly be shocked to fi nd that posterity hardly 
remembers his comets. His immortality has come instead from the objects 
he so studiously and assiduously avoided in his relentless pursuit of them.
*   *   *
 1. C. Robert O’Dell to William Sheehan, July 1, 
2013, personal communication.
 2. The most complete biography of Messier is 
Jean-Paul Philbert, Charles Messier: Le furet des 
comètes. Sarreguemines: Edition Pierron, 2000.  
Regarding Messier’s attempt to discover Halley’s 
Comet, see: Peter Broughton, “The First Pre-
dicted Return of Comet Halley,” Journal for the 
History of Astronomy, xvi (1985), 123-133. The 
third and deﬁ nitive edition of Messier’s catalog 
published during his lifetime is: “Catalogue des 
Nebuleuses et des amas d’Etoiles,” in Connais-
sances des Temps, 1784 (Paris, 1781), 117-272. 
An English translation of the catalgo is found in 
Kenneth Glyn Jones, Messier’s Nebulae and Star 
Clusters (Cambridge: Cambridge Univeristy 
Press, 2nd rev. ed., 1991).
 3. For details about Delisle’s career, see: William 
Sheehan and John Westfall, Transits of Venus 
(Amherst, New York: Prometheus, 2004), 136-
138.
  4. J.L.E. Dreyer, ed., The Scientiﬁ c Papers of Sir Wil-
liam Herschel (London: the Royal Society and 
the Royal Astronomical Society, 1912), vol. 1, 
lxii.

28
I have looked farther into space than ever a human being did before me. 
I have observed stars of which the light, it can be proved, must take two 
million years to reach the earth…. Nay more … if those distant bodies 
had ceased to exist millions of years ago, we should still see them, as the 
light did travel after the body was gone.
 
—William Herschel to the poet Thomas Campbell (1813)
F
riedrich Wilhelm Herschel—or William Herschel as he naturalized his 
name aft er moving to England—was the great pioneer of stellar astron-
omy and the nebulae in the 18th century. At the time he began, the nebu-
lae—catalogued by Messier only to save time in eliminating them as comet 
suspects—were hieroglyphs of the universe, which no one had a clue how to 
decipher. Herschel left  a fi eld having at least begun to ask the right questions.
Herschel was born in the German city of Hanover in 1738, into a 
family of accomplished musicians. His own musical skills—already by age 
four, his father was setting him on a table with a fi ddle to play a solo—led 
him to follow in his father’s footsteps, and in his late teens he obtained a 
position as oboist in the Hanoverian regimental band. However, during a 
particularly unpleasant skirmish with the French during the Seven Years’ 
War between France and England—Hanover, whose Grand Elector sat on 
the English throne, was allied with England—he and his father were forced 
to seek shelter beneath a tree. As the musket balls whizzed over their heads 
through the branches, his father shouted at him, “Go! Go!” waving his hand 
in the direction of Hamburg. Since, as William aft erward refl ected, “no body 
seemed to mind whether the Musicians were present or absent,” he left  for 
Hamburg. From there he made his way to England.
William arrived in England with “good linen and clothing,” a service-
able smattering of French, Latin, and English, and skill on the oboe, violin, 
harpsichord, and organ. In addition, he had the enormous drive of an immi-
3.
“I Have Looked 
Farther....”
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_3, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
29
grant, and hated nothing more than 
wasting time. He started as a music 
copyist in London, but fi nding the city 
“overstocked with musicians,” he set out 
for the provinces, and by 1759 used his 
military contacts to fi nd employment, 
on a month-to-month retainer, in York-
shire, as head of the Earl of Darlington’s 
private militia band. He was now travel-
ing by horseback all over Yorkshire, 
“crossing over the moors alone at night” 
and fi nding himself “studying the pano-
ply of stars overhead as he had done as 
a boy.”1 By day, he read while he rode, 
and on at least one occasion became so 
absorbed in his reading that he som-
ersaulted from his horse and landed, 
to his surprise, upright, still holding 
the book in his hand. He was drawn to 
composition, and began churning out 
symphonies and concertos, all the while 
directing and performing concerts in 
the great houses of the North—and even a castle or two.
Eventually, Herschel began to fi nd the harassments of business 
wearing on him. Fortunately, he found a more stable situation in Leeds, as 
Director of Public Concerts, and his loneliness was assuaged by the com-
pany of a Mr. and Mrs. Bulman and their daughter, with whom he shared 
lodgings. He now had more leisure for private studies and schemes for 
self-improvement. “During all this time,” he refl ected aft erwards,” … I had 
not forgot my former plan [to give] all my leisure hours to the study of lan-
guages. Aft er I had improved myself suffi  ciently in English I soon acquired 
the Italian, which I looked upon as necessary to my business; I proceeded 
next to Latin, and having also made considerable progress in that language 
I made an attempt at Greek, but soon aft er dropped the pursuit… as lead-
ing me too far from my other favorite studies by taking up too much of 
my leisure. Th e theory of music being connected with mathematics had 
induced me very early to read in Germany all that had been written upon 
the subject of harmony; and when not long aft er my arrival in England the 
valuable book of Dr [Robert] Smith’s Harmonics came into my hands, I per-
ceived my ignorance and had recourse to other authors for information, by 
which I was drawn on from one branch of mathematics to another.”2
Aft er a couple years in Leeds, something better came up: he was 
appointed organist at the private Octagon Chapel then being organized 
Fig. 3.1. William Herschel, an engraving based on 
the portrait by John Russell, 1794. Russell, a por-
trait artist, had made sketches of the Moon with 
a Herschel telescope several years earlier (see Fig. 
3.5). Image from: William Sheehan Collection.

 30 
Galactic Encounters
in the resort town of Bath. With its healthful waters (later described by 
Dickens’s Sam Weller as having “a very strong fl avor o’ warm fl at irons”) 
and its new Pump Room and Th eatre Royal, Bath was becoming the most 
fashionable city outside London. It had already achieved distinction as a 
cultural center second only to London itself, and was then undergoing the 
major expansion of Georgian-era architecture for which it remains famous. 
Th e Octagon Chapel was a symptom of Bath’s growing prosperity. It was 
designed to cater to Christians of the aristocracy, as a place where they 
could worship their Creator in style without mixing with the vulgar mem-
bers of the working classes.
By obtaining a foothold in Bath, Herschel, at 28, watched the cur-
tain fall on a decade of obscure and lonely struggle. Henceforth he would 
make his way among scenes of brilliant architecture, dazzling society, and 
lucrative possibilities. And in Bath, too, William Herschel the musician 
underwent a dramatic metamorphosis into William Herschel the astrono-
mer. “He was sure to have emerged sooner or later,” writes his nineteenth-
century biographer E. S. Holden, “but every year spared to him as a strug-
gling musician was a year saved to Astronomy.”3
When Herschel arrived in Bath, the Octagon Chapel was still unfi nished. 
He could not aff ord to sit idle, and with his usual precipitancy threw him-
self into the local music scene. In addition to public engagements, Herschel 
advertised for pupils, off ering to give lessons in guitar, harpsichord, violin, 
and singing. Teaching became the most lucrative source of income. At his 
peak, he was meeting with four, fi ve, six and even more “private scholars” 
a day, mostly ladies of the aristocracy striving to improve themselves (and 
their marriage prospects) by learning to sing or play the harpsichord. (Th is 
was the Bath Jane Austen knew and heartily disliked: the elegant, well-
ordered, cut-throat world of Northanger Abbey and Persuasion, where a 
successful marriage was a woman’s only way of securing her social status 
and where no advantage was ever neglected in the goal of “marrying up”).
Th ough a composer by inclination, Herschel’s time aft er 1770 
was increasingly squeezed by demands for concert performances and 
the instruction of pupils. Nevertheless, by then he had already produced 
an impressive oeuvre consisting of countless symphonies, concertos, and 
oratorios. Much of his musical oeuvre is only now being rediscovered. As 
a composer, he was, as Patrick Moore has said, “not of the fi rst rank, but 
perfectly acceptable.”4 To some, he may seem like Mozart gone stale, but 
at least one authority has called his compositions “arresting, innovative 
works, the product of a superb analytic mind driven by an obsession for 
order and coherence.”5 Th ese manuscripts are of particular value to musi-
cologists since, in contrast to most composers of his day, Herschel was 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
31
meticulous in giving precise indications 
to his musician, and expected them to 
follow his instructions to the letter; they 
thus furnish insights into the practices 
of the great virtuosi of the period. Th ey 
also foreshadow his career as an astrono-
mer. He learned to handle astronomical 
instruments with the same dexterity as 
he handled the organ and the fi ddle, and 
his precision about musical indications 
would continue in the detailed records 
he kept of his astronomical “scores.”
Th ough Herschel was a success-
ful professional musician, he was com-
ing to regard music—and especially the 
grim routine of teaching (for him) —as 
“an intolerable waste of time.” Over the 
next several years he was joined in Bath 
by his younger brother, Alexander, who 
was mechanically as well as musically 
gift ed and by his younger sister Caroline.
When she arrived in August 
1772, Caroline was 22, and her whole life so far had been spent in a Cin-
derella-like existence under the thumb of her mother who kept her around 
as a kind of all-purpose household drudge. Unlike her brothers, she had 
had no formal schooling, and though William later taught her to add and 
subtract, she continued till the end of her life to carry a set of multiplica-
tion tables around with her. During a visit to Hanover, William whisked 
her away to begin a new existence. Th ere she hoped that, while serving as 
female head of her bachelor-brother’s household, she might receive les-
sons from him and pursue a career as a soprano. Her prospects can hardly 
have seemed good. Th ough not without the family talent for music, she was 
only four-foot nine, her complexion was badly scarred by smallpox, her 
manners were coarse, and she spoke only German. She was hardly likely to 
command a stage, but against all odds she did for a time—until William’s 
astronomical preoccupations forced her to choose between a career and a 
brother. She chose the brother.
Aft er Easter, Bath emptied for the summer months, and though 
William kept busy doing concerts out of town, he again had time for other 
interests. When the winter season of 1772-73 ended, Caroline not unrea-
sonably expected to see more of him and to receive more regular instruc-
tion. But for several years he had been working at mathematics, physics, 
and the theory of music, and that winter, aft er his fatiguing day of business 
Fig. 3.2. Caroline Herschel; silhouette. 
Photographed by William Sheehan, 
2009, with permission of the William 
Herschel Museum, Bath.

 32 
Galactic Encounters
working sometimes 14 or 16 hours a day, Caroline recalled fi nding him 
“retiring to bed with a basin of milk, sago or a glass of water and [Robert] 
Smith’s Harmonics or Opticks and [James] Ferguson’s Astronomy, etc., and 
so went to sleep under his favorite authors.”6
Th ough he began with the Harmonics, it was the Opticks that 
William found all-absorbing. “When I read [in the Opticks] of the many 
charming discoveries that had been made by means of the Telescope,” he 
later recalled, “I was so delighted with the subject that I wished to see the 
heavens and Planets with my eyes thro’ one of those instruments.”7
Indeed, that spring, as soon as the heavy music season ended, the 
memoranda Herschel had long been in the habit of keeping register a 
dramatic change. Hitherto almost all of his entries relate to music. Now he 
recorded the acquisition of a quadrant, of texts on astronomy and trigo-
nometry, and of assorted lenses and tubes. With the lenses, he put together 
some small telescopes, including one with a tube of 12 feet, and “con-
trived a stand for it.” It was good enough to show Jupiter and its satellites. 
He attempted another of 18 or 20 feet focal length, but the tube, being of 
pasteboard, was too fl imsy, so that, as Caroline recalled, “no one beside my 
Brother could get a glimpse of Jupiter or Saturn, for the great length of the 
telescope could not be kept in a straight line.”8 Replacing the paper tube 
with a tin tube made it sturdier. Still, William was fi nding such long tubes 
“almost impossible to manage.” Th ese were all refractors. In despair, he 
turned to the refl ector. Commercial instruments were at the time beyond 
his means, so he did as many an amateur has done since: he began to grind 
and polish his own mirrors.
 With the manual dexterity of a musician, Herschel was not put 
off  by the diffi  culty of acquiring, learning to use, and fi nally building his 
own instruments. It was just as well, since there were at the time only a 
few other amateur telescope-makers in England; how-to information was 
scarce, and Herschel had to work everything out for himself, by trial and 
error. Th e only abrasives available at the time were sand and emery. Th e 
mirrors were made of speculum-metal, a rather hard, brittle bronze alloy, 
which required a mirror-maker to be a metallurgist and foundry man as 
well as an optical worker. Herschel had to select and refi ne the oft en crude 
raw materials for their alloys, then melt suitable disks using a small iron 
furnace and special molds. He eventually found that the best molds were 
formed from pounded horse-dung. Th e castings had to be slowly cooled so 
they could be properly annealed. Because speculum metal is much harder 
than glass, working a mirror was physically demanding and very fatiguing. 
Moreover, since speculum metal tarnishes in the open air, any mirror made 
has to be periodically re-polished and re-fi gured—Herschel’s mirrors oft en 
deteriorated noticeably within a month, and were unusable aft er three or 
four months. In the interests of being able to continue to use his telescopes 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
33
without interruption, Herschel eventually produced two or three specula 
for each of his telescopes, deploying them relay-style while he reworked the 
tarnished members.
As he began to work his mirrors, his rooms underwent a dramatic 
transformation. “To my sorrow,” Caroline complained, “I saw almost every 
room turned into a workshop; a cabinet-maker making a tube and stands 
of all descriptions in a handsomely furnished drawing-room; Alex[ander] 
putting up a huge turning machine … in a bedroom for turning patterns, 
grinding glasses and turning eye-pieces &c.”9 Naturally, Caroline wanted 
to continue her music lessons but now found herself “much hindered in 
my practice by my help being continually wanted” by her brothers in the 
execution of their telescope-making schemes. By January 1774, Herschel 
had managed to complete a 4½-inch mirror, and mounted it in a square 
wooden tube. On March 1, with a power of 40x, he made his fi rst recorded 
observations: of Saturn, which appeared “like two slender arms,” and of 
the “lucid spot in Orion’s sword” (the Great Nebula). Comparing his view 
to Huygens’s old sketch reproduced in Ferguson’s Astronomy, he found 
them like but not identical, and began to suspect that the Great Nebula 
might be subject to change over time. He made this entry in his notebook: 
“perhaps from a careful observation of this Spot something might be 
concluded concerning the Nature of it.”10 He had identifi ed an important 
problem of astronomical research. In later years he would not let go of it.11
Up to this time, he had been renting a house at 7 New King Street, 
on the same street as the house which he would make famous only a few 
years later. He now moved to a house on Walcot Parade near the outskirts 
of Bath. Despite its greater distance from the concert halls, it had sheds and 
stables that he turned into workshops for his mirror-making. Th ere he built   
a 7-foot telescope and furnished it with “many diff erent object mirrors, 
keeping always the best of them for use and working on the rest at leisure.” 
When William got a feel for a mirror’s shape, he dared not let go. 
Recalling his work on one of these mirrors, Caroline recalled:
 … my time was so much taken up with copying Music and practic-
ing, besides attendance on my Brother when polishing, that by way 
of keeping him alife [sic] I was even obliged to feed him by putting 
the Vitals by bitts into his mouth; this was once the case when at the 
ﬁ nishing of a 7 feet mirror he had not left his hands from it for 16 hours 
together.12
Th ough Herschel would later be remembered as the “father of stel-
lar astronomy,” at fi rst he was “moonstruck.” Like most men of the time, he 
was always fascinated by—and a fi rm believer in—the habitability of other 
worlds, including the Moon. In Ferguson’s Astronomy, he had read: “From 

 34 
Galactic Encounters
what we know of our own System, it may be reasonably concluded that 
all the rest are with equal wisdom contrived, situated, and provided with 
accomodations for rational inhabitants.” Th is is an important side of Her-
schel’s interests too long neglected, or more precisely, airbrushed out as the 
unfortunate idiosyncrasy of an otherwise sober researcher. But the record 
has been set straight by the historian of the 18th century extraterrestrial life 
debate, Michael Crowe, who sees Herschel “less as an isolated empiricist 
than a speculatively inclined celestial naturalist, quixotically caught up in a 
quest for evidence of extraterrestrials.”13
On May 28, 1776, he was testing a new 10-foot telescope on the 
Moon. With a power of 240, he scrutinized an area in Mare Humorum 
near the imposing crater Gassendi, when he found himself
Fig. 3.3. (left) William Herschel’s workshop on the ground level at 19 New King Street, Bath; showing 
grinding equipment and damage to ﬂ agstones from a near-fatal casting mishap. Photographed by William 
Sheehan, 2009, with permission of the William Herschel Museum, Bath.
Fig. 3.4. (right) William Herschel’s seven-foot reﬂ ector; the celebrated instrument used to discover Geor-
gium Sidus—the Star of George. Photographed by William Sheehan, 2009, with the permission of the 
William Herschel Society, Bath.

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
35
struck with the appearance of something I had never seen before, which I 
ascribed to the power and distinctness of my instrument [but which may 
perhaps be an optical fallacy]... I believed [myself] to perceive something 
which I immediately took to be growing substances. I will not call them 
trees, as from their size they can hardly come under that denomination.14
Th e region is merely one of rough terrain seen by low illumina-
tion, and Herschel himself seems to have given up on the “forests” of Mare 
Humorum soon aft erward, but he had not, by any means, given up on the 
habitability of the Moon. 
In 1778 William’s records of his telescope-making eff orts become 
very lengthy. Obsessed with aperture, he began work on a 20-foot tele-
scope, for which he made three 12-inch mirrors in order to use them as 
usual relay-style. It was a monstrous instrument by the standards of the 
time, and tricky to put into working order. Caroline recalled the precari-
ousness of Alexander’s situation “standing at the top of the house support-
ing himself with his left  arm on the chimney stack whilst with the right at 
full stretch he was guiding [a] plumbline.”15 When in use, the telescope was 
elevated by means of a long pole to the top of which was fastened a short 
arm holding a set of pulleys, and a movable ladder was employed on which 
the observer perched precariously and looked sideways into an eyepiece 
near the top of the tube. If the instrument was pointed at something near 
the zenith, the observer found himself standing some 20 feet above ground 
level—in the dark. 
Given the diffi  culty and downright danger of using the “small 
20-foot,” Herschel did most of his routine work with a new 7-foot tele-
scope, with a 6.2-inch mirror, which was conveniently mounted on a fold-
ing wooden frame. It was also fi nished in 1778, and proved to be one of his 
most productive instruments. 
Herschel was still giving concerts in town, and despite its advan-
tages as a workshop, the location at Walcot Parade was proving increasingly 
inconvenient. So Herschel moved again, to No. 19 New King Street (for the 
fi rst time) where he had a workshop at ground level, then, two years later, 
to No. 27 Rivers Street, near the Circus and New Assembly Rooms where 
he had many of his concerts. By now, his astronomical passion was so all-
consuming that he regularly dashed home from the theater between acts in 
order to observe, and was increasingly regarded, by the more charitably dis-
posed, as an eccentric. Th e less charitably disposed presumably thought him 
quite mad. A revealing description of him during his time on Rivers Street 
is given in the Retrospections of the Stage of the Bath actor John Bernard, 
who says he called on Herschel twice a week for singing lessons, “at his own 
lodgings, which then resembled an astronomer’s much more than a musi-
cian’s, being heaped up with globes, maps, telescopes, refl ectors, &c., under 

 36 
Galactic Encounters
which his piano was hid, and the violoncello, like a discarded favorite, 
skulked away in a corner.”16 On one occasion, having diffi  culty with a song,
I went as usual to my clever friend to rehearse it. It was cold and clear 
weather, but the sky that night was rather cloudy, and the Moon peeped 
out only now and then from her veil. Herschel had a ﬁ re in his back apart-
ment, and placed the music stand near its window, [a circumstance] 
which I could not account for. He then procured his violin, and com-
menced the song, playing over the air twice or thrice to familiarize me 
with its general idea; and then leading me note by note to its thorough 
acquaintance. We got through about ﬁ ve bars pretty well, till of a sud-
den the sky began to clear up, and his eye was unavoidably attracted 
by the celestial bodies coming out, as it were, one by one from their 
hiding places: my eye, however, was ﬁ xed on the book: and when he 
exclaimed “Beautiful! beautiful!” squinting up at the stars, I thought he 
alluded to the music. At length, the whole host threw aside their drap-
ery, and stood forth in naked loveliness:—the eﬀ ect was sudden and 
subduing,—“Beautiful, beautiful,” shouted Herschel, “there he is at last!” 
dropping the ﬁ ddle, snatching a telescope, throwing up the window, 
and (though it was a night in January) beginning to survey an absentee 
planet, which he had been looking for.17
Herschel Discovered 
As Herschel had no yard or garden, he simply set up his telescopes on the 
cobblestone street in front of the house. In due course this was to lead to 
a fateful meeting. At the end of December 1779, he had the 7-foot refl ec-
tor trained on the Moon just as William Watson, Jr., a physician and son 
of William Watson, Sr., the secretary to Sir Joseph Banks, the president of 
the Royal Society of London, happened to pass by. Watson was a founding 
member of Bath Philosophical Society, which had its rooms  nearby, and 
asked if he could look through the homebuilt telescope. To his surprise, the 
view of the Moon was the best he had ever had. Th e two men then entered 
into a lively conversation that continued inside Herschel’s rooms, and 
seems to have lasted till dawn. Watson invited Herschel to join the Bath 
Philosophical Society, and not only did Herschel begin to attend the meet-
ings, he became its most enthusiastic member; over the two years of its 
existence, he submitted 31 papers, on topics ranging from the growth and 
measurement of corallines (lime-impregnated red algae), static electricity, 
for which he volunteered himself as a kind of human Leyden jar to deter-
mine whether the discharge of static electricity aff ected the heart rate, and 
the nature of matter and space. Th ough the Bath Philosophical Society was 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
37
a local aff air, because of Watson’s connections Herschel was soon submit-
ting, through Watson, some of his papers to the prestigious Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, including one on the variable 
star Mira in the constellation Cetus which—as was typical of Herschel’s 
luck—had just had the brightest fl are-up ever recorded, and “Astronomical 
Observations related to the Mountains of the Moon,” a product of his lunar 
enthusiasm. 
In March 1781, Herschel moved again, back to the house at 19 New 
King Street. (On the brink of being torn down only a few years ago, it was 
fortunately saved and restored, and is now open to the public as the Wil-
liam Herschel Museum). Probably he wished he had never left ; the site had 
the advantage of a good workshop at ground level where he could cast and 
grind his telescope mirrors as well as a southward-facing garden, “behind 
the house and beyond its walls all open as far as the River Avon,”18 in which 
he could set up his telescopes.
Th e superb optics of his telescopes and eyepieces—and his ensu-
ing ability to employ magnifi cations that were regarded as insanely high 
by contemporary astronomers—now opened up a new fi eld to him that 
rapidly eclipsed even his studies of possible life in the Moon. As long ago as 
August 1779, he had begun a survey—a “fi rst review” of the heavens —with 
his 7-foot refl ector. His purpose was to scrutinize all the naked-eye stars 
down to the fourth magnitude, in order to make out which of them were 
double stars.
On the very fi rst night of searching, he discovered what previous 
astronomers had missed. Polaris, the Pole Star, was a double.
As always with Herschel, his preoccupation was not an idle one. 
He was trying to apply a method of working out the distances to the stars 
proposed as long ago as 1632 by Galileo. Th e principle of the technique 
is simple. Assume the stars of a pair are unrelated to each other, and only 
happen to lie along the same line of sight from the Earth. Assume, further, 
that wherever there is a diff erence, the brighter star must lie at a much 
closer distance than the fainter. By measuring the separation between the 
stars from opposite sides of the baseline of the Earth’s orbit (say in January 
and in June), it ought to be possible to detect a slight shift —called a paral-
lax—of the nearer star relative to the more distant one. Th is happens for the 
same reason that, in holding one’s thumb at arm’s length and looking at it 
alternately with each eye, the thumb appears to “jump” relative to a distant 
backdrop of trees. To continue the analogy, the brighter star is the thumb 
and the distant star the trees. 
During his fi rst “review,” Herschel carefully listed all the stars that 
appeared double. He then decided to take the project a step farther, and in 
1780 set about a much more ambitious “second review”, in which he hoped 
to examine for “duplicity” all stars down to 8th magnitude in the great star 

 38 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 3.5. (above) John Russell, the famous portrait 
artist who would paint Herschel in 1794, made these 
exquisite sketches of the Moon a decade earlier 
from London with a Herschel telescope. They recall 
Herschel’s early infatuation with the Moon. Photo-
graphed by Laurie Hatch, with permission of the Oxford 
Science Museum.
Fig. 3.6. (above right) The garden at 19 New King 
Street, Bath, from which William Herschel discovered 
the new planet. Photographed by William Sheehan, 
2009, with permission of the William Herschel Society, 
Bath.
Fig. 3.7. (right) Albireo. This famous double, one of 
the most beautiful in the sky, consists of the brighter 
golden component (magnitude 3.1) and blue-green 
companion (magnitude 5.1). At a distance of 430 
light years, it is still not certain whether they are 
a physical system; if so, the period of revolution 
around the barycenter must be on the order of 
100,000 years. Imaged by Dietmar Hager, Linz, Aus-
tria. Courtesy: Dietmar Hager.

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
39
catalog drawn up by John Flamsteed at the Royal Observatory at Green-
wich. It was a colossal undertaking, and would occupy him for two years, at 
the end of which he published a fi rst catalog of 269 double stars; 227 were 
new. 
The “Georgian Star”
With Caroline still tying up ends at the Rivers Street residence, William, in 
the throes of this vast project, was observing alone with the 7-foot refl ec-
tor—the instrument he regarded, “for distinctness of vision … the equal of 
any ever made”—on the nights of March 12 and 13, 1781. His observing log 
for March 12 records that he looked at Mars at 5:45 in the morning. “Mars,” 
he wrote, “seems to be all over bright but the air is so frosty & undulating 
that it is possible there may be spots without my being able to distinguish 
them.” At 5:53 he added: “I am pretty sure there is no spot on Mars.” He 
next looked at Saturn and noted, “Th e shadow of Saturn lays [sic.] at the 
left  upon the ring.”
On March 13 his log book reads:
“Pollux is followed by 3 small stars at about 2’ and 3’ 
“Mars as usual.
“In the quartile near Zeta Tauri the lowest of two is a curious either 
nebulous star or perhaps a comet.
“A small star follows the Comet at 2/3rds of the ﬁ eld’s distance.”
It thus appears that Herschel observed Pollux and Mars in the 
morning of March 13, and then—in the evening, presumably aft er return-
ing from his professional duties, such as giving concerts—he recommenced 
his close scrutiny of Flamsteed stars, looking for new doubles. As was his 
custom, he was using an ocular magnifying 227x. Suddenly, a new planet 
swam into his ken. He did not at fi rst recognize it as such. He could only 
be certain that the object he had in his grasp was no ordinary fi xed star; it 
had a disk. Th e excellence of his telescope and his customary use of higher 
powers allowed him to recognize it, and Herschel noted it down as a “curi-
ous either nebulous star or perhaps a comet.”
It was “perhaps fortunate,” John Louis Emil Dreyer would observe, 
that “at the time Herschel had never come across a planetary nebula … as 
he might have taken the stranger for one of these bodies, noted its place, 
and not looked it up again for some time; in which case it might have 
fi gured for years as a lost nebula, like the lost stars of Flamsteed.”19 (Pre-
cisely this misapprehension was to deprive his son, Sir John Herschel, of 
the chance to discover the next planet out from the Sun, Neptune, in 1830.)  

 40 
Galactic Encounters
But in any case, the object’s motion was soon apparent to Herschel, and 
this showed it to be an object held fi rmly by the reins of the Sun’s gravita-
tional force. It was not a nebula; it must, then, be a comet.
In “An Account of a Comet,” dated March 22, 1781, presented to 
the Bath Philosophical Society and communicated by Watson to the Royal 
Society, Herschel gave additional details about the discovery. At “between 
ten and eleven” in the evening, that is aft er his concerts would have ended, 
he began scrutinizing stars in the interesting region between M1 (the Crab 
Nebula) in Taurus and M35, an open cluster in Gemini. Using an ocular 
magnifying 227x, which was his usual practice when looking for double 
stars, he examined two small stars near Zeta Tauri and found that one of 
them didn’t quite look right:
While examining the small stars in the neighborhood of H Geminorum 
[1 Geminorum], I perceived one that appeared larger than the rest; being 
struck with its uncommon magnitude, I compared it to H Geminorum 
and the small star in the quartile between Auriga and Gemini, and ﬁ nd-
ing it so much larger than either of them, suspected it to be a comet.20
Th ough a Messier or a Méchain would have found their hearts skip-
ping a beat at the discovery of a new comet, Herschel seems to have taken it 
in stride; its discovery was inevitable, given the quality of his telescope and 
the thoroughness of his methods. Messier, indeed, found what Herschel 
had done little less than incredible. In congratulating “Monsieur Hertsthel 
at Bath,” he added: “I cannot conceive how you were able to return several 
times to this star—or comet … since it had none of the characteristics of a 
comet.”21 Herschel turned over the routine work of tracking the comet and 
computing its orbit to the professionals, like Nevil Maskelyne, the Astrono-
mer Royal at Greenwich, and Oxford astronomer Th omas Hornsby. Maske-
lyne wrote on April 4, 1781 that the comet’s motion was “very diff erent 
from any comet I ever read any description of or saw,” and added on April 
23 that it was “as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit very nearly 
circular around the sun as a comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis.”22 
Th is proved to be the case. By May, Messier’s friend, Jean Baptiste Gaspard 
Bouchart de Saron, demonstrated to the Paris Academy of Sciences that 
the object was very remote—at least as far out as 14 astronomical units (14 
A.U.) from the Sun. As better orbits were computed, its mean distance was 
increased to 19 A.U. Th e size of the Solar System had doubled.
Herschel was almost the very last to recognize or appreciate the 
importance of his own discovery. He was like Columbus, the man who 
having found an authentic New World believed he had simply reached the 
East Indies—conceiving, as do most of us, that the world holds fewer sur-
prises than is actually the case. As late as November, when Sir Joseph Banks 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
41
awarded him the prestigious Copley medal of the Royal Society, Herschel 
still hedged as to the object’s signifi cance, and said only: “With regard to 
the new star I may still observe that tho’ we are not suffi  ciently acquainted 
with its nature, yet enough has been seen already to shew that it diff ers in 
many essential particulars from Comets and rather resembles the condition 
of Planets.”23 But this is the last note of diffi  dence Herschel expressed, for by 
then there could no longer be any doubt. Herschel had discovered nothing 
less than a new major planet of the Solar System, the fi rst to be added in 
modern times.
Astronomy writer Richard Baum has conjured up the importance of 
what Herschel had achieved:
Herschel had broken with immemorial tradition. His sighting of a body, 
identiﬁ ed as a massive world beyond the icy rim of the known, a world 
so remote as to be barely visible to the unaided eye, at once doubled 
the size of the known solar system. Importantly it sent a breath of fresh 
cosmic air coursing through the dusty corridors of thought.24
It was indeed the beginning of a revolution in astronomy, a revo-
lution as great as that which took place in North America the following 
October with the surrender of Lord Cornwallis’s army to George Washing-
ton at Yorktown—an event that has been regarded as the “dirge” of the Brit-
ish Empire in America, the fi rst slippage of that imperial grasp that had led 
Fig. 3.8. Jupiter and the Galilean satellites, with Uranus in the same ﬁ eld (at far upper right) for 
comparison. Imaged on September 5, 2010, with an 85 mm apochromat and a Canon 35mm digital 
camera by Michael Conley and William Sheehan.

 42 
Galactic Encounters
to Britain’s subjugation of an empire on which the Sun never set. Historian 
Piers Brendon has written:
The Old World did regard the New World’s victory as an ominous inver-
sion of the established order. It was an unbeaten revolt of children 
against parental authority—the ﬁ rst successful rebellion of colonial 
subjects against sovereign power in modern history.25
In astronomy, the new planet was the harbinger of a similar revolt 
against the starry status quo, but it was also, for Herschel, the harbinger 
of a potential sea-change in his life circumstances—at least if he played 
it right, he could expect the new planet to allow him to give up music 
and devote himself full-time to astronomy. Th e discovery of a new planet 
would have been enough for most men to sit contented on their laurels, but 
Herschel was always restless and eager to move on to new frontiers. A new 
planet was for him almost small change. He was a man who did not recog-
nize any limits to his own mind, or—in Shakespeare’s words—he was
like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-oﬀ  shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal to his eye. 
—(Henry VI, Part III, ii)
His promontory was the eyepiece of his splendid telescopes; the far-off  
shore where he would tread lay far beyond even the distant new planet. For 
his most important work—on the Galaxy and the nebulae—was just to begin.
Packing up the 7-foot telescope with its folding stand in a mahog-
any traveling case, Herschel and Watson took the stage to London, and 
went from thence to Greenwich (where his telescope trounced the perfor-
mance of the professional telescopes of the Royal Observatory) and fi nally 
to the King’s palace at Kew, near which (at Deer Park, Richmond) George 
had his personal observatory. Urged on by Watson and other friends, Her-
schel angled for an offi  cial position. As a step in that direction, he fl attered 
the King by proposing that the new planet receive the name Georgium 
Sidus, George’s Star, and spelled out the reasons for his choice:
As a subject of the best of kings, who is the liberal protector of every art 
and science ... and ... as a person now more immediately under the pro-
tection of this excellent monarch, and owing everything to his bounty; 
I cannot but wish to take this opportunity of expressing my sense of 
gratitude, by giving the name Georgium Sidus (the Georgian Star) ... to a 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
43
star, which (with respect to us) ﬁ rst 
began to shine under His Auspi-
cious Reign.26
(Needless to say, the name 
didn’t stick; it was rejected by Conti-
nental astronomers, who instead pro-
posed a name from Greek mythology, 
Uranus, and Uranus it would be.)
George was genuinely inter-
ested in science, and could hardly 
resist. He off ered to sponsor Herschel’s 
work in astronomy, but since the 
position as astronomer at his private 
observatory at Kew had already been 
promised to another, George had to 
create a new post for Herschel. He 
would become the King’s “Personal 
Astronomer,” at a salary of £200 per 
annum (though a substantial sum, Her-
schel had been making at least £400 per 
annum as a professional musician). Th e 
disbursement was contingent on Her-
schel’s moving his residence from Bath to the neighborhood of Windsor 
Castle so that he could (when summoned) present occasional astronomical 
entertainments to the royals and their guests. Even before he had received 
this grant, Herschel had written with keen anticipation to Caroline:
Among Opticians and Astronomers nothing is now talked of but what 
they call my great discoveries. Alas! This shows how far they are behind, 
when such triﬂ es as I have seen and done are called great. Let me but 
get at it again!  I will make such telescopes & see such things…27
At the time he discovered the new planet, Herschel was only 43. Still pos-
sessed of tremendous energy and drive, his portraits show an eager, agile, 
cat-like face that only gradually, as he aged, became increasingly slabby 
and jowly, until it resembled the face of a prosperous German burgher. As 
much as he had accomplished in astronomy so far, he was on the verge of 
the most productive decade of his career, and would soon begin to fulfi ll 
the prophetic words that he had uttered to Caroline, “I will make such tele-
scopes & see such things.”
Fig. 3.9. George III; mezzotint by Johann Zoﬀ any. 
From: Wikipedia Commons.

 44 
Galactic Encounters
Even before he left  the residence at 19 New King Street, Herschel—
who always wanted larger and larger telescopes: more aperture, more light, 
more “space-penetrating power”—was working on a new giant telescope. 
Twice—in August 1781—he had attempted to cast a three-foot mirror in 
the basement where he did his own foundry work. As was his usual prac-
tice, the mold of loam was prepared from loam or horse dung, of which, 
says Caroline, “an immense quantity was to be pounded in a morter and 
sift ed through a fi ne seaf; it was an endless piece of work and served me 
for many hours exercise and Alex frequently took his turn, for we were all 
eager to do something towards the great undertaking.”28 Even Watson took 
a turn at pounding horse dung. Unfortunately, two attempts to cast the 
large speculum failed, and on one of the two attempts the mirror cracked 
on cooling. Both Caroline and William gave accounts; Caroline’s is the 
more dramatic. “As soon as the season for the Concerts was over,” Caro-
line writes, “and the mould &c in readiness a day was set apart for casting 
and the metal was in the furnace; which unfortunately began to leak at the 
moment when ready for pooring, and both my Brothers, and the Caster 
with his men were obliged to run out at opposite doors; for the stone fl oor-
ing (which ought to have been taken up) fl ew about in all directions as 
high as the ceiling. My poor Brother fell exhausted by heat and exertion on 
a heap of brick-batts.”29 Clearly, William had narrowly escaped with his life.
On the last day of July 1782, the three Herschel siblings—William, 
Alexander, and Caroline—left  Bath forever, and began a new chapter of 
their lives at Datchet, a village between Slough and Windsor on the banks 
of the Th ames. Th ey moved to a large rambling property that had not been 
lived in for years; “the ruins of a place,” Caroline groused. It no longer 
exists, though the grander adjoining house, the “Lawns,” remains, much 
altered. William and Alexander saw more possibilities in it than Caroline 
did. Th ey adapted the stables for a workshop for mirror-making and set 
up a library in the laundry. Alexander, searching the overgrown garden 
for a place to set up the 20-foot telescope, had a close call of his own—he 
nearly fell in a well. At fi rst, Herschel was much put upon by the King, and 
regularly had to transport the seven-foot refl ector to Windsor castle so 
the Royal Family could look through it. Th e “small” 20-foot telescope was 
too large to transport, but the King was eager to see it. On December 1 he 
came to Datchet expressly for the purpose. “Th e precarious observing lad-
der was no place for royalty,”30 notes Herschel scholar Michael Hoskin, and 
the King settled for a view of the “Georgian” through Herschel’s 10-foot 
telescope. Eventually the novelty of looking through Herschel’s telescope 
wore off  at Windsor. Herschel had fewer interruptions. 
At Datchet, Herschel resumed the quest for double stars with the 
seven-foot telescope. Th is remained his main preoccupation until Septem-
ber 1783. Meanwhile, thinking to improve the knowledge of the heavens of 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
45
his “assistant,” Caroline, he set her to work with a small refractor, placed on 
an ingenious mounting of his own design that allowed her to make hori-
zontal sweeps across the sky in the quest for interesting objects. He later 
fabricated an equally ingenious instrument for doing vertical sweeps. She 
complained as she always did of her hard lot, and found life hard to bear 
when William was away. Th en she was
left solely to confuse myself with my own thoughts, which were any-
thing else but cheerful; for I found I was to be trained for an assistant 
Astronomer and by way of encouragement a Telescope adapted for 
sweeping consisting of a Tube with two glasses such as are commonly 
used in a ﬁ nder [was furnished to me], I was to sweep for Comets, and 
by my Journal No. 1, I see that I began August 22, 1782 to write down 
and describe all remarkable appearances I saw in my Sweeps…. But it 
was not till the last two months of the same year before I felt the least 
encouragement for spending the starlight nights on a grass-plot cov-
ered by dew or hoar frost without a human being near enough to be 
within call.31
As her sweeps continued, she came across some of the nebulae 
listed in Messier’s catalog, which William had in his possession but, being 
otherwise preoccupied, had hardly so much as glanced at. Th en, in the 
summer of 1783, Caroline began fi nding new nebulae. It was this success 
which fi rst opened her brother’s eyes to the great number of them await-
ing discovery. Th us, Caroline—long relegated to a footnote in her brother’s 
triumphant story—played a key role in inspiring Herschel’s most important 
work. 
At the time, the biggest telescope Herschel had available was the 
“small” 20-foot telescope, with its mirror of 12 inches, but that fall, he 
successfully cast two 18 ¾-inch mirrors to be used relay-fashion in what 
would become his “large” 20-foot telescope. While the “small” 20-foot had 
been diffi  cult and even dangerous to use with its precarious and primitive 
mounting, its successor would be furnished with a solid wooden mount-
ing on wheels which could be rotated by a single workman. It was also 
equipped with a seat, later replaced by a platform extending from one side 
of the tube to the other that could be raised and lowered on a ladder made 
for the purpose.
Herschel began a series of  “sweeps” with the “large” 20-foot on 
October 28, 1783. At fi rst he tried to go it alone, and tried by candlelight 
to sketch the positions of stars in the fi nder and the fi eld of the telescope 
whenever an object of interest passed by. Th is work was not only very 
fatiguing, but each time he wrote something down he found that he spoiled 
the sensitivity of his eye. By mid-December he discarded this ineffi  cient 

 46 
Galactic Encounters
method of operation. Henceforth he resorted to vertical sweeps in which 
a workman was employed to raise and lower the telescope. Th e tube was 
locked on a selected zone (or “gage”) of sky, and William used a handle 
to rack it up and down in 2 degree steps. Bells were placed at the extreme 
positions as a way of alerting him of the need to change direction. Th e 
frequent sound of the bell of the telescope announced that he was happily, 
and productively, sweeping. Caroline, meanwhile, had been impressed into 
service as his amanuensis, carefully recording the observations so that he 
did not need to take his eye from the telescope or expose it to candlelight. 
Th ough the work went on with rather mind-numbing routine, there 
was always danger of  a serious accident. Caroline recalled one such occa-
sion:
My brother began his series of sweeps when the instrument was yet 
in a very unﬁ nished state, and my feelings were not very comfortable 
when every moment I was alarmed by a crack or fall, knowing him to be 
elevated ﬁ fteen feet or more on a temporary cross-beam instead of safe 
gallery. The ladders had not even their braces at the bottom; and one 
night, in a very high wind, he had hardly touched the ground before the 
whole apparatus came down.32
Caroline herself sustained a serious injury soon aft er she began to 
assist her brother. On December 31, 1783, the clouds began to part and at 
about 10 o’clock a few stars were visible. According to Caroline’s own rather 
breathless account: 
In the greatest hurry all was got ready for observing. My brother, at the 
front of the telescope, directed me to make some alteration in the later 
motion, which was done by machinery, on which the point of support 
of the tube and mirror rested. At each end of the machine or trough was 
an iron hook, such as butchers use for hanging their joints upon, and 
having to run in the dark on ground covered a foot deep with melting 
snow, I fell on one of these hooks, which entered my right leg above the 
knee. My brother’s call, “Make haste!” I could only answer by a pitiful cry, 
“I am hooked!”33
Th ough Caroline was unhooked by her brother and the work-
men, the hook tore away about two ounces of her fl esh. Aft erwards she 
was examined by Dr. James Lind, celebrated for his idea of using citrus to 
prevent scurvy on long sea voyages. He declared that a soldier meeting 
with such a wound he would have been entitled to six weeks’ nursing in 
a hospital. Caroline concludes: “I could give a pretty long list of accidents 
which were near proving fatal to my brother as well as myself.” 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
47
Bigger Things
In the 18th century, the spot in Datchet where the 20-foot telescope stood 
and Caroline was “hooked” was a very lonely and desolate place—and it 
still is. On a visit in 2009, one of us (W.S.) found nothing of the house still 
standing, but appreciated the fact that because of its low situation near the 
Th ames it would have suff ered frequent fl oods and been miserably damp 
during the winter. (Even today, the UK Environment Agency’s maps show 
this area as being at risk of fl ooding.) Despite this insalubrious location, Wil-
liam and Caroline labored on tirelessly through all seasons, rubbing their 
faces and hands with onions to warm themselves and ward off  the ague—
though on at least one occasion, William succumbed to the ague at last.34
With the 7-foot used to discover the “Georgian,” the “large” 20 foot, 
with its 18.7-inch mirror, was Herschel’s most productive instrument. He would 
use it for what was nothing less than a survey of the dimensions and structure 
of the entire system of stars. Even today, the scope of his ambition astounds.
As with the double-star survey, he began with certain initial 
assumptions. Th ough hitherto the starry heavens had usually been 
regarded as if they were painted on the surface of a concave sphere, Her-
schel grasped that the objects therein were disposed along the far line of a 
third dimension—the heavens had not only breadth and height but depth. 
It had been in order to get an estimate of the measure of that depth that he 
had tried to use the double-star method to obtain distances to the stars, but 
so far the results were inconclusive, while by 1803 he was forced to admit 
that he had failed to obtain the parallax of a single star this way. Instead he 
perceived something diff erent: one of the doubles he re-measured, Castor, 
showed a change in the relative positions of its components. Parentheti-
cally, it wasn’t Herschel’s own re-measurements that revealed this. By a 
stroke of luck, when Herschel told Maskelyne what he was doing, the latter 
recalled that his predecessor as Astronomer Royal, James Bradley, had 
taken note of the orientation of the components of Castor in 1759, and 
when Herschel compared Bradley’s observation with his own he con-
cluded that the component stars were, in fact, revolving “either in circles or 
ellipses, round [a] common centre of gravity.”35 In other words, they were 
members of a gravitationally bound system, and the diff erence between the 
brighter and fainter member of a pair was a true physical diff erence. 
At this time a Scottish farmer and naturalist, James Hutton, was 
examining geological strata in order to theorize about the processes at 
work on and within the Earth. Herschel, by analogy, proposed studying 
the “geological” structure of the star system, examining beds of stars and 
nebulae, “variously inclined and directed, as well as consisting of very dif-
ferent materials.” Th e Milky Way itself, Herschel asserted, was “nothing but 
a stratum of fi xed stars.” 

 48 
Galactic Encounters
In the “large” 20 foot telescope, Herschel saw that the Milky Way 
about the hand and club of Orion was completely resolved into “small stars, 
which my former telescopes had not light[-grasp] enough to eff ect.” In an 
initial foray, on January 18, 1784, he counted the number of stars visible 
in six fi elds chosen randomly and found them to contain 110, 60, 90, 70, 
and 74 stars each. Th is was Herschel’s fi rst attempt to apply what he called 
the method of “star-gages.” He conceived of himself extending plumb-lines 
along diff erent visual rays and reaching far into the depths of the starry 
stratum. By counting stars in fi elds along diff erent directions, he could 
work out the dimensions of the starry stratum in each direction and so to 
arrive at “the interior construction of the heavens.”  
In his surveys with instruments of unprecedented power under the 
inky-black 18th- century skies, he encountered in his sweeps not only a 
glittering multitude of stars but countless nebulae—including one “nebu-
lous bed” which was so rich that, in passing through a section of it in a 
time of only 36 minutes, he detected no less than 31 nebulae, “all distinctly 
visible upon a fi ne blue sky.” As we now know, he was then sweeping in 
part of the elongated area of sky running up through Virgo and Coma 
Berenices into Ursa Major and containing what is now known as the Virgo 
Cluster, or Super-cluster, of galaxies. 
In yet another “stratum”— perhaps, Herschel added, “a diff erent 
branch” of the one just described—he delighted in the splendid variety of 
what passed before his eye as he called out each object, as it passed, for 
Caroline to write down:
I have seen double and treble nebulae, variously arranged; large ones 
with small, seeming attendants; narrow but much extended, lucid neb-
ulae or bright dashes; some of the shape of a fan, resembling an electric 
brush, issuing from a lucid point; others of the cometic shape, with a 
seeming nucleus in the center; or like cloudy stars, surrounded with a 
nebulous atmosphere; a diﬀ erent sort again contain a nebulosity of the 
milky kind, like that wonderful, inexplicable phenomenon about [theta] 
Orionis; while others shine with a fainter, mottled kind of light, which 
denotes their being resolvable into stars.36
Much of the work by which Herschel is still remembered was 
accomplished by the time he left  Datchet in June 1785 (about the time 
Lemuel Francis Abbott painted his portrait; Fig. 3.1). To stellar astronomy, 
he contributed his fi rst and second catalogs of double stars (containing 
269 and 434 pairs, respectively). He also published an important paper in 
which he announced the important discovery of the motion of the Sun 
with respect to nearby stars. Th is last was a particularly vivid example of 
his genius. Th ough the fi rst proper motions of stars had been discovered 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
49
by Halley in 1718, Herschel argued in 1783 that the dozen or so proper 
motions known by then were not random, but revealed a common com-
ponent due to the motion of the Sun itself—it was, he concluded, hurtling 
through space and carrying the Earth and other objects of the Solar System 
in the direction of the constellation Hercules.
At Datchet, too, he carried out 683 star-gages. Th ese were counts of 
stars of diff erent brightness occurring in randomly selected fi elds. Under 
the assumption that they were all of the same intrinsic brightness and 
knowing that the apparent brightness of any one star falls of inversely with 
the square of the distance, there should be a well-defi ned relation of stars 
per magnitude interval versus magnitude, which would allow him to work 
out what he called the “interior construction” of the heavens.37 He observed 
the expected relation for brighter stars, but found fewer stars at the faint 
end. He interpreted this as running out of stars in certain directions. He 
demonstrated this result in a sketch, which was a cross-sectional map like 
one of those that the pioneering geologist James Hutton was producing at 
the same time of geological formations. (It was not, nor was it intended to 
be, a 3-dimensional map; this is sometimes a source of confusion.). Th at 
he should have found the star system to be elongated was hardly a surprise; 
that result was implied by the very existence of the “stratum” of the Milky 
Way. As we are situated within the disk, we see many more stars than when 
we look along it length-wise than when we look upwards or downwards 
through it. Th e form that Herschel’s plot of his star- gages traced was irreg-
ular, with marked prolongations in certain directions and indentations in 
others. Herschel himself referred to his model as a “Grindstone.” We think 
it looks rather like a snapping alligator with open jaws about to bite down. 
Th e open jaws mark the bifurcation of the Milky Way produced by the dark 
marking known as the “Great Rift ” of Cygnus.
At fi rst blush, the resemblance of Herschel’s diagram to a modern Galaxy 
map seems uncanny. Th is resemblance is, however, misleading. Lacking 
an exact distance to a star, Herschel had had to make assumptions. With 
uncanny intuition, he had supposed that, on average, the stars might be of 
about the same brightness as the one star best known—the Sun. Here, as so 
oft en, he was helped by analogies drawn from natural history. As early as 
1782 he had written to the Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne:
When I say “Let the stars be supposed one with another to be about the 
size of the Sun,” I only mean this in the same extensive signiﬁ cation in 
which we aﬃ  rm that one with another Men are of such or such a partic-
ular height. This does neither exclude the Dwarf, nor the Giant. An Oak-
tree also is of a certain general size tho’ it admits of very great variety…. 

 50 
Galactic Encounters
If we see such conformity in the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms, 
that we can without injury to truth aﬃ  x a certain general Idea to the 
sizes of the species, it appears to me highly probable and analogous to 
Nature, that the same regularity will hold with respect to the ﬁ xt stars.38
Assuming, then, that the stars were more or less like oaks, a 
count of the number of stars visible along diff erent routes or lines of sight 
through his telescope would allow him to map the length and breadth of 
Fig. 3.10. Herschel’s sketches of the nebulae. From: Collected Scientiﬁ c Papers of William 
Herschel, vol. 1.

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
51
the Milky Way just as a count 
of the (mature) oaks along 
diff erent lines of sight in a 
forest would allow one to 
map the forest’s length and 
breadth.
Indeed, Herschel’s 
method was fundamentally 
sound. But his diagram is 
still wrong since his reason-
ing contained a second, and 
ultimately a fatal, fl aw. It 
turns out that space between 
the stars is not empty: there 
is a veil or haze of interstellar 
dust causing distant stars to 
appear fainter than they really 
are. At very great distances—
or in directions where the 
dust is particularly thick—we 
cannot see stars at all, at least 
not in the visible spectrum. (Ironically, Herschel himself, in 1802, was the 
fi rst person to demonstrate the existence of the infrared, which is able to 
penetrate that dust.) Unbeknownst to Herschel, his view of the stars along 
the plane of the Galaxy was being cut off  by clouds of interstellar dust at 
distances of just a few thousand light years. His Grindstone is based on a 
survey of only about one percent of the stars of the Galaxy, most of which 
belong to a nearby galactic structure known as the Orion Spur. Because of 
interstellar dust, he did not even remotely penetrate to the galactic center. 
Th e Sun’s seemingly exalted position near the center of his fl attened disk 
was an illusion just like that had on a stormy night when, in swinging a 
fl ashlight in various directions, one sees the same sheets of blinding rain in 
Fig. 3.11. From the proper motions of a mere hand-
ful of stars, William Herschel managed to deduce 
that the Sun and the Solar System were headed in 
the direction of the star  Herculis, a result that has 
essentially held up. From: Collected Scientiﬁ c Papers of 
Sir William Herschel, volume 1.
Fig. 3.12. Herschel’s grindstone model of the Galaxy. From: Collected Scientiﬁ c Papers of William 
Herschel, vol. 1.

 52 
Galactic Encounters
every direction one looks—though one is not justifi ed in thinking that one 
is therefore standing in the middle of the storm!
With his knack for raising important questions and proposing useful lines 
of inquiry, Herschel had not only made progress in understanding the vast 
spatial extension of the Galaxy—its “inner construction”—he was already 
pondering how that star-system might change over time:
That the milky way is a most extensive stratum of stars of various sizes 
admits no longer of the least doubt; and that our sun is actually one of 
the heavenly bodies belonging to it is as evident. I have now viewed 
and gaged this shining zone in almost every direction…. In order to 
develop the ideas of the universe, that have been suggested by my late 
observations, it will be best to take the subject from a point of view at a 
considerable distance both of space and time.39
Taking the long view across time as he had across space, he imag-
ined cataclysmic events that might produce some of the strange and tortu-
ous forms he visualized in the telescope. Writing about some of the nebulae 
he had seen, he entertained a conjecture anticipating the modern appre-
hension of the gigantic collisions of galaxies in the early universe:
 If it were not perhaps too hazardous to pursue a former surmise of a 
renewal in what I ﬁ guratively called the Laboratories of the universe, 
the stars forming these extraordinary nebulae, by some decay or waste 
of nature, being no longer ﬁ t for their former purposes, and having their 
projectile forces, if any such they had, retarded in each others’ atmo-
sphere, may rush at last together, and either in succession, or by one 
general tremendous shock, unite into a new body.40
Th is passage, and especially the startling phrase “Laboratories of the 
universe,” contains a poetic leap equal to anything in Milton or Coleridge, 
and is prophetic of things to come. In a striking metaphor, Herschel charts a 
course away from familiar moorings in positional astronomy toward future 
directions that would eventually develop into the discipline of astrophysics.
Some of the cloudy patches – nebulosities – Herschel discovered 
seemed to consist of small compact clusters of small stars. Others might 
be vast stellar “strata”, in eff ect whole “milky ways,” in their own right. Th e 
majority of the nebulae he discovered—and there were thousands of them—
seemed to stand well clear of the band of the Milky Way. Th e Milky Way 
was, he said, a “Zone of Avoidance” for the nebulae, and Herschel began to 
suspect that some of them might be milky ways in their own right.41 Fanny 

 
Chapter 3: “I Have Looked Farther....” 
53
Burney, the novelist and Second Keeper of the Robes to Queen Charlotte at 
Windsor, would exclaim, “Herschel has discovered 1500 universes!”
*   *   *
 1. Richard Holmes, Th e Age of Wonder: how the 
romantic generation discovered the beauty and 
terror of science (New York: Pantheon, 2009), 74.
 2. William Herschel, “Letter to Dr. Hutton,” in 
Dreyer, ed., Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Her-
schel, vol. 1, xxi.
 3. Edward Holden, Sir William Herschel: his life 
and works (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1881), 22.
 4. Patrick Moore, 80 Not Out: the autobiography 
(London: Contender Books, 2003), 121.
 5. W. Davis Jerome, quoted in Rutgers Focus Maga-
zine, October 1, 1999.
 6. Michael Hoskin, ed., Caroline Herschel’s Autobi-
ographies (Cambridge: Science History Publica-
tions, 2003), 51.
 7. Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Herschel, 
vol. 1, xxiv.
 8. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 51.
 9. Ibid., 53.
 10. Herschel Archive, Royal Astronomical Society.
 11. For a full account of Herschel’s nebular work, 
see: Michael Hoskin, “William Herschel and 
the Nebulae,” Part 1: 1774-1784,” Journal for 
the History of Astronomy, xlii (2011), 178-192 
and  “William Herschel and the Nebulae, Part 2: 
1785-1818,” Journal for the History of Astron-
omy, xlii (2011), 322-338. 
 12. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 51.
 13. Michael J. Crowe, Th e Extraterrestrial Life 
Debate 1750-1900: the idea of a plurality of 
worlds from Kant to Lowell (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1986), 61.
 14. Herschel Archive, Royal Astronomical Society. 
 15. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 127.
 16. Michael Hoskin, “Vocations in Confl ict: Wil-
liam Herschel in Bath, 1766-1782,” History of 
Science, 41 (pt. 3), 133 (Sept. 2003): 323.
 17. Ibid., 323-324.
 18. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 57.
 19. Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Herschel, 
vol. 1, xxix. Herschel fi rst introduced the term 
“planetary nebulae” in 1785 because some of 
them showed small, hazy greenish disks just like 
the new planet.
 20. William Herschel, “Account of a Comet,” read 
April 26, 1781, Phil. Trans., 1781, 492-501, in 
Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Herschel, 
vol. 1, 30-38.
 21. Constance A. Lubbock, ed., Th e Herschel Chron-
icle: the life-story of William Herschel and his 
sister Caroline Herschel (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press), 40.
 22. Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Herschel, 
vol. 1, xxx.
 23. William Herschel to Joseph Banks, Nov. 19, 
1781, in Occasional Notes of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, vol. 3 (1949):115.
 24. Richard Baum, Th e Haunted Observatory: curi-
osities from the astronomer’s cabinet (Amherst, 
New York: Prometheus, 2007), 19.
 25. Piers Brendon, Th e Decline and Fall of the British 
Empire 1781-1997 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
2008), 4.
 26. William Herschel to Joseph Banks, Phil. Trans., 
1783,1-3, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir Wil-
liam Herschel, vol. 1, 100-101.
 27. Holmes, Th e Age of Wonder, 110.
 28. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 63.
 29. Ibid.
 30. Michael Hoskin, Th e Herschel Partnership: as 
viewed by Caroline (Cambridge: Science History 
Publications, 2003), 60.
 31. Hoskin, Autobiographies, 71.
 32. Ibid., 76.
 33. Ibid., 77.
 34. Holmes, Th e Age of Wonder, 119.
 35. Herschel, “Account of the Changes that have 
happened, during the last Twenty-fi ve Years, 
in the relative Situation of Double Stars; with 
an Investigation of the Cause to which they are 
owing,” read June 9, 1803, Phil. Trans., 1803, 
339-382, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir Wil-
liam Herschel, vol. 2, 250-276:264.
 36. Herschel, “Account of some Observations tend-
ing to investigate the Construction of the Heav-
ens,” read June 17, 1784, Phil. Trans., 1784, 437-
451, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William 
Herschel, vol. 1, 157-166:160.
 37. Herschel, “On the Construction of the Heav-
ens,” read February 3, 1785, Phil. Trans., 1785, 
213-266, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir Wil-
liam Herschel, vol. 1, 223-259.
 38. William Herschel to Nevil Maskelyne, April 28, 
1782, quoted in Lubbock, Th e Herschel Chroni-
cle, 110-111.
 39. Herschel, “On the Construction of the Heav-
ens,” 223.
 40. Ibid., 259.
 41. Michael Hoskin. William Herschel and the Con-
struction of the Heavens (New York: W. W. Nor-
ton, 1964), 99.

While a child, Tennyson said to his brother, who suﬀ ered from shyness: 
“Fred, think of Herschel’s great star-patches, and you will soon get over that.”
—Hallam Lord Tennyson, quoted in Michael Crowe, Modern Theories of the Universe
I
n addition to everything else he was doing, William Herschel continued 
to crank out telescopes. He constructed fi ve 10-foot telescopes on the 
express command of George III, and began to receive orders for seven-foot 
refl ectors similar to the one he had used to discover the “Georgian,” even-
tually producing two hundred of this model alone, on a commercial basis, 
many to royalty and foreign dignitaries and wealthy amateurs, but at least a 
few to observatories (Radcliff e, Armagh, Greenwich, Dorpat) or to serious 
individual astronomers (such as Johann Schroeter at Lilienthal, in Hanover, 
and Giuseppe Piazzi in Sicily). Th e income he obtained this way enabled 
him to make “expensive experiments for polishing mirrors by machinery.” 
Eager to leave the low-lying, damp, and all-but-forgotten place on the 
north bank of the Th ames—today not a rack remains behind, not even a 
marker to show the spot where he produced the fi rst map of the Galaxy—
he and his siblings moved briefl y to Clay Hall, Old Windsor. Aft er clashing 
with a litigious and diffi  cult landlady, he moved in April 1786 to the house 
where he would remain for the rest of his life—“Observatory House,” on 
Windsor Road, Slough. Parenthetically, Observatory House itself no longer 
exists; greatly deteriorated, it was pulled down in 1960, and when one of us 
(W.S.) visited, a few years ago, it had been replaced by a rather nondescript 
modern offi  ce block—rather jarringly called “Observatory House.” Indeed, 
though Herschel’s name is remembered everywhere about Slough, there is 
hardly anything left  of Georgian Slough, the city having served as a dump 
for war surplus materials in the interwar period, and suff ering the usual 
blight from rapid industrialization—until it could serve as the subject of 
one of the poet John Betjeman’s laments:
4.
Chimneys and 
Tubules of the Galaxy
54
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_4, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
55
Come, friendly bombs, and fall on Slough!
It isn’t ﬁ t for humans now,
There isn’t grass to graze a cow.1
For some time Herschel’s imagination had been fi red by the pros-
pect of an even larger telescope. It was ever a feature of Herschel’s mind 
not to recognize its own limitations, and he now dreamed of a giant refl ec-
tor with a focal-length of 40 feet and a mirror of 48 inches. With fi nancial 
support from King George, he set to building it. Th e size and weight of 
the mirror were such that ten men would be employed in polishing it, but 
“the whole of it had been designed by the astronomer who was to use it, 
and every part of it had been made on the spot under his own immedi-
ate and never-ceasing supervision, while the amount of personal, mental 
and manual labor he performed must have been immense.”2 His workmen, 
impressed with his dexterity in turning metal on the lathe, asked him to 
what he owed his skill; “to fi ddling,” he replied. Finally, by February 1787, 
the giant telescope was far enough along to allow a fi rst test: he had the 
mirror placed in the tube and went “into the tube, and lying down near the 
mouth of it,” and held an eye-glass in his hand with which he found the 
place of the focus. He then directed the apparatus toward the Great Nebula 
of Orion. Th e mirror, “though far from perfect… showed the four small 
stars in the nebula and many more. Th e nebula was extremely bright.” 
Ironically, though the great telescope was built mainly to study nebulae, 
this would be practically the only nebular observation Herschel ever made 
with it! 
Indeed, the 40-foot proved in the end to be a magnifi cent failure. It 
was so cumbersome that it required the assistance of two workmen to set 
it on a star, and because of the need to ascend a high platform in the dark-
ness to observe with it, it was dangerous to use, rather like shaving with a 
guillotine. Herschel soon gave up the hope of making extensive use of the 
telescope from which such miracles were expected, and fell back, for the 
rest of his career, on the versatile “large” 20-foot. Th e 40-foot, however, was 
a wonder of the world to all who visited Slough to see it, and though only 
a partial realization of its maker’s dreams would serve, as we shall see, as 
the inspiration of the builders of even larger telescopes in the next century. 
Herschel had thrown his cap over the fence, and others, in due course, would 
try to follow.
William Herschel: Valedictory
Meanwhile, the circumstances of Herschel’s life were changing. On mov-
ing to Slough, he had become a regular visitor at the house of a Mr. and 

 56 
Galactic Encounters
Mrs. Pitt who lived nearby at 
Upton.3 When Pitt, a well-to-do 
solicitor then in failing health, 
died in 1786, Herschel contin-
ued to regularly walk the path 
from Observatory House to the 
widow’s house. Th e widow was 
wealthy, attractive, and amiable. 
Hitherto Herschel’s biography 
had been almost devoid of 
romantic interests (he had had 
a brief interest in a Miss Harper, 
one of his pupils, when he had 
fi rst moved to Bath, but it was 
unreciprocated; if it had been, 
the whole history of astronomy 
might have been diff erent!). 
His life had been too busy, too 
strenuous, to allow much exer-
cise of the aff ections, but in due 
course a romance developed 
between the widow and the 50 
year-old bachelor astronomer. 
Herschel proposed marriage, and the proposal was accepted. Initially the 
plan was for the couple to take up residence at Mrs. Pitt’s house at Upton. 
She was shrewd enough to realize, however, that “the Doctor would be 
principally at [Observatory House], and that Miss Herschel would be 
mistress of the concern, and considering the matter in all its bearings, she 
determined upon giving [the engagement] up.” Herschel was disappointed, 
but naturally unwilling to give up his pursuit of astronomy; he also refused 
to give up the sister who had been trained to be a “most effi  cient” assistant 
and was beginning to earn a reputation as an astronomer in her own right 
as a discoverer of comets. (She had discovered her fi rst “Lady’s Comet” at 
Slough on August 1, 1786, with a small refl ector of two foot focal length 
which she called her “comet sweeper,” and would follow it up with seven 
more, of which two were co-discoveries; the last was made in 1797). Even-
tually, a compromise was reached:  “Th ere were to be two establishments, 
one at Upton and one at Slough; two maidservants in each, and one foot-
man to go backwards and forwards, with accommodation at both places, 
and Miss Herschel to have apartments over the workshops [at Observatory 
House].” Th e marriage took place on May 8, 1788 at the small church of St. 
Laurence, Upton. Sir Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society, served 
as Best Man. 
Fig. 4.1. Herschel’s “nebulous star,” NGC 1514, 
imaged with the 32-inch Ritchey-Chrétien tele-
scope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Courtesy: 
NOAO/AURA/NSF.

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
57
Inevitably, William’s marriage altered his relationship with Caroline, 
who had willingly (if sometimes grudgingly) sacrifi ced her personal happi-
ness in the interests of her idolized brother. She regarded the marriage as a 
betrayal, and insisted on moving out of “Observatory House,” though she 
settled nearby and continued, not without regular irruptions of bitterness 
confi ded to the pages of her diary, to assist her brother in his work.
Aft er his marriage, Herschel’s own routine gradually relaxed. He was less 
driven than before, less eager to persevere through long damp cool nights 
searching for nebulae. Moreover, his celebrity made him much in demand. 
Even before the move from Datchet, Caroline had started a double-col-
umned visitors’ book of the same kind as that in which she recorded obser-
vations. Among those who visited in spring 1784 was Susannah Th rale, the 
third daughter of Mrs. Th rale, the long-time friend of the celebrated Dr. 
Johnson. “He can show you in the night sky,” Johnson advised, “what no 
man before has ever seen, by some wonderful improvements he has made 
in the telescope. What he has to show is indeed a long way off , and perhaps 
concerns us little, but all truth is valuable and all knowledge pleasing in its 
fi rst eff ects, and may subsequently be useful.”4
Th ough Herschel was less driven to spend his nights under the 
stars, he continued his sweeps as before, and in November 1790 made 
an observation whose implications were particularly portentous. Until 
then, he had believed that all the nebulae consisted of star clusters, some 
of which were however too far away to be resolved into stars. He thought 
this even of the Great Nebula in Orion, which might be a stellar stratum 
that might, as he wrote, “outvie our milky-way in grandeur.” What fi nally 
changed his mind was an observation of a much humbler object, a nebula 
of the smooth round type he had, since 1785, taken to calling “planetary” 
nebulae, because of their superfi cial resemblance to the small pale greenish 
disk of Uranus.
As Herschel had cataloged it, the object was the 19th cluster of his 
6th class (now designated NGC 1514 in Taurus). It is much less impressive 
than such kindred and well-known planetary nebulae as M27 (the “Dumb-
bell”) in Vulpecula or M57 (the “Ring”) in Lyra. He examined it carefully 
with the 20-foot, and entered the following note in his log book:
November 13, 1790. A most singular phenomenon! A star of about the 
8th magnitude, with a faint luminous atmosphere, of a circular form, 
and of about 3’[of arc] in diameter. The star is perfectly in the center, and 
the atmosphere is so diluted, faint, and equal throughout, that there 
can be no surmise of stars; nor can there be a doubt of the evident con-
nection between the atmosphere and the star.5

 58 
Galactic Encounters
Th is observation shattered his faith that all the nebulae must neces-
sarily be resolvable into tiny stars. Th e natural historian of the heavens had, 
in fact, come across nothing less than a new celestial species. Th e paper 
which he published in the Philosophical Transactions in 1791, “On the 
Nebulous Stars, properly so called,”6 is well worth quoting in part:
While I pursued [my] researches, I was in the situation of a natural phi-
losopher who follows the various species of animals and insects from 
the height of their perfection down to the lowest ebb of life; when, arriv-
ing at the vegetable kingdom, he can scarcely point out to us the precise 
boundary where the animal ceases and the plant begins; and may even 
go so far as to suspect them not to be essentially diﬀ erent. But recol-
lecting himself, he compares, for instance, one of the human species to 
a tree, and all doubt upon the subject vanishes before him. In the same 
manner we pass through gentle steps from a coarse cluster of stars, such 
as the Pleiades, the Praesepe, the milky way, the cluster in the Crab, the 
nebula in Hercules, that near the preceding hip of Bootes [i.e., M3] etc., 
etc…. till we ﬁ nd ourselves brought to an object such as the nebula in 
Orion, where we are still inclined to remain in the once adopted idea, 
of stars exceedingly remote, and inconceivably crowded, as being the 
occasion of that remarkable appearance. It seems, therefore, to require 
a more dissimilar object to set us right again. A glance like that of the 
naturalist, who casts his eye from the perfect animal to the perfect veg-
etable, is wanting to remove the veil from the mind of the astronomer. 
The object I have mentioned above, is the phenomenon that was want-
ing for this purpose. View, for instance, the 19th cluster of my 6th class 
[i.e., NGC 1514], and afterwards cast your eye upon this cloudy star, and 
the result will be no less decisive than that of the naturalist we have 
alluded to. Our judgment, I may venture to say, will be, that the nebulos-
ity about the star is not of a starry nature.7
Th e “cloudy star” led to a paradigm shift  in Herschel’s thought, and 
henceforth he allowed the existence of truly nebulous matter—a “shining 
fl uid” or “fi re-mist”—into the heart of his cosmogony.
During these years, visitors continued to stream to Observatory House. 
One of the most famous was the composer, Joseph Haydn, who on his visit 
to England in 1791 came to Windsor to meet George III and paid a visit 
to Slough to look through Herschel’s telescope. He later claimed that the 
experience helped him to compose his celebrated oratorio Creation, which 
premiered at the Schwarzenberg Palace in Vienna in 1798 before an audi-
ence that possibly included the young Beethoven. (In a sense, Herschel’s 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
59
music—or at least an echo of it—lingers in our ears even today.) Th e open-
ing orchestral number, “Th e representation of Chaos,” includes a splendid 
passage which opens in the dark key of C minor and in which the chorus 
soft ly sings “And God said, ‘Let there be light,” followed by silence, then an 
even soft er passage, “And there was…,” followed by a booming Light in the 
bright key of C major. Th is was the way Haydn’s musical mind responded 
to the stars and nebulae that had fl oated before him in the eyepiece of 
Herschel’s telescope. Beethoven biographer Edmund Morris, contrasting 
Haydn’s approach to chaos with what Beethoven would have done with the 
same theme, declares:
Miraculously, Haydn had managed to do [it] without aﬄ  icting any pow-
dered head with a sense of harmonic or formal disarray. On close analy-
sis, the old man had merely postponed cadences again and again, or 
only half dissolved them, in order to convey a vague state of disequi-
librium. But his modulations fell into logical patterns, and his overall 
design was sonata form. Eighteenth-century to the core, he could not 
imagine anything “without form, and void,” unless he ﬁ xed it inside the 
frame of Reason.8
Well, that was Herschel too. 
Meanwhile, Herschel was traveling again—something he had done 
relatively little since the frenzied days of his early days as a struggling 
musician. In 1792, he went to Scotland and met James Hutton, who a few 
years before had enunciated his principle of uniformitarianism—the same 
geological processes at work on and in the Earth at the present time have 
been operative throughout many geological ages. Hutton’s work was open-
ing up vistas of time as vast as those of space that Herschel was opening 
with his telescopes. Herschel came to a similar view of the nature of the 
forces operative in the heavens. Changes were taking place there—in par-
ticular, he looked for them in the complex forms of the Orion Nebula, and 
suspected that the “shining fl uid” and “fi re mists” in space might supply the 
raw materials needed for the regeneration of stars. But he was not an evo-
lutionist: he believed that over time, despite cycles of change, the universe 
remained essentially the same.
In 1802, Herschel visited Paris, where he met Messier, and in the 
company of the celebrated mathematician Pierre Simon de Laplace, he was 
received by Napoleon, then First Consul. (It was on this occasion that Laplace, 
when Napoleon asked him why he had not mentioned God in his great work 
Exposition du système du monde, supposedly gave his famous reply: “Sire, I 
have no need of that hypothesis!” Th e story, though a good one, is somewhat 
apocryphal; Herschel, whose views on religion were conventional and Angli-
can, must have been shocked—if the incident actually happened.)

 60 
Galactic Encounters
Back in England, Herschel was soon sweeping again. But he was 
now feeling the eff ects of age, and soon gave up. He recorded his last—
Sweep 1112—on September 30, 1803, 20 years aft er his fi rst. 
Despite his herculean eff orts, his work remained unfi nished, and 
he knew it. In the study rather than at the telescope, he sift ed through the 
masses of data he had collected, piecing out the taxonomy of the nebulae 
by arranging them according to their shape, color, and brightness in rather 
the way a botanist did in classifying plants. Th ough he had fi rst believed the 
role of “nebulous matter” was merely to lead to the occasional regeneration 
of already extant stars, aft er meeting Laplace he began to take into account 
the latter’s “nebular hypothesis”—the theory that the Sun and planets had 
condensed out of a rotating cloud of nebulous matter. In an 1811 publica-
tion, “Astronomical Observations relating to the Construction of the Heav-
ens,” the 72 year-old sage of Slough proposed that most of the nebulae were 
clouds of “shining fl uid” on the way to condensing into new stars.9
And what exactly was the shining fl uid? Th is was well before we had 
any idea of what the most common material or elements in the universe 
were, or for that matter that nebulous gas or dust existed in space. Th e 
science of the day embraced both ponderable matter—the ordinary matter 
that followed the Newtonian laws of motion and gravitation—and impon-
derable fl uids. As British chemist Humphrey Davy had jotted in a notebook 
at about this time: “We cannot account well for the phenomena of electric-
ity without supposing the existence of a peculiar fl uid. Is this fl uid the same 
as heat, i.e. are electricity and galvanism currents of a fl uid which when 
expanding in right lines constitutes light.”10 Herschel, having thoroughly 
absorbed such thinking, imagined that such an imponderable fl uid—
“widely diff used and chaotic”—permeated the heavens, and by a gradual 
process of compression condensed into star clusters. In a paper of 1814 he 
extended his speculative vision even farther, and contemplated the eventual 
“breaking up of the Milky Way”11 itself. 
Enter the Reluctant Heir
It was clear that William—who became Sir William aft er 1816, when the 
Prince Regent George Augustus Frederick made him Knight of the Royal 
Guelphic Order—was fast running out of time. Where was a successor to 
carry on the work thus far so nobly advanced?
Th ere was a successor—and he was growing up in the laboratory 
and mirror-making workshops of Observatory House itself. Th e Herschels 
had had their fi rst and only off spring when William was 53. Described by 
diarist Frances Burney as “a delightful child,” John Frederick Herschel was 
a precocious youth. Apart from a brief period at Eton, the famous public 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
61
school near Windsor whose harsh punitive methods led his parents to 
withdraw him, he was educated entirely at Observatory House before going 
to University. He had prodigious gift s in languages (in addition to the 
classical languages, Greek and Latin, he learned German in that bilingual 
household, as well as French and a smattering of other modern languages). 
He was very keen on mathematics, and enjoyed tinkering in the workshop 
with his father’s workmen. His spinster aunt, one of his only regular play-
mates when she could spare the time, recalled his fascination with tools. 
Needless to say, he also took his turns singing and playing musical instru-
ments during the family’s musical diversions. 
John Herschel grew up, as historian Allan Chapman notes, “lonely, 
seriously intellectual and, with the exception of visits from his … cousins 
Mary and Sophia Baldwin, largely spent in the company of people who 
were old enough to be his grandparents.... A child less innately gift ed, or 
naturally aff ectionate, could have been seriously damaged by this upbring-
ing…. Even so, one always feels that John Herschel was old before his time. 
He never really lost his shyness, while the nervous, bronchitic and rheu-
matic diseases that plagued him from his twenties onwards suggest that he 
lacked something of that indomitable toughness possessed by his septuage-
nerian and octagenerian parents and almost centenarian aunt.”12 
Frightfully erudite, backed by a famous name, he entered St. John’s 
College, Cambridge, at 17 (in 1809; the year Charles Darwin, Abraham 
Lincoln, and Alfred Tennyson were all born). He rocketed to the top of 
his class, distinguishing himself in Greek and Latin and becoming Senior 
Wrangler in the Mathematics Tripos and First Smith’s Prizeman in 1813—
high honors indeed, since Cambridge University, though academically 
sluggish during the last sixty years of the 18th Century, took special pride 
in her prowess in mathematics, which she claimed from her famous son, 
Isaac Newton. Newton had written the Principia laying out the laws of 
motion and the theory of gravitation while Lucasian professor at Trinity, 
the college next door to St. John’s. Until 1824 anyone seeking academic 
honors at Cambridge was required to read mathematics, no matter what 
their other interests.
 Aft er fi nishing his exams, John Herschel moved directly into a Fel-
lowship. In order to remain a Fellow and eventually advance into the long-
range prospect of becoming a don, he would have to take Holy Orders. His 
father strongly urged him in this course. “Such a path,” said Sir William, 
“must surely lead to happiness, or else it would never be so wide and so 
beaten.” Th ough John was more than pious enough for the Church—that 
was never his objection—he regarded the teaching duties required of a Fel-
low unbearably pedestrian. “I am grown fat, dull, and stupid,” he told his 
close Cambridge  friend Charles Babbage. “Pupillizing has done this—and 
I have not made one of my cubs understand what I would drive them at.” 

 62 
Galactic Encounters
Instead he began to pivot toward the law. Th ough generally tractable and 
even docile to parental guidance, he was evidently going through a mildly 
rebellious stage. William remonstrated with him that nothing could be 
more unsuitable to him than the law, but John proved resolute, and in Janu-
ary 1814 began reading for the bar at Lincoln’s Inn, London. Inevitably, he 
found it to be quite as tedious and unpleasant as his father had warned him 
it would be. Aft er eighteen months he gave it up; his excuse was that the 
stuff y chambers aggravated his asthma.
He then returned to Cambridge and immersed himself in what 
he would always regard as his fi rst and best love, optics. But he was rush-
ing toward a crisis in his aff airs, indeed in the aff airs of the whole family; 
it could be postponed but not put off  indefi nitely, and was reached in the 
summer of 1816, when John accompanied his parents on a holiday to Dawl-
ish, near Exeter, to visit his father’s old friend from the Bath Philosophical 
Society, Sir William Watson. By then the elder Herschel’s health was failing 
badly; the tremulousness of his hand made writing diffi  cult—all his later 
letters are in Caroline’s hand—and his great work on the stellar system 
remained incomplete. Clearly he needed assistance, and more than the 
aging Caroline could provide. By the time the family returned to Slough, 
John had given in. He agreed to follow the path of duty and to take up at 
long last the “family business of fathoming the ‘length, depth, breadth, and 
profundity of the Universe.’”13 Returning to Cambridge only long enough to 
collect his things, he wrote to Babbage in singularly low spirits:
Farewell to the University. . . . Now I am about to leave it, my heart dies 
within me. I am going, under my father’s directions, to take up the series 
of his observations where he has left them.14
Years later, aft er he had completed the astronomical work he had 
promised his father to carry out, he would tell his wife that all the while he 
had only been “dallying with the stars. Light was my fi rst love!  In an evil 
hour I quitted her for those brute & heavy bodies which tumbling thro’ 
ether, startle her from her deep recesses and drive her [light] trembling and 
sensitive into our view.”15
So it was that in the summer of 1816, John Herschel, at 24, reluc-
tantly accepted the mantle of heir to his father’s work on the stellar system.
Th e wealth he inherited from his mother allowed him to make this choice, 
as John Herschel was not paid to be an astronomer by the now almost com-
pletely mentally disabled king George III, as his father had been.
He began, with Sir William’s assistance, to fi gure an 18-inch mirror for 
a 20-foot refl ector. As yet, however, he was much more oft en in London 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
63
than in Slough. Of the latter, he wrote, “I have regularly heard my mother 
declare that there is not to be found so expensive a place in the King-
dom,” he wrote. “But the worst of the story is the society, which owing 
to the vicinity of the Court is in general peculiarly unpleasant.”16 Indeed, 
throughout the regime of George III, the atmosphere of the court remained 
like that of a minor German principality, “stiff , narrow, fusty.”17 Th e situa-
tion did not improve aft er the fi rst outbreak of King George’s madness in 
1788, which eventually became unremitting and incurable. Aft er ten years 
of roaming the draft y corridors of Windsor Castle with a long white beard 
and purple dressing gown, lamenting the loss of his American colonies and 
beset with delusions that included seeing his native Hanover through one 
of Herschel’s telescopes, the unhappy king was relieved of his earthly mis-
eries by death in 1820. His successor, George IV, who had served as Prince 
Regent since 1811, proved to be a rather scandalous fi gure, and today is 
best remembered for his dissolute lifestyle.
Compared to Slough—and the Court of Windsor—London was 
a place of great stimulation and intellectual ferment, and John Herschel 
seems to have had his fi ngers in every pie. He was a member of all the lead-
ing clubs and societies, acquainted with all the other members who came 
into contact in formal meetings and over convivial dinners and all living 
“within walking distance, or at least within a short cab ride”18 of such ven-
ues as the Athenaeum, the Royal Society, the Royal Institution, the Royal 
Geological Society, the Astronomical Society (later the Royal Astronomi-
cal Society). As Secretary of the Royal Society and Foreign Secretary of the 
Astronomical Society, and through wide-ranging travels, usually with Bab-
bage, he met and corresponded extensively with many of the leading math-
ematicians and scientists on the Continent. One of his biographers, David 
Evans, has written, “his mere lists of addresses are of absorbing interest, 
for they include practically all men of mark in the world.”19 Among those 
men of mark was James (later Sir James) South, a surgeon who, becoming 
independently wealthy through marriage to an heiress (one of the most 
direct routes to independence during the late Regency and early Victorian 
era), abandoned surgery for astronomy and set up a splendidly appointed 
private observatory at Blackman Street, Southwark, near the hospital of 
Guy’s and St. Th omas’s where he had practiced, and joined forces with John 
Herschel in observing and calculating orbits of double stars.
Ironically, it was aft er his father’s death in August 1822 that John 
began spending more time at Slough, and resumed the studies of the nebu-
lae, those mystifying objects that had so perplexed and fascinated Sir Wil-
liam. One of the fi rst orders of business was to carry out a careful study of 
the Great Nebula in Orion. His father had always regarded it as the “most 
wonderful object in the heavens” and had concluded that it was perhaps 
the foremost example of a nebulous “shining fl uid,” a true “fi re-mist” that 

 64 
Galactic Encounters
seemed (as he had long strongly suspected) to be changing form over time 
as it gravitationally condensed into stars and planetary systems. As soon as 
he turned his new 20-foot telescope toward it, the younger Herschel was 
impressed by the uneven texture of the bright region of the nebula around 
the Trapezium stars (the Huygenian region, so-called since it had been the 
only part visible to Christiaan Huygens). He compared it to “a curdling 
liquid, or a surface strewed over with fl ocks of wool, or to the breaking up 
of a mackerel sky.”20 Given the suspicion of its undergoing changes, he real-
ized that the accurate depiction of this and other nebulae posed one of the 
greatest challenges facing astronomers of the day. Photography, to which 
John Herschel himself would make great contributions, was then literally in 
its infancy; the “View from the Window at Le Gras,” the earliest surviving 
photograph by France’s Nicéphore Niépce made by coating pewter sheets 
with a solution of bitumen dissolved in lavender oil, dates only to 1826, 
and it would be decades before the services of the young technology could 
be entrusted with serving as the artisan of the nebulae. John, by the way, 
was by far a better artist than his father had been. Th e images of nebulae 
that William had published in his 1811 paper, “Astronomical Observations 
relating to the Construction of the Heavens,” were made simply by ruling 
crossed lines for dark background then stippling with mezzotint to sug-
gest lighter highlights—a technique that had the fault of giving the nebulae 
“a much better defi nition than they really possess.”21 From sketches and 
notes made on several favorable nights of observing with the 20-foot, John 
Herschel set about making the most accurate drawing of the Great Nebula 
he could. Intended to serve as a benchmark of later studies, he presented it 
Fig. 4.2. (left) Young John Herschel; (right) Margaret Brodie Steward (Lady Herschel). Both by 
Alfred Edward Chalm (Flora Herscheliana, 1829). From: Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
65
to the Royal Astronomical Society in 1826—the same year Niépce obtained 
his primitive but portentous image.
Two years later, we fi nd John still busy with sweeps, and still complaining. 
“Th e sacrifi ce of the night is a very serious evil to me,” he wrote, “regarding 
as I do the completion of this work not as a matter of choice or taste, but a 
sacred duty.”22 Arduous it was, but not without rewards, as he oft en enjoyed 
views of the nebulae superior to any his father had ever had. For instance, 
writing of M51, which Messier had found between the handle of the Big 
Dipper and Cor Coroli (the lead-star of Canes Venatici, the Hunting 
Dogs), Herschel thought it “like our Milky Way,” and could not help recall-
ing his father’s speculations about island universes as he added, “perhaps 
… [it] is our Brother System.”
  “It is a truth universally acknowledged,” Jane Austen refl ected in 
Pride and Prejudice, “that a single man in possession of a good fortune 
must be in want of a wife.” Now pushing 40, and a doyen of the British 
scientifi c establishment, John was also a very eligible bachelor, a Mr. Darcy 
possessed of handsome features, a substantial fortune mostly inherited 
from his mother, and the expectation of more when she died. He had 
always, it seems, been highly susceptible to female charms. His early letters 
refer to an unfortunate unreciprocated love followed by a period of intense 
emotional suff ering. In the 1820s the disappointment of a broken engage-
ment was relieved only when Babbage whisked him off  to strenuous travels 
on the Continent including scrambling the slopes of Monte Rosa, near 
Zermatt, not a bad achievement for a chronic asthmatic. Now he was intro-
duced to Margaret Brodie Stewart, the daughter of a noted Gaelic scholar. 
She was only 19. Despite the diff erence in their ages, John and Margaret 
would enjoy, from fi rst to last, a connection of “unclouded happiness.”
Following his marriage, John became even more frightfully productive 
than he had been as a bachelor. He wrote lucid and infl uential essays on the 
undulatory nature of light and the theory of sound, and published a book 
on the inductive method of science—A Preliminary Discourse on the Study 
of Natural Philosophy—which electrifi ed a 21-year-old former medical 
student and undistinguished student of divinity at Christ’s College, Cam-
bridge, Charles Darwin. Partly on the strength of this performance, in 1831 
the King—now William IV— made him Knight of the Royal Hanoverian 
Guelphic Order, an honor for which his father had had to wait till the last 
six years of his long life. Henceforth he was Sir John. Th at year he ran as a 
candidate for the President of the Royal Society, which had become stag-
nant and reactionary under the long tenure of the late Sir Joseph Banks; 

 66 
Galactic Encounters
he ran as a reformer, but was unsuccessful. Th e next year, when his mother 
died, he received the remainder of her substantial fortune, and never had to 
worry about money again.
Financial security and the independence it brought introduced a 
fresh boldness to Sir John’s aff airs. While at Slough, immersed in extending 
his father’s observations of double stars, clusters, and nebulae, he realized 
that the next logical next step to formulating the laws of the heavens by the 
inductive methods he had championed in the Preliminary Discourse would 
be to extend the survey to the Southern skies. His father had of course 
studied the construction of the heavens—but only from the northern hemi-
sphere perspective. With a bit of the philosophy of “What shall they know 
of England who only England know?” he began to think seriously of an 
extended sabbatical on the other side of the globe. Clearly he was eager for 
a fresh start, but as a practical matter, he was also one of the only men in 
England who could fi nance such a project (the British government’s strong 
embrace of laissez-faire—satirized by Dickens in the HOW NOT TO DO 
IT OFFICE in Little Dorrit—meant opposition to state funding for scien-
tifi c projects on the scale that existed in France and Germany at the time). 
But there were also personal reasons for leaving England. He was being 
ground down by frequent trips by stage between Slough, a place to which 
he no longer had the ties his father as a royal pensioner had, and Lon-
don, where the many distractions of his life there were, as Lady Herschel 
recalled aft erward, “tearing him to pieces.”23
Th us, on November 13, 1833, Sir John and his family embarked on 
the Monstuart Elphinstone, a vessel of less than a thousand tons displace-
ment, to one of farthest points of the British empire: South Africa. From 
Portsmouth to Cape Town they were nine weeks under sail. It is impos-
sible, by the way, not to admire Lady Herschel’s fortitude and sheer physical 
endurance. David Evans writes: “She withstood two long ocean voyages 
in spite of being a ready victim of seasickness…. In South Africa she was 
pregnant more than half the time. Th e home party comprised fi ve adults 
and three children on arrival, and she had to run an establishment which 
employed something like ten servants: Clara and Candassa, who did wash-
ing; Somai, the (Malay) coachman; David, the groom; Minto, the houseboy; 
Dawes and Jack, the laborers; Andreas; Jeptha and his wife, who cooked; 
Hannah; Leah; Catherine Quinn; Nancy, the needlewoman; the cowboy—
and as Sir John would say, &c. &c. &c.”24
Herschel’s own diaries make fascinating reading. His entry for 
December 7, 1833 reads: “Last night saw for the fi rst time the Greater 
Magellanic Cloud. It is brighter and larger than I expected to see it & a very 
odd looking object.” On December 26, aft er dining on deck and watching 
an eclipse of the Moon: “Nothing ever exceeded the magnifi cence of this 
night. I watched Jupiter down to setting & aft er plunging through a small 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
67
cloud line, saw him appear like a lamp on the very edge of the sea and go 
down behind the offi  ng like a fi reball.” On January 15, 1834, coming up on 
Cape Town, he caught sight of some of the most magnifi cent scenery on 
Earth. “Rose & hurried on Deck,” he wrote, “whence the whole range of 
the Mountains of the Cape from Table Bay to the Cape of Good Hope was 
distinctly seen, as a thin, blue, but clearly defi ned vapour. Th e Lions Head 
was seen as an Island the base being below the horizon.”
Th e Cape had already played an important role in the history of 
astronomy. It had been the observing station of the French Abbé Nicolas-
Louis de Lacaille, who in the 1750s had come here and measured the 
positions of 10,000 southern stars and discovered two score nebulae. It was 
now the site of the Royal Observatory, whose fi rst director, Fearon Fallows, 
had been a classmate of Herschel’s at Cambridge. Fallows seems literally to 
have worked himself to death. Contracting scarlet fever, he insisted on con-
tinuing measuring star positions with an instrument called a mural circle—
toward the end, he was so weak he had to be carried to the telescope in 
a blanket!  He was succeeded by Th omas Henderson, who accepted only 
reluctantly aft er being turned down for the chair of practical astronomy at 
Edinburgh University and for the post of superintendent of the Nautical 
Almanac offi  ce. He found Cape Town a dreadfully unpleasant place—“I 
Fig. 4.3. Feldhausen; lithograph by John Ford. William Sheehan Collection.

 68 
Galactic Encounters
will tell you about my residence in the Dismal Swamp among slaves and 
savages,” he wrote to a colleague back home25—and left  aft er only a year, 
when he returned to Scotland. He stayed long enough to obtain nineteen 
precise measures with the mural circle of a star, alpha Centauri, which had 
been found to have a very large proper motion—thus to be presumably one 
of the Sun’s near neighbors in space. Once back in Scotland, he carefully 
analyzed these measures and was able to obtain a parallax—defi ned as half 
the small angle of defl ection of the star, in seconds of arc, as measured from 
opposite sides of the Earth’s orbit. For alpha Centauri, the parallax was ¾” 
of arc—equal to the apparent diameter of a U.S. penny seen at a distance 
of 5 kilometers, which shows why it took so long for astronomers’ to make 
this measurement. From this parallax, Henderson was able to work out the 
distance to the star—the long-sought grail was at last in the astronomers’ 
grasp. Henderson’s star, Alpha Centauri, is indeed a member of the multi-
ple-star system which is the nearest to the Sun at a distance of 42 trillion 
kilometers. (Since light travels 300,000 kilometers/second, this works out 
to 4.3 light years; by way of comparison, this is almost exactly 1,000,000 
times the distance of the nearest planet, Venus). Henderson published his 
result just aft er Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel, another astronomer obsessed 
with precision who was director of the Royal Observatory at Königsberg 
(now Kaliningrad, Russia), had done so for another star with large proper 
motion, 61 Cygni, which had a parallax of 0.3” of arc, making its distance 
11 light years. A third parallax, for the bright star Vega, was published in 
1840 by Friedrich Wilhelm Struve of the Dorpat Observatory in Estonia; 
it was less accurate than those published by Bessel and Henderson, for the 
simple reason that Vega’s parallax is much smaller—only 0.13” of arc—
making its distance 25 light years.
Because stellar distances are tied to measures of parallax, astrono-
mers oft en use as a unit of distance the parsec—the distance from which 
the Earth-to-Sun distance would subtend an angle of 1” of arc. One parsec 
equals 3.26 light years. In what follows, we will sometimes refer to astro-
nomical distances in parsecs. 
Henderson had already left  the Cape before Herschel arrived. On a 
temporary basis, Herschel took up quarters at a Boarding House in town, 
unloaded and carefully unpacked his instruments, and began scouring the 
countryside for a house. He settled on a place called Feldhausen by the 
Dutch and “the Grove” by the English, 10 kilometers from Cape Town.
He wrote to aunt Caroline, who had returned to her native Hanover 
following her brother’s death:
You can imagine nothing more magniﬁ cent than its situation which is 
nearly under the towering precipices of the Table Mountain, and deeply 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
69
sheltered in a forest of Oak and Fir which so eﬀ ectually secure it from 
the South East Gales, that while it has been blowing a perfect hurricane 
in Cape Town I have been able to sweep with the 20-feet without incon-
venience, & even to light one lamp from another in the open air.
The 20-feet is erected in an orchard, which forms a small part only 
of the grounds belonging to the place, which are distributed into great 
squares by long shady avenues of Rich Oak or tall and solemn Pines, 
and either overgrown with trees or laid out in Gardens.—In the same 
orchard also stands (or will stand in the course of next week) the [5-feet] 
Equatorial, for which the house [with a rotating roof] is now building, & 
will be ﬁ nished by that time. The sky has been for at least 3 nights out of 
5 that we have been here, nearly or quite cloudless & rich in stars, nebu-
lae, and clusters beyond anything you can imagine & of which I trust to 
give a pretty good account. We are now inhabiting temporarily, a house 
within half a quarter of a mile of “the Grove.”—Not a very good one, 
but having the advantage of being near enough to allow of my super-
intending all the repairs &c there, and to go over at night with my man 
Stone and work with the 20-feet at my sweeps, and return when tired, to 
sleep here across the rich region of ﬂ owers & shrubs which here is called 
a Heath—but in England would be a ﬂ ower garden or Nursery.26 
Whereas the Royal Observatory occupied what really was at the 
time a “dismal swamp,” and was frequently buff eted by Southeasterlies, 
Feldhausen stood on higher ground, and was partly protected so that 
the blustery gales were reduced to what Sir John called “no more than a 
refreshing & moderate breeze.” Th e idyllic setting was replete with birds 
Sir John could shoot at and “glorious fl owers and rich aromatic scents” 
for Lady Herschel to paint; the only drawback seems to have been a pack 
of savage dogs, which Sir John sometimes encountered in his rides over 
the countryside. By the end of February 1834, the 20-feet telescope was 
set up (at a point still marked by an obelisk on the grounds of what is now 
the Grove Primary School). Commencing in June, Sir John’s sweeps of the 
ravishingly beautiful southern skies continued for the next four years. Just 
before he had sailed for Cape Town, his aunt Caroline had reminded him 
to reexamine a peculiar “hole” in the heavens that her brother had encoun-
tered while sweeping in the body of the Scorpion. “I wish,” she had written, 
“you would see if there was not something remarkable in the lower part 
of the Scorpion to be found, for I remember your father returned several 
nights and years to the same spot, but could not satisfy himself about the 
uncommon appearance of that part of the heavens. It was something more 
than a total absence of stars (I believe).”27 From Cape Town the Scorpion 
rises high into the sky, and Sir John reported his fi ndings:

 70 
Galactic Encounters
The Stars continue to be propitious, and the nights which follow a 
shower, or a “black South Easter” are the most beautiful observing 
nights it is possible to imagine. –I have swept well over Scorpio and 
have many entries in my sweeping books of the kind you describe—viz: 
blank spaces in the heavens without the smallest star. For Example— 
RA. 16h 15m—NPD 113° 56—a ﬁ eld without the smallest star
RA. 16h 19m—NPD 116° 3’—Antares (alpha Scorpio)
16h 23m—114° 25 to 114° 5—ﬁ eld entirely void of stars
 
16h 26—114° 14—not a star 16m.—Nothing!
 
16 27—114° 0—D[itt]o—as far as 114° 10—
and so on—then come on the Globular Clusters—then more blank 
ﬁ elds—then suddenly the Milky Way comes on as here described….28
Here in the Scorpion and in other places along the vast extent of 
the Milky Way he was coming across what he deemed to be true “holes” — 
Fig. 4.4. Crux, showing the bright OB stars and the Coal Sack; imaged by John Drummond with a Sigma 
70-200 lens, 130 mm at f/3.5. Courtesy: John Drummond.

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
71
Fig. 4.5. NGC 4755, discovered by the French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in 1751-52; it appears 
as a hazy star about a degree southeast of the 1st magnitude star Beta Crucis, and was given its name the 
“Jewel Box” by Sir John Herschel (he described it as “an extremely brilliant and beautiful object … the very 
diﬀ erent colour of its constituent stars … gives it the eﬀ ect of a superb piece of fancy jewellery.” It has an 
obvious A-shape of bright stars, and is one of the youngest open clusters known (estimated age 14 mil-
lion years); its brightest stars are blue-white supergiants, with one of the stars a red supergiant that stands 
out at once. Courtesy: John Drummond.
Fig. 4.6. The Large Magellanic Cloud. Courtesy: John Drummond.

 72 
Galactic Encounters
vacant regions, cavernous recesses—in the stratum of stars. Th e Milky Way 
appeared to him not as a “stratum of regular thickness and homogeneous 
formation,” but “broken into masses and aggregates of stars,” whose struc-
ture reminded him of the “cumuli of a mackerel sky.” Th e dark enclosed 
spaces appeared, he noted in an arresting phrase, as “vast chimney-form 
or tubular vacancies.”29 Th ere were, in other words, true caves, recesses, in 
the Milky Way. Herschel, the astronomer, investigating those chimneys and 
tubules, had become a celestial spelunker.
His researches into the construction of the heavens in the southern 
sky extended—and in some cases modifi ed, or at least moderated—his 
father’s views. Sir William’s interpretation of the circle of the Milky Way 
as an optical eff ect due to our immersion in a divided stratum of stars was 
borne out; but Sir John, in attempting to sketch in the details, appreciated 
even more fully than his father had done just how curious, complicated 
and irregular that system was. He noted “the extraordinary display of fi ne 
resolved and resolvable globular clusters” toward Sagittarius and along the 
fringes of the Milky Way, and began to suspect that the stratum of stars 
might be arranged in the form of a great fl at ring. He was also coming 
across planetary nebulae by the score. In contrast to the half dozen or so 
known in the northern skies, these glowing “shells” turned up by the score 
in South Africa. 
Th e question which preoccupied him the most was whether there 
was a single “galaxy,” the Milky Way with all its stars, nebulae and star 
clusters, or whether there might be similar systems—“island universes”—
beyond it. Th e “true” nebulae, as opposed to the resolved and resolv-
able star clusters, really did appear to consist of a mysterious “luminous 
fl uid,” “masses of glowing vapors,” and they puzzled him just as they had 
his father. He confi rmed that they were not irregularly scattered over the 
visible heavens but collected in a sort of canopy, whose vertex was at the 
“Galactic Pole” of the vast stratum of the stars of the Milky Way. In the 
northern hemisphere, they crowded into the constellations Leo, Leo Minor, 
Ursa Major, Coma Berenices, Canes Venatici, and above all Virgo; in the 
southern hemisphere, they were more uniformly distributed, with one 
important exception. In the Magellanic Clouds, the strange objects look-
ing like detached portions of the Milky Way, he found no less than 1,145 
nebulous objects between them. Th e Large Magellanic Cloud, in particular, 
was “a congeries of stars, clusters of irregular form, globular clusters and 
nebulae.”
 One of the enclosed nebulae—now known as the Tarantula Neb-
ula—especially captured his imagination, and he made a careful sketch. As 
anyone who has spent time observing from the southern hemisphere can 
attest, scanning the Large Magellanic Cloud, even in binoculars, is almost, 
as French galactic astronomer Gerard de Vaucouleurs used to say, “like 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
73
Fig. 4.7a. The Carina Nebula, also known as the Eta Carinae Nebula (NGC 3372). A huge HII 
region, surrounded by several spectacular naked-eye star clusters, it contains Eta Carinae and 
HD 93129A, two of the most massive stars in the Galaxy; and lies at a distance of from 6500 to 
10,000 light years. It is located in the Carina-Sagittarius Arm. Photographed from Chile with a 
Takahashi apochromatic refractor, f/6. Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.
Fig. 4.7b. Detail of the above: The star Eta Carinae, which shone as the most brilliant star in the 
sky apart from Sirius in 1841, just after John Herschel returned from the Cape, is a very unstable 
massive star (with a mass of from 100 to 150 times that of the Sun, and a luminosity of four 
million times that of the Sun). The star ﬂ irts dangerously close to the so-called Eddington limit, 
where the outward pressure of the star’s radiation is almost strong enough to counteract grav-
ity—thus it is a good candidate to go supernova in the near future. Note the strange bloblike 
feature surrounding Eta Carinae, the so-called Homunculus Nebula, which appears to have been 
ejected in the 1841 outburst, and the Keyhole, as Sir John Herschel called the dark dust cloud 
superimposed on the center of the nebula. Imaged from Gisborne, New Zealand with a 35cm 
f/10 Meade ACF SCT. Courtesy: John Drummond.

 74 
Galactic Encounters
viewing plates from the famous Barnard photographic atlas.” (For Barnard, 
see chapter 7.)
Lady Herschel, in a charming letter to Caroline, conveys a sense of 
Herschel’s ongoing routine:
You wish to hear about Herschel, & in truth I like to write about him—at 
this moment he is observing, & the bell of his telescope tells me he is very 
busy—he came in a minute ago to say that it is the most brilliant night 
he ever saw, & he has had many such of late—His sweeps seem hitherto 
more productive of Nebulae than Double Stars, & the Mirrors are kept in 
the highest state of polish, by about ¼ of an hour’s rubbing on the very 
ﬁ nest powder, so that the ﬁ gure is not destroyed, & the process can be 
repeated very often—The winter has been most favourable to him & he 
feels already, that his voyage hitherto has been for good—The Literary 
& Scientiﬁ c Institution of the Cape have made him their President (very 
wisely), & he is setting them all to work to observe the Tides, & collect 
Meteorological Obsns &c, & I think he ought to consider the members, 
as learned Operatives under his superintendence—Nothing can be bet-
ter than his health during the whole winter—indeed he looks ten years 
younger, & I doubt if ever he enjoyed existence so much as now.…30
In 1837, Sir John tackled yet again the Great Nebula in Orion, 
which, at a declination of -5°, is well-placed for observation from the 
Southern Hemisphere. Aft er determining the positions of 150 stars with his 
5-inch refractor, so as to furnish a benchmark for later studies, he carefully 
added in the nebulous features visible with the 18-inch mirror. Referring to 
this drawing, he later wrote: “In form the brightest portion [of the nebula] 
off ers a resemblance to the head and yawning jaws of some monstrous 
animal, with a sort of proboscis running out from the snout.” Naturally 
Sir John was eager to compare this drawing with the one he had made at 
Observatory House 9 years earlier. Th ough he could vouch for no changes 
in the interval, the matter could not yet be regarded as settled—there 
would be, as a later astronomer put it, “strange discrepancies in the draw-
ings of the best hands.”31
In the gargantuan constellation then known as Argo Navis, the 
Ship (subsequently broken up into several smaller constellations of which 
Carina—the Keel— includes the bright star Canopus) he followed the 
fascinating changes in brightness of the star Eta Argûs (now Eta Carinae). 
It had fi rst been recorded as a 4th magnitude star by Edmond Halley at 
the island of St. Helena in 1677. Since 1820 it had been brightening, and in 
1837 was entering a particularly dramatic phase, and continued its ascent 
in brightness aft er Sir John left  South Africa and returned to England, 
reaching its maximum brightness in 1843: at magnitude -0.8, it surpassed 

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
75
Fig. 4.8. The Tarantula Nebula (30 Doradus, or NGC 2070), an HII region in the Large Magel-
lanic Cloud, 160,000 light years away. It is so luminous that if it were as close to us as the Orion 
Nebula, it would cast shadows, and is the largest and most active starburst region known in the 
Local Group of galaxies. Just on its outskirts the Supernova 1987A was observed, which has the 
distinction of being the closest supernova observed since the invention of the telescope. It was a 
Type II supernova, resulting from the collapse of a massive star. Courtesy: John Drummond.
Fig. 4.9. NGC 5128 (Centaurus A). The “peculiarity” of the galaxy was ﬁ rst noted by John Her-
schel. It is one of the closest radio galaxies to the Earth, with radio waves being emitted from 
its active galactic nucleus, and contains at its center a 55-million solar mass black hole. It is also 
a “starburst” galaxy, involved in an intense burst of star-formation owing to a collision with a 
smaller spiral galaxy, which Centaurus A is in the process of “devouring,” as has been conﬁ rmed 
in infrared studies with the Spitzer Space Telescope. Imaged from Gisborne, New Zealand with a 
35cm SCT, at f/10. Courtesy: John Drummond.

 76 
Galactic Encounters
every star in the sky except Sirius. Sir 
John had noted that the star appeared 
to be enveloped in a shroud of nebu-
losity that could be made out even with 
the naked eye. He could not fi nd words 
to describe the beauty and sublim-
ity of this nebula, but he did produce 
a memorable sketch of the dark dust 
cloud at the center—the “Keyhole.”
Parenthetically, since Sir 
John’s time, the nebula has continued 
to undergo further changes. It now 
features a small bipolar nebula con-
sisting of an expanding cocoon of gas 
ejected from the star in the 1830s—
the “homunculus.” Th e star itself has 
appeared very orange in recent years. 
As a recurring nova, it may begin 
another rise to brightness at any time, 
and is a likely candidate to go super-
nova in the near future. 
Sir John would always regard the time he spent in South Africa as the 
happiest period of his life. On returning to England in May 1838 (just in time 
for young Queen Victoria’s coronation, at which he was created a baronet), he 
could take satisfaction in having “done his 
duty. “ His survey of the southern skies 
completed, he never bothered to re-erect 
the 20-foot telescope in England. Instead 
he turned with a will to other researches, 
including photography. Spurred by devel-
opments in France where the daguerreo-
type process had just been invented, he 
introduced the use of sodium thiosul-
phate as a fi xing agent and, independent 
of William Fox Talbot, the use of sensi-
tized paper. He also coined such now-
familiar terms as positive and negative. As 
early as 1839, he made several little faint 
paper photographs of the great 40-foot 
telescope, which had long since fallen into 
disrepair in the front yard of Observatory 
House. Th ese faint paper photographs 
were, as Tony Simcock has said, “the fi rst 
Fig. 4.10. The 40-foot telescope at Slough, just 
before it was dismantled by John Herschel in 
1839. This image has been computer-generated 
positive from the original negative-image cibo-
chrome by Herschel. It was Herschel, by the way, 
who introduced the terms “positive” and “negative” 
into photography. Courtesy: Wikipedia Commons.
Fig. 4.11. Sir John Herschel, in old age; a wet-
process plate by Julia Margaret Cameron. From: 
Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 4: Chimneys and Tubules of the Galaxy 
77
photos ever taken of a scientifi c instrument and the fi rst architectural record 
photos ever taken of a structure about to be demolished.”32
By then, despite the fact that during his absence in South Africa the Great 
Western Railway had reached Slough as it thrust farther west, making it pos-
sible for Herschel to travel from Slough to the Athenaeum (his club on Pall 
Mall) via Paddington Station in only an hour, he and his growing family—Sir 
John and Lady Margaret eventually had twelve children together—found 
themselves increasingly uncomfortable in Observatory House. Moreover, 
Herschel craved more rural privacy and solitude than he could have at 
Slough. Aft er knocking down the dilapidated timbers of the 40-foot telescope 
and sheltering its venerable tube in a shed—in a way, he was symbolically 
settling a score with the burdens that had so long lain upon his shoulders as 
the legacy of his famous father—he and his family relocated to Collingwood 
House, a mansion near Hawkhurst, Kent, 20 kilometers from the nearest 
train station (Staplehurst), where he would remain for the rest of his life. 
At Collingwood, Herschel (alone and unaided) embarked upon the 
daunting and laborious task of preparing his Cape observations for pub-
lication and compiling his great General Catalogue of Nebulae (published 
only in 1864). Th e GC, in turn, served as the basis of J.L.E. Dreyer’s revi-
sion of 1888, called the New General Catalogue (or to give it its complete 
name, the New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters, Being the Cata-
logue of Sir John Herschel, Revised, Corrected and Enlarged). Its familiar 
NGC numbers are still standard today. Herschel also wrote and regularly 
revised the popular Outlines of Astronomy (the fi rst edition appeared in 
1849; it would pass through twelve editions in all). Th ough it had relatively 
little to say about the nebulae, what little it did say was to be highly infl uen-
tial among those who remained actively involved in this research.
Sir John Herschel lived on happily in the midst of his large family 
until his death in 1871, amusing himself with many projects, including a 
rather eccentric translation into English hexameters of Homer’s Iliad, and 
posing for one of the pioneering wet-process portraits of Julia Margaret 
Cameron. But he was never tempted to build bigger mirrors or to make 
further sieges on the nebulae with new technologies. “One senses,” writes 
Allan Chapman, “that he felt that his own observing work had gone as far 
as he wished to take it. Now it was up to his younger contemporaries—
Lord Rosse, William Lassell, and James Nasmyth, who were also much 
more compulsive observers than he was—to carry it further.”33
Th e worm had fi nally turned. At last, aft er two generations in the hands 
of the Herschels, the study of the nebulae was fi nally to pass to other hands.
*   *   *

 78 
Galactic Encounters
 1. John Betjeman, “Slough,” from the collection 
Continual Dew. Th e poem was published in 
1937, before the city was subject to actual air-
raids during World War II. 
 2. Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Herschel, 
vol. 1, xlviii.
 3. Th e house belonged to Mary’s mother, Mrs. 
Baldwin.
 4. Samuel Johnson to Mrs. Th rale, March 24, 1784, 
in Th e Letters of Samuel Johnson, ed. Bruce Red-
ford (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1992), vol. 3, 144.
 5. Herschel Archive, Royal Astronomical Society.
 6. William Herschel, “On Nebulous Stars, prop-
erly so called,” read Feb. 10, 1781, Phil. Trans., 
1791, 71-88, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir 
William Herschel, vol.1, 415-425.
 7. Ibid., 416-417.
 8. Edmund Morris, Beethoven: the universal com-
poser, New York: HarperCollins, 2005, 74.
 9. William Herschel, “Astronomical Observations 
relating to the Construction of the Heavens, 
arranged for the Purpose of a critical Examina-
tion, the Result of which appears to throw some 
new Light upon the Organization of the celes-
tial Bodies,” read June 20, 1811, Phil. Trans., 
1811, 269-336, in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir 
William Herschel, vol. 2, 459-497.
 10. Quoted in L. Pearce Williams, Michael Faraday, 
(New York: Basic Books, 1965), 66.
 11. William Herschel, “Astronomical Observations 
Relating to the Sidereal part of the Heavens and 
its connection with the nebulous part,” read 
February 24, 1814, Phil. Trans., 1814, 248-284, 
in Dreyer, Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Her-
schel, vol. 2, 520-541.
 12. Allan Chapman, Th e Victorian Amateur Astron-
omer: Independent Astronomical Research in 
Britain 1820-1920 (Chichester: Praxis, 1998), 
55.
 13. Ibid., 56.
 14. John Herschel to Charles Babbage, October 10, 
1816; Royal Society of London. In general, we 
have relied on Michael J. Crowe, David R. Dyck, 
and James R. Kevin, eds., A Calendar of the Cor-
respondence of Sir John Herschel (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998), as a useful 
guide to the whereabouts of John Herschel’s vast 
correspondence.
 15. John Herschel to Margaret Herschel, August 10, 
1841 or 1843 (date uncertain); quoted in Chap-
man, Victorian Amateur Astronomer, 56.
 16. Quoted in Anthony Hyman, Charles Babbage: 
pioneer of the computer (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1985), 34.
 17. Winston S. Churchill, Th e Great Democracies 
(London: Cassell, 1958), 12.
 18. Martin J.S. Rudwick, Th e Great Devonian Con-
troversy: the shaping of scientifi c knowledge 
among gentlemanly specialists (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1985), 34.
 19. David S, Evans, Terence J. Deeming, Betty Hall 
Evans, Stephen Goldfarb, eds., Herschel at the 
Cape: diaries and correspondence of Sir John 
Herschel, 1834-1838 (Austin and London: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 1969), xxiii.
 20. Quoted in Walter Scott Houston, Deep-Sky 
Wonders. Selections and commentary by Ste-
phen James O’Meara Cambridge, Mass.: Sky 
Publishing, 1999), 4.
 21. Charles Piazzi Smyth, On Astronomical Draw-
ing, Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
15 (1846), 71-82.
 22. John Herschel to Francis Bailey, March 12, 
1828; Royal Society of London.
 23. Lady Margaret Herschel to Caroline Lucretia 
Herschel, September 29, 1834; University of 
Texas, Austin.
 24. David S. Evans et al., Herschel at the Cape, xxliii.
 25. Quoted in Alan W. Hirshfi eld, Parallax: the race 
to measure the cosmos (New York: W. H. Free-
man, 2001), 193.
 26. Sir John Herschel to Caroline Lucretia Herschel, 
March 28, 1834; University of Texas, Austin.
 27. In a postscript to the letter of Caroline Lucre-
tia Herschel to Lady Margaret Herschel, August 
1, 1833; quoted in Lady Herschel, Memoir and 
Correspondence of Caroline Herschel (London: 
John Murray, 2nd ed. 1879), 258.
 28. Sir John Herschel to Caroline Lucretia Herschel, 
February 22, 1835; University of Texas, Austin.
 29. Sir John F.W. Herschel, Results of Astronomical 
Observations made during the years 1834, 5, 6, 
7, 8 at the Cape of Good Hope, being a comple-
tion of a telescopic survey of the whole surface of 
the visible heavens commenced in 1825 (London: 
Smith, Elder & Co., 1847), art. 335.
 30. Lady Margaret Herschel to Caroline Lucretia 
Herschel, September 29, 1834; University of 
Texas, Austin.
 31. Rev. T. W. Webb, Celestial Objects for Common 
Telescopes, edited and revised by Margaret W. 
Mayall (New York: Dover, 1962 reprint of 6th 
ed., 1917), vol. 2, 193.
 32. Tony Simcock to William Sheehan, personal 
correspondence, December 17, 2009.
 33. Chapman, Th e Victorian Amateur Astronomer, 
72.

79
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th’Ocean stream:
Him haply slumb’ring on the Norway foam
The Pilot of some small night-foundered Skiﬀ ,
Deeming some Island, oft, as Seamen tell,
With ﬁ xèd Anchor in his scaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night
Invests the Sea, and wishèd Morn delays.
—John Milton, Paradise Lost, Bk. 1, 201-208
B
etween them the Herschels, father and son, bestrode the astronomical 
world like colossi. For half a century, they commanded the most power-
ful telescopes in existence. Th e greatest of all was the 40-foot, with its 48-inch 
mirror, at Slough. But here William overreached. A glorious failure, diffi  cult, 
even dangerous, to use, it was never deployed for the study of the nebulae 
for which it was designed. But it inspired an even more colossal instrument, 
the “Leviathan,” at Parsonstown (now Birr), Ireland. Built by the wealthi-
est “Grand Amateur” of his day, William Parsons, the 3rd Earl of Rosse, its 
mirror, 72 inches in diameter, would not be surpassed until the 20th century. 
Th e achievement was all the more remarkable, given that at the time Rosse 
built the telescope, Ireland was an economic basket-case of its day.
Th is telescope would fi rst reveal that class of nebulae which are among 
the most imposing, majestic, and characteristic in the universe—the spiral 
nebulae—amply fulfi lling its maker’s expectation that with it “data will be col-
lected to aff ord us some insight into the construction of the material universe.”1
Th e 3rd Earl’s family, the Parsons, were descendents of Anglo-Irish 
Protestant landowners who had prospered during the great Irish land 
confi scations of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Th e founder of 
the family fortune was Richard Boyle, who in 1588, the fateful year of the 
5.
Of Leviathans, Spirals, 
and Fire-Mists
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 80 
Galactic Encounters
Spanish Armada, crossed the Irish Sea from England, having, it was said, 
no more than the shirt on his back. But patronage worked in his favor, and 
obtaining a position as deputy to the escheator general for Crown lands, he 
used it, said his enemies, “to defraud Irish landowners, especially in Mun-
ster, of their existing titles and to pass title to himself at absurdly defl ated 
prices. He then expelled the Irish tenants and replaced them with more 
pliable and profi table English settlers.”2 Relentlessly and ruthlessly forg-
ing ahead in “the path of Christian virtue and the favor of Providence,” 
he amassed vast fortunes in lands and rents, until his income in rents 
exceeded those of any other of the Crown’s subjects. He was raised to a bar-
onage in 1616, created Viscount Dungarvan and fi rst earl of Cork in 1620. 
Th at same year Boyle’s nephew, Laurence Parsons, enters the story: having 
already acquired from Boyle Myrtle Grove (the gabled residence in Youghal 
where Raleigh had once lived), he now established at Birr the Parsons fam-
ily’s connection with the place; it continues right up to the present day.
A castle had stood at Birr since the twelft h century. Laurence Par-
sons had a new one built by English workmen, in which he and his succes-
sors lived as grandees sequestered behind fi ft een-foot high walls (high even 
by Irish standards) within a showpiece demesne consisting of the castle and 
well-manicured grounds. 
In the eighteenth century, one improving landlord at Birr, another 
Laurence Parsons, the 5th Baronet, began digging an artifi cial lake and 
planting beech trees. His son, the 6th Baronet (and aft er 1807 2nd Earl of 
Rosse), turned the old house back to front in order to face the park, height-
ened and crenellated it in the then-fashionable Gothic style, and added 
the great “Gothic saloon” whose windows look down on the waterfalls of 
the river Camcor. He entered politics, and served in Parliament for the 
next several years. He was, of course, highly conservative, and yet in one 
respect unconventional—he and Lady Rosse were unusual in the approach 
they took to the upbringing of their fi ve children, two daughters and three 
sons, including the eldest son William, the future astronomer, born at York 
in 1800. Instead of sending them to the public schools such as Eton, they 
educated them at home with the assistance of tutors, thus aff ording them 
a thorough grounding in science and engineering. Laurence himself was 
of a scientifi c turn of mind; a suspension bridge he built over the Camcor 
was the fi rst of its kind in Ireland, described by a visitor as “a curious wire 
bridge … suspended in the air just under the castle.” 
When William (the future 3rd earl) turned 18, he and his younger 
brother John, who suff ered from ill health and died young, were sent to Trin-
ity College, Dublin, though they continued to do most of their work at home 
as allowed by the regulations of the time. In 1821 they transferred to Mag-
dalen College, Oxford, and William (known as Lord Oxmantown until his 
father’s death) received a First-Class mathematics degree the following year. 

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
81
He followed his father’s footsteps into politics, and served for more than a 
decade in the House of Lords, voting on the great issues of the day (he was in 
favor of both Catholic Emancipation and the Reform Bill). But by 1834 he was 
ready to say farewell to all that; he decided not to stand for election of parlia-
ment the next year year, citing as his reasons “defects of the present franchise” 
and a refusal “to solicit support from the enemies of the Union and of the 
Established Church.”3 Th e real reason was becoming mad about astronomy.
As early as 1830, he had completed a telescope with an innovative 
15-inch compound speculum mirror (one in which the refl ecting surface 
consisted of strips of bronze soldered to a brass base), and set up a wooden 
stand for mounting it outdoors. At the same time he jotted an ambitious 
prospectus for himself:
The examination of the heavens commenced by the late Sir William 
Herschel and prosecuted by him with such success, still continues. New 
facts are recorded: and there can be little doubt that discoveries will 
multiply in proportion as the telescope may be improved.4
His goal was to build ever larger telescopes, until he had surpassed 
even those of his hero, William Herschel. Perhaps there was something phal-
lic in the aspiration; there was certainly a good deal of the spirit of conquest, 
for the building of larger telescopes was necessary to achieve the expansion 
of human knowledge (and perhaps control) into the farther and farther 
reaches of the universe. Herschel was a kind of Alexander who had pushed 
the borders of intellectual empire to the Hydaspean limits of his time; others, 
like William Parsons, wanted to explore territory beyond even the Hydaspes 
(wherever that might be, cosmically speaking) that Herschel had reached.
Science in the 18th and especially the 19th centuries—the age of the 
“gentlemanly specialist”—was a rich man’s game. John Herschel had won 
his place at the table by virtue of his outstanding talent and connections 
but no less so as the heir to a considerable fortune. Despite his not incon-
siderable wealth as an Irish landowner, William Parsons’s grandiose ambi-
tions could never have been realized on the scale he dreamed were it not 
for a successful match in 1836 to Mary Wilmer Field, a wealthy heiress who 
not only brought a signifi cant amount of cash but several valuable proper-
ties in the Bradford area of Yorkshire into the family.
Th ree years later, in 1839—at almost the very moment Sir John was 
dismantling the 40-foot refl ector at Observatory House, Slough, and prepar-
ing to move to Collingwood—Parsons set up a new 36-inch refl ector, with 
a speculum-metal mirror weighing 1 ½ tons cast in his own foundry and 
ground and polished by a steam-powered machine (making it in a real sense 
the fi rst large telescope fabricated using the methods of the Industrial Revo-
lution). Financed with a large chunk of Mary Wilmer Field’s money, it was 

 82 
Galactic Encounters
mounted in Herschelian manner on the extensive lawn in front of the Castle, 
and it did not disappoint. Turning it to the Moon, Parsons’s advisor and 
friend, Dr. Th omas Romney Robinson of Armagh, a fi ercely militant Ulster-
man who had already built up Armagh Observatory from a “ramshackle, 
inactive establishment into a major observatory,” and was irascible enough 
to live to 100, wrote: “It is scarcely possible to preserve the necessary sobriety 
of language, in speaking of the Moon’s appearance.” Still, Parsons remained 
unsatisfi ed. Th e Moon was hardly more than a diversion; it was the nebulae 
he was aft er, his goal being to solve the problems Herschel had not and to 
fi nd out whether the nebulae were, as Allan Chapman writes, “luminous 
‘chevalures’ of glowing, perhaps gaseous, material, or … conglomerations of 
individual stars…. And why ... the star clusters and nebulae tend to occur 
most frequently in diff erent regions of the sky.”5 For this he needed even 
more light-grasp than the 36-inch refl ector furnished; the idea of an enor-
mous telescope with a mirror twice the diameter, the Leviathan, was born.
He began work on the great telescope in earnest aft er 1841, when 
on his father’s death he inherited his title to become 3rd Earl of Rosse and 
a ranking member of the Irish aristocracy. (Henceforth we will refer to him 
by his title.) Like Herschel’s, Rosse’s mirrors were of speculum metal, that 
fi nicky alloy of copper and tin. When polished, speculum metal is as refl ec-
tive as silver (refl ecting two-thirds of the light and absorbing another third), 
but the material is diffi  cult to work with, not easy to cast, prone to crack 
while cooling, and heavy and ponderous (a 6-foot diameter mirror weighed 
at least 3 tons.)6 He cast each of his mirrors—because of their tendency 
to tarnish, several were needed for a working telescope—in three 24-foot 
crucibles, heated with peat. Robinson compared the foundry of Rosse to the 
poet Milton’s “splendid description of the infernal palace” in Paradise Lost. 
Th ough Rosse provided overall direction, much of the actual work was car-
ried out by unsung heroes, including William Coughlan, a local blacksmith, 
and a skilled workforce drawn from “common Irish laborers.” 
Aft er several failures, Rosse oversaw the casting of the fi rst successful 
6-foot mirror in 1842. A backup was cast the following year, which meant 
the two mirrors could be exchanged relay-style as each in turn became 
tarnished and corroded by exposure to the damps and mists of Irish nights 
(and it oft en required no more than a couple months for the mirrors to dete-
riorate). It took another year to fi gure the mirror, and yet another to polish 
it—as with the 36-inch, this was managed with the aid of a steam-engine 
powered machine. By February 1845, the great mirror was placed at the 
end of a 56-foot tube, supported at its lower end by an enormous universal 
joint, and slung in chains between two massive stonework walls evoking the 
remains of a medieval castle. To some, it looked like a “folly,” an architectural 
bauble such as were then fashionable among the idle rich. Others, informed 
of its purpose as a great engine of research, compared it to “that artillery 

described by Milton as pointed by the rebellious angels against the host of 
Heaven,” and looked with keen anticipation to its “quiet victory over space.”7 
Th is sublime and terrifying machine was needed to tackle the fear-
ful immensities of stars and nebulae that, as John Herschel had observed 
with perhaps unintended understatement, “may be thought to savour of 
the gigantesque.”8 Like other monsters of the early Victorian period—the 
iguanadons, ichthysosaurs, and the jawed fi shes—the nebulae, with their 
strange and sometimes grotesque physiognomies, evoked what the poet 
Tennyson would later call the “Terrible Muses” of geology and astronomy. 
Th ey were sublime, in the sense of Edmund Burke’s infl uential essay Philo-
sophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and the Beauti-
ful (1757): huge, obscure, capable of stunning the mind with an emotion 
closely akin to elemental fear. Th e Herschels and Lord Rosse worked at a 
time when God was not as neighborly as of yore. Th eir telescopes revealed 
something vast and indefi nite in the nebulae that paralyzed and astonished 
the human mind, and showed something of the precariousness (which 
Burke too had noted) of quaint 18th century ideas of order.
We emphasize here that the 19th-century quest to determine the 
nature of the nebulae took place without any understanding of the distinc-
tion between the true distant galaxies or island universes and the local 
collections of stars and gas clouds situated within our own Galaxy. It is 
diffi  cult—but essential—if we are to form an appreciation of the way the 
Fig. 5.1. (above) William Parsons, Third Earl of Rosse, 
and Lady Rosse; portrait by Piazzi Smyth. Courtesy of 
the Birr Scientiﬁ c and Heritage Foundation.
Fig. 5.2. (right) The restored Leviathan, as it looked 
in 2010. Looking across the tube in the direction of 
Birr Castle. Photograph by William Sheehan.
83

 84 
Galactic Encounters
pioneers of nebular studies proceeded not to view their eff orts from the 
perspective of current knowledge. What they worked from were merely 
the more or less indistinct forms seen in the sky—hieroglyphs, but with no 
Rosetta stone to help puzzle out their composition, sizes or distances (and 
even the fi rst actual measurements of the distances to the nearer stars had 
only occurred in the 1820s). We must, in a manner of speaking, in Robert 
Smith’s arresting phrase, “put the strangeness back in.”
When Rosse began to employ his gigantic machine on the problem 
of the nebulae, there were essentially two views as to their nature. Th e fi rst 
was that all of them would, when seen with suffi  cient telescopic power, 
resolve into stars. Th is had been the view of William Herschel up to his 
crucial “nebulous star” observation of 1790. Th en he had deserted that posi-
tion and believed right up to his death in 1822 that, in addition to resolvable 
nebulae (star clusters), there were others that were irresolvable, consisting 
not of stars but of a mysterious “shining fl uid,” the substance of which might 
rejuvenate dying suns and even perhaps—as argued by the French math-
ematician Pierre Simon Laplace, working up the idea partly from Herschel’s 
own nebular studies—give rise, through the fl attening of a slowly rotating 
nebula into a thin disk followed by collapse and fragmentation under the 
infl uence of gravity—to the formation of new suns and solar systems. 
It was these questions—which were not without terrestrial impli-
cations, since the nebular hypothesis was “French,” and in England and 
Ireland at least regarded as associated with atheism, the French Revolu-
tion, and other such ideas dangerous to the established order—that Rosse 
and Robinson yearned to tackle with the great telescope. Finally, in Feb-
ruary 1845, Rosse proclaimed that the Leviathan was capable of being 
used “without personal danger.” It was offi  cially opened in a memorable 
ceremony in which George Peacock, one of John Herschel’s best friends 
at Cambridge and now Dean of Ely, wearing his top hat and deploying an 
umbrella, walked the length of the tube to demonstrate its enormous size.
Th e observing platform at the mouth of the great tube was raised by a 
winch, and reached by a system of staircases and galleries. An ingenious 
machinery of cables and chains was worked by two men to point the tube 
toward objects within forty minutes on either side of their culmination 
along the meridian—the only objects accessible given the telescope’s more 
or less rigid north-south orientation between its massive stone walls. Rosse 
and Robinson were joined by Sir James South, John Herschel’s former 
companion in double star observations, who came up from London eager 
for the telescope’s inaugural views. Th ey were a revelation. One can imag-
ine what they must have experienced from the notes that the Astronomer 
Royal at Greenwich, Sir George Airy, made during his own subsequent 
visit to Birr Castle. He described how “the orb of Jupiter produced an eff ect 
compared to that of the introduction of a coach-lamp into the telescope,” 

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
85
while the approach of Sirius was “like the dawn of morning,” its entry into 
the fi eld accompanied “with all the splendor of the rising Sun.”9
Of course, the Leviathan had not been built to show Jupiter or 
Sirius. It was built for the nebulae, and its fi rst priority was the Great 
Nebula of Orion. Unfortunately, the weather during February was “of the 
worst astronomical character,” as Robinson groused, and whenever the 
Great Nebula was in range of the great telescope, clouds interfered. Soon it 
was sliding hopelessly out of range, vanishing early into the evening twi-
light. Th ere was no alternative but to try for something else. Th e mirror 
was therefore removed from the telescope, and repolished on March 3. Th e 
weather then turned clear (but very cold) during the week of March 4-13. 
South exclaimed that the night of March 5 was “one of the fi nest I ever 
saw in Ireland. Many nebulae were observed by Lord Rosse, Dr. Robinson 
and myself.”10 Th e three men carried out a fi rst survey of 40 some of the 
brighter nebulae catalogued by Sir John Herschel. Th ey worked at great 
speed; their excitement must have been almost unbearable, and the prelim-
inary results were everything they could have hoped. “We have,” Robinson 
privately exulted, “… worked to some purpose, for of the 43 nebulae which 
we have examined All have been Resolved [into stars].”11
Among the nebulae that seemed to have been resolved, one of 
the most interesting was M51 in Canes Venatici, the Hunting Dogs. It 
was one of the entries in Messier’s catalog that was actually discovered by 
him, though it was Méchain who fi rst recognized it as a double nebula, 
“each having a brilliant center [with] the two atmospheres touching.”12 On 
examining it in 1833, John Herschel had shown a bifurcated ring swirling 
around a central condensation, and in this form it had also appeared to 
Rosse himself with the 3-foot. In the fi rst view of it through the Leviathan, 
Robinson seemed to peg another notable success: “Here … the central 
nebula is a globe of large stars; as indeed had previously been discovered 
with the three feet telescope: but it is also seen with [a magnifying power 
of] 560 that the exterior stars, instead of being uniformly distributed … are 
condensed into a ring, although many are also spread over its interior.” 
In fact, in reporting stars, Rosse and Robinson were not merely fall-
ing victim to the illusion of expectation; what they saw was real enough—
M51, and similar objects such as M33 and M101, do show starlike objects 
in their outer parts, which appear in better instruments as nebulous knots 
of glowing gaseous matter (now known as HII regions). Th ese are much 
brighter than individual stars. Of course, we shall say more to say about all 
this later, but for now let’s stay with Rosse and Robinson.
In these observers’ fi rst remarks on M51, no comment was made 
on what was to be its most notable feature—its spiral structure. When, and 
under what circumstances, was the discovery made? Apparently, in March 
1845, the observers’ attention was so totally concentrated on resolving it into 

 86 
Galactic Encounters
stars that the novelty of the spiral structure eluded them. Only in April 1845 
did Rosse, now observing alone, discern that M51’s structure was “more 
complicated than had hitherto been appreciated,” its form consisting of “a 
curvilinear arrangement not consisting of regular re-entering curves.”In 
other words, it was a double spiral, with one arm curling out as far as the 
secondary nucleus. And so within only two months of Peacock’s top-hatted 
traverse of the great tube, Rosse had made a discovery that would introduce 
a sea-change in the way astronomers engaged the nebulae at the time and, as 
Sir Bernard Lovell would remark a century later, “open an avenue of explora-
tion which would lead into the inconceivable depths of space and time.”13
An excellent artist, who left  many examples of his skill (some from 
boyhood) in the archives at Birr Castle, Rosse was more than capable of 
recording with perfect assurance the whorls of M51 and its companion. 
Indeed, his sketch from spring 1845 compares favorably with modern pho-
tographic and CCD images.
He passed the sketch around at the meeting of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science, held in Cambridge in June 1845. It 
was received with “much acclaim.” Henceforth, Rosse proclaimed deci-
sively, “our attention was … directed to the form of nebulae, the question of 
resolvability being a secondary object.”14
Th e Great Nebula in Orion, meanwhile, was not well placed enough to try 
at with the Leviathan until Christmas 1845, when John Pringle Nichol, 
Fig. 5.3a. Lord Rosse’s paradigm-shifting sketch of M51, a galaxy located 37 million light years 
away, made with the Leviathan in April 1845. Photographed from the original notebook by William 
Sheehan and reproduced with the permission of the Birr Scientiﬁ c and Heritage Foundation.

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
87
Fig. 5.3b. A modern amateur image of M51, for comparison. Imaged by Mike Hatcher with a 
C-11 SCT. At the time this image was taken, on June 10, 2011, a Type II supernova was visible 
about a third of the way down the spiral arm extending toward the satellite galaxy NGC 5195. A 
classic example of interacting galaxies. Courtesy: Mike Hatcher.
Glasgow University astronomer and radical economist (as such, a fervent 
supporter of the nebular hypothesis) joined Rosse on the platform of the 
great telescope as it was successful pointed to it for the fi rst time. Nichol 
expressed the hope that the observation would, “in so far as human insight 
could ever confi rm it,” either show the correctness of Herschel’s hypoth-
esis that it was a shining fl uid or else dispel that notion once and for all by 
resolving into discrete stars. 
Th e best laid plans of mice and men oft  go awry; and in this case, 
the Irish weather wreaked havoc with their plans. Th e mists and agitated 
air of the Irish winter did not permit a decisive result. Nichol reported, 
heavily, “Not yet the veriest trace of a star.” 
Rosse, undaunted, persisted, and on March 19, 1846 believed he 
had fi nally succeeded in achieving a defi nitive result. 
Ere we go further, however, we need to interpose something about 
the appearance of the Great Nebula in a good telescope. Sir John Herschel 
gave a minutely exact description in his Outlines of Astronomy:
The general aspect of the less luminous and cirrus portion is simply neb-
ulous and irresolvable, but the brighter portion immediately adjacent 
to the [multi-star system] the trapezium … is shown with the 18-inch 
reﬂ ector broken up into masses … whose mottled and curdling light 
evidently indicates by a sort of granular texture its existing of stars.15

 88 
Galactic Encounters
But it was just in this granular texture around the Trapezium that 
Rosse inferred the resolution into stars. As he wrote to Nichol: “I may safely 
say there can be little, if any, doubt as to the resolvability of the nebula; all 
about the trapezium is a mass of stars, the rest of the nebula also abound-
ing with stars, and exhibiting the characteristics of resolvability strongly 
marked.”16 Based on Rosse’s apparent success, but without the qualifi cations 
that the resolution was achieved only in parts of the nebula, the report was 
passed on to foreign journals, and brought apparent confi rmations, includ-
ing, most notably, one from the just unveiled 15-inch Merz refractor at 
Harvard. Robinson rejoiced that the powerful telescope seemed set to fulfi ll 
the utmost dreams of its maker by shedding “a light hitherto not merely 
unattainable, but unhoped, on the constitution of the sidereal universe”?17
Interlude
A candid vignette of Rosse’s activities during the industrious inaugural year 
of his telescope is provided by Th omas Langlois Lefroy, an Irish judge who 
early in his career had had a brief and not very serious romantic fl irtation 
with the novelist Jane Austen (he has even been invoked as the possible 
inspiration for Mr. Darcy in Pride and Prejudice). During a visit to Par-
sonstown, Lefroy was cordially entertained by Lord and Lady Rosse, and 
shown the magnifi cent telescope. He aft erward recalled:
The wonders of his telescope are not to be told. He says – with as much 
ease as another man would say, “Come and I’ll show you a beautiful 
prospect” – “Come and I’ll show you a universe, one of a countless mul-
titude of universes, each larger than the whole universe hitherto known 
to astronomers.” The planet Jupiter, which through an ordinary glass is 
no larger than a good star, is seen twice as large as the moon appears 
to the naked eye. It was all true what Doherty [a fellow justice] said, that 
he walked upright in the tube with an umbrella over his head before it 
was set. But the genius displayed in all the contrivances for wielding this 
mighty monster even surpasses the design and execution of it. The tele-
scope weighs sixteen tons, and yet Lord Rosse raised it single-handed 
oﬀ  its resting place, and two men with ease raised it to any height.18
Hiatus: the Great Famine
Just then, Ireland plunged into the catastrophe of the potato famine, which 
saw a third of the indispensable crop (and foundation of the ill-famed “cot-
tier system”) fail in 1845, and the entire crop in 1846. Th ough it aff ected 

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
89
most of Ireland, and the devastation was especially severe in the West, it 
was the product of factors whose consequences (though anticipated by 
some of the more far-seeing among them, including Rosse, who had read 
his Malthus) could not be prevented by any of them. Rosse did what he 
could, on a local basis. Indeed, he was completely absorbed in the whole 
aff air—as of course it was his duty to be. From early 1846, when the most 
acute phase of the crisis began, the Leviathan was sidelined. Its last pre-
Famine discovery, in the spring of 1846, was of the spiral structure of M99 
in Coma Berenices.
For the next two years the monstrous tube loomed shadowy and 
unused beneath the cold, uncaring stars, idled within the walled and mani-
cured grounds of the Parsonstown demesne as the huddled masses outside 
the walls grew pale and spectre-thin and died.
Judging the worst to have passed by the winter of 1848-49, Rosse at 
last returned to the activities suspended during the depths of the crisis—
including the promising work with the Leviathan. (Even so, aft ershocks 
of the humanitarian crisis continued. As late as May 1849 fi ft y-seven 
“wretched paupers” at the cholera hospital in Parsonstown “breathed their 
last on the same day.”)19 Th ere was still the unfi nished business of the Orion 
Nebula—the resolution question seemingly settled, next was the question 
that had so stirred William Herschel over several decades: did it change?—
and there were many other nebulae to be examined. By 1850, fourteen had 
been identifi ed as spirals by Rosse and his assistants, including such well-
known examples as M33 in Triangulum; M65, the edgewise spiral in Leo; 
M77, the “blue” spiral in Cetus; and M95, the barred spiral in Leo. (A few 
others, such as the globular clusters M12 and M30, were also reported as 
spirals; in these cases, later studies, with better instruments and photogra-
phy, would show this suspected structure to be illusory.) 
Th e enormous light-grasp of the Leviathan showed haunting details 
in many objects which had hitherto seemed little more than nondescript 
blurs of light. Th us Messier’s premier object, M1, showed “streams running 
out like claws” (as Robinson described it); possibly this was the basis of 
its name of “Crab nebula.” Rosse also fi rst detected the two faint stars that 
form the “eyes” in M97, the planetary nebula in Ursa Major, and gave it its 
popular name, the “Owl.” 
Rosse puzzled over the explanation of these strange forms. He 
wrote in 1850 that their discovery
may be calculated to excite our curiosity, and to awaken an intense desire 
to learn something of the laws which give order to these wonderful sys-
tems [but] as yet, I think, we have no fair ground even for plausible con-
jecture; and as observations have accumulated the subject has become, 
to my mind at least, more mysterious and more unapproachable.20

 90
He was coming to terms with the complexity of the nebulae. By 
1850, he had realized that M51—the term “Whirlpool,” by the way, was fi rst 
applied to the object by Ormsby MacKnight Mitchel, director of the Cin-
cinnati Observatory and later Civil War general, in 1848, though it did not 
become prevalent until the early 20th century)21—as well as the other spirals 
could not be systems in “static equilibrium.” Such forms could only result 
from internal movements of rotation. He was leaving a crack open for the 
nebular hypothesis to creep back in to respectability (as indeed it would). 
Rosse himself was by now too busy to devote much time to observ-
ing. It has been said that the “Rosse telescope would have been more 
eff ectively used had its maker been as interested in observing as he was in 
instrument-making. His special interest in the instrument seems to have 
ceased when the last nail was driven into it.”22 Th ere is a grain of truth to 
this: Rosse was an engineer of genius, and what chiefl y engaged him was 
the challenge of building such an instrument, then using it to solve the 
problem of the nebulae. But he was also an extremely overworked and 
heavily burdened man, both in and out of science; not only responsible 
for his demesne and his tenants, but for many years president of the Royal 
Society of London. Moreover, by the 1860s his health was beginning to 
fail (he died in 1867; his son, Laurence, the 4th Earl of Rosse, was also an 
astronomer, whose specialty was the Moon). Despite his other preoccupa-
tions, he was determined that the great engine of research did not fall into 
disuse, and employed a series of gift ed assistants who included George 
Johnstone Stoney (1848-52), the Rev. William Hautenville Rambaut (1848-
Fig. 5.4. The other nebula that Lord Rosse found to be spiral before the Potato Famine broke out: 
M99, at a distance of 50 million light years, in Coma Berenices. Photographed from the original note-
book by William Sheehan and reproduced courtesy of the Birr Scientiﬁ c and Heritage Foundation.

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
91
50), Johnstone Stoney’s brother Bindon (1850-52), R.J. Mitchell (1852-5), 
Samuel Hunter (1860-64), and Robert Stawell Ball (1865-67). 
Th eir chef d’oeuvre was, naturally, still the Great Nebula of Orion. 
Since at least the time it was observed by Huygens and called by William 
Derham a “window into the empyrean,” no other object of the heavens had 
seemed more likely than this, with its complicated mixture of small stars 
and regions of milky smoothness, to be the Rosetta Stone of the nebulae, the 
one that would provide the means to decipher all the rest. Rosse himself had 
set up the result seemingly beyond question that the inner regions around 
the trapezium were resolvable into stars; but this still left  the greenish outer 
regions, that looked for all the world like a cloud of fi re-mist. Was the region 
around the trapezium, which appeared clear of nebulosity, one thing, the 
outer regions another, a true shining fl uid? And what of the other great 
question, which had bearing on both possibilities: the question of change.
 And here we see that, if in fact the Great Nebula consisted of a glit-
tering dust of small stars, resolvable only in the largest instruments (and 
then only in part), from the great distance with which it was viewed, the 
nebula’s structure ought to maintain a more or less permanent form. On 
the other hand, if it were an insubstantial mist or vapor, it might shift  like 
cloud-forms on a windy day. Th e only way to settle the matter seemed to 
be through construction of an accurate map—a “physiognomy”—of the 
singular object for the purpose of answering, once and for all, the question 
of its changeability. But the problem was that, in the pre-photographic era, 
when the observer had only his eyes, his brain, and a pencil and sketchpad, 
the mapping of such a complex object was extremely laborious, and ulti-
mately likely to be inconclusive. 
Next to the studies of John Herschel, who had completed a draw-
ing at the Cape which he compared with one made at Observatory House, 
Slough, nine years earlier, and Rosse himself, the next most widely mooted 
investigation regarding the nature of the Great Nebula was made in March 
1846—just months before a new planet (Neptune) was discovered in Berlin 
as it lurked among the stars near the Ophiuchus-Capricorn border. It 
was the work of an American, William Cranch Bond at Harvard College 
Observatory, using the just unveiled 15-inch Merz refractor at Harvard 
College Observatory. Th ough conceding the Leviathan’s superior light 
grasp, the Harvard achromat was unrivalled for exquisite defi ning power 
(not to say in need of an observation that might justify its great expense), 
and Bond, eager (overeager) to put Harvard College Observatory on the 
map of leading astronomical institutions, wrote to the College president 
Edward Everett on September 22, 1847:
You will rejoice with me that the great nebula in Orion has yielded to the 
power of our incomparable telescope.23

 92 
Galactic Encounters
Th e Parsonstown group began their own massive study in the 
winter of 1848-49. Th ey began by carefully laying down a grid of measured 
stars, based on Sir John Herschel’s Cape Observations and on the cata-
logues of leading stellar positional astronomers Wilhelm and Otto Struve 
of Pulkovo Observatory in Russia. Upon this grid, the observers regis-
tered their fl uctuating impressions of the nebula, which were found to be 
extremely variable depending on the steadiness and transparency of the air 
and the condition of the mirror. Th us George Johnstone Stoney, observing 
on February 17, 1849, rejoiced in the revelation of a “multitude of stars,” 
only to discover, as soon as he sat down to attempt a drawing, “the state of 
the air” had changed, leaving him with only nine sure and fi ve suspected 
stars. His brother Bindon, engaged in taking observations during the whole 
winter of 1851-52 of the bright inner Huygenian region, the part of the 
nebula where resolution was most strongly suspected, noted the persistent 
impression of faint nebulosity but explained it away: “an observer might 
suppose milkiness to exist,” he wrote, “on unfavourable nights for defi nition 
or with an imperfect speculum, where in fact no nebulosity would appear 
with a freshly polished speculum free from all tarnish and on a fi rst class 
night.” Unfortunately, the speculum-mirror was seldom freshly polished 
Fig. 5.5. A detailed map of the Orion Nebula, made by Samuel Hunter from observations by 
himself and several other observers with the Leviathan at Parsonstown between 1860 and 1864. 
From: Lord Oxmantown (later the Fourth Earl of Rosse, “Account of the Observations of the Great 
Nebula in Orion,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (1868). 

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
93
Fig. 5.6. Brendan, Seventh Earl of Rosse, and William Sheehan, in front of the restored Leviathan, 
at Birr Castle, 2010. Photograph by Deborah Sheehan.
and free from tarnish, and as always, truly fi ne nights for observing were 
exceedingly rare in Ireland. 
Samuel Hunter, the most gift ed artist among Rosse’s assistants, 
devoted four years between 1860 and 1864 to making a drawing that would 
be suitable for a steel engraving. He explained why it took so long: on any 
given night he could gaze at Orion only for fi ft y minutes, when the tube 
stood in the right position between its two stone walls. Moreover, condi-
tions in Ireland were such that over the course of four years he enjoyed 
only fi ve “really good” and twelve “fair nights” for observing it.
As the Parsonstown observers con-
tinued their long labors to record the 
“physiognomy” of the Orion Nebula, 
an even more heroic attempt—more 
heroic because it proceeded as the 
work of a lone observer—had been 
advancing slowly over the course of 
several years at the Harvard College 
Observatory. Th e observer was George 
Philips Bond, an astronomer-son of 
William Cranch Bond whose report of 
the resolution of the nebula with the 
15-inch Merz had attracted so much 
attention a decade earlier.24Motivated 
initially by fi lial devotion to redeem his 
Fig. 5.7. A cartoon of G.P. Bond and W.C. Bond by 
volunteer observer Sidney Coolidge. This sketch 
is the only likeness that exists of G.P. Bond, the 
obsessive observer of the Orion Nebula. Photo-
graph by William Sheehan with the permission of the 
Harvard College Observatory.

 94 
Galactic Encounters
father’s work, which had been harshly criticized by Otto Struve, the younger 
Bond labored with the monomania of obsession between 1859 and 1865, 
distracted only by the visitation, in seriatim, of several unusually brilliant 
and beautiful comets, beginning with Donati’s of 1858. (It is this comet, by 
the way, which Walt Whitman seems to be referring to in his poem “Year of 
Meteors,” on the events of the fateful year in which John Brown was hanged 
and America drew steadily toward Civil War. At the time, comets were 
widely believed, as J.P. Nichol had maintained, to be themselves “nothing 
but nebulosities, small portions of a substance precisely similar in physical 
constitution to that which our hypothesis assumes. Even their nuclei dis-
solve into a fog under the inspection of the telescope.”)25 Bond published a 
lavish monograph on Donati’s Comet,26 and made careful observations of 
the Great Comet of 1861 as well as the pair of great comets of 1862.27 But 
nothing on earth or in the heavens could distract him for long from his 
lengthy and arduous siege on the Great Nebula of Orion. 
Th e harsh New England winters took their toll on him and added 
their rigors to the work. Th us Asaph Hall, assistant at the observatory and 
later renowned for his discovery of the two satellites of Mars, recalled 
Fig. 5.8. Comet Donati, seen above Notre-Dame de Paris, October 4, 1858. This, one of the most 
beautiful comets ever observed, was studied intensely by G.P. Bond, and distracted him from his 
great work on the Orion Nebula. From: E. Weiss, Bilderatlas der Sternenwelt, 1888.

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
95
how cold my feet were when he was making his winter observations of 
Orion. I sat in the small alcove of the great dome behind a black curtain, 
and noted on the chronometer the transits of stars when Professor Bond 
called them out, and wrote down also the readings for declination…. 
Sometimes I was called to examine a very faint star, or some conﬁ gura-
tion of the Nebula. Prof. Bond had one of the keenest eyes I have ever 
met with. His work on this great nebula forms an epoch in its history.28 
A perfectionist, Bond “made scores of drawings, in white on black, 
and the reverse, in colors, etc.,” in preparation for it, as his cousin and later 
fi rst director of the Lick Observatory, Edward S. Holden, would later write. 
Each of these, Holden continues, “was revised and re-revised many times. 
Th e revision of the … plate lasted many months, and I have myself exam-
ined from fi ft een to twenty ‘fi nal’ revisions of the plate. Color, form, and 
relative brilliancy were all successively and exhaustively criticized.”29 (Note: 
some of these drawings, each lovely in its way, are being published here for 
the fi rst time.) In the end, Bond was to prove a martyr to the Great Nebula. 
He had suff ered from tuberculosis since 1858. Aft er his father’s death in 
Fig. 5.9. (left) Owen Gingerich and Rich Schmidt seated at the eyepiece of the Merz refractor, with its mahog-
any-veneered tube, at Harvard College Observatory. Photograph by Rich Schmidt. Courtesy: Rich Schmidt. 
Fig. 5.10. (right) The Great Nebula of Orion. Engraving by J.W. Watts, based on visual observations made 
by G.P. Bond between 1858 and 1863 with the 15-inch Merz refractor of the Harvard College Observatory. 
From: “Observations of the Great Nebula of Orion,” ed. Truman Henry Saﬀ ord, Annals of the Harvard College 
Observatory, vol. 5, 1867, frontispiece. 

 96 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 5.11. One of G.P. Bond’s sketches made in preparation for his great drawing of the 
Orion Nebula. Photographed by William Sheehan with the permission of the Harvard Col-
lege Observatory. 
1859, he was appointed director of the observatory in his stead, but imme-
diately was faced with diffi  culties. With the onset of the Civil War, funds 
were diverted to the war eff ort, and the observatory’s fi nancial situation 
suff ered; federal contracts and income ended completely by 1862.30 More-
over, he complained that all but one of his assistants had enlisted or been 
draft ed into the army. Nevertheless, in spite of failing health, he persevered. 
He gave up work at the telescope in August 1864. As the winter of 1864-65 
came on, and Orion once more commanded foremost place in the skies, he 
studied only an effi  gy of the nebula lying before him on his desk. He was 
busy reducing his earlier observations, which included measured positions 
of 800 or 900 stars. Aft er a brief rest in Maine urged on him by friends 

 
Chapter 5: Of Leviathans, Spirals, and Fire-Mists 
97
growing alarmed by his pale complexion and gaunt appearance, he rallied 
for a fi nal eff ort, and spent the last weeks of his short life “forced to give up 
everything but the one obsessive thought … [of completing] his long work 
on the nebula in Orion.”31 On January 7, 1865, he admitted to Hall:
My disease makes progress, and leaves me little hope of putting the mate-
rials of my work on Orion—to which I had devoted so much labor—into 
condition such that another could prepare them for the press. In truth, I 
am becoming resigned to the idea that most of it is destined to oblivion.
I had planned to accomplish something considerable, and this is the 
end. ‘It is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.’32
He died on February 17, 1865, at the age of only 39. His great 
monograph on the Orion Nebula was published posthumously.
In 1864, Sir John Herschel published his Catalogue of Nebulae (the Gen-
eral Catalogue, or GC, which was later absorbed into the still-standard 
New General Catalogue, or NGC). Th at same year Edward Sabine, then 
President of the Royal Society, opined that nebular astronomy had reached 
a crisis. Observations of the nebulae with powerful telescopes, he wrote, 
had “revealed many strange arrangements … some of which are scarcely 
reconcilable with ordinary dynamics.”33
Sabine’s point was that, despite the eff orts of the Herschels, Rosse, 
and the Bonds, the nebulae remained as shrouded in mystery as ever. Were 
they truly fi re-mists? Were they resolvable, with suffi  cient telescopic power, 
into stars? Did they lie within the star-system of the Galaxy? Were they 
island universes far beyond the Milky Way? 
What were those questions the Almighty hurled at Job out of the 
whirlwind?
*   *   *
 1. W. Garrett Scaife, From Galaxies to Turbines: 
Science, Technology and the Parsons Family 
(Bristol and Philadelphia: Institute of Physics, 
2000), 12.
 2. Steven Shapin, A Social History of Truth: civil-
ity and science in seventeenth-century England 
(Chicago and London: University of Chicago 
Press, 1994), 132.
 3. Scaife, From Galaxies to Turbines, 31.
 4. Ibid., 31.
 5. Chapman, Victorian Amateur Astronomer, 96.
 6. Th e fi rst mirror cast (“on the 13th of April 1842 
at 9 in the evening”) weighed 3 tons, the second 
4 tons, according to Th omas Woods, Th e Mon-
ster Telescopes Erected by the Earl of Rosse… etc, 
1st edition, 1844.
 7. Quoted in Simon Schaff er, “On Astronomi-
cal Drawing,” in Caroline A. Jones and Peter 
Galison, eds., Picturing Science: Producing Art, 
Caroline A. Jones and Peter Galison (New York 
and London: Routledge, 1998), 456.
 8. Ibid., “On Astronomical Drawing,” 461.
 9. G. B. Airy, “Notice of the Substance of a Lecture 
on the Large Telescopes of the Earl of Rosse and 
Mr. Lassell,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, 9 (1849):120.
 10. J. South, Th e Times, April 16, 1845.
 11. T.R. Robinson, manuscript entry in Astronomical 

 98 
Galactic Encounters
Scrapbook: 3rd and 4th Earl of Rosse, quoted in 
Michael Hoskin, Stellar Astronomy (Chalfont St. 
Giles: Science History Publications, 1982), 145.
 12. S.J. O’Meara, “Méchain’s unsung discovery,” Sky 
& Telescope, September 2006, 62-63.
 13. Sir Bernard Lovell, quoted in Patrick Moore, 
Th e Astronomy of Birr Castle (Birr: Th e Tele-
scope Trust, 1971), 49.
 14. William Parsons, “On the construction of 
specula of six-feet diameter; and a selection of 
observations of nebulae made with them,” Phil. 
Trans., 1861, 681-745.
 15. Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy (Phila-
delphia: Blanchard and Lea, 1861), 512.
 16. Schaff er, “On Astronomical Drawing,” 462. 
 17. Hoskin, Stellar Astronomy, 145.
 18. Memoirs of Chief Justice Lefroy, Dublin: Hodges, 
Foster & Co., 1871.
 19. Brendon, Decline and Fall, 122.
 20. Rosse, “Observations on the Nebulae,” Phil. 
Trans., 1850, 499-514.
 21. For a complete discussion of the use of the term 
“whirlpool” for this object, see: William Tobin, 
“Full-text search capability: a new tool for 
researching the development of scientifi c lan-
guage. Th e ‘Whirlpool Nebula’ as a case study.” 
Notes and Records of the Royal Society, 62, 2 (20 
June 2008),187-196.
 22. Henry C. King, Th e History of the Telescope (New 
York: Dover, 1979 reprint of 1955 edition), 212.
 23. William Cranch Bond, “[Letter to President 
Everett],” American Journal of Science and Arts, 
Series 2, no. 4 (1847), 427. 
 24. W.C. Bond had three sons and two daughters. 
Th e sons were W.C., Jr., who died while a stu-
dent at Harvard or just aft erward, G.P., whose 
fame as an astronomer equaled his father’s, and 
Richard Fifi eld Bond, who observed with the 
15-inch at Harvard and helped run the family 
chronometer business; the daughters were Eliz-
abeth Lidstone and Selina Cranch.
 25. John Pringle Nichol, Views of the Architecture 
of the Heavens in a Series of Letters to a Lady 
(Edinburgh: William Tait, 1837), 129.
 26. George Phillips Bond, “Account of the Great 
Comet of 1858,” Annals of the Astronomical 
Observatory of Harvard College, 3 (1862).
 27. Th e last two were discovered by Harvard Col-
lege Observatory assistant Horace P. Tuttle. A 
great deal of useful information about Tuttle 
and the early history of Harvard College Obser-
vatory is found in Richard E. Schmidt, “Th e 
Tuttles of Harvard College Observatory: 1850-
1862,” Th e Antiquarian Astronomer, 6 (January 
2012), 74-104.
 28. Asaph Hall, “My Connection with the Harvard 
College Observatory and the Bonds—1857-62,” 
in Edward Singleton Holden, Memorials of Wil-
liam Cranch Bond and of His Son George Phillips 
Bond (San Francisco: Holden and Day, 1897), 
78-79.
 29. Edward Singleton Holden, “Monograph of the 
Central Parts of the Nebula of Orion,” Washing-
ton Astronomical Observations for 1878, Appen-
dix I (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing 
Offi  ce, 1882), 227.
 30. During that year 1862, Alvan Clark, the tele-
scope-maker, was testing the 18.5-inch objec-
tive that eventually went to Dearborn Obser-
vatory, in a temporary mount at his workshop 
in Cambridge. It was used to discover the com-
panion of Sirius, and later was turned to the 
Orion Nebula. One of the observers, H.P. Tut-
tle, described the occasion: “Mr. Clark at once 
adjusted the telescope on the celebrated nebula 
in the sword handle of Orion. With a far less 
powerful telescope than this, the most wonder-
ful of all nebulous objects presents a spectacle 
surpassing all description; but the view which 
this telescope revealed was gorgeous and strik-
ing far beyond any view ever before obtained of 
it. Stars of every conceivable telescopic magni-
tude were scattered over the brilliant mottled 
nebulous mass, and blaze upon the eyes with 
great distinctness and splendor. Th e remark-
able sextuple star 1 Orionis, disclosed to view 
its two minutes members, which stood out clear 
and prominent…How many of the innumer-
able stars in the fi eld had been before noted 
by astronomers, it was impossible to tell from 
so general an observation. Th e grand nebula 
was most admirably defi ned, and the luminous 
ridges of its granular structure seemed almost 
ready to bloom into swarms of individual min-
ute stars, and especially so in that part where its 
form assumes a kind of rude resemblance to the 
head and yawning jaws of a monster.”
 31. Bessie Zaban Jones and Lyle Giff ord Boyd, 
Th e Harvard College Observatory: the fi rst four 
directorships, 1839-1919 (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Th e Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 
1971), 133.
 32. Ibid., 133. Th e line quoted is from Jeremiah 
10:23: “O Lord, I know that the way of man is 
not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to 
direct his steps.”
 33. Edward Sabine, “President’s Address,” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of London, 13 (1863-
64):500.

99
Meantime, refracted from yon eastern cloud,
Bestriding earth, the grand ethereal bow
Shoots up immense; and every hue unfolds,
In fair proportion running from the red
To where the violet fades into the sky.
Here, awful Newton, the dissolving clouds
Form, fronting the Sun, thy showery prism,
And to the sage-restricted eye unfold
The various twine of light, by thee disclosed
From the white mingling maze.
 
—James Thomson, Spring (1728), from The Seasons
T
he Leviathan’s example inevitably stirred attempts to emulate its power 
without suff ering the disadvantages of its situation. William Lassell, a 
wealthy Liverpool brewer who had visited Rosse’s workshops in Parson-
stown in 1844 and had partly witnessed the six-foot refl ector’s erection, 
set to building a grinding machine and polishing machine similar to (but 
improving upon) those Rosse had used, and constructed a 24-inch refl ec-
tor, mounted equatorially rather than on an alt-azimuth, at his residence 
near Liverpool. He demonstrated its power with the discovery of Triton, 
Neptune’s largest satellite, soon aft er the discovery of the planet itself in 
September 1846. Increasingly dissatisfi ed with the poor observing condi-
tions in Liverpool—this was, aft er all, the period of the Industrial Revolu-
tion, and Liverpool was in the heart of the north of England with their 
“dark Satanic mills” and choking air pollution–Lassell in 1852 transported 
the 24-inch to the clearer skies of Valetta, Malta, chiefl y to observe the neb-
ulae. He followed up with construction of a 48-inch refl ector, also mounted 
equatorially, which he took to Malta in 1861. It was never installed in a 
building, but remained in the open air when not in use. Until his return 
6.
Th e Various Twine of 
Light
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_6, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 100 
Galactic Encounters
to England in 1865, Lassell announced the discovery of six hundred new 
nebulae, and published wonderful drawings of many of the more notable 
ones, including the Great Nebula of Orion. However, he found no signs of 
the latter’s resolvability (to the contrary, it appeared to him that the nebula 
actually “retreated” than became more “concentrated” around the stars). 
Lassell wrote to fellow amateur and retired naval admiral W. H. Smyth:
All the stars I see [in the Orion Nebula] are individual, isolated, and rather 
unusually brilliant points, without apparently any connection with it. 
Examined under good circumstances, with a power of 1018, the bright-
est parts of the nebula look like masses of wool … one layer seemingly 
laying partly over another, so as to give the idea of great thickness or 
depth in the stratum.1
By the time Lassell wrote these words—and as the debate over the 
nature of the Orion Nebula ground on—a startling announcement came 
from John Russell Hind, Superintendent of the Nautical Almanac Offi  ce 
and in charge of the private observatory of George Bishop, who had made a 
fortune in the wine business, at South Villa, London. Hind wrote a letter to 
the Times in 1862, asserting that a small nebula (now known as NGC 1555), 
discovered a decade earlier, had disappeared. Th e German astronomer 
Heinrich d’Arrest in Leipzig, who had observed it several times since Hind 
discovered it, found no trace of it in October 1861. By the end of the year 
Otto Struve at Pulkova could barely make it out, but by March it appeared 
to have brightened again, and “Hind’s wonderful nebula” was cited as an 
example of a change in a nebula that had been established on grounds of 
unimpeachable authority.2 Such a change could be expected of a shining 
fl uid but hardly of a remote system of stars! Not only did the astronomers 
of the time not know the distances to these nebulae, they had to address 
the issue of what was the source of the light from these systems, with either 
heated gas or unresolved star light the two leading ideas.
Th e curious nebula discovered by Hind, disappearing from the 
sky, might have provided the same impetus to the study of the nebulae 
as the apparent disappearance of the small crater Linné did to studies of 
the Moon, setting off  decades of inconclusive controversy.3 It might have, 
except that just then the spectroscope intervened as an active tool of astro-
nomical research. With its aid, the existence of “true nebulosity,” the “shin-
ing fl uid” of William Herschel, in space was defi nitively proved, the long-
standing debate over the nature of the Orion Nebula was fi nally settled, and 
the way was opened up to the analysis of the chemical composition of the 
stars. Th is is how it came about.
Spectra had been studied since Isaac Newton’s famous studies 
with the prism in the 17th century. A particularly important develop-

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 101
ment occurred in 1814, when 
a Bavarian optician, Joseph 
von Fraunhofer, placed a slit 
in front of the collimating lens 
used to concentrate light onto 
a prism—this gave a cleaner 
image of the spectrum, and 
allowed him to perceive and 
map 600 dark lines (still known 
as Fraunhofer lines) in the 
otherwise continuous spectrum 
of the Sun.
Fraunhofer himself was 
not particularly curious about 
the origin of these lines—he 
was a master optician, and his 
purposes were more practi-
cal. He noted that the dark 
lines, corresponding in fact to 
the image of the slit, appeared 
always in the same position 
when dispersed by his prism.
Th us he could use them to determine precisely the refractive indices of 
glass used to produce his superb achromatic lenses. Th e lines most useful 
for his lens calibration work were given letter labels—for instance, a pair 
of closely spaced lines in the yellow part of the spectrum (at wavelengths 
589.6 and 589.0 nanometers) were assigned the letter D, another pair in the 
red were designated H and K (at 396.8 and 393.4 nanometers), and so on. 
We mention these particular lines because they would prove very impor-
tant to the work of astronomers later, when they began to examine the 
spectra of distant galaxies in detail.
Tragically, Fraunhofer died of lung disease in 1826, at the age of 39, either 
of tuberculosis or deterioration of his lungs caused by incessant exposure 
to furnace heat and lead oxide, such as was suff ered by many glassmakers 
at the time.
Th e explanation of Fraunhofer’s lines proved elusive until 1859 
(the year of Darwin’s Origin of Species), when the German physicist Gustav 
Kirchhoff  presented an important paper to the Berlin Academy. At the time 
Germany was bursting with vigor and material success, well on the way 
to becoming a leading European military power that would defeat France 
with shocking ease in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. Its universities and 
Fig. 6.1. Fraunhofer. From: Wikipedia Commons/
small portraits collection, History of Science Collec-
tion, University of Oklahoma Library.

 102 
Galactic Encounters
technical schools were greatly admired, and German methods were the 
most thorough anywhere (it was in Germany, for instance, that the Ph.D 
degree was introduced, which was soon adopted elsewhere). For some years 
Kirchhoff  and a colleague, the chemist Robert Bunsen, had been studying 
the spectra of heated salts. Recalling that Fraunhofer himself had observed 
that heating table salt in a fl ame produces two bright lines in the same posi-
tions as the two dark lines D in the solar spectrum, Kirchhoff  hit on the 
idea of passing sunlight through a fl ame containing table salt. “I … let the 
solar rays, … before they fell on the slit [of the spectroscope] pass through a 
strong table salt fl ame,” he wrote. “If the sunlight was suffi  ciently weakened, 
two bright lines appeared in place of the two dark D lines; if the intensity 
of sunlight exceeded a certain limit, the two dark D lines appeared in much 
greater distinctness, than without the presence of the table salt fl ame.”4
Physicists were then actively investigating the nature of light, 
electricity, and magnetism. Th is proved to be the breakthrough that would 
eventually lead to the chemistry of the stars (and the foundation of the 
discipline now known as astrophysics). Only a few years before, in 1835, 
the French philosopher August Comte had written that though it was pos-
sible to determine the shapes, distances, sizes and movements of the stars, 
“we would never know how to study by any means their chemical compo-
Fig. 6.3. Emission spectrum: hydrogen, including the H-alpha line in the red. Credit: Wikipedia Commons.
Fig. 6.4. iron. Credit: Wikipedia Commons.
Fig. 6.2. Fraunhofer lines on the Sun. Credit: Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 103
sition, or their mineralogical structure, and, even more so, the nature of 
any organized beings that might live on their surface.”5 It was one of the 
most infamous wrong predictions in history, ranking with the astronomer 
Simon Newcomb’s claim in 1903 that humans would never achieve heavier-
than-air fl ight. Mercifully, Comte, who had died in 1857, did not live to 
learn of his misfi re.
Kirchhoff  and Bunsen established spectroscopy as an empirical sci-
ence by enunciating three laws of spectroscopy:
 
1. incandescent solids or liquids (or stars, which are of gas under high 
pressure) emit a continuous spectrum;
 
2. the spectra of a heated gas (like the atmosphere around a star) con-
sists of bright lines, with the lines appearing at wavelengths that are 
characteristic of the gas;
 
3. when light from an incandescent gas or liquid traverses a heated 
gas, the gas absorbs light at the same wavelength as it emits when 
heated to the same temperature.
On the basis of these three laws, Kirchhoff  could explain the origin 
of the Fraunhofer lines in the solar spectrum. Th e continuous spectrum 
of the Sun is absorbed in discrete wavelengths by elements in the gas that 
made up the Sun’s atmosphere. Th is is the reason the Fraunhofer lines 
are dark—they represent gaps where the continuous spectrum has been 
absorbed. It is also the reason they are located in the same positions as the 
bright lines of spectra of elements heated in the laboratory. A given set of 
lines is, moreover, a unique signature of the presence of a given element.
Aft er Kirchhoff  had recognized that the pair of dark Fraunhofer 
lines, D, in the solar spectrum corresponded to the pair of bright yellow 
lines given by sodium, he resolved to compare the spectra of other ele-
ments with the solar dark lines. In so doing, he passed from the spectrum 
of sodium, to others—that of hydrogen was much simpler, while that of 
iron was of much greater complexity, yielding more than 2000 lines, irregu-
larly distributed through all the colors from deep-red to lavender. To create 
a comparison spectrum for iron, for instance, he needed to resort to the 
spark of an electric arc, which could produce a much higher temperature, 
or the spark of an induction coil; in the latter case, a vacuum tube with a 
trace of the gas of the substance under scrutiny (here, volatilized iron) was 
submitted to the discharge of an induction coil charged by a series of Ley-
den jars. Directing his spectroscope toward the Sun and exposing the lower 
half of its slit to its light, and then by means of a refl ecting prism placed 
in front of the upper half bringing the image of the spark into juxtaposi-
tion with it in the fi eld of view, he could compare the positions of the dark 
Fraunhofer lines directly with the bright lines due to vaporized iron. In 

 104 
Galactic Encounters
this way, Kirchhoff  determined that not only sodium but also iron and a 
number of other terrestrial elements, calcium (which produces the H and K 
lines), barium, strontium, magnesium, nickel, copper, cobalt and zinc, were 
present in the Sun’s atmosphere. 
Meanwhile, there was another development, owing to the Austrian 
physicist Christian Doppler, which allowed spectroscopy to be applied not 
only to the important problem of the composition of the Sun and stars but 
also to the analysis of their motions toward or away from the Earth. Born in 
1803, Doppler was the son of a stonemason in Salzburg, who couldn’t follow 
his father’s business because of poor health. Aft er completing his education 
in Salzburg and Vienna, he found it diffi  cult to obtain a permanent aca-
demic position in Austria. He briefl y considered emigrating to the United 
States before obtaining a post in Prague, where his teaching and examina-
tion duties were onerous and he was regarded as a harsh (and hence unpop-
ular) examiner. It was in Prague that he did the work for which he will 
always be famous. In a May 1842 lecture to the Royal Bohemian Scientifi c 
Society, “On the colored light of double stars and some other stars in the 
heavens,” he announced a formula showing how the frequency (or wave-
length) of sound waves changed depending on the radial motion of either 
the source or the observer. Th is is the eff ect that explains the change of pitch 
as a train is approaching and then leaving a platform: as it approaches, the 
pitch of the wailing siren is higher than when it moves away.
Believing that light was a longitudinal wave, like sound, rather 
than a transverse wave, he tried to use his theory to explain the colors of 
double stars. His analysis was, however, incorrect, as Doppler thought 
that the motion of stars along the line of sight towards or away from us 
would result in their colors being shift ed towards the red or blue end of 
the spectrum (thus white stars would become colored), and didn’t seem to 
allow for invisible radiation from stars being shift ed into the visible part of 
the spectrum and thereby compensating for the other colors being shift ed 
out. Aft er Doppler’s death, of tuberculosis in 1853, the French physicist 
Armand Fizeau—who is best remembered for being the fi rst person to suc-
ceed in measuring the speed of light—concentrated not on changing hues 
of stars, due to the Doppler eff ect, but upon the shift  of identifi able spectral 
lines toward the blue or red, which was much more useful and measurable. 
(For future reference, we note that the change in wavelength is equal to z 
= v/c, where v is the velocity of the emitting source relative to the observer 
and c is the speed of light. Th is formula applies when the emitting source 
has velocities of less than about a tenth the speed of light; for higher veloci-
ties, such as those encountered in remote galaxies due to the expansion of 
the universe, the velocities can be much higher, and since Einstein’s special 
theory of relativity does not allow anything to travel faster than the speed 
of light, a relativistic correction is needed.) 

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 105
It should be emphasized that the Doppler eff ect does not give us 
any information about motions perpendicular to the line of sight; it is 
used only to determine motions along the line of sight. In the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries, the determination of the radial velocities of stars was 
to become a major research program at several observatories, and later 
the principle was applied to the nebulae, leading to the recognition of the 
expanding universe in the early 20th century.
Spectroscopist of the Nebulae
By 1861—the same year that Hind’s nebula disappeared—the ideas from 
Germany were coming to the attention of British scientists. Warren De la 
Rue, whose father had founded a highly lucrative stationary and printing 
business but who like a number of scions of wealth preferred the pastimes 
of science to the toil of business and became an avid amateur astronomer, 
commented on a talk at the Royal Institution of London by Henry Roscoe, 
a professor of chemistry in Manchester who had once worked with Bunsen:
The physicist [Kirchhoﬀ ] and the chemist [Bunsen] have brought before 
us a means of analysis that, as Dr. [Michael] Faraday recently said, if we 
were go to the Sun, and to bring away some portions of it and analyze 
them in our laboratories, we could not examine them more accurately 
than we can by this new mode of spectrum analysis.6
De la Rue grasped the potential spectrum analysis had for astro-
nomical uses. So did W. Allen Miller, professor of chemistry at King’s Col-
lege, London, who discussed “the new method of spectrum analysis” at a 
meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Man-
chester. He reprised the lecture at a meeting of the Pharmaceutical Society 
in London in January 1862 at which William Huggins, another young man 
with money and time on his hands to devote to technical avocational inter-
ests, was in attendance.
Still in his 30s, Huggins had retired from running the family silk 
business in order to devote himself to astronomy. Like Lassell, George 
Bishop, De la Rue and others, he would become an independent “Grand 
Amateur,” to use a phrase coined by historian Allan Chapman, able to pur-
sue his own research.
It is important to point out that at this time there existed no “scien-
tifi c profession” as such, and very few men were able to earn a living doing 
science. Chapman reminds us that professional astronomers, like George 
Airy, the Astronomer Royal at Greenwich, “received a stipend … [but] 
were either under-resourced or else kept too busy with routine or teaching 

 106 
Galactic Encounters
or administrative duties to think seri-
ously of research. In fact, the ex-Royal 
Navy offi  cer Grand Amateur, Admiral 
William Henry Smyth … likened ama-
teurs such as himself—who did astron-
omy for love—to the initiative-taking 
offi  cers in the armed forces; whilst the 
professionals—who needed a job and a 
salary—resembled the ‘other ranks,’ who 
obediently followed where the offi  cers 
led!”  A profoundly diff erent situation 
from that prevailing today.7
At fi rst Huggins tried his hand 
as an enthusiastic observer of the plan-
ets, using an 8-inch refractor built by 
the Cambridgeport, Massachussetts, 
telescope-maker Alvan Clark. But he 
soon became dissatisfi ed with the routine 
character of this work. “In a vague way,” 
he wrote, “I sought about in my mind 
for the possibility of research upon the 
heavens in a new direction.”8 He seems 
to have been at least vaguely aware of 
Kirchhoff ’s “great discovery” when he 
attended Miller’s lecture, but now he 
grasped its potentialities for the fi rst time. “Th is news,” he recalled aft erward, 
“was to me like a coming upon a spring of water in a dry and thirsty land.” 
He was fortunate in that Miller was not only an experienced labora-
tory spectroscopist, well connected in the highest scientifi c circles (he was 
both treasurer and vice-president of the Royal Society), he was also a neigh-
bor—the two men lived across the street from one another at Upper Tulse 
Hill, a posh and rapidly growing London suburb on the south side of the 
Th ames. As soon as Miller fi nished lecturing, Huggins wrote, “A sudden 
impulse seized me to suggest to him that we should return home together. On 
our way home I told him of what was in my mind, and asked him to join me 
in the attempt I was about to make, to apply Kirchhoff ’s methods to the stars.”9 
What happened next is known only in outline, since Huggins’s 
records from this period of intense activity are incomplete. Clearly, how-
ever, in the spring and summer of 1862, Miller, who had been trying to 
photograph metallic spark spectra in his laboratory, began to work in 
Huggins’s observatory. Th ey adapted a laboratory spectroscope (of the kind 
used by Kirchhoff  and Bunsen and still familiar in physics labs today) to 
the telescope, and subjected spectra of the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, and several 
Fig. 6.5. William Huggins. Caricature by Leslie 
Ward (Spy); Vanity Fair, April 9, 1903. From: Wiki-
pedia Commons.

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 107
bright stars to the same kind of analysis that physicists and chemists did 
the substances they heated in the fl ame of the laboratory. Th ey did not have 
the fi eld to themselves. Others were already working along similar lines, 
including Giovan Battista Donati in Florence, Lewis M. Rutherfurd in New 
York City, and Father Angelo Secchi in Rome. By February 1863, Huggins 
and Miller published detailed maps of dark lines in the spectra of Betel-
guese, Aldebaran, and Sirius, and in a paper, “Spectra of the Fixed Stars,” 
published the following year, they pondered the implications of the fact 
that they were fi nding elements common to life on Earth in the stars:
It is remarkable that the elements most widely diff used through the 
host of stars are some of those most closely connected with the constitution 
of the living organisms of our globe, including hydrogen, sodium, mag-
nesium, and iron. Of oxygen and nitrogen we could scarcely hope to have 
any decisive indications since these bodies have spectra of diff erent orders. 
Th ese forms of elementary matter, when infl uenced by heat, light, and 
chemical force, all of which we have certain knowledge are radiated from 
the stars, aff ord some of the most important conditions which we know 
to be indispensable to the existence of living organisms such as those with 
which we are acquainted.10
Huggins made his most important discovery soon aft erwards. Th e 
spectroscope was demonstrating the similarity in the constitution of stars 
and the Sun from the similarity of their spectra, and now he wanted to 
see if the same result could be established for the “distinct and remarkable 
class of bodies known as nebulae.”11 Rather than begin with a large and 
extended object, like the Great Nebula in Orion or the one in Andromeda, 
Huggins decided to investigate the planetary nebulae, which he regarded as 
the most enigmatic of all. As the fi rst such object of spectroscopic scrutiny, 
on August 29, 1864, he set the slit of his spectroscope on a nebula, the so-
called “Cat’s Eye” (NGC 6543) in Draco.
In “A Personal Retrospect” penned thirty years later, which Hug-
gins’s biographer Barbara Becker calls a “suspenseful and well-craft ed 
narrative,”12 even though one which, through golden mists of nostalgia, 
perhaps glosses over the details, Huggins takes us with him to his observa-
tory as a virtual eyewitness. He asks us
to picture … the feeling of excited suspense, mingled with a degree of 
awe, with which, after a few moments of hesitation, I put my eye to the 
spectroscope. Was I not about to look into a secret place of creation?... I 
looked into the spectroscope. No spectrum such as I expected!  A single 
bright line only!  At ﬁ rst, I suspected some displacement of the [spec-
troscope’s] prism, and that I was looking at a reﬂ ection of the illumi-
nated slit from one of its faces. This thought was scarcely more than 
momentary; the true interpretation ﬂ ashed upon me. The light of the 

 108 
Galactic Encounters
nebula was monochromatic, and so, unlike any other light I had as yet 
subjected to prismatic examination, could not be extended out to form 
a complete spectrum… A little closer looking showed two other bright 
lines on the side towards the blue, all the three lines being separated 
by intervals relatively dark. The riddle of the nebulae was solved. The 
answer, which had come to us in the light itself, read: Not an aggrega-
tion of stars, but a luminous gas. Stars after the order of our own sun, 
and of the brighter stars, would give a diﬀ erent spectrum; the light of 
the nebula had clearly been emitted by a luminous gas.13
Huggins presented the solution of the problem of the nebulae as 
an intuitive leap. Th e reality of how he came to his conclusion was prob-
ably more complicated, but in the end he managed to satisfy himself that 
NGC 6543 consisted of luminous gas or vapor. It was certainly not a distant 
cluster of stars. As usual old William Herschel had been right aft er all. (Th e 
identity of the vapor was unknown. Th ere were two bright green lines in 
the spectrum appearing at wavelengths of 495.9 and 500.7 nanometers, but 
they did not appear to be in positions corresponding to any known ele-
ments. When, at the total solar eclipse of 1868, Jules Janssen and J. Norman 
Lockyer discovered the 587.7 nm line in Sun’s spectrum—another line that 
did not correspond with that of any known element—Lockyer deduced that 
it was a new element found only in the Sun, and named it Helium. Hug-
gins, by a similar line of reasoning, concluded that his green lines were also 
due to an unknown element, and in 1898 or so began to refer to it as Nebu-
lium. But Nebulium does not exist. (Parenthetically, Huggins’s green lines 
were explained only in 1927, when Ira Sprague Bowen, an assistant profes-
sor at Caltech, who specialized in laboratory spectroscopy, used quantum 
mechanics to show that they were emission lines from twice-ionized oxy-
gen raised to an excited state by collisions with other atoms, and deexciting 
only aft er a very long time. Th ey are examples of what are known as “for-
bidden lines,” because they are never seen in laboratory samples, but they 
are important in nonterrestrial environments where extreme conditions, 
such as low density, prevail.)
Aft er his success with the Cat’s Eye, Huggins launched a systematic 
examination of the spectra of sixty of the brighter nebulae and clusters. 
Th is grand project occupied him for the next two years. He found that 
a third resembled the planetary nebulae in showing the signature bright 
green-line spectrum (and became known as “green” nebulae). 
In 1865, he classed among the “green” nebulae the Great Nebula of 
Orion itself. On whatever part of the nebula he placed the slit of his spec-
troscope, he saw only the signature bright green emission lines of luminous 
vapor or gas. Th e conclusion was obvious:

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 109
Fig. 6.6. The Cat’s Eye Nebula (NGC 6543), the planetary nebula in Draco whose emission lines 
ﬁ rst revealed its gaseous nature to William Huggins in 1864. The complicated structure sur-
rounding the star has been produced by ejection of the star’s outer gaseous layers, in a process 
through which the Sun will eventually pass late in its evolutionary history. Courtesy: Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
the detection in a nebula of minute closely associated points of light, 
which has hitherto been considered as a certain indication of a stellar 
constitution, can no longer be accepted as a trustworthy proof that the 
object consists of true stars. These luminous points, in some nebulae 
at least, must be regarded as themselves gaseous bodies, denser por-
tions, probably, of the great nebulous mass, since they exhibit a con-
stitution which is identical with the fainter and outlying parts have not 
been resolved. These nebulae are shown by the prism to be enormous 
gaseous systems.14
Th e vast beast with its proboscis running out from its snout did not 
consist of stars but was an infernal region consisting of, to borrow the poet 
Milton’s phrases describing the infernal regions, “surging smoke” and a 
“cloudy chair.”  
Th e other two-thirds of the nebulae examined by Huggins showed, 
as he found in the case of the most famous example, M31, the Great 

 110 
Galactic Encounters
Nebula of Andromeda, “light … distributed throughout the spectrum, and 
consequently extremely faint…. Th ough continuous, the spectrum did 
not look uniform in brightness, but its extreme feebleness made it uncer-
tain whether the irregularities were due to certain parts being enhanced 
by bright lines, or the other parts enfeebled by dark lines.”15 In contrast 
to “green” nebulae like the Cat’s Eye or the Orion Nebula, the Androm-
eda Nebula became the leading object belonging to the group of “white” 
nebulae. 
Th e interpretation of the meaning of the Andromeda Nebula’s 
spectrum was not entirely straightforward at the time. Th e hazy oval of the 
nebula was seen through a rich stratum of 1500 stars, but no telescope had 
ever resolved its nebulosity into stars—not even the great 15-inch Merz at 
Harvard, with which William Cranch Bond had made out a nearly stellar 
nucleus at the center and, along one side of the nebulous oval, two narrow 
mysterious dark lanes (“Bond’s canals”). Th e ghostly vision of the Androm-
eda Nebula in the telescope was of one of Rosse’s “spirals” seen along an 
oblique line of sight. Inevitably it conjured up an image of Laplace’s nebular 
hypothesis in action—perhaps a Solar System in formation, a cloud of gas 
and dust swirling around an already condensed center that was just begin-
Fig. 6.7. M31, the classic example of a “white” nebula, i.e., one showing a continuous (starlike) spectrum, 
now known to be the nearest spiral galaxy to the Earth. The dark lanes below the brilliant nucleus were 
known as “Bond’s canals,” after W.C. Bond who recorded them with the 15-inch Merz refractor at Harvard 
College Observatory. Imaged with a TMB-130 apo refractor at f./7 by Klaus Brasch. Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 111
ning to shine as a sun. Th is vision of its nature seemed however no more 
probable than the idea that it might be a mass of distant suns in its own 
right, grown misty with excessive distance. Indeed, both points of view had 
its adherents. How could one decide between them?
In 1882, the Rev. T.W. Webb summed up the situation as it 
appeared to him at the time when he called the Andromeda Nebula “a 
mystery in all probability never to be penetrated by man.”16
Th en, in August 1885, a new and unexpected clue came within 
sight of astronomers which, if only it could be deciphered, might say some-
thing of the true nature of the Andromeda nebula. A nova or “temporary” 
star appeared only 16 seconds of arc (the separation of a close double star) 
from its star-like nucleus, thereby producing “one of the strangest sights 
in the heavens,” in the words of one witness. Another, E. Walter Maunder 
of the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, pronounced that “the strange and 
beautiful object has broken silence at last, though its utterance may be diffi  -
cult to interpret.”17
Once before a nova had appeared in a nebula—in May 1860, when 
the German astronomer Arthur Auwers had discovered a nova in M80, a 
globular cluster in Scorpio. But M80 was a diff erent case; it was not strictly 
a nebula at all, having been resolved by William Herschel in 1785 into a 
globular cluster that was “the richest and most condensed mass of stars 
which the fi rmament can off er to the contemplation of astronomers.” Th e 
new star in the Great Nebula of Andromeda stood out as a singular stellar 
point against what to all intents and purposes was a cloud. 
Th e new star, “S Andromedae”—the designation “S” signifi ed that, 
for want of a better name, it was considered a new “variable” star, the let-
ters from R onwards being assigned to variable stars in each constellation; 
this, then, was the second variable star to be noticed in Andromeda—had 
defi nitely not been present on the evening of August 16, 1885, when the 
nebula was examined by several skillful European observers. First noticed 
by a French observer on August 17, he thought it too strange to counte-
nance. On August 20 was it fi nally seen by someone confi dent enough to 
accept it as reality, Ernst Hartwig at the Dorpat Observatory in Estonia, 
who thinking in terms of Laplace’s nebular hypothesis imagined it was the 
central sun forming out of the nebular mist. (“Th ere’s the beautiful central 
Sun shining through the fog!” he exclaimed.) When Hartwig saw it, it was 
possibly as bright as the 6th magnitude, but the observatory’s conservative 
director refused to allow him to announce the discovery until its existence 
could be confi rmed in a moonless sky, and because of a run of clouds, this 
did not happen until August 31. By then the star had already begun to fade. 
It was then 8th magnitude. Within only a few weeks it had dropped to the 
11th magnitude, and when seen for the last time, on February 7, 1886, by 
Asaph Hall with the great 26-inch refractor of the U.S. Naval Observatory 

 112 
Galactic Encounters
in Washington, D.C., it had faded to 16th magnitude—the limit of visibility 
with that telescope. Th en it vanished forever.
Th e eruption of “S Andromedae” led to a brief but vigorous dis-
cussion regarding its implications. Th e irrepressible French astronomer 
Camille Flammarion, favoring the “island universe” theory, enthused: 
“Probably the Andromeda Nebula is a cluster of stars, and the star which 
has fl ared up close to the center is one of its suns of which the photosphere 
has undergone a sudden confl agration…. [I]t is a huge sun, without doubt 
thousands of times more gigantic than our own!  Th e heavens are immense; 
man is insignifi cant.”18 Writing eight years aft er the event, the judicious 
Agnes M. Clerke, a great Irish popularizer of astronomy, called attention to 
the fact that the outburst in the Great Nebula in Andromeda had occurred 
only a few years aft er that in M80, and that they could hardly have occurred 
accidentally just on the line of sight between the Earth and the central por-
tions of those two objects. Th us, she argued, they had to be associated with 
the objects in the midst of which they had fl ared up. If so, however, she 
concluded it was 
eminently rash to conclude that [these nebulae] are really aggregations 
of sun-like bodies…. For it is practically certain that, however distant the 
nebulae, the stars were equally remote; hence, if the constituent par-
ticles of the former be suns, the incomparably vaster orbs by which their 
feeble light was well-nigh obliterated must … have been on such a scale 
as the imagination recoils from contemplating.19 
Man had entered the 19th century using “only his own animal 
power, supplemented by that of wind and water, much as he had entered 
the Th irteenth, or, for that matter the First.” At least in the industrial world, 
he bade farewell to all that “with his capacities for transportation, commu-
nication, production, manufacture and weaponry multiplied a thousand-
fold by the energy of machines.”20 Even so, it was impossible at the time to 
imagine any source of energy capable of keeping a star like the Sun burn-
ing long enough to make it last for the aeons of time required by Darwin’s 
theory of evolution much less a source capable of powering the stupendous 
outburst of a new star erupting in an island universe located far beyond our 
Milky Way. As Kenneth Glyn Jones writes:
This one item of astronomical evidence remained an obstacle in the way 
of progress to a ﬁ rmer grasp of the scale of the universe for nearly forty 
years, and the recognition of the “island universe” status of the great spi-
ral nebula in which the nova had appeared, was perennially hampered 
by the incredible implication that a single star could, if only temporarily 

 
Chapter 6: The Various Twine of Light 113
 1. W. H. Smyth, A Cycle of Celestial Objects contin-
ued at the Hartwell Observatory to 1859 (Lon-
don: J.W. Parker, 1860), 165.
 2. J. R. Hind, “Changes among the stars,” Th e 
Times, February 4, 1862. 
 3. For the Linné controversy, see: William P. 
Sheehan and Th omas A. Dobbins, Epic Moon: 
a history of lunar exploration in the age of the 
telescope. Richmond, Virginia: Willmann-Bell, 
2001.
 4. G. Kirchhoff , Ueber die Fraunhoferschen Linien. 
Monatsbericht der Akademie Wissenschaft en 
Berlin, 1859, 662-665. Within six months, it was 
translated into English by George Stokes, “On 
the simultaneous emission and absorption of 
rays of the same defi nite refrangibility…,” Philo-
sophical Magazine, Series 4, no. 21 (1860), 195-
196.
 5. Auguste Comte, Cours de Philosophie Positive, 
II, 19th lesson. Paris: Bachelier, 1835. 
 6. “Proceedings of the Chemical Society,” Chemi-
cal News, 4 (1861), 130-133. 
 7. Allan Chapman, “Airy’s Greenwich Staff ,” Th e 
Antiquarian Astronomer, issue 6 (January 2012), 
4-18:7.
 8. William Huggins, “Th e New Astronomy: a per-
sonal retrospect,” Nineteenth Century, 41 (1897), 
907-929:911.
 9. Ibid.
 10. Sir William Huggins and Lady Huggins, eds., 
Th e Scientifi c Papers of Sir William Huggins 
(London: Publications of Sir William Huggins’s 
Observatory, 1909), 60.
 11. William Huggins, “On the Spectra of some of 
the Nebulae,” Phil. Trans., 1864, 437-444:437.
 12. Barbara Becker, Unravelling Starlight: William 
and Margaret Huggins and the Rise of the New 
Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2011), 73.
 13. Huggins, “New Astronomy,” 916.
 14. William Huggins, “On the spectrum of the Great 
Nebula in the Sword Handle of Orion,” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society, 14 (1865), 39-42: 41.
 15. Ibid.
 16. Quoted in Gerard de Vaucouleurs, “Discover-
ing M31’s Spiral Shape,” Sky and Telescope, 74 
(1987):596.
 17. Quoted in William Sheehan, Th e Immortal Fire 
Within: the life and work of Edward Emerson 
Barnard (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995), 85.
 18. Camille Flammarion, “Apparition d’une Étoile 
dans la Nébuleuse d’Androméde,” L’Astronomie, 
4 (1885), 361-367.
 19. A.M. Clerke, A Popular History of Astronomy 
During the Nineteenth Century (London: Adam 
& Charles Black, 3rd ed., 1893), 493.
 20. Barbara Tuchman, Th e Proud Tower: a portrait 
of the world before the war, 1890-1914 (New 
York: Macmillan, 1966), xii.
 21. Kenneth Glyn Jones, “S Andromedae, 1885: an 
analysis of contemporary reports and a recon-
struction.” Journal for the History of Astronomy, 
7 (1976), 27-40:27.
 22. Clerke, A Popular History, 5.
equal in brightness a sizeable fraction of a huge system of millions of 
stars. 21
Instead, S Andromeda became a stumbling block, and a seemingly 
insurmountable one, to the island universe theory. Miss Clerke noted in 
her inimitable way, “Th e conception of the nebulae as remote galaxies … 
began to withdraw into the region of discarded and half-forgotten specula-
tions.”22
*   *   *

Sweep on through glittering star ﬁ elds and long for endless night!  More 
nebulae, more stars. Here a bright and beautiful star overpowering in its 
brilliancy, and there close to it a tiny point of light seen with the great-
est diﬃ  culty, a large star and its companion. How plentiful the stars now 
appear. Each sweep increases their number. The ﬁ eld is sprinkled with 
them, and now we suddenly sweep into myriads and swarms of glitter-
ing, sparkling points of brilliancy — we have entered the Milky Way. We 
are in the midst of millions and millions of suns — we are in the jewel 
house of the Maker, and our soul mounts up, up to that wonderful Cre-
ator, and we adore the hand that scattered the jewels of heaven so lav-
ishly in this one vast region. No pen can describe the wonderful scene 
that the swinging tube reveals as it sweeps among that vast array of suns.
 
—Edward Emerson Barnard, The Nashville Artisan (1883)
E
ven from the northern hemisphere, the Milky Way, seen from a clear 
dark site, exhilarates with its magnifi cence. A northern hemisphere 
witness to its grandeur, the Japanese haiku writer and pilgrim Basho (1644-
94), looked across the sea to Sado Island, where political exiles were con-
fi ned, and exclaimed:
High over wild seas,
Surrounding Sado Island —
The River of Heaven!1
Th e River of Heaven was, of course, the Milky Way. Basho wrote 
that haiku on the eve of Tanabata Matsuri (the “Evening of the Seventh”), 
a Japanese summer star-festival celebrating the reunion (for one night) of 
Orihime and Hikoboshi, represented by the stars Vega and Altair. Accord-
ing to a legend originally imported into Japan from China, these personali-
7.
Fields of Glory
114
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_7, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 115
ties were separated from one another by the river Amanogawa (literally, 
the “heavenly river,” i.e., the Milky Way) but were permitted to meet again 
for one night a year, on the seventh day of the seventh lunar month of the 
luni-solar calendar.2
For the lover of the Galaxy, it is not separation that is the diffi  culty; 
it is obscuration. Th e overpowering lights of cities keeps him or her from 
the objects of desire. Th ough the center of the Galaxy (best seen from the 
Southern Hemisphere, since it lies at 20 degrees south latitude) is, rather 
surprisingly, bright enough to cast a shadow on a clear dark night—and 
is one of only a few celestial objects able to do so; the others include the 
Moon, Venus, Jupiter, and Mars at its very best—it cannot be seen at all 
from cities. It glows with a subtle light, only fi ft y percent brighter than the 
ambient background of the sky brightness furnished by the Zodiacal Light 
and airglow. City lights brighten the back-sky glow by factors of 10 to 100 or 
more, causing the Milky Way to fall below the threshold of visibility. Th us 
the Milky Way for the city-dweller resembles a Renaissance fresco whose 
vivid hues are obscured under a centuries-old coat of grime and soot.
Sadly, the glories of the night sky have been expunged by light pol-
lution in the vast cities in which most of the world’s population lives. Th e 
habitat of amateur astronomers is vanishing. It is probably fair to say that 
most of the world’s population has never experienced a pristine view of the 
Milky Way. No wonder those who take an interest in such things are now 
a graying, affl  uent, and predominantly male demographic (as surveys of 
the readership of popular astronomy magazines like Sky & Telescope and 
Astronomy show over and over) whose enthusiasm was sparked in another 
era and who can aff ord to travel to dark sites with portable telescopes to 
feed their appetite for galactic wonders.
One can well appreciate their determination to do so, for under 
conditions of transparent and dark skies, the Milky Way opens up as a 
grand and glorious avenue of bright stars, powdered with open clusters, 
diff use nebulae, and—most wonderful of all—a fretted lattice-work of 
strange dark markings. Under such conditions, the Galaxy—our own vast 
star-system—presents what is probably the most awe-inspiring and sub-
lime sight a mortal can behold.
Th e structure of the Milky Way Galaxy, which was already hinted at in 
Herschel’s snapping alligator depiction, as mentioned in early chapters, 
resembles two fried eggs clapped together. By this analogy, the yolks make 
up the “bulge.” Luminous with the massed eff ect of billions of small, old, 
distant suns, it extends across some 30 degrees of the sky. Dark mark-
ings superimposed upon the distant stars form an intricate meshwork and 
include a vast tongue-like extension to the south, extending another 30 

 116 
Galactic Encounters
degrees or more. Th e dark markings do not form a uniform band, and even 
the naked-eye reveals that they are full of complications. As one studies, 
a few of the better-defi ned forms emerge. Dark tubules reach from the 
Antares, the red star that marks the heart of the Scorpion, toward the claws. 
(Here, the globular cluster M4 is visible as a hazy patch with the naked 
eye and becomes big and bright in binoculars). Th ere is a kind of heavenly 
stairway consisting of dark forms winding upward through Sagittarius; the 
curving Pipe nebula scoops up in its bowl immense vacuities. (And how 
many light years, we may ask, does that bowl span?)
Relative to these dark monstrosities, which have a sort of impen-
etrable emptiness, the brighter stars — especially alpha and beta Centauri 
and the Southern Cross that straddles the sharp outline of the Coal Sack – 
stand out strikingly by contrast. 
Th e Milky Way’s river of light winds its way, a seeming backdrop 
to all of these, from Canis Major, whose leader Sirius stands almost over-
head in the Southern Hemisphere and appears as brilliant as a planet, 
through the brilliant stars and profuse nebulae of Monoceros and Orion; 
upward along the stars of the Summer Triangle, Vega, Deneb, and Altair; 
till it arrives at the Great Rift  in Cygnus, a great black slipstream cleaving 
the river, and farther on past the glittering Scutum star-cloud, through the 
treasure houses of Scorpio and Sagittarius, through Norma, Centaurus, and 
Crux, with all their wonders, and peters out at last among the mellow glo-
ries of Carina and Vela and Puppis. Th e brighter stars — jewel-like, glisten-
ing — hug the plane of the Galaxy along this mysterious trail. 
Turn binoculars on some of these objects and what an extension of 
the wonderful appears!  Scores of diff use nebulae, open clusters, globular 
clusters swim through the fi eld. And always there is the fretwork of dark 
markings, the strange, mysterious, ominous abysses leading to where God 
only knows.
Are they abysses? Dark clouds?  In some places they seem to tower 
into black nimbuses; in other places they become tarry horsetail-bobs, or 
thin coal-dust cirrus. In still others they stretch into thick taff y-pulls. Some 
are distinctly spheroidal blobs; others are elongated and wisp-like. But they 
are everywhere — one could not view them for long without realizing that 
space — the darkness of space — is fi lled with what appears to be a mys-
terious substance, thickly or thinly spread. Th e impression of these dark 
markings is of a puzzled and involved topography. Th ey form an intricate 
landscape – they feature ruts, crannies, outcrops — from which, once lost, 
it might never be possible to emerge again. Th ey form a rugged Peloponne-
sus shaped into jutties, islands, inlets, coves, peninsulas. Or is it a landscape 
at all, not rather a depth below the ocean — a seascape full of darkling 
forms, sprawling kelp or tangled seaweed?  Are these lurking and drift ing 
shadowy immensities, monsters of sea-bottoms, sulking among cavernous 

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 117
recesses, lurching aft er their prey in the depths as upon their surface the 
ephemeral light-forms, stirred by the bow-wake of a ship, churn phospho-
rescent microorganisms into quickening forms send them skidding about 
like hosts of dancing fi refl ies?
Admittedly it is diffi  cult to form a clear idea of the relation of all these dif-
ferent objects. Th ough they appear to be sparks and inkblots on the curved 
surface of a great dome — the ceiling, if you will, of a great and mysterious 
cave – they are seen in projection. We must conjure up for ourselves the 
third dimension and realize that they are arranged along curvilinear arc-
swaths. Viewed along a line of sight extending from the Sun to the Galactic 
Center (toward Sagittarius, as we now know), foreshortened and silhou-
etted along more or less oblique lines of sight, so that objects at diff erent 
distances are superimposed upon one another in confused and contortion-
ate projection. 
Viewing the distant parts of the Galaxy, we face the same problem 
as a tourist wishing to view the forest on a distant mountain ridge from 
within a pine wood. Th e star masses and dark blobs appear like the ridges 
of mountains viewed through a foreground of mist in a complicated — 
but fl at — picture. Everything is foreshortened or obscured or otherwise 
muddled. We are left  with a view rather like that of intussuscepted human 
bowels  as envisaged by a swallowed fl ea.
Th e nature of the dark markings of the Milky Way was long one of the 
seemingly insoluble problems of astronomy. No other objects were more 
obscure or menacing or sublime. Th e Herschels, father and son, concluded 
they were unplumbable abysses. William had called the starless patch in 
the body of the Scorpion a ”true hole in the heavens,” John had seen the 
dark markings as the tubules and chimneys of vast cavernous strata. In his 
charming novel Two on a Tower, Th omas Hardy takes chapter and verse 
from John Herschel in making the ambitious young astronomer Swithin 
St.-Cleeve conjure for his patron Lady Constantine something of the terror 
of these darknesses visible:
“You would hardly think at ﬁ rst that horrid monsters lie up there wait-
ing to be discovered by any moderately penetrating mind—monsters 
to which those of the oceans bear no sort of comparison.”
“What monsters may they be?”
“Impersonal monsters, namely, Immensities. Until a person has 
thought out the stars and their interspaces he has hardly learnt that 
there are things much more terrible than monsters of shape; namely, 

 118 
Galactic Encounters
monsters of magnitude without known shape. Such monsters are the 
voids and waste places of the sky. Look … at those pieces of darkness 
in the milky way,” he went on, pointing with his ﬁ nger to where the gal-
axy stretched across over their heads with the luminousness of a frosted 
web: “You see that dark opening in it near the Swan?  There is a still more 
remarkable one south of the Equator called the Coal Sack, as a sort of 
nickname that has a farcical force from its very inadequacy. In these our 
sight plunges quite beyond any twinkle we have yet visited. Those are 
deep wells for the human mind to let itself down into, leave alone the 
human body! And think of the side caverns and secondary abysses to 
right and left as you pass on.”3
As John Herschel had realized, the Milky Way consisted of a com-
plicated structure traversed, in places, by what he thought were “conical or 
tubular hollows.”4 And here we revert to an image with which we began: 
the cave of the night. Herschel and others of his generation could be con-
sidered explorers, spelunkers, of the chimneys and tubules of the Galaxy, 
structures remote in space—as men like Marcelino Sanzo de Sautuola, 
Marcel Ravidat, and Jean-Martin Chauvet explored the Upper Paleolithic 
caves of northern Spain and southern France, structures remote in time. 
And, of course, because light travels at the vast but fi nite speed of 
300,000 kilometers/second (186,000 miles/second), structures remote in 
space are also remote in time. It is curious to ponder that the monster Black 
Hole which, as we now know, sits black-widow like at the center of the Gal-
axy in the direction of but far beyond the foreground stars that outline the 
constellation Sagittarius, lurks some 27,000 light years away, which means 
that light from stars in that neighborhood left  them almost as far back as 
when the “world’s oldest paintings” were being painted at Chauvet cave, 30 
to 32,000 years ago. Time on such a grand scale is, if not abolished, at least 
no longer really comprehensible. And how is the human mind to grasp 
such enormous distances?  One light year is equal to 10 trillion kilometers 
(6 trillion miles). Th e galactic center is so remote that in all the time since 
the end of the Last Glacial Maximum, light has just barely had time enough 
to traverse that unimaginable distance.
Astronomical Photography
Attempts to produce adequate impressions of the visual appearance of the 
Milky Way, such as the evocative but stylized print by the French astrono-
mer-artist Leopold Trouvelot, were even more unsatisfactory than attempts 
to render the Orion Nebula had been. Ultimately, both objects defi ed 
human skill with the pencil and the brush. 

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 119
Th ey would fi nally yield only to the advancing arts of photography. 
Photography was one of the great triumphs of 19th century technology, 
and—with spectroscopy—utterly transformed astronomy. We briefl y advert 
again to the pioneering experiments of Nicéphore Niépce and his col-
laborator and successor Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre in the 1820s and 
30s, as well as the fi rst astronomical applications of photography using the 
primitive daguerreotype process, which deposited positive images directly 
on a metal plate. Daguerre publicized his process in 1839. Almost at once, 
it was taken up by an American, John William Draper, professor of chem-
istry and botany at New York University, who in March 1840 obtained the 
fi rst daguerreotype showing features on the Moon. A decade later, George 
Phillips Bond imaged the star Vega; while on July 28, 1851, at the Royal 
Observatory in Königsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), a local 
daguerreotypist named Berkowski (his fi rst name has not been recorded), 
obtained the fi rst daguerreotype of a total eclipse of the Sun.
A great step forward was taken with the introduction of the wet-
collodion process, which involved coating a glass plate with gun cotton 
and potassium iodide dissolved in alcohol or ether, letting this collodion 
dry, and then, just before use, dipping the prepared plate into a silver 
nitrate solution. Introduced in England by Scott Archer in 1851, the wet-
collodion process off ered amazingly good resolution of detail, conveniently 
produced negative rather than positive images, and allowed exposures of 
up to 10 seconds. By the mid-1850s, wet-collodion plates had rendered 
the daguerreotype obsolete, but the method was still diffi  cult to use, as 
the exposure had to be made while the plate was still wet. Pioneering 
photographers such as Mathew Brady, Alexander Gardner, and Timothy 
O’Sullivan, who followed the clashing armies of the North and South dur-
ing the American Civil War and developed their plates while still in the 
fi eld, demonstrated enormous technical skill, and through their eff orts, 
the “shockingly realistic medium” of photography showed citizens at home 
the carnage of far-away battlefi elds and stripped away the Victorian-era 
romance of warfare forever (“into the valley of death,” anyone?). But what 
the wet-collodion process did for far-away battlefi elds it could not do for 
the far-away stars.
As early as 1857, G.P. Bond obtained a wet-collodion plate of the 
double star Mizar and Alcor, in the handle of the Big Dipper, and confi -
dently predicted the future application of photography in astronomy on 
a magnifi cent scale. Dying tragically young, he did not live to see it. Even 
wet-collodion plates were only to capture images of the brighter celestial 
objects, such as the Sun (photographed on every clear day from the King’s 
Observatory at Kew between 1858 and 1872, when the program was trans-
ferred to the Royal Observatory at Greenwich), the Moon, and the brighter 
planets and stars. Th e fi rst photograph of a spectrum of a star—Vega 

 120 
Galactic Encounters
again—was obtained by Henry Draper, John W.’s son, on a wet-collodion 
plate in 1872. Trained as a physician, just as his father had been, he married 
an heiress whose father happened to own a signifi cant part of the island 
of Manhattan. Th is allowed him to devote full-time to his real passion, 
astronomy, from 1873 until the end of his life. He was a “Grand Amateur” 
in every sense of the word, setting up a private observatory at Hastings-on-
Hudson (near Dobb’s Ferry, New York) equipped with a homebuilt 28-inch 
refl ector with a silver-on-glass mirror, and an 11-inch Clark refractor espe-
cially designed for photography.
During a visit to London in 1879, Draper called on Sir William 
Huggins at Tulse Hill. By now, Huggins had upgraded his own observatory, 
replacing the 8-inch Clark refractor he had used to obtain spectra of the 
nebulae with two instruments provided by the Royal Society of London: an 
18-inch refl ector and a 15-inch refractor, which he set up in an imposing 
new dome in his garden. He had also, in 1875, at age 51, married Margaret 
Lindsay Murray of Dublin, 25 years his junior, a highly intelligent woman 
who shared his enthusiasm for astronomy. Despite the diff erence in their 
ages, the marriage was a success, and 
Lady Huggins entered fully and equally 
in the work. In consequence of the new 
techniques he was pioneering, Huggins 
was, moreover, transforming the nature 
of the astronomical observatory. Th us, 
the establishment that Draper saw was 
nothing if not futuristic. To give Hug-
gins’s own description:
[The] astronomical observatory began, for 
the ﬁ rst time, to take on the appearance 
of a laboratory. Primary batteries, giving 
forth noxious gases, were arranged out-
side one of the windows; a large induc-
tion coil stood mounted on a stand on 
wheels so as to follow the positions of the 
eye-end of the telescope, together with 
a battery of several Leyden jars; shelves 
with Bunsen burners, vacuum tubes, and 
bottles of chemicals … lined its walls.5
Draper learned from Hug-
gins of the commercial availability of 
the gelatino-bromide dry plate, which 
would render the wet-collodion plates 
Fig. 7.1. William Huggins in his laboratory-obser-
vatory. From: Publications of Sir William Huggins’s 
Observatory, vol. II (1909).

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 121
obsolete. Here, photoactive chemicals were suspended in a solution of 
gelatin and spread in a thin layer on a glass plate. Th e chemicals remained 
sensitive even aft er the gelatin had dried, allowing long exposures to be 
obtained. In addition, the new process was incalculably more convenient 
than wet plates, since exposed gelatino-bromide dry plates did not need to 
be processed immediately. Th is made the new plates decidedly more useful 
than the wet-process plates in astronomy. Aft er Draper returned to Hast-
ings-on-Hudson, he made an exposure of 50 minutes on the Great Nebula 
of Orion, on September 30, 1880. A better image, with a 137-minute 
exposure, was obtained on March 14, 1882. Of the latter, Edward Singleton 
Holden, in his Monograph of the Central Parts of the Nebula Orion, noted 
that it showed the Nebula, “for nearly every purpose incomparably better”6 
than the careful drawing, the work of so many years, by G. P. Bond. A new 
era—the photographic study of the nebulae—had commenced. 
Draper, alas, did not live long enough to fulfi ll his own nearly limit-
less potential. Soon aft er he obtained this image of the Orion Nebula, he 
went on a hunting trip to the 
Rocky Mountains, was caught 
out in the open on a stormy 
night, and fell ill with double 
pneumonia. He died on Novem-
ber 20, 1882, at the age of 45.
By this time the name of Edward 
Emerson Barnard, who would 
revolutionize this fi eld, was 
beginning to echo around the 
astronomical world. Barnard 
would become the foremost 
practitioner of celestial photogra-
phy of his era, and will always be 
remembered for his pioneering 
(and in some ways still unsur-
passed) wide-angle photographs 
of the Milky Way. He was also, 
in contrast to most of the fi gures 
we’ve encountered so far, decid-
edly not born with a silver spoon 
in his mouth. To the contrary, 
his childhood was spent in abject 
poverty, and he had only two 
months of formal schooling.7
Fig. 7.2. Henry Draper’s 137-minute exposure 
on a gelatino-bromide dry plate, taken on March 
14, 1882. This pioneering eﬀ ort already shows 
more detail than G.P. Bond’s masterpiece of visual 
observations. Courtesy: C. Robert O’Dell.

 122 
Galactic Encounters
Observer of all that Shines and Obscures
One of the most appealing things about Barnard was his ability to over-
come so much childhood hardship. Th ough nineteenth century readers 
might have thought of him in terms of the Horatio Alger “rags to riches” 
stories, we are more likely today to see him as an object-study in resiliency. 
Psychologists are eager to discover factors allowing someone like Barnard 
to overcome a level of hardship that would defeat most of us. In Barnard’s 
case, those factors included a keen sense of wonder, extraordinary motiva-
tion and drive (what one of his youthful acquaintances described as “the 
immortal fi re within himself”), patience and endurance, including the 
ability to get by on very little sleep, and perhaps most important, the kindly 
interest of adult mentors who encouraged his interests and helped him 
acquire technical mastery in an area—photography—that would soon, and 
largely in his hands, revolutionize astronomy.
Barnard was born in Nashville in December 1857. His father, 
Reuben, an illiterate laborer, died before he was born, leaving Edward to 
be brought up by his mother, Elizabeth. (He had an older brother too, who 
appears to have been mentally defi cient.) At the time of Edward’s birth, she 
was 42 years old, struggling to eke out a living modeling fl owers in wax.
In the 1850s, Nashville was a place of culture and cultivation. It was 
then the largest and most important American city south of the Ohio River 
with the exception of New Orleans, with a population of 17,000, of whom 
4,000 were black slaves. Wide turnpikes and busy railroad lines radiated 
from it; the coiling Cumberland River, draining Cumberland Gap on its 
way to the Mississippi, was crowded with river traffi  c carrying goods from 
the city’s foundries, ironworks, and small manufactures to Memphis and 
New Orleans. With its Female Academy and Nashville University, it was a 
center of education. Its free public school system was the fi rst in the south. 
But, for all its dazzling appearances, Nashville in the 1850s was a 
troubled city. Th e decade had begun with the Convention of Southern States, 
which convened in the Nashville Capitol in 1850 with the express purpose 
of forming a Southern sectional party to protest the attempt being made in 
Washington by President Zachary Taylor’s administration to exclude South-
ern men with their slaves from territories recently ceded to the U.S. by Mex-
ico. Th ough there was far from a unanimous viewpoint represented at the 
Convention, and it adjourned without reaching any defi nite conclusions, its 
members planned to reconvene in November if Congress failed to respond 
to the Southerners’ demands. It never did; Taylor died suddenly, and his 
successor, Millard Fillmore—oft en rated by historians as one of the worst 
presidents in American history—was eager for appeasement, and worked 
out with Congress the Compromise of 1850 whereby popular sovereignty 
was proposed as a way of deciding the issue of slavery in the territories.

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 123
Th e Compromise unraveled with the election of Abraham Lincoln 
in 1860, when ten southern states withdrew from the Union. In April 1861, 
Fort Sumter fell, and Tennessee, throwing in its lot with the seceded states 
in June, almost at once became a theater of war. General Albert Sidney 
Johnston was placed in command of the Confederate defense line running 
from the mountains around Cumberland Gap to the Mississippi, and Fort 
Donelson was built to defend the vital supply lines where they crossed the 
Cumberland. Aft er a few days of assault, the fort surrendered to Ulysses 
S. Grant on February 16, 1862, with the capture of 15,000 men, thereby 
opening Nashville itself to the invading Union troops. Confederate sol-
diers meanwhile cut the cables and burned the railroad bridge on aban-
doning the city. Within two days, Nashville had fallen into Union hands, 
and remained under occupation for the duration of the war. Th e Capitol 
was surrounded with temporary stockades made of cotton-bales, and an 
extensive system of fortifi cations was built up throughout the city. Th at was 
Nashville as young Ed Barnard would have known it.
Th e dreadful privations that befell the South during and just follow-
ing the war only intensifi ed the misery of the impoverished Barnard family. 
Many years aft erward, Edward stated that his early youth was “so sad and 
bitter that even now I cannot look back to it without a shudder.”8
But the fi rst two years of the Civil War also happened to coincide 
with the appearance of spectacular comets—two in 1861, one in 1862. 
Many an astronomer has been captured for his or her vocation by the 
experience, at a susceptible age (almost always in pre-adolescence, some-
times even in early childhood) of an awesome spectacle in the sky—usually 
an eclipse or a brilliant comet. Barnard was one of them. Long aft erward 
he recalled: “When I was very small I saw a comet; and I have a vague 
remembrance that the neighbors spoke of this comet as having something 
to do with the terrible war that was then devastating the south.”9 Possibly 
it was the Great Comet of 1861, discovered by amateur astronomer John 
Tebbutt in New South Wales (Australia) but not making an appearance 
in the northern sky until June 30, when it emerged spectacularly out of 
the evening twilight with a head brighter than Jupiter and its tail stretch-
ing across a swath of 105º of the sky. Th ough fading fast, it was still vis-
ible to the naked-eye on July 21, when the Union and Confederate armies 
grappled in Virginia at the First Battle of Bull Run. Or it may have been 
Comet Swift -Tuttle. With a head reaching the 2nd magnitude and sporting 
a tail 25 to 30 degrees long in late August and early September 1862, it was 
fading (but still visible to the naked-eye) on September 17, when the Union 
and Confederate armies were engaged at Antietam, in Maryland, in what 
was till then, and remains still, the bloodiest day in American history.
Whichever it was, it clearly awakened the child’s sense of wonder—
surprise at the rare and unexpected; perhaps also of awe, the quintessen-

 124 
Galactic Encounters
tial emotion of astronomy, which exists, psychologists say, “in the upper 
reaches of pleasure and on the boundary of fear” and is associated with 
the contemplation of whatever is vast and powerful and obscure. “Fleeting 
and rare, … [it] can change the course of a life in profound and permanent 
ways.”10 Th en and later, the small, half-starved and frightened youngster 
must have reveled in such emotions. 
During the years the war was raging, Barnard used to lie out in the 
open air on summer nights, fl at on his back in an old wagon bed, watch-
ing the stars (and the Milky Way, which was still brilliant in Nashville), a 
pastime which, he aft erwards recalled, “helped to soft en the sadness of my 
childhood.”11 Among the stars he saw from that wagon was “a very bright 
one, which during the summer months shone directly overhead in the early 
hours of the evening.” It would be many years before he learned its name—
Vega.
On Barnard’s seventh birthday, December 16, 1864, the fi ghting 
between the Union and Confederate armies came within a few miles of 
Nashville. Barnard himself could hear cannons booming in the distance. 
General George Th omas’s Union forces routed the Confederate troops 
under General John Hood. Hood’s troops had already been decimated at 
the battle of Franklin two weeks earlier, when the Confederate General 
had ordered a desperate frontal assault on the Union line, “sending 18,000 
men forward through the haze of an Indian-summer aft ernoon in an attack 
as spectacular, and as hopeless, as Pickett’s famous charge at Gettysburg,” 
in the words of Civil War historian Bruce Catton.12 Th e Confederacy was 
wobbling toward inevitable defeat; for all practical purposes the war was 
over. Lee’s surrender to Grant at Appomattox only months away.
Unfortunately, the Barnards’ situation did not improve much under 
Reconstruction—“the last battle of the Civil War.”  Nashville remained 
occupied as the major supply base for Union forces in Tennessee (the last 
troops were not withdrawn until 1877). Nashville, like the rest of the South, 
was economically depressed. A cholera epidemic swept through the city 
in 1866, claiming 800 lives. Meanwhile, in the North, an unprecedented 
period of expansion began, in which opportunities seemed to open on 
every hand; the country was made “safe—and lucrative—for the capital-
ist.”13 Government was a paid agent. Scandals and deals became blatant. A 
few men made vast fortunes. It was the Gilded Age, the Age of the Tycoon. 
Some of them would endow institutions of learning. A few would even sup-
port the progress of astronomy.
Meanwhile, the nightmare of Ed Barnard’s childhood was coming 
to an end. His mother came upon a photograph of a man now working as a 
photographer in Nashville, whom she had known quite well in Ohio dur-
ing better days. Th e man was John H. Van Stavoren, who since the begin-
ning of the Civil War had owned a photograph gallery in Nashville. When 

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 125
Elizabeth called on her old acquaintance, she 
found that he was looking for a boy to run errands 
and to guide an immense solar camera he had 
mounted on the studio roof. Th e camera, called 
“Jupiter” because of its enormous size, was used 
to make life-sized enlargements on silvered paper 
from negatives. Because of the relative insensi-
tivity of the silvered paper then in use, intense 
sunlight was needed, and was produced by con-
centrating the sunlight with a condensing lens. An 
artist could also paint from an image formed in 
this way. Van Stavoren himself oft en used it this 
way for portrait painting.
Van Stavoren needed an assistant to keep 
the camera moving precisely with the Sun by 
turning a pair of hand wheels. One wheel turned 
the camera west, the other tilted it up or down. 
Because of the camera’s size, a small boy could 
reach the hand wheels only by standing on top 
of a stepladder. It was tedious work. A number 
of boys tried in the position had nearly burned 
down the house falling asleep in the warm sunshine. Van Stavoren asked 
Elizabeth: “Will your boy 
keep awake?”  She responded 
without hesitation, “My son 
will not go to sleep!”  Barnard, 
who was then nine years old, 
was duly hired, and he never 
did go to sleep while on duty. 
As he wrote long aft erwards, 
“Th rough summer’s heat and 
winter’s cold I stood upon the 
roof of that house and kept the 
great instrument directed to 
the Sun. It was sleepy work and 
required great patience and 
endurance for one so young, 
and at this distant day I real-
ize that this training doubtless 
developed those qualities—
patience, care and endurance 
so necessary to an astronomer’s 
success.”14
Fig. 7.3. E.E. Barnard, at about the 
time he started work at John van 
Stavoren’s Photograph Gallery in 
Nashville. Note the ulcerated area 
on his right jaw. Courtesy: Yerkes 
Observatory.
Fig. 7.4. The Jupiter Camera on the roof of Van 
Stavoren’s Photograph Gallery. Courtesy: Yerkes 
Observatory.

 126 
Galactic Encounters
Barnard’s association with the Photograph Gallery would be long and pro-
ductive; he remained there as an employee until he was 25. As a result, we 
have more portraits of him, in childhood and as a young man, than of any 
19th-century astronomer. He was far more oft en photographed than even 
Abraham Lincoln. 
His interest in astronomy, awakened by the comet and by watching 
the stars from his wagon bed, received a further stimulus with the eclipse 
of the Sun on August 7, 1869. It was almost total from Nashville (the path 
of totality ran from Alaska to North Carolina), and Barnard noted that 
“the Sun was so nearly hidden that the spectacle presented some of the awe 
and sublimity of the total phase,” and increased his “wonder at the phe-
nomena of nature.”15 He was then living in “Varmint Town,” a rough part 
of South Nashville, putting in long hours at the Photograph Gallery. It was 
oft en dark when he walked home (remember, those were days long before 
electric lights). “Away back yonder,” he aft erwards recalled in a letter to the 
assistant postmaster Joseph S. Carels,
… when I was small and ragged and sick and desolate just after the 
close of the war, when even those who had rolled in wealth but a few 
years before were struggling for subsistence, and few there were who 
could bestow even a kind word—so terrible had been the desolation 
and its eﬀ ect on the people—in these times when I used to trudge 
home some two miles every night from work, timid and frightened, I 
frequently would meet a gentleman who always had a nod and a smile 
for me—in bad or cold weather he always wore a cloak. Sometimes he 
would stop me and ask how I was getting on but he never passed me 
without a recognition. I did not know who that man was, but his smile 
lighted up my heart, for years he never failed to greet me. Soon I learned 
to my awe that he was assistant Postmaster!  Had he been President 
[of the United States] his position would not have appeared higher and 
more exalted to me—and that he should notice me and should stop to 
speak to me—I could not understand it, and I cannot understand it to 
this day—unless it was indeed an inborn desire in him to sympathise 
with the friendless and wretched for friendless and wretched I was in 
those days if any one was ever friendless and wretched.16
During this sad time Barnard had a sore on his face that refused to 
heal and aft erwards left  a prominent scar on his right jaw. Whenever Carels 
stopped Barnard, he would always ask how that sore was coming along. To 
Barnard’s niece Mary Calvert, this episode always “seemed eloquent of the 
loneliness of his life in those days.”17

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 127
Apart from Carels, the other friends Barnard remembered from 
this lonely period were the stars. “I oft en noticed in my long walks home-
ward in the early night an ordinary yellowish star which, to my surprise, 
seemed to be moving eastward among the others stars”:
This attracted my attention because in all the time I had noticed the 
stars, though they came and went with the seasons, they seemed all to 
keep to their same relative positions. This one must be quite diﬀ erent 
from the others though it resembled them…. I watched it night after 
night and saw that though it moved eastward with reference to the 
other stars, it also partook of their general drift westward and was ﬁ nally 
lost with them in the rays of the sun. In later years when I had become 
more familiar with astronomy it occurred to me to look up this moving 
star, and I found then that what had attracted my boyish attention was 
the wonderful ringed world of Saturn.18
So far Barnard’s interest in astronomy was of a completely uninformed 
kind. Th ough a sense of wonder and awe had been oft en awakened by celes-
tial phenomena such as comets, eclipses, and wandering planets, like Wil-
liam Herschel he was anything but precocious in his formal study of astron-
omy. Th at began only at the rather advanced age of 19!  By then he was no 
longer living in “Varmint Town” but had taken a room in the top story of 
the Hotel St. Charles, in downtown Nashville, which was more convenient 
to the Photograph Gallery. One night a young man came to his room:
We had been children together, but he was a born thief. As a boy he stole, 
and when he got older the law often laid its hands upon him. On several 
occasions I had helped him out from my meager earnings for my sym-
pathies were easily worked upon. At one time I had paid his ﬁ ne when 
a policeman brought him around where I was at work. On this night in 
particular I was in no mood to be gracious; for he had come to borrow 
money from me, which I knew from previous experience would never 
come back. As security for the return of the money he had brought a large 
book. This I refused to look at; and ﬁ nally, to get rid of him, I gave him two 
dollars (which was the amount asked for). I never saw him or the money 
again. Shortly after he had gone I noticed he had left the book lying upon 
my table. I felt very angry, because the money was a large amount to me 
then, and it was some time before I would open the book.19
Th e book contained the Works of the Scots writer, the Reverend 
Th omas Dick, known as the “Christian philosopher of Dundee,” who 

 128 
Galactic Encounters
tried to blend fundamentalist Christianity with astronomy and who had 
included a set of rudimentary star charts in one of his books. Soon Barnard 
set out to compare these charts with the patch of sky visible from the open 
window of his small apartment:
In less than an hour I had learned the names of a number of my old 
friends; for there was Vega and the stars in the Cross of Cygnus and Altair 
and others that I had known from childhood. This was my ﬁ rst intelligent 
glimpse into astronomy. It is to be hoped that my sins may be forgiven 
me for never having sought out the rightful owner of that book in all 
these years.20
By now, Barnard was fi nding new mentors. Aft er Van Stavoren went 
bankrupt, the Photograph Gallery passed into the hands of one Rodney 
Poole. Barnard had long since graduated from guiding “Jupiter.” Having 
inherited some of his mother’s artistic talent, he was employed for a time as 
the Gallery’s artist until Poole hired Peter Ross Calvert, a Yorkshire immi-
grant who had studied art in London. Calvert took over as Gallery’s artist, 
and Barnard became chief assistant to James Braid, Poole’s chief photogra-
pher and later a prominent electrician in Nashville.
One day Braid found a one-inch spyglass lens on the street lead-
ing to the Union barracks and helped Barnard assemble it into a small 
telescope; he wrote of it as “a paper tube and lenses that looked as If they 
had been chipped out of a tumbler by an Indian in the days of the Mound 
Builders. Yet it fi lled my soul with enthusiasm when I detected the larger 
lunar mountains and craters, and caught a glimpse of one of the moons 
of Jupiter.”21 Eventually Braid helped him to get a better telescope, with a 
2 1/4-inch lens, and Barnard began using it in the spring of 1876, when 
the brilliant planet Venus was a exhibiting a crescent phase as it dropped 
toward the Sun in the evening sky. His telescopic sighting of this phase 
“made a more profound and pleasing impression,” he later recalled, than his 
celebrated discovery of the fi ft h moon of Jupiter. Henceforth he lived heart 
and soul for astronomy.
Braid learned from relatives in New York City that John Byrne, a 
skillful optician, was off ering fi rst-rate refracting telescopes for sale. Now 
Barnard began saving from his slender salary enough money to acquire a 
5-inch refractor. Byrne listed it for $550 but was willing to part with it (as a 
favor to Braid) for only $380—still two-thirds of Barnard’s annual salary at 
the time. 
Barnard had hardly inaugurated his work with the new telescope 
when members of the American Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence, the premiere scientifi c organization in the U.S., gathered at the State 
Capitol in Nashville for their annual meeting. Th e most anticipated speaker 

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 129
was O.C. Marsh, paleontologist of Yale, who had just pieced together an 
extinct land beast, Titanosaurus montanus, found in the sandstone hog-
backs of Morrison, Colorado (near Denver), but the meeting was presided 
over by an astronomer, Simon Newcomb, president-elect of the Association 
and so infl uential he has been called “America’s Astronomer Royal.” Bar-
nard’s friends were able to arrange a meeting with Newcomb. Th ough he 
must have petrifi ed with fright, Barnard managed to ask the great man how 
someone with a small telescope might make himself useful in astronomy. 
Newcomb made the usual suggestions—searching for comets and nebulae. 
Th en suddenly he changed tack and asked Barnard if he was acquainted 
with mathematics. He was not. Newcomb then advised him, “Lay aside at 
once that telescope and master mathematics, for you will never be what 
you seek to become without this mastery.” Barnard was so depressed at this 
that he got behind one of the columns of the State Capitol and had a good 
cry. Th ough Barnard did his best to follow Newcomb’s stern admonition 
(and hired a mathematics tutor, possibly the very next day), he eventu-
ally decided that Newcomb’s injunction was too severe, and decided on a 
compromise—he would devote all clear and moonless nights to working 
with the telescope, the rest to the study of mathematics. Despite his eff orts 
in mathematics, he never advanced very far in that line. As an observer, 
however, he was a natural, and possessed perhaps the greatest talent since 
William Herschel.
He spent his nights observing Jupiter, whose Great Red Spot was 
then becoming prominent, and searching for comets. Th e discovery of a 
new comet was then rewarded with a handsome monetary prize off ered by 
a New York patent-medicine (i.e., snake-oil) manufacturer, H. H. Warner. 
Barnard, frankly, needed the money; he had his invalid mother to care for, 
and he was also courting Peter Calvert’s sister Rhoda. She was seven years 
his senior, but they were already very devoted to each other, and hoped to 
marry as soon as they could aff ord it. Barnard’s enthusiasm and diligence 
were soon rewarded; he discovered his fi rst comet in 1881, and between 
then and 1887 discovered a total of 10. By then he was, along with Louis 
Pons, a one-time doorman of the Marseilles Observatory, Messier, and 
Méchain among the greatest visual comet discoverers of all time. Money 
earned through the Warner prizes helped him to acquire a plot of land and 
to build his own cottage, “Comet House,” where he lived with his wife and 
mother. He was a local hero now, and received a fellowship to the recently 
opened Vanderbilt University (funded by the uneducated transportation 
genius “Commodore” Vanderbilt) where he took charge of the college 
observatory’s 6-inch refractor—though he continued, when comet-seeking, 
to use his own 5-inch refractor.
Comet-seeking was laborious, routine work, not without its 
share of drudgery. Nowadays, the era of visual comet discovery is all 

 130 
Galactic Encounters
but over, and most discoveries are made by automated surveys, such as 
Project LINEAR. But for Barnard, at least, “sweet were the uses of adver-
sity.” He learned a great deal as he swept the sky for comets. “To me,” he 
later recalled, “the views of the Galaxy were the most fascinating part of 
comet-seeking, and more than paid me for the many nights of unsuccess-
ful work.” As Messier had done, he came across new nebulae in the course 
of searching for comets. Among his notable fi nds were the dwarf galaxy 
N.G.C. 6822, now known as Barnard’s galaxy, in Sagittarius, N.G.C. 1499 
(the “California” nebula) in Perseus, and N.G.C. 281 (the “Pacman” nebula; 
obviously not Barnard’s name for it!) in Cassiopeia.
Fig. 7.5. E.L. Trouvelot’s evocative rendering of the Great Comet of 1881 (Tebbutt’s Comet), the 
brightest of the comets of the year that saw E. E. Barnard’s ﬁ rst discovery with the 5-inch Byrne 
refractor at Nashville. From: Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 131
Fig. 7.6. An invitation to the night-sky. The Moon appears with Venus and Jupiter in the evening 
sky, as the shutter of the dome of the Lick Observatory’s 36-inch refractor opens. This telescope 
was used by E. E. Barnard to make many spectacular discoveries, including the ﬁ fth satellite of 
Jupiter, which he discovered visually in September 1892. Copyrighted image by Laurie Hatch, used 
with permission.
Barnard’s fellowship allowed him experience in practical astronomy 
without leading to a degree, and in 1887 he received an invitation to join the 
staff  of the Lick Observatory, then under construction on 4200-foot high 
Mt. Hamilton, near San Jose, California. Th e Lick Observatory marked the 
beginning of a new era in astronomy. Hitherto, professional astronomers 
and their assistants at the great national observatories like those of Paris 
and Greenwich and Washington had largely been occupied with routine 
work such as measuring the positions of the Moon and planets relative to 
the background stars, in the service of time-keeping and navigation. Th e 
work of discovery was largely the province of the “Grand Amateurs,” like 
Rosse, Lassell, De la Rue, Huggins, Draper, men who possessed indepen-
dent means and were able to equip themselves with the best equipment and 
pursue whatever investigation they wished. Th e Lick Observatory, on the 
other hand, was built through the philanthropic endowment of James Lick, 
who had made fortune in real estate speculation in California during the 
Gold Rush, and who was, therefore, even richer than the Grand Amateurs. 

 132 
Galactic Encounters
Having no heir (he refused to the end to legally recognize a natural son from 
a disappointed love aff air), he began to cast around for a way to dispose of 
his fortune. Aft er a couple of miscues—for a while he favored a plan to set 
up colossal fi gures of himself and his parents bestriding San Francisco Bay, 
and next considered building a pyramid larger than that of Cheops on the 
corner of Fourth and Market Streets—he was fi nally persuaded that it would 
be more useful to use the money to build the largest and most powerful 
telescope in the world. In the end a 36-inch refractor was commissioned 
from the Clark fi rm, and it was decided—at a time when most observatories 
were located at sea-level and in cities—to set it up on a mountain-top, where 
it could “see” rather than be “seen.” 
Lick died in 1876, but the observatory was not fi nished until 1888. 
Meanwhile, a staff  of astronomers had to be selected. Th e director was to 
be West Point trained Edward Singleton Holden, a former astronomer at 
the U.S. Naval Observatory. Other staff  members included James Keeler, a 
superb spectroscopist, Sherburne Wesley Burnham, by profession a Court 
Reporter from Chicago who had made a name for himself as the discoverer 
of new double stars, John Martin Schaeberle, a professor of astronomy at 
the University of Michigan, and Barnard, who was chosen expressly for his 
profi ciency in discovering comets. 
Barnard, however, was not interested exclusively in comets. He 
proved to be an all-around observer, interested in every conceivable class of 
object in the heavens—planets, comets, double stars, star clusters, nebulae.
His greatest preoccupation was with the Milky Way, which was fi rst 
fostered during his comet-sweeps in Nashville if not even earlier during his 
Fig. 7.7. California Nebula (NGC 1499), an HII region in the Perseus Arm, discovered by E. E. 
Barnard at Vanderbilt University Observatory in Nashville, in 1884. This image was obtained by 
Barnard with the 6-inch “Willard” portrait lens at Lick Observatory. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 133
childhood vigils from the old 
wagon-bed. In August 1889, 
he began drawing on his long 
experience in photography 
by strapping a wide-angle 
portrait lens (a six-inch “Wil-
lard” lens, obtained for a pit-
tance to take photographs of 
the total solar eclipse visible 
in California on New Year’s 
Day, 1889) onto an equatori-
ally mounted telescope, and 
meticulously guiding it for 
three hours on the star clouds 
of Sagittarius. It was the fi rst 
of scores of plates he obtained 
between then and 1895, when 
he left  Mt Hamilton, largely 
owing to diffi  culties with Holden whom he regarded as an insuff erable 
autocrat; he was not alone—there was a general exodus of astronomers 
from the mountain, beginning with Keeler in 1891. Among the terms they 
used to describe their director were “the Devil,” “the Czar,” “an unmitigated 
blackguard,” “the Dictator,” “Prince Holden,” “the great I am,” “the Great 
Mahatma,” “that humbug,” “”that contemptible brute,” “that immoral and 
incompetent man,” and “our former colleague and fake.”22
But before Barnard left , he had accomplished some of his greatest 
work. Th e plates obtained with the humble Willard lens were scientifi cally 
rich, and showed a large number of mysterious and hitherto unappreciated 
dark features. Barnard described the area of sky shown in a plate taken in 
1894 to the English barrister and amateur astronomer Arthur Ranyard: “It 
is essentially a region of vacancies. Th ere is a great chasm here in the Milky 
Way.”23 Another plate centered on the star Rho Ophiuchi, the very place 
where William Herschel had exclaimed to his sister Caroline, “Here surely 
is a hole in the heavens.” For a long time Barnard lacked the confi dence to 
challenge the conventional interpretation of these dark markings as holes. 
But Ranyard off ered a fresh perspective: “Th e dark vacant areas or chan-
nels … seem to me to be undoubtedly dark structures, or absorbing masses 
in space, which cut out the light from a nebulous or stellar region beyond 
them.”24 Barnard did not yet agree, and could not bring himself to relin-
quish the old idea that they were true vacancies in the sky.
 Nevertheless, the issue continued to nag at him. Aft er leaving 
Lick, Barnard took a job at the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observatory. 
Named for Charles Tyson Yerkes, a Chicago elevated train tycoon who 
Fig. 7.8. Barnard, setting up to photograph with the 
Bruce photographic telescope at Mount Wilson in 
1905. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 134 
Galactic Encounters
provided some of the funds, the principal instrument was a 40-inch refrac-
tor, with which the observatory’s founder and fi rst director, George Ellery 
Hale, wanted to study the spectra of the Sun and stars. Barnard used the 
great refractor whenever he could, and also began casting around for a new 
photographic telescope that would be better suited for his Milky Way pho-
tography than the one built around the primitive Willard lens. Eventually 
Catherine Bruce, a spinster heiress, whose father was the inventor of a pro-
cess for molding metal type, agreed to provide funds for such a telescope. 
Th e 10-inch Bruce Photographic Telescope was fi nished by 1904, and 
mounted under a tin dome on the grounds at Yerkes on the path between 
the main building and Barnard’s house on the shore of Lake Geneva. 
Hale, not yet 30 when the Yerkes Observatory was fi nished, was 
a restless soul (see chapter 10). Even a 40-inch refractor could not satisfy 
him, and he began planning for an even larger telescope in a better climate. 
Mt. Wilson, a 5,886-foot peak near Pasadena, was known to be an excel-
lent site for an observatory, and Hale, receiving funding from the Carn-
egie Institution (founded by the steel magnate and philanthropist Andrew 
Carnegie), resigned from Yerkes and began building the Mt. Wilson Solar 
Observatory there. Th e observatory was not very much developed when 
in 1904 Barnard received permission from Edwin B. Frost, who took over 
as the director of Yerkes aft er Hale’s departure, to send the Bruce telescope 
to Mt. Wilson to photograph the Milky Way from its clear dark skies. An 
added advantage of the Mt. Wilson site was that it was ten degrees farther 
south than Yerkes.
On January 10, 1905, Barnard, pushing 50 and gaining weight, led a 
mule saddled with the 10-inch lenses on a fi ve-hour trek up what was little 
more than a footpath, from Pasadena to the “Monastery,” the astronomers’ 
residence on the mountain. A horse-drawn wagon hauled the rest of the 
telescope to the summit. As soon as he reached the summit Barnard, beside 
himself with excitement, worked relentlessly, seldom bothering to sleep. 
In only two weeks he had the telescope up and running, and was already 
exposing the fi rst plates to the skies.
During the winter of 1905, Mt. Wilson was still a primitive wilderness, and 
Barnard was oft en the only human on the mountain (his wife Rhoda had 
remained with relatives back East). He later recalled:
I must confess that at times, especially in the winter months, the loneli-
ness of the night became oppressive, and the dead silence, broken only 
by the ghastly cry of some stray owl winging its way over the canyon, 
produced an uncanny terror in me, and I could not avoid the dread feel-
ing that I might be prey at any moment to a roving mountain lion…. So 

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 135
lonely was I at ﬁ rst that when I entered the Bruce house and shoved the 
roof back I locked the door and did not open it again until I was forced 
to go out.25
While guiding exposures, Barnard usually let his legs dangle 
through a trap door in the fl oor of this building. One night he heard rus-
tling noises. On investigating, he discovered that a rattlesnake had been 
making its home there. “It must have been a friendly snake and was there 
for the purpose of warming the observer’s feet,” he quipped.26 Friendly or 
not, the snake was killed; the next night the trap door was open as usual.
Th ere was no running water on the mountain, so the water used to 
develop his plates had to be carried up the peak by a burro named Pinto. 
Barnard became especially fond of Pinto when he discovered that a burro’s 
hair is fi ner than a human’s, which made it eminently suitable for making 
the crosshairs of a guiding telescope.
Barnard maintained an inhuman work pace on Mt. Wilson. He was 
a tireless observer — an “observaholic” — and long since has been known 
as the man “never known to sleep”—who night aft er night, with superhu-
man patience, guided the Bruce Telescope on the magnifi cent star-clouds 
and dark markings of the Milky Way. As the French writer Balzac had 
done, he kept himself going by consuming enormous quantities of cof-
fee. As spring came on, the crickets and other insects began their nightly 
serenades, and Barnard felt less alone on the mountain. Also, one by one, 
other astronomers began taking up residence there. One of them, Walter 
Sydney Adams, noted, “Barnard’s hours of work would have horrifi ed any 
medical man.”27 
During eight months at Mt. Wilson, Barnard exposed 500 Milky 
Way plates. Th e best of them were included in the Atlas of Selected Regions 
of the Milky Way, and have never been surpassed.
Th eir most remarkable features were what Barnard called the “dark 
markings.” Some — dark lanes — ran through Taurus and Perseus. Oth-
ers straddled Sagittarius. Still others, east of Rho Ophiuchi, “shattered 
into fragments.” Th e “wild region” north of Th eta Ophiuchi was “fuller of 
strange and curious things than any other … with which my photographs 
have made me familiar.” Barnard’s descriptions are wonderfully evocative 
and romantic. One dark area, he thought, looked like a lizard; another like 
a parrot’s head; yet another resembled “a beast, with round head, nose, 
mouth, ears, and great staring eyes.”28 
Th e appearance of these dark markings strongly supported Ran-
yard’s contention that light-absorbing material existed in interstellar space. 
Of the photograph of the region north of Th eta Ophiuchi, for instance, 
Barnard wrote: “that most of these dark markings … are real dark bodies 
and not open space can scarcely be questioned. Th ere seems to be every 

 136 
Galactic Encounters
evidence of their reality. What their true nature is does not seem clear. 
Th at they are some form of nebulosity is possible if not probable; but that 
they are real obscuring bodies is evident.”29 A photograph Barnard took in 
January 1907 – by then the Bruce was back in its tin dome at Yerkes — of 
a region in Taurus, in the Northern Milky Way, showed, he wrote, “curious 
dark lanes” whose feeble light covered “an abrupt, irregular, vacant hole in 
the dense background of small stars. But there is every evidence that this 
is not a hole in the stratum of stars, for over its entire extent is a feeble veil 
of nebulosity with small, round dark spots in it.” Th ough edging up to the 
Fig. 7.9. (left) Rho Ophiuchi. Plate 13 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. “The 
region of Rho Ophiuchi is one of the most extraordinary in the sky. The nebula itself is a beautiful object. 
With its outlying connections and the dark spot in which it is placed and the vacant lanes running to the 
east of it, it makes a picture almost unequaled in interest in the entire heavens.” Courtesy: Yerkes Observa-
tory.
Fig. 7.10. (right) Plate 20 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way: “This picture was 
especially made to show the remarkable blank space east and south of Theta Ophiuchi… Remarkable as is 
the region south and east of Theta Ophiuchi, the most curious of the dark markings lie to the north of it… 
The S-shaped ﬁ gure, B 72, just above the center of the picture, is much darker than the great dark region 
southeast of Theta… The curled ﬁ gure, B 75, is, perhaps, as strange an object as can be found anywhere 
in the sky… Certainly this is one of the most surprising and curious regions in the sky.” Courtesy: Yerkes 
Observatory.

 
137
recognition of some kind of interstellar matter, Barnard was still not able to 
commit himself—quite. He was still thinking that some of the dark nebu-
lae were burned out examples of luminous nebulae, of similar form, that 
appeared in the sky.
His moment of epiphany did not fi nally come until a “beautiful transpar-
ent moonless night” in the summer of 1913, when the brilliant star clouds 
of Sagittarius were in view. He had oft en wondered at the brilliance of 
those star clouds when, on heavily clouded moonless nights, small breaks 
appeared in the clouds allowing the Milky Way to be visualized beyond. On 
this particular night he was treated to the reverse spectacle, as a few small 
cumulus clouds, each a round globose about the size of the Moon, stood in 
projection against the great star clouds. Barnard recalled:
Fig. 7.11. (left) Plate 23 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. Region of 58 
Ophiuchi. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.
Fig. 7.12. (right) Plate 31 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. Sagittarius Star 
Cloud. “This splendid star cloud, with its dark spots and lanes, with its straight and curved lines of stars, is 
well shown on this plate. The region to the northwest of it apparently consists of a relatively thin stratum 
of stars.” Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 138 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 7.13. (left) Plate 5 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. Of this plate, 
Barnard wrote: “Very few regions are so remarkable as this one. Indeed this photograph is one of the most 
important of the collection, and bears the strongest proof of the existence of obscuring matter in space.” 
Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.
Fig. 7.14a. (right) Plate 40 from The Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. In Aquila, 
northeast of the star cloud in Scutum. “The curved object, looks like a great, black lizard crawling south. 
Its body is curved toward the west, and its head is a sharp, dark projection, B 137.” Barnard thought this 
perhaps a burnt-out nebula of the type that is shown in Fig. 7.14b; but in fact, the resemblance is entirely 
superﬁ cial. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.
Fig. 7.14b. (below) The Veil Nebula in Cygnus (NGC 6960, the western veil which passes through the 
foreground star 52 Cygni; it was discovered by William Herschel in 1784), and the Eastern Veil (NGC 6992), 
and various other ﬁ laments and knots in the area, are remnants of a supernova explosion that occurred 
5,000 to 8,000 years ago. The morphological resemblance Barnard saw in this to his “lizard” is entirely 
accidental, as in fact the two objects are of entirely diﬀ erent type. Imaged by Klaus Brasch with a TeleVue 
101 apochromat at f/5/5. Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 139
I was struck with the presence of a group of tiny cumulus clouds scat-
tered over the rich star-clouds of Sagittarius. They were remarkable for 
their smallness and deﬁ nite outlines…. Against the bright background 
they appeared as conspicuous and black as drops of ink. They were 
in every way like the black spots shown on photographs of the Milky 
Way…. The phenomenon was impressive and full of suggestion. One 
could not resist the impression that many of the small spots in the Milky 
Way are due to a cause similar to that of the small black clouds men-
tioned above — that is, to more or less opaque masses between us and 
the Milky Way.30
In later years Barnard suff ered from diabetes. Because of declining 
health, he was expressly forbidden by Frost from working on the 40-inch 
refractor for the whole year of 1914-1915. He no longer had his erstwhile 
stamina, but he soldiered on as best he could, and among his most impor-
tant achievements was completion of his famous catalog of dark nebulae. It 
is to that class of obscuring objects what Messier’s had been for the shining 
ones. Th e fi rst list of Barnard objects, 
carrying the designation B, was pub-
lished in 1919, and contains 182 objects; 
more would be added later, bringing the 
total to 349. 
Th ough most of the Bruce plates 
had been taken on Mt. Wilson in 1905, 
and their publication was assured by 
a grant from the Carnegie Institution 
in 1907, Barnard did not get around 
to publishing the work he originally 
planned to call An Atlas of the Milky 
Way for many years. Th ere were sev-
eral reasons for the delay. First, as Frost 
pointed out, his “well-known eager-
ness to observe the heavens whenever 
the sky was clear left  him little time 
for the remainder of the preparation 
of the work for publication.”31 But he 
was also a perfectionist, and could not 
fi nd means of reproducing them that 
were up to his high standards. (Despite 
time-consuming experiments, neither 
the collotype nor the photogravure met 
Fig. 7.15. Barnard and Frost, on the gallery of 
the 40-inch refractor looking out toward Lake 
Geneva. Authors Sheehan and Conselice stood in 
the very spot in 1993, after observing an eclipse 
of the satellite Iapetus by the A-ring of Saturn. 
Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 140 
Galactic Encounters
his approval). At last he decided on nothing less than an edition of actual 
photographic prints. He had to write up descriptions of the photographs 
and personally prepare, inspect, and pass each individual print —35,700 in 
all. Aft er Rhoda, his wife, died in 1922, he rapidly faded, and never lived 
to see the publication of his masterpiece. He died in February 1923. Th e 
work was fi nished aft er his death by Frost and Barnard’s niece, Mary Cal-
vert, who utilized not only the master’s draft s but many scattered notes on 
which he had indicated his intentions. Th ough originally to appear under 
the title An Atlas of the Milky Way, Barnard abandoned that grandiose title 
for An Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way. It appeared in 1927, just 
as prohibition-era Chicago was in the midst of gang wars; a truck carrying 
copies of the Atlas was caught in the crossfi re — one copy, riddled with a 
bullet, was long on display at the observatory.
Th e Atlas is today a collector’s item, one of the most highly sought-
aft er books in astronomy. No reprint, no matter how carefully prepared, can 
do it justice.32 How could it? Only the original volumes carry the Master’s seal.
Th ough Barnard’s plates were taken over a century ago, and tech-
nology has continued its inevitable march since, they remain in a class by 
themselves. Th ey are works of art as much as of science. Th e black-and-
white medium Barnard used — even the aberration of the Bruce telescope 
that soft ened and rounded up the stars — bring out in inimitable fashion 
the “dark Monsters of Immensity” with which he fi rst communed on wild 
and lonely nights on Mt. Wilson.
Aft er his night of epiphany in 1913, Barnard was never again to doubt the 
existence of vast clouds of interstellar matter in space, though only later did 
astronomers fully appreciate their signifi cance. By 1930, it was apparent that 
dust exists not only in the thicker clouds Barnard photographed but also as 
an exiguous veil permeating the entire Galaxy. Th us the light of all the stars 
is reddened to some extent by the intervening dust, causing astronomers to 
believe them fainter, and thus more distant, than they really are. 
Some of this dust has been shot through interstellar space by the 
violent supernova explosions of massive stars, but most of it comes from 
more ordinary stars like the Sun which, during their expiring phases, blow 
silicate and carbon dust grains into the galactic medium, where it accu-
mulates into dusty cocoons. Sheltered from ultraviolet radiation coursing 
through the Galaxy, complicated molecules, such as hydroxyl, water, carbon 
monoxide, formaldehyde, are able to form as ices around the grains, and 
within these cocoons Molecular Clouds begin to form. Th ese interstellar 
beasts are distributed patchily along the galactic plane, especially along the 
inner edges of the Galaxy’s great spiral arms. We see their greatest concen-
tration in the general direction of the galactic center in Sagittarius, which is 

141
Fig. 7.16 (left) Horsehead Nebula (Barnard 33, NGC 2070), located just south of Alnitak, the 
easternmost star in Orion’s belt. First recorded by Williamina Fleming in 1888, it is visible due to 
ionization by the nearby star Sigma Orionis (just out of the ﬁ eld in this image). Image by Michael 
Conley and William Sheehan with an RC-10 telescope and an Orion Parsec imaging system.
Fig. 7.17 (right) The Horsehead, as imaged in the infrared with the Wide Field Camera 3; in which 
it “rises like an apparition rising from whitecaps of interstellar foam.” Courtesy: NASA/ESA/Hubble 
Heritage Team (AURA/STScI).
Fig. 7.18 (below) The Triﬁ d Nebula (M20) in Sagittarius, so-called by John Herschel because of its 
three bands of interstellar dust, located some 9000 light years away. It is a region of star forma-
tion. The O-type stars illuminate the pillar of gas and dust to the right of this image; these young 
hot stars release a ﬂ ood of ultraviolet radiation and erode the dust. Courtesy: F. Ysef-Zadeh, NASA, 
ESA and the Hubble Heritage Team (AURA/STScI).

 142 
Galactic Encounters
located 27,000 light years away. At about half the Sun’s distance between us 
and the galactic center circulatesa massive ring of molecular clouds, con-
taining enough gas and dust to produce more than a billion suns; it looms 
in projection along the moth-eaten, mottled, and rift ed outline of the Milky 
Way, and Barnard imaged many of its features in loving detail. Th e Orion 
Nebula is itself a centerpiece of such a giant molecular cloud.
Th e Milky Way is not unique. We see similar structures in the spiral arms 
of other galaxies. Th ey are especially striking as the dark obscuring bands 
that bisect galaxies that, like the Milky Way itself, are viewed edgewise to 
our line of sight, such as NGC 891 
in Andromeda, NGC 4565 in Coma 
Berenices, and M104 in Virgo. Th ey 
are awesome specters of otherworldly 
beauty.
Some of the Molecular Clouds 
are rather small—like the Taurus 
Molecular Cloud, at a distance of 450 
light years, whose tendril-like dark 
features reach eerily across one of 
Barnard’s most famous photographs. 
Others, the Giant Molecular Clouds, 
are enormous, with breadths of 10 to 
100 light years, and containing perhaps 
100,000 times the mass of the Sun. 
Th e Molecular Clouds may remain 
quiescent for a long time until, owing 
to eff ects of general turbulence in the 
interstellar medium, the passage of 
a spiral density wave, a blast from a 
windy star or sudden concussion due 
to a nearby supernova explosion, they 
collapse, and give birth to stars. Th e 
smaller clouds, like the one in Taurus, 
are massive enough only to give birth 
to smaller stars, of one solar mass or 
less (and mostly dim and cool M-type 
stars with masses of only 0.1 to 0.6 that 
of the Sun). Only the Giant Molecular 
Clouds are massive enough to form 
giant stars, such as the brilliant blue 
supergiant Rigel in the foot of Orion 
Fig. 7.19 Molecular clouds such as those shown 
here are known as Bok globules, for Bart J. Bok, 
who discussed them in the 1940s. They are on 
the order of hundreds of light years across. These 
belong to Pacman Nebula, NGC 281, in Cassiopeia, 
which was discovered by E. E. Barnard in 1883. He 
described it as a “large faint nebula, very diﬀ use.” 
It is located some 9500 light years away in the 
Perseus Arm of the Milky Way. The globules are 
silhouetted against HII regions illuminated by the 
intense radiation of the hot young stars of the 
IC 1590 cluster. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team 
(AURA/STSCI).

 
Chapter 7: Fields of Glory 143
Fig. 7.20. Milky Way: 3 x20mm f/3.5 stitched images, by John Drummond in Gisborne, New Zealand. Note 
the dark dust lane, made up molecular clouds and running the length of the Galaxy. These molecular 
clouds were captured in detail by E.E. Barnard in his wide-angle photographs. Smaller clouds, such as the 
nearby one in Taurus, are not large enough to give brith to stars of more than a few solar masses, but in 
giant molecular clouds (of which some 6,000 have been identiﬁ ed in carbon monoxide surveys across the 
Galaxy), more massive and luminous stars are able to form. Examples of these giant molecular clouds are 
found in Orion and Monoceros. Courtesy: John Drummond.
Fig. 7.21. NGC 891, an edge-on spiral galaxy in Andromeda. Compare to Fig. 7.20. Image obtained 
with the Discovery Channel Telescope of Lowell Observatory. Courtesy: Lowell Observatory.
and 1 Orionis C, in the Trapezium. It is 40 times more massive than the 
Sun (only 0.00004% of stars are that massive), and its surface, at a tempera-
ture of 35,000 degrees K, produces intense winds and staggering amounts 
of ionizing UV radiation, which excites the gas of the Orion nebula to 
glowing. Th e sheer violence of the photoevaporative eff ects of the UV 

 144 
Galactic Encounters
radiation and blustery stellar winds of this star produce strong headwinds 
for the proplyds, young stars preceded by shock waves, featuring bright 
irradiated heads, and tails pointing directly away from 1 Orionis C. 
Th e intense ultraviolet radiation and ferocious stellar winds of 
these stars are hugely erosive, and produce some of the grandest scenery 
in the heavens, as in the moth-eaten, ragged, mangled remnants of cos-
mic dust clouds (IC 2944, Th ackeray’s globules) in Centaurus, which hang 
like shipwrecked galleons among wisps of interstellar gas, or the towering 
“hoodoos” or fairy chimneys such as the famous “Pillars of Creation” in 
the Eagle Nebula (M16) in Serpens. Th ese, however, grandiose as they are, 
are only details. Th e broader cosmic landscape of which they are a part was 
fi rst captured in the wide-angle photographs of E.E. Barnard taken a cen-
tury ago, and we can only return to them again and again to reexperience 
the sheer “Ahhhh” of the scene.
*   *   *
 1. Matsuo Basho, Narrow Road to the Interior and 
other Writings, Sam Hamill, trans. (Boston and 
London: Shambala, 2000), 29.
 2. Lafcadio Hearn, Th e Romance of the Milky Way, 
and other studies and stories (Boston: Houghton 
Miffl  in & Co., 1905).
 3. Th omas Hardy, Two on a Tower (Oxford and New 
York: the World’s Classics, Oxford University 
Press, 1993), 33-34.
 4. Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy, 449.
 5. Huggins, “New Astronomy,” 913.
 6. Holden, “Monograph of the Central Parts of the 
Nebula of Orion,” 227.
 7. Th e most complete biography of Barnard is Wil-
liam Sheehan, Th e Immortal Fire Within: the life 
and work of Edward Emerson Barnard. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
 8. Sheehan, Immortal Fire, 3.
 9. Ibid., 4.
 10. Dacher Keltner and Jonathan Haidt, “Approach-
ing awe, a moral, spiritual, and aesthetic emo-
tion,” Cognition and Emotion, 17(2) (2003), 297-
314.
 11. Sheehan, Immortal Fire, 4.
 12. Bruce Catton, Th e Civil War (New York: Th e Fair-
fax Press, 1980), 260.
 13. Barbara Tuchman, Th e Proud Tower, 119.
 14. Sheehan, Immortal Fire, 5-7.
 15. Ibid., 10.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Ibid., 11
 18. Ibid.
 19. Ibid., 12.
 20. Ibid., 13.
 21. Ibid., 15.
 22. As summarized in Donald E. Osterbrock, “Th e 
Rise and Fall of Edward S. Holden: Part I,” Journal 
for the History of Astronomy, xv (1984):81.
 23. Sheehan, Immortal Fire, 274.
 24. Ibid.
 25. Ibid., 340-341.
 26. Ibid., 343.
 27. Ibid., 342.
 28. E.E. Barnard, Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky 
Way (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution, 
1927), description of Plate 26.
 29. Ibid., description of Plate 19.
 30.  E.E. Barnard, “Some of the dark markings in the 
sky and what they suggest,” Astrophysical Journal, 
43 (1916), 1-8:4.
 31. E. B. Frost, in ibid., vi. 
 32. On the other hand, the original is very scarce, and 
when a copy becomes available, it is extremely 
costly; one recently sold on e-bay for $12,500, 
which was actually a steal. A commendable eff ort 
is Gerald Orin Dobek, ed., A Photographic Atlas 
of Selected Regions of the Milky Way (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011), which has the 
added merit of presenting Barnard’s original two 
volumes (plates in volume 1, diagrams showing 
the identifi cation of signifi cant objects in volume 
2) within one cover.

145
The ﬁ res that arch this dusky dot—
Yon myriad-worlded way—
The vast sun-clusters’ gather’d blaze,
World-isles in lonely skies,
Whole heavens within themselves, amaze
Our brief humanities.
 
—Alfred, Lord Tennyson, “Epilogue”
Ad Aspera
A
s we have seen in previous chapters, the Milky Way is a kind of 
rag-and-bone shop of stars. It contains the gas and dust of molecu-
lar clouds, hot young stars forming within them and entering the main 
sequence, noble stars burning in their prime. But it also consists of the slag 
and debris of dying or already-dead and depleted stars—the relic exotica 
of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes. Th e individual stars evolve; 
they have their personal histories. 
Astronomers have learned a lot about these stars, but at fi rst they had 
only two features to go on. Th e fi rst is a star’s apparent brightness, or mag-
nitude. A stellar brightness scale was already being used by ancient Greek 
astronomers such as Hipparchus and Ptolemy, in which the brightest stars 
visible to the naked eye were called fi rst magnitude, and the faintest sixth 
magnitude. William Herschel (again!) discovered that a fi rst magnitude star 
was 100 times brighter than a sixth magnitude star, and this led to the adop-
tion of a precise quantitative scale for magnitude (i.e., since fi ve magnitudes 
correspond to a factor of 100 in brightness, one magnitude diff erence cor-
responds to a factor of (100)1/5 = 2.512). Th e other feature is the star’s color. 
Some, such as Betelgeuse and Antares, are noticeably reddish, others, like 
Capella, yellow, still others, like Sirius and Vega, are white or blue-white.
8.
What Stuff  Stars Are 
Made Of
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_8, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 146 
Galactic Encounters
Another feature that astronomers discovered about the stars is that, 
though they appear fi xed in position over short time periods, in fact (as 
Edmond Halley discovered in 1718 by comparing modern measures of star 
positions with those recorded by Hipparchus and Ptolemy) at least some 
of them have detectable proper motions relative to the other stars. Large 
proper motions were a clue to a star’s proximity. It was no accident that 
the fi rst two stars to have their parallaxes successfully determined, Alpha 
Centauri (by Th omas Henderson) and 61 Cygni (by F.W. Bessel), have very 
large proper motions.
Having measured distances of a few stars was obviously a break-
through of the greatest importance. If all the stars were of the same actual 
brightness, as Herschel originally assumed in plotting the cross-sections 
Fig. 8.1. Stars within 20 light years of the Sun. As would be expected, most of these are dwarfs. For each 
star of solar mass, there are more than twenty stars smaller than the Sun—mostly M-type dwarfs. Image: 
Wikipedia.

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 147
of the Galaxy, then the brighter ones would obviously be closer and the 
fainter ones farther away. Herschel himself did not believe that this could 
literally be true, but intuited that the stars might on average be about the 
same actual brightness as the Sun. Once astronomers had measured dis-
tances for stars, the actual brightnesses (or luminosities) could be worked 
out. A few stars proved to be much more luminous than the Sun. Among 
stars relatively close by, Sirius, which appears to be the brightest star in 
the sky, is 25 times more luminous than the Sun; Vega is 40 times more 
Fig. 8.2. Stars within 250 light years. Now the brilliant young massive stars dominate the scene. Because 
of observer selection, they can be seen across great distances—they are truly the stellar beacons. Stars of 
stellar type A, which include Sirius, Vega, and Altair, comprise about 1% of stars; B stars, like those in the 
Pleiades and many of those outlining the Scorpion, about 0.1%; while the true stellar beacons—O stars, 
like Theta 1 Orionis C in the Trapezium, a star 40 times as massive as the Sun, with a surface temperature 
of 35,000 degrees, producing intense stellar winds and emitting staggering amounts of UV radiation, 
account for a mere 0.00004% of stars. Image: Wikipedia

 148 
Galactic Encounters
luminous, Arcturus 170 times more 
luminous. But most of the nearby stars 
are stellar glow-worms, much feebler 
than the Sun; 61 Cygni, for instance, 
a double star, consists of one star with 
15% of the luminosity of the Sun, and 
another with a luminosity of 8.5%; 
while fast-moving Barnard’s Star has a 
luminosity of only 0.04% of the Sun’s—
so, despite its proximity to us, it is 
invisible without a telescope.
Yet another feature of stars of 
interest to astronomers is their masses. 
Half of all stars are members of binary 
systems, and as these stars revolve 
slowly around a common center-of-
mass, they trace out an apparent rela-
tive orbit. Th e center-of-mass travels 
along a straight line relative to the 
background stars, and the binary com-
ponents weave periodically around this 
line. By using Kepler’s laws to work 
out the relative distance of each star from the center-of-mass, the masses of 
each of the components can be derived. In 1844, F.W. Bessel, analyzing the 
proper motion of Sirius, found that the bright component (Sirius A, with 
a mass of 2.2 times that of the Sun) was wobbling relative to the center-of-
mass, and deduced that it was being pulled on by an unseen companion; 
this faint companion was discovered by Alvan Graham Clark in 1862, 
when he was testing the lens of the 18-inch refractor built for the Dearborn 
Observatory, and despite its faintness has a mass equal to that of the Sun. It 
was later identifi ed as a peculiar degenerate star known as a white dwarf—
of which we shall say more in the next chapter.
The Classiﬁ cation of Stellar Spectra
Th ough the measurement of distances, brightnesses, and masses are fun-
damental to stellar astronomy, and remain important branches of research 
right up to the present day, pioneering 19th century astrophysicists gave 
particular attention to the study of the spectra of stars.1 When Fraunhofer 
fi rst noted the dark lines in the spectrum of the Sun, he mapped only the 
600 or so most prominent ones. Th ere are actually many more. Th is spec-
trum, which as we now know is produced in the Sun’s photosphere, obvi-
Fig. 8.3. Father Angelo Secchi, pioneer of stellar 
spectroscopy. From: Wikipedia Commmons.

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 149
ously contains an enormous amount of information—if only we knew how 
to interpret it. 
When pioneer spectroscopists fi rst studied the spectra of the other 
stars, they were confronted with a “bewildering variety.”2 However, aft er 
sorting spectra for a while, it became clear that most specimens fell into 
relatively few classes. 
Th e individual most strongly identifi ed with this realization was an 
Italian priest-astronomer, Angelo Secchi. Born at Reggio Emilia (west of 
Bologna), he entered the Jesuit novitiate in Rome at the age of 15, taught 
physics at Loreto College before being recalled to Rome to study theology, 
and was ordained a priest in 1847, just before the year of “revolution,” and 
the expulsion of the Jesuits from Rome (then in Austrian hands). He spent 
his exile at the Jesuits’ Stonyhurst College in England and then in George-
town, near Washington, D.C. Returning to Rome in 1849, a year later Pope 
Pius IX named him director of the observatory of the Collegio Romano, 
replacing Francesco de Vico, a well-known discoverer of comets, who had 
died in exile in England. Secchi upgraded the observatory’s instrumenta-
tion, acquiring a 9.5-inch Merz refractor with the intention of measuring 
double stars; but he soon came against structural limitations owing to the 
observatory’s location in the tower of the Jesuit church of San Ignacio which 
limited his ability to make the very precise measurements of stellar positions 
that were the mainstay of astronomy at the time. Malleable to circumstance, 
he turned in 1863 (at the same time as Lewis Rutherfurd in New York and 
Huggins at Tulse Hill) to investigating the stars with a spectroscope. 
It has been said that “classifi cation is one method, probably the 
simplest method, of introducing order in the world.”3 Secchi made the fi rst 
sustained attempt to bring order into this fi eld. From 1863, when he began 
his investigations, until his death in 1878, he carried out visual studies 
of the spectra of thousands of stars, and developed an infl uential scheme 
of spectral classifi cations. (His friend, Giovanni Schiaparelli at the Brera 
Observatory in Milan, exclaimed in March 1868: “Th e spectral classifi ca-
tion … is a very important undertaking! I see this as an opening to new 
horizons that nobody would have ever dreamed of. I do not know where 
[you] fi nd the time...”)4 
Secchi’s classifi cation system included fi ve groups:
 
I. White or blue-white stars (Sirius, Vega), whose main spectral 
features were a few strong absorption lines, attributed by Secchi to 
hydrogen.
 
II. Yellow stars (the Sun, Arcturus) with more numerous, narrow 
absorption lines. Hydrogen lines, though still visible, less intense.
 
III. Orange or red stars (Betelguese, alpha Herculis), with spectra having 
wide dark bands and maximum intensity at the red end of the spectrum.

 150 
Galactic Encounters
 
IV. Very red stars (19 Piscium), with dark bands but diff erent from those 
of Type III. Secchi noted that these spectra were similar to the inverted 
(i.e., fl ame) spectrum of carbon; he had discovered carbon stars.
 
V. A rare type (e.g., gamma Cassiopeia) with bright emission lines.
Th e classifi cation system of Secchi, published as Le Stelle (Th e Stars) in 
1877, would remain the standard for fi ft y years. Unfortunately for Secchi, his 
later years were sad ones. Aft er the Franco-Prussian war of 1870, Italian nation-
alist troops occupied Rome and the Vatican. Secchi remained loyal to Pius IX, 
who spent the last eight years until his death “a prisoner in the Vatican.”
The United States: a factory observatory
Up to this point in the history of astronomy, the great breakthroughs had 
been largely those of the Grand Amateurs, men who made (or inherited) 
fortunes and who enjoyed independent means. Th ey could, as Henry James 
put it, “to their hearts’ content build their own castles and move by their 
own motors.”5 Meanwhile, those who toiled at professional observatories, 
such as the Royal Observatory at Greenwich and the Paris Observatory, 
were overwhelmingly concentrating on positional astronomy, and oft en 
assigned to drudge-like tasks, as human computers poring mindlessly 
over tables of logarithms. Th ey were more like clerks and accountants 
than astronomers. So, for instance, when aft er the death of G.P. Bond in 
Fig. 8.4. Spectra of typical stars, according to Father Secchi. Included here are: a star of solar 
type; Sirius; Betelgeuse; and alpha Herculis. In modern terms, these would be classiﬁ ed as G1, A1, 
M1, and M5 stars. From: Angelo Secchi, L’Etoiles, 1895.

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 151
1865 and the retirement ten years later of his successor, W.C. Winlock, a 
new director of the Harvard College Observatory was sought by president 
Charles Eliot, Charles S. Pierce, a sometime assistant at the observatory 
who was later to attain distinction as a philosopher, wrote to his friend 
William James:
Of all situations I know of the one which has the most thankless, utterly 
mechanical drudgery, together with vexatious interference from … dif-
ferent sources [is] the Directorship of [the observatory].6
Simon Newcomb—the eminent astronomer who had sternly 
rebuff ed the aspirations of young E. E. Barnard with his small telescope at 
the A.A.A.S. meeting in Nashville—was a professor of astronomy at the 
U.S. Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C. at the time. He was off ered 
the Harvard position, but declined because, as he said in his memoirs, the 
observatory was
poor in means, meager in instrumental outﬁ t, and wanting in working 
assistants; I think the latter did not number more than three or four, with 
perhaps a few other temporary employees. There seemed little pros-
pect of doing much.7
It was certainly poor in means compared to the U.S. Naval Obser-
vatory; but, as Bessie Zaban Jones and Lyle Giff ord Boyd write in their 
history of the Harvard College Observatory, Newcomb “might correctly 
have said the same for nearly all the thirty-odd public and private observa-
tories existing in the United States before 1880. None of them had enough 
fi nancial support or a large enough staff  to operate solely as a research 
institution. In European countries astronomy was usually supported by the 
state. In America, however, only the Naval Observatory was so fortunate; 
astronomy was generally regarded not as a science in its own right but 
chiefl y as a tool to be used in solving practical problems—the determina-
tion of latitude and longitude, geographical boundaries, accurate time, and 
the peculiarities of weather and climate.”8 
Aft er failing to interest an astronomer for the position, President 
Eliot chose, in 1876, a 30 year-old professor of physics at the recently 
founded Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Edward C. Pickering. 
Of course, Eliot was criticized for his unconventional choice, but having 
known Pickering personally, he was confi dent of his abilities and his tem-
perament. In the end, Pickering proved a wise choice. Th e fi rst American 
Pickering was a Yorkshireman who had settled in Salem, Massachusetts 
by 1636, and brought with him the family coat of arms (a lion rampant) 
and motto Nil desperandum (never despair). A great-grandfather, Timothy 

 152 
Galactic Encounters
Pickering, had served during the Revolutionary War as George Washing-
ton’s quartermaster general, then as Washington’s Indian commissioner, 
postmaster general, secretary of war, and the nation’s third secretary of 
state under Washington and the second President John Adams.
E.C. Pickering, born on Vernon Street on Beacon Hill, attended the Boston 
Latin School (founded in 1635), the usual prep school for New England’s 
elite; among the exercises he recalled was the memorization of long pas-
sages of works such as Xenophon’s Anabasis, which had the result that 
he “studied little and learnt less.” His interests lay in other directions. He 
read mathematics books on his own, and abandoned classics for a more 
congenial course of study at the Lawrence Scientifi c School at Harvard, 
where Eliot was  an assistant professor of mathematics and chemistry at the 
school. Pickering received his Bachelor’s degree in 1865 on his 19th birth-
day. With that he was done with his formal education.
Aft er two years as instructor of mathematics at Lawrence Scientifi c 
School, Pickering went to M.I.T. (then known as Boston Tech), where he 
set up the fi rst physical laboratory for student instruction in the United 
States, and published a two-volume lab manual.
Pickering and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of former Harvard presi-
dent Jared Sparks, moved to Observatory Hill on February 1, 1877. At once 
the physicist-technician began nudging the observatory away from the 
“old” astronomy of measuring star positions toward the burgeoning fi eld of 
astrophysics, and his characteristic philosophy quickly emerged. Th e time 
was not yet ripe for theory, he believed. Instead what was needed was the 
steady accumulation of astronomical facts. For example, the magnitudes 
of stars, among the most basic data of stellar astronomy, had not yet been 
measured accurately. Th ough the German astronomer Friedrich Arge-
lander at the Bonn Observatory had in 1843 produced a catalog, Uranime-
tria nova, giving the brightnesses of 3250 stars estimated visually by sub-
jective “steps” between standard stars, Pickering wanted something more 
quantitative. At fi rst he tried an astrophotometer developed by another 
German astronomer, Johann Zöllner, in the 1860s, in which an observer 
compared the brightness of stars with the light from a kerosene lamp seen 
through a pinhole, but it proved diffi  cult to maintain a constant enough 
light with a kerosene lamp. Finally, with the optician George B. Clark of 
the fi rm of Alvan Clark and Sons, he developed photometers that allowed, 
through suitable arrangements of mirrors and prisms, a direct comparison 
of stars with Polaris, which he chose as his standard star (he assigned it a 
magnitude of 2.1; unfortunately, his choice of Polaris was rather unfortu-
nate, since it turns out to be a variable star, with a variation in brightness 
of 14% over a period of four days. Much later, Vega was chosen as the 

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 153
standard, with a magnitude of 0.0, and 
continues in the role today). 
In the fall of 1879, Pickering 
and two assistants began a systematic 
program of remeasuring all the stars 
in the Uranometria nova. According 
to Jones and Boyd, “the work required 
physical endurance. Adjusting the 
images and reading the scales involved 
a certain amount of bodily contortion. 
Also … during the winter months, 
when the temperatures dipped toward 
zero, and sometimes below, all the 
men suff ered from the pain of the cold 
and consequent ailments of the throat 
and lungs.” Despite the arduousness of the work, reminiscent of the harsh 
conditions under which George Bond worked to the bitter end at his draw-
ing of the Great Nebula of Orion, with practice the measurements became 
routine, and Pickering and his colleagues were knocking off  a star a minute 
like parts on a moving factory assembly-line. A list of magnitudes for 4,000 
stars appeared in 1884, and another, for 45,000 stars, appeared in 1908. 
Pickering himself seems to have enjoyed making such measures—perhaps 
they were a form of relaxation for him from his job’s other pressures, as 
the task was suffi  ciently repetitive that it required no substantial amount 
of mental concentration once it had been mastered. In any case, Picker-
ing himself made something like 1.5 million photometric measures over a 
period of a quarter century!
With the photometry program, Pickering had begun the retool-
ing of the Harvard College Observatory as a “factory” observatory. He 
himself thought in those terms. “A great observatory,” he wrote, “should 
be as carefully organized and administered as a railroad. Every expendi-
ture should be watched, every real improvement introduced, advice from 
experts welcomed, and if good, followed, and every care taken to secure the 
greatest possible output for every dollar expenditure. A great savings may 
be eff ectuated by employing unskilled and therefore inexpensive labor, of 
course under careful supervision.”9 
As a member of a prominent Boston family, Pickering had out-
standing connections, and was an eff ective fund-raiser for the observa-
tory. Within a year of his publication of the results of his photometry 
project, he was in correspondence with Henry Draper’s widow. Having in 
1872 obtained the fi rst spectrum of a star, Vega, to show defi nite spectral 
lines, Draper was at the time of his death planning much more extensive 
investigations using the new dry plates, and Mrs. Draper was eager to see 
Fig. 8.5. Edward C. Pickering, at the International 
Solar Union meeting at Mt. Wilson in 1910. Cour-
tesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 154 
Galactic Encounters
them carried forward. At fi rst she hoped to continue the work at her late 
husband’s observatory at Dobb’s Ferry, New York but realizing the imprac-
ticality of the idea, instead turned her late husband’s instruments over to 
Harvard and provided a substantial grant of $1000 to establish the Henry 
Draper Fund for the study of stellar spectra. It was to be used by Pickering 
and his colleagues to photograph, measure, and classify the spectra of stars, 
leading to a catalogue of stellar spectra to be published as a memorial to 
Henry Draper in the Annals of the Harvard College Observatory. 
Earlier spectroscopists, such as Secchi and Huggins, had had to 
carry out their studies visually. Th is meant many fatiguing hours at the 
telescope to obtain the spectrum of a single star. Th e largest catalog of stel-
lar spectra available at the time, listing some 4000 stars, was the work of 
the German astronomer Hermann Vogel of the Potsdam Observatory, and 
represented the labors of twenty years. Photography changed everything. 
By placing a large prism in front of a telescope’s objective lens, as many as 
200 stellar spectra could be recorded in a few minutes’ exposure on a single 
photographic plate, and though the defi nition was not, obviously, as good 
as was attainable using a spectroscopic slit, it was good enough for a prac-
ticed eye to classify them at a glance. Th ough in 1885 Pickering had writ-
ten to Eliot that in the photometry work, “the fatigue and the exposure to 
the cold in winter are too great for a lady to undergo,” he evidently did not 
consider the tedious work of sitting at a desk examining and classifying the 
stars on these plates to be unsuitable for women. It wasn’t an early embrace 
of feminism that led Pickering to this innovation; it was merely an interest 
in saving the factory observatory money. Astronomy, before the arrival of 
a few millionaire tycoons who would bequeath large amounts of money to 
assure its advance, was used to sailing fi nancially close to the wind, and was 
also at the time very much a man’s world. Despite the brilliant contribu-
tions of Caroline Herschel, Maria Mitchell (who had discovered a comet in 
1847 and was professor of astronomy at the all-women’s college of Vassar 
in New York), and Lady Margaret Huggins, who was her husband’s right-
hand—woman!—aft er their marriage in 1875—there were virtually no pro-
fessional opportunities in astronomy for women. Th e woman who hoped 
for such an opportunity could easily imagine that things were still as they 
were when George Eliot [Mary Ann Evans] wrote in Th e Mill on the Floss,
I suppose it’s all astronomers [who hate women]; because, you know, 
they live up in high towers, and if the women came there, they might 
talk and hinder them from looking at the stars.
When work began on the Draper catalog, the classifi cation of spec-
tra was seen as a mindless, repetitive task, with echoes of domestic drudg-
ery. At fi rst, a Miss Nettie A. Farrar did most of the measures of spectra, 

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 155
but by the end of the year she decided to leave to get married. Pickering 
replaced her with a woman with no particular training in science and one 
well inured to domestic drudgery. She was his housekeeper!
Th at woman, Williamina Paton Fleming, had been born and grew 
up in Scotland, and married James Fleming, an uneducated worker with 
his hands. Th ey emigrated to Boston when she was 21, but their marriage 
fell apart soon aft er that. It was then that Mrs. Fleming—as she was always 
known—caught on as Pickering’s live-in housekeeper. (Over just how many 
months all this happened tends to be fuzzed over in biographies about her, 
but it is certain that about this time she had a son, who was named Edward 
Pickering Fleming, who looked like E.C.P. and whose education E.C.P. later 
supported.) In any case, Pickering realized that Mrs. Fleming was too intel-
ligent to mop fl oors all day, and since he was then looking for a “computer” 
who was willing to work seven hours a day, six days a week, classifying 
spectra, and was frustrated with the low productivity and lack of interest 
of his male assistants, he announced, “my Scotch housekeeper could do 
the work better than you!” With that, he dismissed the male assistants, and 
hired her for $10.50 a week—about two-thirds  what it would have cost to 
hire a man for the same position.
As it turned out, Mrs. Fleming proved to be a natural at spectral 
classifi cation. She was promoted to being the straw boss of the other women 
computers hired at the observatory who became known, unoffi  cially, as 
“Pickering’s harem.” She got very good 
work out of them, and led by example.
It is important to point out 
that classifi cation is not a “discovery” 
process. At least in the beginning, it 
is designed simply for the purpose of 
bringing order into a huge mass of 
observational data. When Mrs. Flem-
ing started classifying spectra on those 
objective-prism plates, she had nothing 
astrophysical to go on. She published a 
fi rst catalogue in 1890 in which stars in 
Secchi’s classifi cation I were subdivided 
into classes A, B, C, D; those in his 
classifi cation II into E, F, G, H, I, K, L; 
his III became her class M, IV became 
class N. She also used O for Wolf-Rayet 
stars (named for their French discover-
ers; their spectra had bright emission 
lines), P for planetary nebulae, and Q 
for other spectra (“peculiar” stars).
Fig. 8.6. Mrs. Williamina Fleming, E. C. Pickering’s 
former maid, at center of the image, taken about 
1890, presides over “Pickering’s harem,” the women 
computers at Harvard College Observatory who val-
iantly cataloged the stellar spectra. They were less 
expensive than men, earning between 25 and 50 
cents an hour—more than a factory worker but less 
than a clerical worker. From: Wikipedia Commons.

 156 
Galactic Encounters
Mrs. Fleming’s scheme was revised repeatedly as instrumentation 
and the quality of the spectrograms improved. It had many advantages, 
but it was not the only way to classify stars. Another Harvard “computer,” 
Antonia Maury, introduced a diff erent scheme. Miss Maury happened to 
be Henry Draper’s niece. She had studied under Maria Mitchell at the all-
women’s college Vassar, and was the most creative of the women computers 
employed on the stellar classifi cation project. In 1897, though still using 
lettered classifi cations like those used by Mrs. Fleming (though with some 
of her classes reordered so that, for instance, B preceded A, rather than 
being intermediate between A and F), she also introduced a second dimen-
sion based on the strength of the lines (“a” stood for average spectra with 
well-defi ned lines, “b” for those in which the lines were hazy and indistinct, 
and “c” for those with narrow sharp lines). Th e signifi cance of this second 
dimension was not recognized at fi rst. Unfortunately, Pickering did not like 
the way she classifi ed. She, for her part, refused to change her approach. 
Aft er her great publication in 1897, she left  Harvard and, practically speak-
ing, astronomy. Before she left , Pickering hired Annie Jump Cannon, who 
had studied astronomy at Wellesley, another all-women’s college. Miss 
Cannon was a cheerful person, easy to get along with (at least compared to 
the deep and complicated Miss Maury). Most important, she classifi ed stars 
in the way Pickering wanted them classifi ed, and did so with remarkable 
dispatch. According to the greatest spectral classifi er of a later era, W. W. 
Morgan, who met her in the 1930s when she was still classifying stars:
I had quite a talk with her … and I saw how she classiﬁ ed stars. She had 
a low-powered eyepiece, and the striking thing was that she had to hold 
it in the air instead of placing it on the glass [plate], at a constant focus. 
And that’s the way she did the whole Henry Draper Catalogue. Hanging 
[the eyepiece] up in the air like this. And if you do that, you can’t help 
changing the focus a little. That means your eye jumping back and forth 
and focusing all the time. That’s the way she showed me, she was still 
doing it that way, still classifying when I was there.10
Th e Henry Draper Catalogue, published in nine volumes between 
1918 and 1924, included Miss Cannon’s classifi cation of 225,300 stars, with 
the lettered categories fi nally reordered in their familiar and fi nal form 
OBAFGKM. Examples of each type are:
O 1 Orionis C (in the trapezium),  Orionis, AE Aurigae,  Ophiuchi
B  Orionis,  Aurigae,  Ursae Majoris
A Sirius, Vega, Altair, Fomalhaut
F Procyon (A),  Virginis (A and B)

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 157
G Th e Sun, alpha Centauri A,  Ceti, 51 Pegasi
K 	 Centauri B, 61 Cygni (A and B), 
 Indi
M Proxima Centauri, Barnard’s star
The H-R diagram evolves
Although the classifi cations had originally been merely descriptive, the 
classifi ers guessed that their order refl ected a temperature sequence. Th ey 
were right, and this temperature sequence was to prove to be one key for 
understanding the properties and evolution of stars. Th e other was the 
absolute luminosity (the true brightnesses) of stars. However obtaining 
a luminosity is more diffi  cult, as it requires that we know the distance to 
these stars. At about the same time in the early part of the 20th century, 
astronomers were fi nally able to obtain distances to many stars through 
the measurement of their parallex. Once these distances are computed it 
then becomes possible to obtain a measure of the luminosity. If one plots, 
for a large number of stars spectral class (or temperature), on the x-axis 
and luminosity on the y-axis, as two astronomers working independently, 
the Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung and the American astronomer 
Henry Norris Russell, did by 1913, 
the resulting graphic—known as the 
Hertzsprung-Russell, or HR diagram—
shows at once that the stars divide into 
two main groups, giants and dwarfs 
depending only on their temperature 
and their luminosity. 
(Hertzsprung realized at once 
that Miss Maury’s spectroscopic crite-
rion “c” identifi ed very bright supergi-
ants, but when he wrote to Pickering to 
congratulate him, Pickering continued 
to insist that Miss Maury was wrong.)
Th e HR diagram is one of 
the most important diagrams in 
astronomy—a kind of Rosetta stone 
for understanding the properties and 
evolution of stars. 
As shown here, stars on the 
HR diagram divide into two broad 
swaths. Th e fi rst swath is called the 
main sequence. It runs diagonally 
from dim-red stars at the lower right 
Fig. 8.7. Annie Jump Cannon, portrait from 1922. 
From: Wikipedia Commons.

 158 
Galactic Encounters
to bright blue stars at the upper left . Th ese are dwarf stars, and include the 
Sun—enormous, of course, by everyday standards, but a fairly typical dwarf 
star of spectral class G. Stars along this distribution vary somewhat in size 
(from about 1/10 to 10 times the Sun’s radius) but enormously in luminos-
ity (from 1/1000 to 100,000 that of the Sun). Th is means the diff erence 
in luminosity must depend on something other than size, and it does: it 
depends also on surface temperature. Dim stars of low surface temperature 
sit on the lower right, while bright stars of high surface temperature sit on 
the upper left  of the HR diagram.
Th e other swath, consisting of stars in the upper right of the HR 
diagram, are the much more luminous giant and supergiant stars. Th ough 
Fig. 8.8. H-R diagram, based on Hipparcos data. Image by Wikipedia.

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 159
very rare, these stars are overrepresented among the brightest naked-eye 
stars, since their great luminosity makes them celestial beacons visible 
across great distances of space.
Th e HR diagram contains a great deal of important data about the 
way that stars evolve during a signifi cant part of their lifetimes. However, 
in order to interpret this data, it is necessary to understand the energy 
sources of stars, and for a long time this was completely inscrutable. Sir 
John Herschel, addressing the question of the Sun’s energy source in 1833, 
remarked that the “great mystery … is to conceive how so enormous a 
confl agration (if such it be) can be kept up. Every discovery in chemical 
science here leaves us completely at a loss, or rather, seems to remove far-
ther the prospect of probable explanation. If conjecture might be hazarded, 
we should look rather to the known possibility of an indefi nite genera-
tion of heat by friction, or to its excitement by the electric discharge…for 
the origin of the solar radiation.”11 Herschel’s conjectures certainly are, as 
historian Karl Hufb auer notes, ”feeble,”12 and his failure to come up with a 
plausible explanation was complete.
The energy of stars
By the early 1840s, Julius Robert Mayer, a German physician, and John 
James Waterston, a Scottish engineer in Bombay, were independently toy-
ing with the idea that solar radiation originated in the conversion of gravi-
tational energy to heat—Waterston, in a paper submitted but rejected as 
too speculative by the Royal Society of London, even tried to connect the 
idea with the nebular hypothesis, suggesting that as the Sun formed from 
the nebula, the gradual contraction of its mass might be the source of its 
heat, and went so far as to calculate that it was massive enough to continue 
shining for another 9,000 years. He also suggested an alternative source of 
gravitational energy in the form of meteorites falling into the Sun. Th ough 
at fi rst ignored, Waterston’s ideas were again presented in 1853 at a meet-
ing of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and this 
time they were taken up by the Glasgow physicist William Th omson (later 
known as Lord Kelvin), who in a presentation a year later before the Royal 
Society of Edinburgh strongly advocated the meteoric theory of solar 
energy and went so far as to propose that Kirchhoff ’s discovery of iron in 
the solar spectrum in its support. At the same time, the German physicist 
Herman Helmholtz was enthusiastically arguing that the Sun’s gravitational 
contraction was the source of its heat. By the mid-1860s, the gravitational 
contraction theory had won out over the meteoric theory, basically because 
it could be shown that there were not enough meteors to generate enough 
heat to maintain the Sun’s temperature. Th omson himself now became the 

 160 
Galactic Encounters
leading champion of the gravitational contraction theory, and calculated—
on the assumption that this was the only source of the Sun’s energy—upper 
limits to the age of the Earth, which went from 400 million years in 1862, 
to no more than 100 million years in 1868, to only 50 million years in 1876, 
to nearer 20 million than 40 million years in 1897. As a check to these 
results, he also tried to calculate the Earth’s age based on the theory that it 
had been slowly cooling since it had formed. Geologists, meanwhile, and 
supporters of Charles Darwin’s theory of natural selection were becoming 
more and more sure that the Earth’s age was considerably older than Kelvin 
calculated. Joe Z. Burchfi eld writes: “For a time geologists, convinced or 
cowed by Kelvin’s mathematics, yielded to his results. But as the estimates 
grew more restrictive they grew more restive. In 1897, for the fi rst time, 
Kelvin’s results from his theory of terrestrial cooling were nearly in agree-
ment with those from his theory of solar heat, but as he was well aware, 
neither was in close agreement with the hypotheses of the geologists.”13 
Needless to say, Kelvin held to his conclusion until his death in 1907.
Th e deus ex machina, which vindicated the geologists, came from 
a new branch of physics that began with Henri Becquerel’s discovery of 
radioactivity; studying the phenomenon of phosphorescence, and think-
ing that the recently discovered X-rays might have something to do with 
it, Becquerel wrapped a glass plate in black paper and then placed various 
phosphorescent salts on it. Of the salts tried, only those containing ura-
nium blackened the plate. Becquerel made his discovery of what were then 
known as Becquerel Rays in 1896—ironically, the very year before Kelvin 
published his fi nal calculations of the age of the Earth. Th ough X-rays 
proved to be high-energy electromagnetic radiation, Becquerel Rays were 
more complicated. By 1899 Ernest Rutherford, a native of New Zealand 
then working at McGill University in Canada, discovered that Uranium 
and other radioactive elements gave off  two types of particles: alpha par-
ticles (helium ions), which were easily absorbed by paper and did not 
blacken the plate, and much more penetrating beta particles (electrons), 
which did. In 1909—at just about the exact moment that Hertzsprung 
was producing the earliest sketch of the HR diagram—Rutherford, who 
had meanwhile left  McGill for Manchester University in England, and his 
students Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden, aimed a collimated beam of 
alpha particles at a thin gold foil and observed scintillations from scat-
tered particles on a zinc sulfi de screen. Most of the alpha particles were 
either undefl ected or defl ected through very small angles, but surprisingly, 
some of them were defl ected through angles as large as 90 degrees or more. 
Th ey published the results in 1911. Th eir experiment showed that, surpris-
ingly, most of the mass of the atom was concentrated in a small positively 
charged nucleus, which was incredibly dense and small—“like a pinhead in 
the earthly vastness of St. Paul’s,” Rutherford himself said.

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 161
At the time, the most widely accepted model of the structure of the 
atom had been that of the British physicist J.J. Th omson, director of the 
Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, who envisaged an atom as a kind of 
electrically neutral plum pudding—consisting of negatively charged par-
ticles, electrons (which he himself had discovered), embedded in some 
kind of fl uid that contained most of the mass of the atom and possessed 
enough positive charge to make the atom electrically neutral. Th e gold foil 
scattering experiment ruled out the Th omson model. Now all the positively 
charged pudding was stuff ed into the dense and massive core at the cen-
ter, while the electron plums were displaced into distant orbits. But there 
were problems with the Rutherford atom too. Opposite charges attract and 
like charges repel, so the electrons in such atoms ought to either undergo 
a death spiral into the nucleus, or blasted each other out of their orbits as 
they approached too near each other. Rutherford’s atom should have been 
highly unstable—it was calculated that it ought to last no longer than a mil-
lisecond or so. Such atoms ought not to exist.
Th ey don’t. Enter Niels Bohr, a young Danish physicist with a rare 
ability to tolerate dilemmas and contradictions. He started working with 
Th omson at Cambridge but soon transferred to Rutherford’s lab in Man-
chester, and while there he proposed a model of the atom that combined 
classical physics and the new quantum theory, according to which energy, 
including light, could only be emitted and absorbed in discrete packets (later 
called photons) even though it was known to travel in waves. Bohr’s model 
postulated that electrons could only occupy certain specifi c orbits around 
the nucleus, and when in them, they neither emitted or absorbed radiation. 
Th ey only emitted radiation when they jumped from a higher to a lower 
orbit, and absorbed it when they jumped from a lower to a higher orbit. Th e 
wavelength or frequency of the emitted or absorbed light was proportional 
to the energy diff erence between the levels. Th is was why the lines in the 
spectrum occupied the specifi c places they did. Applying this model to the 
simplest case—hydrogen, which consists of a proton and an electron—Bohr 
was able to derive the specifi c wavelengths of the series of Balmer lines, dis-
covered in the late 19th century by German schoolteacher Johann Balmer, 
and which correspond to  discrete energy states of the hydrogen atom. Th e 
lines involve emitted wavelengths produced by electrons in higher orbits 
(n=3, 4, 5 etc.) jumping to the second orbit (n = 2). Th us the fi rst Balmer 
line, known as H-alpha (HII), is a beautiful ruby-red line at wavelength of 
656.28 nanometers, and is emitted when an electron jumps from the third 
(n=3) to the second (n=2) lowest energy levels of the hydrogen atom.
Since the Balmer lines are in the visible part of the spectrum, they 
were the fi rst recognized. Electron jumps from n=2, 3, 4, etc. to the fi rst 
orbit (n = 1) produce emitted wavelengths of higher energy than those in 
the Balmer series, and are in the ultraviolet; these are known as the Lyman 

 162 
Galactic Encounters
series, aft er Harvard physicist Th eodore Lyman. Electron jumps into the 
third, fourth, and fi ft h orbits (making up the Paschen, Brackett, and Pfund 
series) correspond to lower energies, and thus are found in the infrared. 
Note that the placement of the lines of these series will be aff ected by the 
Doppler shift ; thus, for galaxies at cosmological distances, where the red-
shift s are very large, even the Lyman series is red-shift ed into the infrared.
Higher states of excitation of hydrogen are known as H, H, 
and so on, and converge at shorter and shorter wavelengths through the 
blue and violet parts of the spectrum. Th ough the success of his model in 
explaining the Balmer lines was, as Bohr himself realized, largely owing 
to hydrogen’s simplicity—it didn’t work for more complicated atoms—at 
least it provided a vindication of his belief that atomic physics could only 
be understood in terms of quantum theory. Th e next important step would 
be the development of modern quantum mechanics by Werner Heisenberg 
and Erwin Schrödinger in the 1920s, when solutions were found for more 
complicated atoms than hydrogen. 
As electrical forces are weak enough to be rather easily overcome, 
electrons in the atmospheres of stars are easily stripped away from the 
nucleus to produce charged nuclei called ions. As shown by Cecilia Payne 
in 1925 in her Harvard Ph.D. thesis (which Otto Struve called “undoubt-
edly the most brilliant Ph.D. thesis ever written in astronomy”), tem-
perature controls ionization. Th e spectral sequence is thus a result almost 
entirely of temperature progression in the atmospheres of stars. Th ese range 
from something like 50,000 K in some O-type stars to 2000K in M-type 
stars. Th e higher the temperature, the faster the atoms are moving, and the 
more electrons will be stripped away. Since the number of atoms in one 
state of ionization versus another depends on competition between colli-
sions of all kinds and radiation causing ionization and rates of electron-ion 
collisions producing recombination, temperature—not chemical composi-
tion—determines which absorption lines appear in a star’s spectrum. 
Th is is an important result, and the key to unraveling the details 
of stellar spectra. In low-temperature stellar atmospheres such as those in 
M-type stars, metals will be in their neutral states; e.g., iron will be pres-
ent as Fe I, and even molecules such as TiO will be present. In stars at 
higher temperature, K-type and G-type (like the Sun), calcium ionizes; this 
explains why the two strongest lines in Fraunhofer’s spectrum, which he 
called D but are now known as the H and K lines, correspond to once-ion-
ized calcium (Ca+); at still higher temperatures, as in A-type stars, hydro-
gen ionizes, and the Balmer lines become prominent. 
It follows that metals (by which astronomers mean all elements 
except hydrogen and helium), despite the prominence of their lines in stel-
lar spectra, are present as mere whiff s; instead, as Payne was fi rst to real-
ize, stars consist preponderantly of hydrogen and helium. Th is result went 

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 163
profoundly against what was believed by most astronomers at the time, 
but we now know that Payne was right; hydrogen makes up about 75% (by 
mass) of a star like the Sun, helium about 23%; all the other elements make 
up the rest.
Chemical energy—that involving electrons bound to atoms, the 
source of energy in batteries, for instance—is, it turns out, no more ade-
quate than gravitational energy to sustain the heat of the Sun for a dura-
tion consistent with the aeons of geological time. But what about nuclear 
energy?  If an unstable nucleus, like one of Uranium, decays, it gives off  
high-energy particles such as alpha and beta particles, and highly energetic 
electromagnetic radiation in the form of gamma rays. Th is process, which 
we observe in the case of radioactive decay, involves nuclear fi ssion, and 
gives some idea of the kind of energies are involved. Th e reverse process—
taking lighter nuclei and compressing them so that they fuse together 
into heavier nuclei—is known as nuclear fusion. Th e sequences of nuclear 
reactions that provided the energy sources for the Sun and other stars 
engaged in hydrogen fusion (stars on the main sequence) were clarifi ed 
by the German-American theoretical physicist Hans Bethe in 1939. Th e 
details needn’t concern us; the important point is that four hydrogen nuclei 
(protons) fuse to form one helium nucleus (a helium nucleus contains two 
protons and two more particles of almost the same mass called neutrons). 
Since the mass of a helium nucleus is 0.007 percent less than that of four 
hydrogen nuclei (protons), the diff erence is converted into energy accord-
ing to the famous equation published by Albert Einstein in 1905: E=mc2. In 
the case of hydrogen fusing into helium, the energy is released in the form 
of a gamma ray.
Th is, then, is the basis of the energetics of stars, and the key, at last, 
to decoding the HR diagram.
Th e rest of this chapter discusses the details of stellar evolution. While the 
below is not required for the rest of our story on how galaxies were discov-
ered and studied in proceeding chapters, we include it for completeness. 
It can be skipped or skimmed for those interested in continuing the main 
story in the next chapter.
Stellar evolution: a primer
Th e Milky Way—and other galaxies—are made up of gas, dust, stars, and 
radiation, as well as remnants of stars such as white dwarfs, neutron stars, 
and black holes. Galaxies also include—in large haloes far from the galac-
tic disk—matter which we cannot see and which only interacts with the 

 164 
Galactic Encounters
familiar atomic type of matter through gravitation; this is the famous dark 
matter, about which we will need to say more later. Th e galactic environ-
ment may be considered an ecosystem in which these components interact 
with one another, and evolve over time. 
One of the great intellectual achievements of the 20th century, accom-
plished largely in the 1920s through the 1950s, has been to understand the way 
that stars form and evolve. Th is is a vast subject, and we can only briefl y touch 
on it here, but it may be useful to at least recall some of the main themes. 
The Birth, Evolution, and Deaths of Stars
Consider a star on the main sequence, that is, one that is “burning” hydro-
gen in its core. Some 90 percent of all bright stars are there, including the 
star that is brightest of all to our eyes—the Sun. Th e Sun, of course, is of all 
stars the nearest and dearest to us, and though it has its cycles and occa-
sional tempests, overall it is exceedingly mild-mannered and mellow as 
stars go. It is, for the likes of us, like Goldilocks’s porridge, just right.
Th e Sun formed about 5 billion years ago from a collapsing Molecu-
lar Cloud, a cold womb containing grains of silicate- and carbon-dust and 
a breeding ground of stars, like those that are so dramatically silhouetted in 
Barnard’s photographs. Th e Molecular Cloud from which the Sun formed 
probably was much like the Taurus Molecular Cloud. At a distance of 450 
light years, it is the closest Molecular Cloud to us in which stars are form-
ing, and modest in size, with dimensions of 90 by 70 light years and a mass 
of about 24,000 Suns. It is also very cold, with a temperature at only a few 
degrees above absolute zero. Among these cold dusty tendrils— which 
appear like ribbons of crepe streaming across Barnard’s pictures, but are 
actually swaddling bands—new stars are forming; for example, the Taurus 
Molecular Cloud is collapsing, by gravity, into dense cloud stars, which will 
eventually form stars. 
A newly formed star is a famous one called T Tauri, which is still 
entangled in the gas and dust of the enigmatic nebular feature known as 
Hind’s variable nebula—the fi rst “variable” nebula detected in the heavens, 
which created a sensation when it was fi rst detected in 1852. Th e nebula 
itself is a refl ection nebula. It is shining as light from the star it envelops 
is scattered by dust; the nebulosity that swathes the stars of the Pleiades is 
of the same type. Its variability is due to the fl uctuations of light intensity 
from T Tauri itself, which is still unstable but which will eventually settle 
down to the business of fusing hydrogen into helium in its core. Once it 
does so, the tendency to further gravitational collapse is in intricate balance 
with the heat and pressure pushing outward from within. At this point it is 
a stellar debutante, a full-fl edged main sequence star like the Sun. 

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 165
Indeed, T Tauri seems destined to produce a star of about one solar 
mass, so we may see in it a refl ection what the Sun and its system of planets 
were as they formed from a Molecular Cloud almost 5 billion years ago. 
Th e more massive stars form from Giant Molecular Clouds, like 
those in Orion and Monoceros. Th ey are much larger in scale than that 
of Taurus, ponderous hulks with breadths of 10 to 100 light years, and 
containing perhaps 100,000 times the mass of the Sun. It is the star’s mass 
that ultimately determines where it enters the main sequence. As soon as 
it begins burning hydrogen into helium, it is locked into a well-defi ned 
place, shining with a fi xed color and brightness for as long as it continues 
to do so. In the case of a G-type dwarf like the Sun, the period of its main 
sequence existence is on the order of 10 billion years, for very bright, mas-
sive O and B stars, which burn hotter and brighter and more voraciously 
than lower-mass stars, it may be only a few million. Th e more massive 
the star, the hotter and more brilliantly it burns, but its glory—like that 
of the hero Achilles—is purchased at a price; its very brilliance destines it 
to a short lifetime. Eventually a main sequence star will ‘burn’ most of its 
hydrogen in its center. So what happens when the star has depleted the 
hydrogen fuel in its core (i.e., reached the point where only 1% of its fuel 
remains)? At this point it is no longer able to remain on the main sequence. 
It leaves the main sequence and moves to the upper right of the HR-dia-
gram, becoming colder and more luminous, and joins the realm of “giants.” 
As a giant, it is surrounded by a distended outer envelope, an outward 
manifestation of internal adjustments occurring unseen within. Th e core 
of the star now collapses in a gambit to increase its core temperature to 
about 300 million degrees K, at which it begins to burn helium into carbon 
and oxygen by the so-called “triple-alpha” process (the point of ignition is 
known as the “helium fl ash”). 
Like a debtor pursued by creditors, the star is now maintaining its 
solvency only by relying on ever more desperate high-interest loans. Once 
it leaves the main sequence, a star of solar mass remains in the red giant, 
helium-burning, stage for about 1 billion years. As it continues helium 
burning, it passes through a “zone of instability,” to become an RR Lyrae 
variable star (aft er the prototype star in Lyra, discovered by Mrs. Fleming 
in 1901). Th e helium-burning core remains enwrapped by a shell which is 
still burning hydrogen; in the boundary between the two, the temperature 
is just right for helium to alternate between single- and double-ionization 
states, and these alternations cause the star to oscillate between equilib-
rium states of slightly diff erent radius and luminosity. During this unstable, 
manic-depressive period of its existence, the star gives off  stellar winds of 
enormous intensity, a billion times greater than those that characterized it 
during the halcyon days of its main-sequence prime. Th e material expelled 
in this way piles up in the colorful shells of a planetary nebula (and also 

 166 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 8.10. (below left) The Eagle Nebula, a hoodoo of gas and dust located in the constellation Serpens. 
The pillars are four-light years high—or equal to the distance between the Sun and alpha Centauri (!). 
Intensely radiating hot young blue stars, OB stars, with their ﬁ erce outpouring of UV radiation, are at work 
here, savagely weathering—photoevaporating—their surroundings. Echoing Clarence Dutton’s words 
on the Grand Canyon, William Waller describes these cosmic structures as bespeaking “tales of wholesale 
erosion and exquisite sculpting…. The gestation of stars in molecular clouds leads to the remaining nebu-
losity being reshaped, rekindled, with new star formation—and ultimately destroyed.” Courtesy: Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScl/AURA).
Fig. 8.11. (below right) N 180B, an HII region that is the scene of active star formation in the Large Magel-
lanic Cloud. Courtesy: Y.-H. Chu and Y. Nazé, NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScl/AURA).
Fig. 8.9. (right) The “Mystic 
Mountain,” an H.P. Lovecraft 
inspired name for a spectacu-
lar structure in the Eta Carina 
Nebula. A three-light-year pillar 
of hydrogen is being worn away 
by UV radiation streaming from 
hot young stars. The blebs are 
places where radiation from 
newly formed stars are pushing 
outward. Courtesy: M. Livio and 
the Hubble Heritage Team (STScl/
AURA).

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 167
contributes most of the dust in the interstellar medium). Hundreds of these 
“cosmic butterfl ies” are known, their brilliant colors owing to fl uorescence 
of gas by the intense star at their centers. Among themost celebrated are 
the Ring Nebula (M57) in Lyra, the Dumbbell (M27) in Vulpecula, the Owl 
(M97) in Ursa Major, and the Helix (NGC 7293) in Aquarius.14 Th e Sun 
will eventually pass through such a stage.
Stars from one solar mass up to about eight solar masses puff  away 
most of their material in this way. By the time it is done with all its blowing 
and wheezing and wasting itself, the star has dwindled to a mere vestige 
of its former self; unable to sustain thermonuclear burning, what is left  of 
it collapses into a stripped-down hyper-dense remnant known as a white 
dwarf, in which the mass, typically on the order of 0.6 solar masses, is 
squeezed down into a volume a million times smaller than the Sun. Th e 
matter is so compressed that a cubic centimeter of the stuff  weighs a ton, 
and it resists further collapse because it no longer consists of separate 
atoms; it now exists as a plasma of protons, neutrons, and electrons called 
degenerate matter. Th e Milky Way is littered with these stellar corpses. 
Among the Sun’s closest stellar neighbors, Sirius, Procyon, and 40 Eri-
dani all have white dwarf companions; they are  remnants of stars once 
larger and more luminous than their companions. Th e companions being 
more ravenous and spendthrift , they have hurried along their life-courses, 
branched off  the main sequence long ago to become red giants, sloughed 
off  their outer layers, and fi nally collapsed into these now-inconspicuous 
embers where they will continue shining feebly till the end of time. 
We have so far described the fate of stars of up to about 8 solar masses, or 
some 99% of all the stars. Th e more massive stars, the cosmic 1%, follow 
more complex life-histories. As usual, the details are highly dependent 
upon their mass. Evolving rapidly, these massive stars use up their hydro-
gen fuel in only a few tens of millions of years, and become red supergiants. 
Th ey too pass through a zone of instability, becoming the metronomically 
regular pulsating stars known as Cepheid variables (aft er the prototype 
delta Cephei). Th eir periods of pulsation are precisely tied in to their lumi-
nosities, and because they are also intrinsically very bright—some of them 
attaining brightnesses equal to 100,000 times that of the Sun—they are 
important beacons for astronomers measuring the distances to remote star 
systems. Th us they are important yardsticks across the Galaxy, and indeed 
form the fi rst rung of the extragalactic distance scale to which we will turn 
later.
Instead of giving up the ghost at the helium-burning stage, these 
massive stars are able to stubbornly hang on by pushing through to a series 
of further internal collapses. Each successive collapse raises the core-

 168 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 8.12. Close-up of Hubble Space Telescope color mosaic (Fig. 1.5), showing the region south-
west of the Trapezium stars. Above the center is the star LL Orionis. A bow shock wave surrounds 
the star and points toward the stream of gas ﬂ owing from the neighborhood of the Trapezium 
stars located to the upper left (just outside the image). The bright star toward the lower left, LP 
Orionis, is surrounded by a prominent reﬂ ection nebula. Courtesy: M. Robberto and the Hubble 
Space Telescope Orion Treasury Team; NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
temperature to the point where a new, more intense stage of thermonuclear burn-
ing can occur. Helium burns to carbon, carbon to neon, neon to oxygen; carbon 
and oxygen are cooked into silicon, oxygen and oxygen into sulfur. Again, the 
star attempts to shed mass, by blowing off  a good part of itself in fi erce interstellar 
winds. A star having thirty times the mass of the Sun may “evaporate” as much as 
two-thirds of its total mass in this way. 
Th e end, like Hamlet’s slaying of his murderous and adulterous uncle 
Claudius, is postponed, but at last becomes inevitable. Each successive collapse 
involves the star’s ever-more desperate attempt to sustain itself at whatever cost, 
but at last it plays its trump card. As soon as it attempts to burn silicon to form 
iron, it has reached the end-game — or at least the beginning of the end. In struc-
ture, the star at this stage is onion-layered: the iron core overlain by a sulfur layer, 
the sulfur wrapped in hides of silicon, oxygen, carbon, and helium, and the whole 
enveloped in a hugely rarefi ed atmosphere of hydrogen. When the star attempts to 
burn silicon to form still heavier elements, it has reached the end of the line. From 
this stage onwards each reaction uses up more energy than it releases. 

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 169
It cannot sustain this level of defi cit spending for long. Indeed,aft er 
maintaining itself for millions of years, the end comes in less than a day. 
Th e star’s energy fi nances go into a fateful crash. Th e long intricately-
balanced homeostatic structure between the heat and radiation pressure 
within the star and the gravitation of its mass gives way. Gravitation must 
win out. In less than a second, the core itself implodes into a small dense 
object with the density of pure neutrons — a neutron star – or, if it is mas-
sive enough, forms an even denser and more compressed object. In the 
latter case, it turns the fabric of space-time inside-out like a stuff ed stocking 
to form a black hole. Th e whole process occurs with such startling rapidity 
that the rest of the star has absolutely no chance of adjusting: the overly-
ing shells, no longer supported from below, crumple; envelope careens on 
envelope, and everything ends in a tremendous jumble. Th e star plunges, as 
it were, over a Victoria-Falls or Niagara cataract. Th e shock wave produced 
by rebound from the core carries off  the lion’s share — 99 percent  — of the 
energy of collapse in an explosion so energetic that all the elements of the 
periodic table heavier than iron are formed therein (it is a staggering refl ec-
Fig. 8.13. Detail of the above: The famous Trapezium, as imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope. This 
image shows how examples of proplyds, young stars with circumstellar clouds of gas and dust that are 
rendered visible because they lie close to an emission nebula.  The poplyds have tails pointing away from 
the brightest and hottest of the Trapezium stars, Theta 1C. With a mass of 40 times that of the Sun, it 
dominates the radiation ﬁ eld, driving oﬀ  material from the proplyds, and causing the region behind the 
proplyds to be in shadow. Courtesty: John Bally and NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
Fig. 8.14. Another detail of above: Bow shock wave near LL Orionis. NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage 
Team (STScI/AURA).

 170 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 8.15. The Helix Nebula in Aquarius (NGC 7293), located at a distance of 650 light years. The 
top composite image is a view of the colorful Helix Nebula taken with the Advanced Camera for 
Surveys aboard NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and the 4 meter telescope at the Cerro Tololo 
Inter-American Observatory in Chile. The object is so large that both telescopes were needed to 
capture a complete view. The Helix resembles a simple doughnut as seen from Earth. But looks 
can be deceiving. The bottom illustration is a model constructed from observations from several 
ground- and space-based observatories, and shows how the Helix would appear if viewed from 
the side. In this illustration, the Helix consists of two gaseous disks nearly perpendicular to each 
other. One possible scenario for the Helix’s complex structure is that the dying star has a com-
panion star. One disk may be perpendicular to the dying star’s spin axis, while the other may lie 
in the orbital plane of the two stars. The Helix, located 690 light-years away, is one of the closest 
planetary nebulas to Earth. The Hubble images were taken on November 19, 2002; the Cerro 
Tololo images on Sept. 17-18, 2003. Courtesy: NASA, ESA, C.R. O’Dell (Vanderbilt University) and M. 
Meixner and P. McCullough (Space Telescope Science Institute).

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 171
tion but the energy in all the radioactive elements found on earth, such as 
thorium and uranium, is a remnant of the energy generated in such mas-
sive stellar detonations billions of years ago).
If the star enters this stage we may be privileged to contemplate 
— hopefully, from a safe distance — one of the most awesome and terrify-
ing spectacles in all nature: a supernova. Th e outer layers of the destroyed 
star are fl ung into space; massively convulsed, they are wrenched into the 
far-fl eeing knots, tendrils, and fi laments of an expanding cloud, strewing 
star-stuff  across the interstellar medium. Th e tortured and twisted material 
mixes and mingles with new generations of stars in the unfolding cycle of 
stellar death and rebirth. Since the formation of the Milky Way, at least 11 
or 12 billion years ago, there have been tens of millions of these superno-
vae, spewing oxygen, silicon, magnesium, calcium, titanium, as well as a 
smattering of the heavy elements, thorium and uranium — through space. 
Th e shock-fronts of supernovae from time to time have jostled molecular 
clouds and triggered new generations of star-birth.
Th e situation is actually a bit more complicated than the above 
scenario would suggest. Supernovae like those just described, involving 
core collapse, are described as Type II and Type 1b. A Type II supernova 
at its peak may achieve a luminosity equal to 200 million suns. But there 
is another way for a star to “go supernova,” and the resulting explosion, 
known as a Type Ia supernova, is even more powerful, reaching a luminos-
ity of 5 billion suns. Obviously, such luminous objects can be seen even in 
remote parts of the universe.
A Type Ia supernova occurs in a binary system in which one com-
ponent has already reached the white dwarf stage and the other is evolving 
to become a red giant. An accretion disk may form around the giant star 
and begin channeling material from the giant to the white dwarf. Small 
amounts of material may trigger modest outbursts known as “novae,” 
in which hydrogen from giant star is deposited onto the carbon-oxygen 
“crust” of the white dwarf until thermonuclear reactions occur again; in 
this case the star may temporarily brighten by a factor of thousands or even 
millions. Since the white dwarf survives the process, these novae may be 
“recurrent.” But in the special case of a white dwarf in which the fl ow of 
material onto its surface is just enough for the hydrogen to push the white 
dwarf’s mass above 1.4 solar masses (Chandraskehar’s limit, named for 
the theoretical astrophysicist who fi rst calculated it in the 1930s), even the 
pressure of degenerate matter is not able to sustain the white dwarf against 
further gravitational collapse, and it suddenly detonates in a tremendous 
explosion that will lead to its utter destruction. Type Ia supernovae within 
our Galaxy include Tycho’s star of 1572 and Kepler’s star of 1604; another 
in our part of the Galaxy is long overdue. Because they are eff ectively cali-
brated bombs, with peak luminosities that are very large and in a consistent 

 172 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 8.16. (right) The Ring Nebula, 
M57. A favorite in small tele-
scopes, here shown in detail in a 
Hubble Space Telescope image. 
The vivid colors are produced as 
atoms are irradiated by ultra-
violet light from the hot white 
dwarf at the center: the deep 
blue in the center is produced by 
atoms of helium, the sea-green 
glow by atoms of hydrogen and 
oxygen. The red of the main ring comes from atoms of nitrogen and in the outer halo the red comes from 
molecules of hydrogen. The central blue area is actually shaped like a football, and protrudes through the 
doughnut of orange gas, while the dark spokes on the inside of the reddish ring are towers of gas denser 
than their surroundings. Courtesy: NASA, ESA, C.R. O’Dell (Vanderbilt University) and D. Thompson (Large 
Binocular Telescope Observatory).
Fig. 8.17. (below left) The Crab Nebula, the remnant of a Type II supernova, located some 6,500 light years 
from the Earth (in the Perseus Arm). In this Hubble Space Telescope view taken in 1995, the colorful net-
work of ﬁ lament constitute material from the outer layers of the doomed star, which went supernova in an 
explosion observed by Chinese astronomers in 1054 A.D. The collapsed core of the star, which has a mass 
1.4 times that of the Sun but a diameter of only about 10 miles, is a neutron star, and spins on its axis 30 
times a second. It is the lower of the two moderately bright stars to the upper left of center, and as it heats 
its surroundings, it creates the blue arc just to the right of the neutron star. Courtesy: William P. Blair, NASA 
and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
Fig. 8.18. (below right) A supernova remnant in N 63A, a star-forming region in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud. Courtesy: Y.-H. Chu and R.M. Williams, NASA, ESA, HEIC, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 8: What Stuﬀ  Stars Are Made Of 173
range, Type Ia supernovae are an ideal “standard candle” for measuring 
distances to galaxies forming in the very early universe. For this reason, we 
shall return to them again later.
Stars, immortal as they have always seemed from our brief human per-
spective, age, decline and die. In the phrase of Alfred North Whitehead, 
“Th ings fade.” Even such things as stars. But ongoing renewal is also part of 
the story. Th e dying stages of more modest stars, stars like the Sun that are 
not massive enough to become supernovae, puff  dust and gas over a very 
long period of time back into the interstellar medium, enriching molecular 
clouds and forming the substance of new generations of stars. It all begins 
over again, and will continue to do so just as long as there is cold gas and 
cold dust to work with.
Dust to dust. Within the soft  and muffl  ed dark wombs of the dust 
clouds of the Galaxy, the stars and their planets are born. Th ey embrace a 
cycle extending from the soft est and most gentle beginnings to the most 
unimaginably violent ends, a symphony ranging from mute tones and 
fl oating whispers to thunderously deafening cacophonies and back.
*   *   *
 1. John B. Hearnshaw, Th e Analysis of Starlight: one 
hundred and fi ft y years of astronomical spectros-
copy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1990), is the standard work on the subject.
 2. James B. Kaler, Stars and their Spectra: an intro-
duction to the spectral sequence (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1989, 62.
 3. Abraham Wolf; quoted in Otto Struve, “Th e 
Classifi cation of Stellar Spectra,” Sky & Tele-
scope, May 1953, 184-187:184.
 4. Quoted in S. Maff eo, S.J., “G.V. Schiaparelli 
and Fr. A. Secchi, S.J.,” in Memorie della Società 
Astronomica Italiana, 82 (2011):261.
 5. Henry James, “Boston,” in Th e American Scene 
(1907), in Collected Travel Writings: Great Brit-
ain and America (New York: Library of Amer-
ica, 1993), 550.
 6. Quoted in Jones and Giff ord, Harvard College 
Observatory, 176.
 7. Simon Newcomb, Reminiscences of an Astrono-
mer (Boston: Houghton-Miffl  in, 1903), 67.
 8. Jones and Boyd, Harvard College Observatory, 
177.
 9. E.C. Pickering, address to the Harvard Chapter 
of Phi Beta Kappa, June 28, 1906. Harvard Uni-
versity Archives.
 10. W. W. Morgan, Oral interview with David 
DeVorkin, Niels Bohr Library of Physics.
 11. J.F.W. Herschel, Treatise on Astronomy (London: 
Longman, 1833), 212.
 12. Karl Hufb auer, Exploring the Sun: Solar Science 
since Galileo (Baltimore and London: Th e Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1991, 55.
 13. Joe D. Burchfi eld, Lord Kelvin and the Age of the 
Earth (Chicago and London: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1990), 43.
 14. An accessible account is: Sun Kwok, Cosmic 
Butterfl ies (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001).

Thanks for Percival Lowell. I hadn’t realized his errors were so fruitful, I 
suppose that’s the rule in science. 
 
—Robert Lowell, the poet, to Elizabeth Hardwick, July 2, 1976
O
bservational cosmology was born in the early years of the 20th cen-
tury, and was largely an American enterprise. Th ere were good reasons 
for this. As Donald E. Osterbrock has pointed out:
I believe it is because galaxies are faint, and hence to get good observa-
tional data required large telescopes at good observing sites. These existed 
in the United States, partly because of geography and climate (the clear 
weather, good-seeing sites in California and Arizona), and partly because 
of a very few American millionaires, such as James Lick and Andrew Carn-
egie [who could ﬁ nance the construction of large telescopes].1
Th e fi rst of the great American observatories was Lick, on Mt. 
Hamilton, a 4200-ft . peak in the Coast Range near San Jose, whose 36-inch 
refractor was funded by the late eccentric California real estate specula-
tor James Lick. It was there, as we have seen, that E. E. Barnard began the 
wide-angle photography of the Milky Way. It was no accident, by the way, 
that California would become not only the premier location for astronomy 
but also for the nascent motion picture industry: in both cases the sine qua 
non was the climate. 
Along with Barnard, the most productive member of the original 
staff  at Lick was James E. Keeler, who was probably the best astronomical 
spectroscopist of his day. When the staff  began to grow restive under the 
autocratic director Edward S. Holden, Keeler was the fi rst to leave, in 1891, 
to assume the directorship of Pittsburgh’s Allegheny Observatory where he 
carried out a classic spectroscopic study of Saturn’s rings showing them to be 
9.
Th e Nebula Is Leaving 
the Solar System
174
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_9, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 175
Fig. 9.1. Pre-dawn snow at Lick Observatory. The large dome in 
the middle is that of the 120-inch Shane reﬂ ector. The Crossley 
dome is the one on the ridge just to the left of it, while the 
36-inch refractor dome is part of the complex of buildings on the 
far right. Copyrighted image by Laurie Hatch, used with permission.
composed of meteoritic material. However, Keeler returned to Mt. Hamil-
ton to become director of Lick a year aft er Holden himself resigned in 1897. 
One of the fi rst decisions he faced was what to do with a 36-inch refl ector 
that Holden had acquired from a wealthy English industrialist and ama-
teur astronomer, Edward Crossley. It was in such bad shape and so poorly 
mounted that Barnard, before he had left  Mt. Hamilton for Yerkes Observa-
tory in 1895, had told Holden it was a piece of junk he wouldn’t have paid 
fi ve cents for. Keeler rebuilt it so completely that  hardly any of the original 
telescope remained, and as soon as he got it into working order, in 1899, 
began using it to obtain direct photographs of the nebulae.2 At fi rst Keeler 
held, as did most astronomers at the time, that spiral nebulae were nearby 
masses of gas and dust in rotation, quite possibly solar systems in forma-
tion and in any case relatively near. His images with the Crossley revealed 
that these nebulae existed in staggering perfusion; some of the larger and 
brighter ones showed subtle detail, but there were many smaller ones, in 
various orientations but all evidently of the same type. Keeler estimated, 
conservatively, that 120,000 spiral nebulae might be within reach of the 
Crossley. Th ere were lots of them, but no one was yet sure what they were.
Keeler had intended from the fi rst not only to take direct photo-
graphs of the nebulae but also to investigate their spectra. Th e brighter stars 
(and also planetary nebulae, which are of high surface brightness at their 
emission wavelengths) can be studied with a relatively simple optical set-
up. For this reason the pioneers of spectroscopy like Huggins concentrated 
on studying the spectra of stars and planetary nebulae. Th e spiral nebulae, 
on the other hand, are very faint, and have low surface brightness. Th e feat 
of obtaining spectrograms of 
these baffl  ing objects was to 
prove one of daunting techni-
cal diffi  culty for astronomers 
at the time.
By the 1890s, it was 
already clear that planetaries 
and diff use nebulae have the 
bright-line spectra character-
istic of hot, low-density gas. 
Th e spirals appeared to show 
only faint continuous spectra, 
like those of stars, though 
there were inconsistencies in 
the data. Huggins had earlier 
reported seeing weak absorp-
tion lines in the continuous 
spectrum of the Great Spiral 

 176 
Galactic Encounters
of Andromeda, but confusingly, he also reported seeing some emission 
lines, like those in gaseous nebulae. Th en, in 1899, a German astronomer 
Julius Scheiner, using a 12-inch F/3 refl ector at the Potsdam Observatory, 
reported a couple of Fraunhofer absorption lines, so  once more it appeared 
that the Great Spiral consisted of stars.
Even while busy with his direct photography of the spiral nebu-
lae with the Crossley, Keeler was turning over in his mind the design of 
a spectrograph suitable for studying the nebulae. In contrast to the high-
dispersion three-prism stellar spectrograph fi tted to the 36-inch refractor, 
which was meant to obtain highly detailed stellar spectra and to measure 
radial velocities of the stars by means of their Doppler shift s, he wanted a 
low-dispersion spectrograph to use on the nebulae. He ordered a quartz 
prism from instrument-maker John Brashear for a slitless spectrograph 
that would give very low dispersion spectra. As is usual with the building 
of new instruments, mishaps delayed its delivery, and it was not fi nished 
until the very day Keeler left  Mt. Hamilton for the last time. Already ill, 
he was destined to die unexpectedly soon aft erward, at the age of only 42. 
An “astronomical Adonais,” 
cut short in his prime, one can 
only imagine what he might 
have done had he lived a more 
normal length of years.3 
Denied by death, Keeler 
never trained the spectrograph 
on a nebula. Later, his succes-
sor, W. W. Campbell, attempted 
to use it in its slitless form 
but found it useless; without 
lenses, it was impossible to 
bring it to focus. Campbell 
mounted quartz lenses in front 
of and behind the prism, and 
in this form it proved to be a 
very effi  cient instrument—it 
was especially sensitive to 
the ultraviolet, which made it 
useful for studying planetary 
nebulae, novae, and Wolf-Rayet 
stars (stars with emission lines). 
Campbell’s graduate student, 
Harold Palmer, made many 
studies of such objects, includ-
ing Nova Persei, in 1901, and 
Fig. 9.2. Remington Stone stands by the 36-inch 
Crossley reﬂ ector, one of the most productive tele-
scopes in astronomical history. Copyrighted image 
by Laurie Hatch, used with permission.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 177
aft er Palmer left , it was used by another graduate student, Joel Stebbins, 
who took a few spectrograms with it. But by then Campbell was no longer 
interested in the nebulae. He was almost exclusively involved in making 
highly precise measures of the radial velocities of stars, which could be 
determined from the Doppler displacement of Fraunhofer lines in their 
spectra. A displacement toward the violet end of the spectrum meant that a 
star was approaching, a displacement toward the red end meant that it was 
receding. Th ese measures were used to detect spectroscopic binaries and to 
study the motions of stars through space. Typically, the velocities Campbell 
found were on the order of 10 or 20 km/sec.
Th e small spectrograph went unused for a few more years, until 
Edward Fath, another graduate student, arrived on Mt. Hamilton. Fath had 
been born in Germany of American parents, and received his education 
fi rst at Wilton College, Iowa (it no longer exists), then at Carleton College, 
in Northfi eld, Minnesota, whose college observatory boasted a 16-inch 
Brashear refractor (a large instrument at the time) and also contained the 
editorial offi  ces of the infl uential journal Popular Astronomy. Aft er graduat-
ing from Carleton in 1902, Fath taught physics, chemistry and mathemat-
ics for three years, then went to the University of Illinois where he studied 
under Stebbins, who had just completed his Ph.D. under Campbell. Steb-
bins recommended Fath to Campbell for graduate studies at Lick. For his 
thesis, Fath wanted to study the spectra of the spiral nebulae. He made a 
few spectrograms with Keeler’s slitless spectrograph, but realized that to 
learn much about the physical nature of these objects he would need a 
slit-spectrograph equipped with a fast (short focal-ratio) camera lens. He 
quickly put together a crude spectrograph of this type, with a box of wood 
that was shellacked and screwed together. It was just sensitive enough to 
record absorption lines in the continuous spectra of the brighter spirals, 
such as M31 in Andromeda, but because the spectrograph had to be com-
pletely removed from the telescope in order to add spectral comparison 
lines to any spectrum, he lacked the ability to make precise measures of 
radial velocities. Th at, as we shall see, was to prove a crucial lack.
By the end of September 1908, Fath, with an exposure of 18 hours 
over three nights, was able to use his nebular spectrograph to obtain a good 
spectrogram of M31 showing fourteen defi nite absorption lines of “solar 
type.” Th ere were no bright emission lines such as Huggins had reported. 
Fath went on to obtain spectrograms of six other spiral nebulae; one, NGC 
5194, was too faint to show anything, but the others, though fainter than 
M31, showed similar absorption lines. 
(One or two objects puzzled him: M77 showed the emission lines of a 
gaseous nebula as well as solar-type absorption lines. We now know that this 
object is the brightest galaxy with an active galactic nucleus—a so-called Sey-
fert galaxy, named aft er Carl Seyfert who studied such objects in the 1940s. 

 178 
Galactic Encounters
So it really does have emission lines. Another object, NGC 4736, seemed to 
show one broad emission line, but as later studies were to show, this was only 
a bright part of the continuum spectrum between absorption features).
Since Fath knew that the nucleus of M31 was an extended object—
not a star—he argued that it must be a “star cluster.” But why should all the 
stars in the cluster have the same spectral type? To throw light on this ques-
tion, he obtained spectrograms of the globular clusters M2, M13, and M15, 
and found that as with M31 the spectra were continuous, with absorption 
lines of solar-type stars. In his Ph.D. thesis of 1909, he correctly concluded 
that the spirals were composed of stars, but neither he nor anyone else at 
the time had a way of measuring the distance to a spiral, and unfortunately, 
he watered down his conclusion by suggesting that his hypothesis “must 
stand or fall on the determination of the parallax” (i.e., a direct distance 
measurement) to M31. Osterbrock, whose insight into the motives of these 
astronomers is always keen, suggests that it was quite likely that Camp-
bell—who was very conservative, and who as late as the end of 1916 was 
still saying of the spirals, “We are not certain how far they are; we are not 
certain what they are”—might have suggested that Fath include this dis-
claimer, since “he did not want anyone from his observatory ever to pub-
lish and later have to admit a mistake.”4 He may also have been thinking 
of a recent parallax measure by a Swedish astronomer, Kurt Bohlin, which 
had indicated that the Andromeda Nebula was only 19 light years away!  
Whatever the case, Osterbrock concludes, “Fath had brilliantly discovered 
and proved the nature of the spirals.” Unfortunately, the disclaimer weak-
ened his case, so that “Fath’s result, so clear to 
us today, had little impact at the time, and the 
nature of the spirals remained an open question 
for at least another decade.”5 Simply put, the 
paradigm was not yet ready to shift .
Fath published his Ph.D. in 1909, then 
left  for Mt. Wilson Observatory near Pasadena 
where, with a slower spectrograph than the one 
he had used at Lick, he continued his studies of 
the spirals. Aft er three years, he left  Mt. Wilson 
for a teaching position at Beloit College in Wis-
consin, and shortly aft erwards moved on again 
to become president of tiny (and now defunct) 
Redfi eld College in South Dakota. At last, in 
1922, he returned to Carleton, his alma mater, 
where he spent thirty years as a teacher, editor 
and textbook writer but never returned to his 
groundbreaking research on the spiral nebulae. 
Before leaving research, however, Fath 
Fig. 9.3. Percival Lowell, 1904. Cour-
tesy: Lowell Observatory.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 179
attended one of the most important astronomical meetings held in the 
fi rst quarter of the century, the meeting of the International Solar Union 
at Mt. Wilson Observatory in 1910 which served as an opportunity for the 
astronomers there to unveil the recently completed 60-inch refl ector (see 
chapter 10). Th ere he met another young astronomer struggling with the 
problem of obtaining spectrograms of the nebulae: Vesto Melvin Slipher 
(“V.M.,” as he preferred to be called, of the Lowell Observatory). Slipher 
was to make the discovery that Fath, owing to his inability to obtain com-
parison spectra with his crude wooden spectrograph, had missed.
Slipher had spent most of the previous decade working as an assistant 
astronomer to Percival Lowell, one of the most colorful fi gures ever to 
appear in the history of astronomy. Lowell had built a private observatory 
on a mesa in Flagstaff , Arizona, in 1894 for the purpose of studying Mars 
and the other planets of the Solar System. His stimulating—but controver-
sial—theory of intelligent life on the red planet, based on his interpreta-
tion of linear markings (canals) fi rst reported by the Italian astronomer 
Giovanni Schiaparelli in 1877, had won him the adulation of the general 
public as well as the animus of many professional astronomers through 
promotion of his theory that Mars was inhabited by intelligent beings 
(Keeler and George Ellery Hale, the leading American astrophysicists of 
this era, who founded the prestigious Astrophysical Journal in 1895, refused 
to accept his articles as they were not up to their standards). 
By any measure, Lowell had followed a rather unorthodox route 
into astronomy. Born in Boston in 1855 into a prominent New England 
family, then at the pinnacle of what passed for American aristocracy, he 
graduated with honors from Harvard in 1876, giving for his part in the 
graduation exercises an oration on Laplace’s nebular hypothesis on the ori-
gin of the Solar System. He remained enamored of the nebular hypothesis 
for the rest of his life—not in Laplace’s original formulation so much as in 
that of the English philosopher Herbert Spencer, whose “System of Syn-
thetic Philosophy” tried to explain how everything in the universe, includ-
ing man, developed from a simple undiff erentiated homogeneous state (i.e., 
nebula) to a complex, diff erentiated heterogeneity, through a principle of 
evolution. Indeed, Spencer’s conceptual framework would fi t Lowell snugly 
for the rest of his life, and implied, at least in Lowell’s view of the matter (as 
he expressed it in a talk he gave to the Boston Scientifi c Society on May 22, 
1894, the eve of his departure for his Arizona observatory), the existence of 
intelligent life on other planets. He said: 
If the nebular hypothesis is correct, and there is good reason for believing in 
its general truth, then to develop life more or less distinctly resembling our 

 180 
Galactic Encounters
own must be the destiny of every member of the solar family which is not 
prevented by purely physical conditions, size and so forth, from doing so.
As for the Schiaparelli canals—which, remember, he had not even 
seen as yet—he was already pretty sure what they were:
The most self-evident explanation from the markings themselves is 
probably the true one: namely, that in them we are looking upon the 
result of the work of some sort of intelligent beings…. The amazing 
blue network on Mars hints that one planet besides our own is actually 
inhabited now.6
With the support of a fortune founded on the textile mills of the city of 
Lowell, Massachusetts—whose mills were powered by six miles of canals 
dug by immigrant Irish canal diggers to divert water from the Merrimack 
River—Percival Lowell was born every inch an aristocrat. Aft er his gradu-
ation from Harvard and a Grand Tour of Europe as far as Syria, he briefl y 
tried managing textile mills and trusts in his grandfather’s offi  ce on State 
Street, but his interest in business soon fl agged and at 28, to the considerable 
shock of his family, he broke off  an engagement (probably to a cousin) and 
quit the business. He seems to have been suff ering from one of the periodic 
breakdowns that would recur during times of stress over the rest of his life. 
He soon formulated a plan for his personal rehabilitation, however, having 
just heard a stimulating lecture on Japan given by the zoologist Edward S. 
Morse. For Lowell, Morse’s lecture served as a siren call to adventure, and 
as soon as he could, he left  Boston, which he called “the most austere soci-
ety the world has ever known,” and set sail for the Far East. He spent the 
next decade in travel and literary activity in Korea and Japan. Th en, as the 
romance of the Far East began to fade, he switched careers again.
On returning from Tokyo in the latter part of 1893, Lowell’s imagi-
nation was fi red by La Planète Mars, a book authored by the French astron-
omer Camille Flammarion, which Lowell received as a gift  from an aunt at 
Christmas 1893.7 Th e book off ered detailed descriptions of Schiaparelli’s 
canals. It was the intellectual equivalent of love at fi rst sight. Lowell was 
captivated by the canals and by the possibility of life on Mars to the point 
of obsession. Indeed, as Stephen Jay Gould has written, he “fell under the 
spell of these nonexistent phenomena and spent the rest of his career in 
increasingly elaborate attempts to map and interpret ‘these lines [that] run 
for thousands of miles in an unswerving direction, as far relatively as from 
London to Bombay, and as far actually as from Boston to San Francisco.’”8
By the time of Mars’s next biennial approach to the Earth in Octo-
ber 1894, Lowell was determined to have an observatory up and running. 

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 181
He commissioned Harvard astronomer (and veteran Mars observer) Wil-
liam H. Pickering, E.C.’s younger brother, and Pickering’s assistant Andrew 
E. Douglass to join him in an expedition to the American Southwest to 
observe Mars under conditions of clear and steady air. Douglass was sent 
on ahead to scout sites with a 6-inch refractor; everything being rushed, 
Lowell somewhat impetuously chose the mesa (which Lowell called “Mars’ 
Hill”) above the lumbering and ranching town of Flagstaff ; in addition to its 
purportedly good seeing, the town lay conveniently on a railroad line that 
connected it to Chicago and Boston, and also had better saloons than other 
sites considered. Using two borrowed telescopes, Lowell, Pickering, and 
Douglass gathered on Mars Hill at the beginning of June 1894 to launch the 
most ambitious and systematic campaign of Mars observations attempted 
up to that time. Peering at the red planet nightly, and with monomania-
cal intensity, for months on end (though Lowell himself was not at his new 
observatory all the time, observing only through the month of June, briefl y 
late in August, and then most extensively in October and November), they 
produced hundreds of sketches of Martian surface detail in their observing 
logbooks, and in a series of books (Mars, 1895, Mars and its Canals, 1906, 
Mars as the Abode of Life, 1908), articles, and lectures, Lowell proceeded 
to lay out his theory that the canals on the surface of the planet were noth-
ing less than irrigation channels that had been built by the inhabitants of a 
world increasingly turning to desert and in the throes of dying of thirst.
Lowell, at age 39, had entered astronomy just as the fi eld was undergoing 
dramatic transformations. He was a well-educated generalist in an era of 
increasing specialization in the sciences. But at the very moment he began 
his career as an astronomer, the initiative had already passed to special-
ists—astrophysicists, who were combining the forces of spectroscopy and 
photography to advance the study of stars and nebulae. By contrast, the 
area of his interest, planetary astronomy, continued a tradition of visual 
observations going back to Galileo. Th ere were obvious reasons for the 
diff erence. Th e photographic plate is an integrating detector; it builds up a 
cumulative impression of faint objects. Th e human eye, on the other hand, 
is a diff erentiating detector. It lacks the ability to see faint objects, but is  
quick and agile, and well-equipped for analyzing objects in motion.
A planet, because of the vicissitudes of the atmosphere (“seeing”), 
has more in common with a motion picture than a still-life. When we look 
at a planet, say Mars, through the telescope, what we see is a staccato of 
fi xed images, each immediately erased by the next one. A trick of the brain 
called fl icker-fusion takes these static images and fuses them into what 
appears to be a seamless continuum—it is this which makes the illusion of 
“motion pictures” so convincing. Th e problem in planetary astronomy is 

 182 
Galactic Encounters
not, however, just that of detecting motion: one also wants to “stop action,” 
to freeze the occasional high-defi nition frame from the series of the blurry 
ones. Unfortunately, the eye-brain system isn’t designed for that. 
Indeed, the moving planetary image might be compared to gal-
loping horse. Despite the fact that people have been watching galloping 
horses with keen interest for thousands of years, it was only in 1878, when 
Eadweard Muybridge invented stop-action photography, that the sequence 
of movements involved in the galloping horse was demonstrated. Astrono-
mers in the visual observing era were like the watchers of horses in the pre-
Muybridge era. Th ey had photography, but the photographic plate required 
an appreciable time—from 0.5 to 5 seconds and longer—just to “see” the 
planet. Th is meant that detail in photographs of Mars was much more 
blurred than what the visual observer could make out. Th e eye remained 
supreme over the plate for planetary imaging, and was not superseded until 
the late 1980s when CCD became available, which is even faster and more 
sensitive than the eye. An 1890s astronomer like Lowell, whose primary 
interest was planets, had no choice but to rely on the old-fashioned eye-
brain-hand technology, in contrast to the astrophysicist who had the new-
fangled photographic plate and spectrograph in his arsenal.
 Also, since making an observation of a planet was something one 
did in private (in “peepshow” fashion) rather than in a public setting like a 
movie theater, consensus could only be obtained through indirect means 
and a process of negotiation (e.g., viewing published drawings and attempt-
ing to confi rm what one saw in them with detail visible in the eyepiece). 
Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that the testimony of one 
authority frequently confl icted with that of another. Th is would lead to 
interminable and inconclusive arguments such as those Lowell engaged in 
about the “canals” of Mars.
Aft er the 1894 opposition of 
Mars, Lowell returned the larger of the 
borrowed telescopes to Brashear and as 
a permanent replacement ordered from 
the Alvan Clark fi rm of Cambridgeport, 
Massachusetts (which had just created 
the lens for the Lick refractor) a 24-inch 
refractor. It arrived at the Flagstaff  train 
station on July 22, 1896. At this time, 
Lowell and Douglass (Pickering having 
meanwhile sundered his connection 
with the observatory and returned to 
Harvard) expected that the Flagstaff  site 
would be temporary, and envisaged the 
observatory as a peregrinating aff air, 
Fig. 9.4. Dome of the 24-inch Clark refractor, 2013. 
Photograph by William Sheehan.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 183
moving across latitudes 
and from point to point 
on the Earth’s surface at 
successive oppositions 
of Mars so as always to 
enjoy the best possible 
locality and atmospheric 
conditions. In line with 
this philosophy, the Clark 
refractor, as soon as it had 
passed its initial tests, was 
shipped to Tacubaya, out-
side Mexico City, for the 
December 1, 1896 oppo-
sition of Mars. Douglass 
served as front man, arriv-
ing in Mexico in Novem-
ber. Lowell himself arrived 
only in late December, well 
aft er the Martian opposi-
tion.
Several assistants 
went to Mexico with the 
expedition. As usual, 
Lowell’s secretary, Wrexie 
Louise Leonard, was with him (there would be rumors, never substantiated 
though likely enough, that they had a long-running aff air), and several new 
assistants had been added, of whom the most notable was Th omas Jeff erson 
Jackson See, a Berlin-trained Ph.D. who was on leave from the University 
of Chicago and then at the height of his fame as an expert on double stars. 
See’s inclusion indicates that, in addition to studying the objects of the 
Solar System, Lowell had decided to expand the observatory’s program of 
research to stellar studies. Even before the telescope had moved to Mexico, 
See announced that on August 30-31, 1896, he had rediscovered the notori-
ously diffi  cult “companion” of Sirius, missing since 1890 in the glare of Sir-
ius itself. It was not observed by other astronomers until November 1896, 
when it was seen at Lick Observatory—but in a diff erent position from 
where See had made it out. Th e Lick director at the time was still Edward S. 
Holden, and citing a careful series of observations by double-star special-
ist Robert G. Aitken, Holden concluded, “there is no object in the place 
reported by the astronomers of the Lowell Observatory.”9 Th e episode was 
only one of what would become an endless series of controversies between 
astronomers at the rival institutions.
Fig. 9.5. Venus, 1899; observed by Percival Lowell with the 7-inch 
refractor at the Amherst Observatory. These drawings show the 
characteristic spokes seen by Lowell and Wrexie Louise Leonard.
Courtesy: Lowell Observatory.

 184 
Galactic Encounters
Lowell himself provided the best copy from the 1896-97 observ-
ing campaign. Ten days before See “rediscovered” the companion of Sirius, 
Lowell began a study of the inner planets, Mercury and Venus. His obser-
vations of Mercury were relatively uncontroversial, and merely seemed to 
confi rm an earlier result from Schiaparelli that the planet’s rotation was iso-
synchronous, i.e., it rotated in the same period as that with which it orbited 
the Sun. But Lowell shocked astronomers with what he found on Venus—
usually a notoriously bland and unrevealing object in the telescope. He 
made out markings that were, he wrote, “In the matter of contour, perfectly 
defi ned throughout, their edge being well marked… a large number of 
them … radiate like spokes from a certain center.”10  Th e observations had 
not even been confi rmed before Lowell was advancing interpretations 
that went against the general consensus that the Earth’s sister-planet was 
shrouded in clouds. Th e hub and spoke markings, Lowell claimed, had 
the appearance of “ground and rock,” which suggested that Venus had an 
extensive but transparent atmosphere. Th eir deadpan stare also suggested 
that like Mercury, Venus also had an isosynchronous rotation period—one 
hemisphere was forever sun-lit, the other in night. Th is confi rmed another 
of Schiaparelli’s result, but Lowell went so far as to suggest that the hub and 
spoke pattern was produced by the “funnel-like indraught of air from the 
dark side to the bright and then an umbrella-like return of it.” Th is, Lowell 
added, would “necessarily” lead to the transport of all the water to the night 
side where it would remain forever as ice! 
At the time, there was no agreement about Venus’s rotation 
period—indeed, the matter would not be settled until the 1960s. Some (like 
Schiaparelli) had proposed a very long rotation, one in which the rota-
tion had been locked to the period of revolution, 225 days, by tidal forces 
from the Sun. A majority still favored a short Earthlike period, of 24 hours. 
But no one announced his results with the boldness and self-confi dence 
of Lowell. It is notable that though Lowell’s interpretations of the Martian 
phenomena he observed attracted critics, he was far from the only one to 
see canals on Mars. In the case of Venus, it was not his inferences but the 
data themselves that were in doubt.
Seeing him as something of an interloper, rushing in “where angels 
feared to tread,” several astronomers ferociously attacked Lowell and the 
hub-and-spoke system. To Captain William Noble, fi rst president of the 
British Astronomical Association, Lowell’s map of Venus looked “suspi-
ciously like Mars. I do not know whether Mr. Lowell has been looking 
at Mars until he has got Mars on the brain, and by some transference … 
ascribed the markings to Venus.” Th e most respected observer of the day, E. 
E. Barnard, training the 12-inch refractor of George Ellery Hale’s Kenwood 
Observatory at Venus while he waited the commissioning of the great 
40-inch Yerkes refractor in the summer of 1897, entered in his observing 

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 185
log book: “no markings seen—though there were the usual suggestions of 
large dusky regions. It seems to be fully steady enough to have seen Lowell’s 
narrow markings.” In fact Barnard never would succeed in seeing them.
Lowell must at fi rst have experienced these criticisms as a case of 
lese majéstè. But he was clearly unprepared for their ferocity, and arguably 
the stress of defending them undermined his health. On his return from 
Mexico, aft er a brief stay in Boston, he attempted to return to Flagstaff  
but made it only as far as Chicago before having to turn back. He reached 
Boston exhausted and a nervous wreck. Th e doctors prescribed that he 
take the then-fashionable “rest cure” in his father’s Brookline mansion. He 
was allowed no visitors, no reading material, no distractions, and no intel-
lectual activity. Deciding aft er a month that the cure was worse than the 
disease, he set off  for Bermuda, and continued his convalescence in places 
like Virginia, Maine, New York, the French Riviera. It would be nearly four 
years before he would return to his observatory.
All this may seem like a long digression. In one sense, it is. Lowell’s Venus 
observations were of little real importance, and would prove to be an astro-
nomical dead-end. But his reaction to his critics and his determination to 
vindicate his observations would lead in fruitful directions, and produce one of 
the most paradigm-shift ing discoveries ever made in observational cosmology. 
During his long and enervating illness, Lowell turned over admin-
istrative supervision of the observatory’s business to his brother-in-law, 
William Lowell Putnam II, who toward the end of 1898 was forced to 
dismiss See. Th at strange and colorful fi gure, besides being egotistical 
and self-serving—among other things, he wrote and published grandiose 
reviews of his own work in which he described himself as a “worthy suc-
cessor of the Herschels”—behaved in a dastardly manner toward the other 
assistants (there were even rather explicit accusations of sexual impropri-
eties). Th e “See aff air” completely demoralized the Lowell staff , leading 
to the departure of several assistants, including Wilbur A. Cogshall who 
left  to take charge of the Kirkwood Observatory at Indiana University 
(but will surface again briefl y at a critical juncture, as we shall see). With 
See’s departure, only Douglass remained. In 1899, on a visit to Boston, 
Douglass found Lowell still in poor shape. He “wants to work away on the 
observations of Venus,” Douglass noted; “he is not working very hard but 
is nervous enough to have it worry him if all the material is not at hand.”11 
Perhaps stimulated by this visit, Lowell and his secretary Wrexie Leonard 
set off  on a short trip to Amherst, to observe Venus with the 7-inch refrac-
tor at the observatory there. Th ese observations continued into 1900. A bit 
like “the man upon the stairs who wasn’t there,” the spoke-like markings 
reasserted themselves.

 186 
Galactic Encounters
Douglass, meanwhile, had 
increasingly begun to doubt the real-
ity of some of the usual markings seen 
on planets, especially those on Venus. 
He carried out a series of experiments 
in which artifi cial planet disks were 
observed through the telescope. Th e 
results were unsettling, to say the least, 
as spurious markings were regularly 
recorded on the artifi cial planet disks, 
of the same general type as those 
recorded in drawings of planets.
Lowell, still in Boston but being 
kept apprised of developments, was of 
two minds about all this, and vacillated 
between ordering Douglass to cease and desist (on the grounds the experi-
ments cast doubt on some observatory publications) and encouraging 
their continuation. Douglass was still being permitted to continue when, in 
April 1900, a bombshell landed from Russia. Aristarch Belopolksy, a highly 
esteemed astronomer at the Pulkova Observatory, published a spectro-
graphic measure of Venus’s rotation of 24 hours. But Lowell’s hub-and-
spoke system was compatible only with a very long, indeed an isosynchro-
nous, rotation. Lowell did not admit defeat, but clearly the testimony of one 
spectrograph had to be answered by the testimony of another. So Lowell, 
in December 1900, ordered (on Douglass’s recommendation) a powerful 
spectrograph from John A. Brashear, who had designed and built the Mills 
stellar spectrograph of the Lick Observatory. In ordering this expensive 
state-of-the-art instrument, Lowell was explicit about his purpose. It was 
“to test spectrographically the rotation period of Venus.”12
Lowell was now well enough to contemplate returning full-time 
to astronomy. He had missed the Mars opposition of January 1899 com-
pletely, and though the next opposition occurred in February 1901, he was 
in England at the time, where he saw Nova Persei “through a hole in the 
clouds.” He did not fi nally return to Flagstaff  until the end of March, when 
Mars was already a long way off . Douglass, an ambitious scientist in his 
own right who had developed a strong independent streak during his boss’s 
nearly four-year absence, was not exactly thrilled. In truth, he had become 
increasingly dissatisfi ed with Lowell’s whole approach, and confi ded to 
his former mentor W. H. Pickering: “It appears to me that Mr. Lowell has 
a strong literary instinct and no scientifi c instinct.” He also alluded to 
Lowell’s “strong personality, consisting chiefl y of immensely strong convic-
tions.”13 He wrote (also in confi dence) to Putnam, “His work is not credited 
among astronomers because he devotes his energy to hunting up a few facts 
Fig. 9.6.V.M. Slipher and his family. Courtesy: 
Lowell Observatory.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 187
in support of some speculation instead of perseveringly hunting innumer-
able facts and then limiting himself to publishing the unavoidable conclu-
sions, as all scientists of good standing do, in whatever line of work they 
may be engaged,” and ended, “I fear it will not be possible to turn him into 
a scientifi c man.”14
Putnam kept Douglass’s letter confi dential for a while, but fi nally 
divulged the contents to his brother-in-law in July 1901. Lowell was not 
amused. He immediately fi red Douglass, and fumed for a while in a solipsis-
tic rage in which he resolved to soldier on alone without assistants. At this 
point Cogshall resurfaced to remind Lowell of an earlier off er he had made 
to hire on a temporary basis a young Indiana graduate, Vesto Melvin Slipher 
(“V.M.” as he was always known). Lowell shot back: “I shall be happy to have 
him come when he is ready. I have decided, however, that I shall not want 
another permanent assistant and take him only because I promised to do 
so; and for the term suggested. What it was escapes my memory. If, owing 
to this decision, he prefers not to come, let him please himself.”15 Slipher 
indeed arrived on Mars Hill that August, and would remain employed at the 
observatory until his retirement in 1954, at the age of 79.
When Slipher arrived, Lowell was once more pointing his telescope 
at Venus (then appearing in the evening sky on the way to an evening elon-
gation in December). Apparently, the usual radial markings were recorded 
(that particular observing logbook seems to have gone missing from the 
archives). However, though Lowell did not publish anything specifi cally 
about Venus that year, he was still evidently thinking a great deal about the 
problematic planet, for within a month of Slipher’s arrival, Lowell, writing 
from Boston, was advising his new assistant “on the need for short expo-
sures in photographing Venus,” adding that experience had taught him that 
“the markings grew more and more diffi  cult as the phase increased.”16 In the 
last part of September 1901, the Brashear spectrograph arrived on schedule, 
and Lowell ordered his assistant to “get the spectroscope [sic.] on and … 
work as soon as you can. Perhaps—and I trust this may be the case—you 
have already done so.” To which he added, as an aft erthought, “How fare the 
squashes?” (i.e., in Lowell’s garden, of which he was inordinately proud).17
Th e query about the squashes was not to be the last in that line. 
Lowell appears in this correspondence as a fastidious micromanager who 
did not distinguish among specifi c roles for those he employed. His assis-
tant astronomers were treated as a rather higher-class type of servant, and 
having grown up surrounded by servants, Lowell’s expectation was that 
they glide about providing service effi  ciently without being themselves 
visible. If they drew attention to themselves, it was inevitably for falling 
short. And Lowell had a temper. Once, in a fi t of rage, he threw a butler 
down the stairs of his Beacon Hill bachelor’s residence, and to add insult to 
injury, threw the poor man’s trunk aft er him; while in his 1906 book Mars 

 188 
Galactic Encounters
and Its Canals, he complained that they didn’t make servants like they used 
to and that even domestics were showing “arrogant independence.” It is 
hardly surprising that whenever Lowell needed something, he turned to the 
nearest underling, no matter what the task or the employee’s title, skills or 
experience. He never considered taking the time to match the employee to 
the task at hand. His secretary Wrexie Leonard was oft en asked to convey 
his displeasure over seemingly minor problems, like being sent the wrong 
cigars or a soup ladle with the wrong length of a handle. At other times 
she was asked to take her place at the eyepiece to verify whatever planetary 
markings he was studying at the time (and her drawings of Venus alone 
among those of his assistants capture with the same boldness and assur-
ance the characteristic form of his hub-and-spoke system). In the same 
way, Slipher was not only expected to look aft er the squashes, he was also, 
especially in the early years of his employment, tasked with some very non-
astronomer tasks—such as measuring and creating blueprints of all the new 
rooms in the sprawling Lowell residence known as the “Baronial Mansion,” 
or even purchasing a cow for the observatory (something which the native 
of Mulberry, Indiana, was able to manage without breaking a sweat). Some 
of Lowell’s requests seem almost humorously trite; for instance, Lowell 
writes to Slipher from Chicago, “Will you kindly see 
if shredded wheat biscuits are to be got at Flagstaff ?  
If not please wire me at the Auditorium Annex [now 
the Congress Plaza Hotel].”18 But despite the some-
times bucolic nature of his assignments, Slipher 
always insisted on his dignity, and was never casual. 
In fact, his manner was formal and rather stiff . He 
usually dressed in a suit complete with a vest, and 
“kept his tie perfectly knotted even when alone in 
the dark of the 24-inch Clark.”19
By assigning Slipher the task of getting the spectro-
graph in perfect running order, Lowell completely 
discounted the fact that though Slipher’s degree 
had been in astronomy and mechanics he had no 
specifi c training in the use of such an instrument. 
Slipher managed to “get the spectroscope on” the 
24-inch Clark refractor within two weeks of Lowell’s 
letter to that eff ect, but his fi rst attempts to use it left  
much to be desired; Lowell, with evident disgust, 
wrote to him that not only did his fi rst spectrograms 
of Jupiter, with a rapid rotation of 10 hours, show 
the Doppler-shift ed lines of a body in rotation, so 
Fig. 9.7. V. M. Slipher looking at the 
plate-holder of the Brashear spec-
trograph, which he used to obtain 
spectrograms of spiral nebulae. 
Courtesy: Lowell Observatory.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 189
did those of the star Capella and Venus (obviously not the desired result!).20 
Lowell corresponded about the problem with an offi  cial at the Brashear 
fi rm, who suggested that Slipher’s disappointing results were due to “lack 
of adjustment.”21 Slipher can hardly have found the comment particularly 
illuminating.
Th e assistant astronomer’s perplexity continued until, in December 
1901, he suggested to Lowell that he ought to pay a visit to Lick Obser-
vatory to learn from the leading expert in astronomical spectroscopy at 
the time, W. W. Campbell. Campbell’s specialty was measuring the radial 
velocities of stars, but he had also been one of Lowell’s most ferocious crit-
ics, dating back to a devastating critique he had written of Lowell’s book 
Mars, in which he had said, among other things, “Mr. Lowell went direct 
from the lecture hall to his observatory, and how well his observations 
established his pre-observational views is to be read in this book.”22 Need-
less to say, Lowell did not endorse Slipher’s request; he told him that it was 
“inadvisable to go at present,”23 and lest Slipher fail to catch the hint fol-
lowed up with a letter that left  no room for misunderstanding:
I am glad the postponing of your desired trip to the Lick commends 
itself to you. You are quite right in supposing that everybody encoun-
ters the same snags; the only diﬀ erence being the clever ones contrive 
to get over them themselves whereas the stupid ones have to have 
recourse to others.24
Fortunately, having grown up on a farm, V.M. had great practical 
sense, and was extremely clever with his hands. By mid-summer 1902 he 
had come far, and was producing spectrograms of Jupiter and Saturn that 
Lowell was bragging up to Brashear. Venus was still the main prize. On 
receiving an appointment as nonresident professor of astronomy at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Lowell sent its president, Henry S. Pritch-
ett, prints of Jupiter’s spectrum as “the fi rst fruits of the new spectroscope, 
made by Brashear, in the hands of V.M. Slipher” and added, for emphasis:
The spectroscope Mr. Brashear considers “the ﬁ nest and best instru-
ment we have ever made” under the date of Sept. 21, 1901. It was made 
so that I might be sure of the best possible instrument in the matter of 
Venus’ rotation period.25
Lowell seems to have been a bit at sea about Venus at the time. 
Despite the fact that he registered the hub-and-spoke confi guration not 
only in 1896-97 but also in 1899 (with the Amherst telescope) and in 1901, 
Douglass’s artifi cial planet work and Belopolsky’s spectrograms had clearly 
shaken him. In 1901, he engaged in his own series of artifi cial planet obser-

 190 
Galactic Encounters
vations which led to what was (for him) almost unprecedented: a brief 
retraction, published as a note in the German journal Astronomische Nach-
richten, in which he conceded, “the spoke-like markings are probably not 
upon the surface of the planet but are optical eff ects of a curious and—astro-
nomically speaking—of a hitherto unobserved kind.”26 Meanwhile, he pri-
vately confessed to Slipher, “Belopolsky’s sentence is a hard nut to crack.”27 
When, in December 1902, he delivered at MIT a series of lectures on the 
Solar System, later published in book form, he sidestepped the Venus prob-
lem altogether. His lectures covered Mercury, Mars, Saturn and Its System, 
and Jupiter and Its Comets. Venus is noteworthy by its absence.
In 1903, however, Slipher served his master well and brought him 
apparent vindication. He obtained spectrograms in March of that year 
which implied, when the tilt of the absorption lines at opposite sides of the 
visible disk of Venus were compared, practically a null value for rotation. 
Th ough in his published report, Slipher claimed nothing more than evi-
dence of a “slow” rotation,28 Lowell, committing a logical fallacy, went fur-
ther. Eff ectively retracting his earlier retraction about the spokes, he wrote 
to Pritchett at M.I.T. that Slipher’s result “which was got without any bias 
from me and with every precaution of his own to prevent unconscious bias 
on his part and to eliminate systematic errors, is completely confi rmatory 
of Schiaparelli’s period and of my visual 
work here in 1896-97—the planet undoubt-
edly rotates in the time it revolves.”29
Th ere was never again to be any 
doubt in Lowell’s mind, at least, about the 
rotation of Venus, or the planet’s place in 
his Spencerian scheme of planetary evolu-
tion (he saw it as a world that had come 
to the end of its evolutionary career, suc-
cumbing to relentless tidal friction from 
the Sun to become a “planet corpse, circling 
unchanging, except for libration, around 
the Sun”). He re-observed the spoke-like 
markings again in 1903 and 1910, and 
made his last telescopic foray at the planet 
in October 1914—at the very moment 
when, a world away, the bloody standoff  
at Ypres was beginning in Flanders during 
the start of the fi rst World War. On a bright 
sunny day he posed in the Clark dome for 
a photograph. He was dressed as always in 
sartorial splendor, his domical bald head 
covered with a newsboy cap turned back 
Fig. 9.8. Percival Lowell, observing Venus 
by daylight, October 1914. Courtesy: Lowell 
Observatory.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 191
to front as he peered into the eyepiece of the Clark refractor in what has 
become one of the iconic images of astronomy.
Slipher’s spectrograms were not, alas, quite as conclusive as Lowell 
thought, and the spectrographic analysis of Venus’s clouds still failed to 
yield a specifi c result as late as the 1960s.30 Nor has any satisfactory expla-
nation ever been given for Lowell’s system of hub and spoke markings; 
there is not even any consensus as to whether the markings he recorded 
were on the planet or somehow produced in his own eyeball. When one of 
us (W.S.) discussed Lowell’s Venus map in a lecture to a group of ophthal-
mologists, he was informed by one of the experts that the Y-shaped mark-
ing so prominent in Lowell’s drawings and map looked a good deal like a 
congenital cataract. No better explanation has ever been proposed. 
Th e important thing about all this is that by 1903 Slipher’s mastery 
of the spectrograph had convinced Lowell that his assistant was indispens-
able. Lowell’s preoccupation was always with the planets. He now charged 
V.M. with investigations of the spectra of the giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus, and Neptune, in which the assistant fi rst recorded the dark bands 
now known to be due to the presence of methane, as well as to the spectro-
scopic detection of water vapor in the atmosphere of Mars. Slipher believed 
he had succeeded in detecting Martian water vapor by 1909. His result 
was vigorously challenged, however, by W. W. Campbell of Lick, who that 
same year took a spectrograph to the summit of Mt. Whitney, and failed to 
reproduce the Lowell result. When Mars was not near opposition (at which 
times Lowell commandeered the 24-inch Clark refractor for his ongoing 
visual studies of the planet) or when Lowell was on one of his frequent 
trips to Europe or back in Boston, Slipher had the independence to pursue 
his own studies. It’s clear that the controversies of his employer aff ected 
him at times, and that he suff ered at times from what might be called the 
“Lowell Observatory inferiority complex.” Th ough he was fi ercely loyal to 
Percival Lowell, he was also understandably eager to establish a reputation 
in his own right. Whenever he could, he made spectrographic measures 
of the radial velocities of standard stars, which led to extensive correspon-
dence with Campbell at Lick and Edwin B. Frost at Yerkes about their 
radial-velocity programs (the latter long addressed him as “Mr. Victor 
M. Slipher”). Campbell and Frost were both willing to impart practical 
advice—though they did so in an oft en curt and condescending manner, 
which shows that they regarded the Lowell Observatory astronomer more 
as a novice in need of tutoring than as an already accomplished peer.
An idea of Slipher’s sometimes painful situation can be gleaned from 
a Lowellian imbroglio in which he briefl y and reluctantly became entangled. 
In 1908 Lowell had written an article for Outlook magazine in which he 
claimed rather provocatively that the Lowell 24-inch was relatively more 
powerful than the Lick 36-inch, based on the number of stars visible in a 

 192 
Galactic Encounters
given fi eld. Slipher sided with Lowell, which earned him a prompt rebuke 
from Campbell. Later, Slipher attempted to defend his role in the matter. In 
a letter marked “Private,” he explained, rather plaintively, to Campbell:
I wanted to write you at the time concerning the Outlook criticism, but 
was too busy. I deplore controversy much more than the case may suggest 
and I was induced to make reply solely and wholly because I am selﬁ sh 
enough to wish my own work to receive an unprejudiced hearing, while 
as you know when discredit falls on Lowell’s work, it falls on mine, too.31
In yet a further demonstration of his desire for professional stand-
ing and respect, Slipher at about the same time privately began negotiations 
with Frost at the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observatory about doing a 
Ph.D. thesis, based on his spectrographic work at Flagstaff . (At age 34, he 
was still “Mr.,” rather than “Dr.” Slipher.) Frost was tentatively encouraging, 
and told Slipher: “As I understand it a residence of three quarters is insisted 
upon for the degree. So that work done at Flagstaff  could probably not 
be counted as residence…. Nevertheless, it might be a good arrangement 
to secure data there and then bring it here for measurement and discus-
sion. Probably your regular routine duties would interfere with giving as 
much time to your thesis while at Flagstaff  as you would like.” He added, 
“I am assuming of course that any arrangement you propose is endorsed 
by Director Lowell.”32 Slipher was sure of Lowell’s “sanction,” but the three 
quarters residence requirement proved a stumbling block—an insurmount-
able one unless the University would consider an exception:
If the residence requirement could be reduced to two quarters it would 
mean a great deal to me for it would probably make it possible for me 
to meet the requirements with one less vacation—which would mean 
a year and a half or two years less time…. Inasmuch as I shall want most 
of all to do work in the department of physics you might think it worth 
while to speak of the matter to Professor [Albert] Michelson.33
Unfortunately, Frost replied, such an exception as Slipher asked 
for had never been made at the University, and in any case would have 
had to be approved by the chairman of the astronomy department, For-
est Ray Moulton. Unfortunately, Moulton had just become engaged in a 
particularly nasty controversy with Lowell about the so-called planetesi-
mal hypothesis of the Solar System’s formation, which Th omas Chrowder 
Chamberlin, a University of Chicago geologist, and Moulton had published 
in 1905. Since the planetesimal hypothesis played a signifi cant role in 
Lowell’s instructions to Slipher to study the nebulae, there was some irony 
in this development, as we shall see. But to follow out to its end this par-

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 193
ticular strand of the story, Slipher, though he continued to correspond with 
Frost, never mentioned the University of Chicago degree (or his desire to 
study physics with the likes of Michelson) again. He didn’t have to. With 
some wire-pulling from his employer, he received his Ph.D. from Indiana 
University later that same year. (Frost, however, who had fi nally learned to 
refer to Slipher as “Mr. V.M.” rather than “Victor M.,” continued neverthe-
less to refer to him ever aft er as “Mr.”)
If history is not, as Napoleon cynically claimed, “lies agreed upon,” it is cer-
tainly a matter of quirks and chances. Pondering “what might have been” is 
seldom useful, but in this case, the temptation is hard to resist. How would 
the history of astronomy have been diff erent if V.M. had gone to the Univer-
sity of Chicago to do a Ph.D. in 1909?  At 34, and already a veteran of prac-
tical research with the spectroscope, he might have made a brilliant impres-
sion, and been recruited to a career at Yerkes—or even Mt. Wilson. If so, he 
might have eclipsed the achievements of young Edwin Hubble, who in 1909 
was still an undergraduate on the Hyde Park campus and soon to head to 
Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, specializing in the study of law and Spanish. 
On the other hand, it is equally possible that he would not have decided to 
study the nebulae at all but continued to investigate the spectra of the outer 
planets or Frost’s preferred area of study, the radial velocities of stars. 
And this brings us back to Percival Lowell. In truth, Slipher’s deci-
sion to study the nebulae was not spontaneously arrived at. It was the prod-
uct of one of many brilliant—if somewhat quirky—brainstorms of Percival 
Lowell. As so oft en has happened in the history of discovery, Lowell’s direc-
tive led not to the expected landfall but to a new and hitherto unsuspected 
continent, the demonstration of an expanding universe.
Despite his long-standing allegiance to the classical nebular hypothesis of 
Laplace, by 1905 Lowell had absorbed the au courant Chamberlin-Moulton 
hypothesis of the Solar System’s formation, according to which encounters 
among stars (many of them spent suns, dark stars roaming like “tramps” 
through space, in Lowell’s vivid phrase) might pull fi laments of gaseous 
material and debris from one of the stars to form a spiral nebula. Th e gases 
would then condense to form small particles—“planetesimals”—and the 
planetesimals would then, by accretion, form planets and satellites.
Th e Chamberlin-Moulton hypothesis had challenged Lowell’s 
Spencerian conviction of the inevitable advance of a nebula to planets in 
diff erent stages of life and, during at least part of their life cycle, to life-
forms including intelligent life as on the Earth and Mars. Now the Solar 
System was envisaged as beginning with a chance and haphazard event; the 

 194 
Galactic Encounters
inevitability of the origin of life-forms on which Lowell had counted for his 
Mars theories had been struck out. Nevertheless, Lowell, fi rst and foremost 
a literary man, at once sensed the inherent drama of the new scenario. 
While barely hinting at it when, a year aft er Chamberlin and Moulton 
published their hypothesis, he gave the Lowell Institute lectures in 1906 
(published as Mars as the Abode of Life), he developed the idea fully in MIT 
lectures given in February and March 1909, published as Th e Evolution of 
Worlds. Lowell pictured the more massive dark star on its approach rais-
ing giant tides in the other, tearing it to pieces and spreading the debris in 
antipodal directions along the line of their relative approach. And this, he 
claimed, was precisely what appeared in the spiral nebulae: 
The form of the spiral nebulae proclaims their motion, but one of its par-
ticular features discloses more. For it implies the past cause which set 
this motion going. A distinctive detail of these spirals, which so far as we 
know is shared by all of them, are the two arms which leave the centre 
from diametrically opposite sides. This indicates that the outward driving 
force acted only in two places, the one the antipodes of the other. Now 
what kind of force is capable of this peculiar eﬀ ect?  If we think of the 
matter we shall realize that tidal action would produce just this result….
Suppose, now, a stranger to approach a body in space near enough; 
… if the approach be very close, the tides will be so great as to tear the 
body in pieces along the line due to their action; that is, parts of the body 
will be separated from the main mass in two antipodal directions. Th is is 
precisely what we see in the spiral nebula. Nor is there any other action that 
we know of that would thus handle the body.34
 Ironically, Lowell’s deployment of features of the Chamberlin-
Moulton hypothesis led Moulton to mount a savage attack in which he 
practically accused Lowell of plagiarism. Aft erwards the two men were 
hardly on speaking terms. But already Lowell had put Slipher on the quest 
of vindicating his latest planetological scheme. Th us, on January 29, 1909, 
Lowell wrote to Slipher: “I think it might be fruitful if you were to make 
spectrograms with your red plates of a conspicuous green nebula (emis-
sion nebula) and then compare the lines as yet unidentifi ed with the known 
ones of the spectrum of the Major Planets. It occurs that the two may be 
possibly related.” Th en, on February 8, 1909, he sent another letter adding:: 
“I would like to have you take with your red sensitive plates the spectrum 
of a white nebula—preferably one that has marked centers of condensa-
tion.” Beneath his signature, he added two asterisked handwritten notes, 
“continuous spectrum” and “but I want its outer parts.” He was thinking 
that the outer parts might betray the formation of new planets and show 
dark bands like those Slipher had been recording in the spectra of the 

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 195
giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Among the fl urry of 
letters and requests, this was the really important one. But before Slipher 
could respond to these letters, there was further correspondence between 
the two men about many other matters. Slipher asked Lowell to send him 
and his brother E.C. to South America for the Mars opposition that year 
(eventually, Lowell declined). Th en Lowell sent another letter to Slipher 
with several numbered requests: “Cannot you manage to take the spectrum 
of the 3rd satellite of Jupiter now for the red end of its spectrum to bring 
out any telluric lines it may show?  I know it is diffi  cult but I think you can 
bring it about.” Also: “Did you ever publish your spectroscopic determina-
tion of Jupiter’s rotation showing how close you got to a visible one?” It was 
the end of February before Slipher could get back to Lowell’s letters about 
the green and white nebulae. A spectrogram of a green nebula would not 
be diffi  cult, he explained, since the light is concentrated at a few points. Th e 
faint white nebulae with their faint continuous spectra would be another 
matter, however, and here Slipher did not sound encouraging:
I do not see much hope in getting the spectrum of a white nebula 
because the high ratio of focal length to aperture of the 24-inch gives 
a very faint image of a nebula…. This would mean 30 hours with the 
24-inch for direct photograph, and as the dispersion of the spectrograph 
[should] be at least 100 times the slit-width in order to get detail, it would 
seem the undertaking would have to await the [40-inch] reﬂ ector.35
Th e 40-inch refl ector referred to here had been ordered by Low-
ell in order to push his Mars work to a new level, and to combat claims 
that the “canals,” though evident in smaller telescopes, disappeared with 
larger aperture telescopes. Here was another of Lowell’s brainstorms: in 
order to keep the telescope at uniform temperature, he had it mounted 
ten feet below ground. Th ough the telescope did in fact remain at uniform 
temperature, burying it underground proved disastrous, as a temperature 
inversion was created above the telescope causing terrible “seeing.” On the 
whole, the telescope was to prove a great disappointment—especially for 
planetary work. Slipher would never use it for nebular spectrographs. In 
any case, he realized that he did not need a large refl ector to obtain spec-
trograms of nebulae. Th e 24-inch Clark would do.
When Fath published his Ph.D. thesis on the spectra of the spiral 
nebulae in 1909, Slipher acknowledged, it “dulled somewhat the edge of 
my desire” to do work along that line. But when the two came face to face 
at the International Solar Union meeting in August 1910, they hit it off  at 
once. It probably helped that both had come from rural backgrounds. Fath 
was clearly encouraging, and when Slipher returned from Pasadena, he 
began thinking seriously about Lowell’s request that he try to capture the 

 196 
Galactic Encounters
spectrum of a white nebula. By November he had devised a single-prism 
spectrograph, “from equipment on hand,”36 which, he told Lowell, “requires 
only about a hundredth part of the exposure required by the three-prism 
arrangement.”37 In December, he succeeded in obtaining a spectrogram of 
the Great Nebula in Andromeda. It seemed to show faintly “peculiarities,” 
which had not been commented upon by earlier workers in the fi eld. Th is 
success showed him that he had been wrong in assuming that a large refl ec-
tor with a short focal length would be needed to make such observations. 
In fact, he later explained, “no choice of telescopes—as regards aperture or 
focal-length or ratio of aperture to focus—will increase the brightness of 
the spectrum of an extended surface.”38 Instead, what he needed now was 
a fast camera. Th is insight led to the technical breakthrough that would 
assure his success. Th ough, as he later learned from Fath, the same insight 
had been published by Keeler almost two decades before, it was much to 
his credit that he had worked it out independently on his own.
Th roughout 1911 and 1912 Slipher was oft en distracted by the 
mundane details of running the observatory when Lowell was away (and 
he oft en was in 1912, since Mars was not available for study and he was 
mostly in Boston working feverishly, with a team of human computers, 
trying to calculate a position for a trans-Neptunian planet, which he called 
“Planet X”; indeed, he worked so hard that at the end of the year, he suf-
fered another mental collapse, but fortunately it wasn’t as severe as that of 
1897, and he returned to work aft er seven weeks). Slipher’s main project 
that year was improving the observatory property, which included putting 
a fence around it, but he pursued his own research whenever he could and 
in September 1912 had equipped his spectrograph with the fast camera he 
had realized he needed. With this, a commercial Voigtlander F 2.5 camera 
lens, he expected to reach “something like 200 times the speed of the usual 
three-prism spectrograph.”
Now, with the faster spectrograph attached to the 24-inch Clark, 
Slipher, on September 17, 1912, made an exposure on the Andromeda 
Nebula of more than six hours. Up until now his chief concern had been 
“the nebular spectra themselves”—he was following along the lines of Fath’s 
dissertation work. But this spectrogram showed enough detail to make him 
think that a measure of the radial velocity of the nebula might be possible. 
Since, as noted earlier, Fath’s rather primitive wooden-box spectrograph 
did not allow comparison spectra to be made, but the rigid metal Brashear 
spectrograph had been designed for such a purpose, he was now pursuing 
an investigation that was completely new. At the time, the radial velocities of 
some 1200 bright stars and a few bright planetary nebulae had been mea-
sured; all these objects moved at speeds on the order of tens of kilometers per 
second. Th ough no radial velocities had been measured for the white nebulae 
or spirals, no on expected at the time that they would be much diff erent.39

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 197
Slipher made further attempts to obtain spectrograms of the Great 
Nebula in Andromeda on November 15-16 and December 3-4. Also in 
December, he achieved another momentous result—he obtained a good 
spectrogram of the nebula around the star Merope in the Pleiades, with 
a 21-hour exposure with the fast spectrograph. Previously, the Pleiades 
nebulosity, which had made the famous seven stars appear “like a swarm 
of fi refl ies tangled in a silver braid,” as the poet Tennyson wrote, had been 
assumed to be gaseous. However, Slipher’s spectrogram showed no trace of 
the emission lines associated with hot gas, but instead showed a continuous 
spectrum with exactly the same hydrogen and helium absorption lines that 
occur in the spectra of the hot young B-type stars of the cluster. Slipher 
correctly concluded that the Merope nebula was a refl ection nebula; that it 
consisted of “disintegrated matter [dust as we should now call it] similar to 
what we know in the solar system, in the rings of Saturn, comets, etc., and 
that it shines by refl ected starlight.”40 
At fi rst, and naturally enough perhaps, Slipher tried to use the Ple-
iades refl ection nebula as an analogy to what he was seeing in the Androm-
eda spectrograms. Th us, on December 28, 1912, he wrote to astronomer 
John C. Duncan, who had been a fellow at Lowell Observatory in 1905-06 
and had completed his Ph.D. at Lick under Campbell in 1909, “If this 
nebula [the Merope nebula] shines by refl ected light, why could not the 
nebula in Andromeda shine in the same way being lighted by a central sun 
obscured [sic] by the fragmentary material around it?”41
Th at same day, December 28, 1912, he began a heroic spectrogram 
of the Andromeda Nebula, exposing the plate over three nights and into 
the pre-dawn hours of January 1, 1913. Th e spectrum was continuous; i.e., 
there were absorption lines, which meant that the Great Spiral was star-like 
not gaseous. He also measured positions of some of these absorption lines—
including the celebrated H and K lines of ionized calcium—against those 
in an iron-vanadium spark comparison spectrum. Th e fi rst inkling of what 
he found came in his response to an overnight telegram from Lowell ask-
ing Slipher to rush materials, including a transparency of Halley’s Comet in 
1910, to him for an exhibit back East. “We shall get out the material for the 
exhibit as soon as possible,” he assured his boss, then added the bombshell. 
“… Since writing you before I have got another spectrogram of the Androm-
eda Nebula…. I feel safe to say here that the velocity bids fair to come out 
unusually high. I should be able to send you something defi nite soon.”42 
With classic understatement, Slipher had just announced what would prove 
to be one of the most momentous fi ndings in astronomical history.
Th e absorption lines in the spectrum of the Andromeda nebula 
(M31) were markedly shift ed toward the blue relative to those of the com-
parison spectra. Th is implied that, if the Doppler shift  was a valid indicator 
of radial velocity (at fi rst there were some doubts), M31 was approach-

ing the Earth with a velocity of 275 km/sec. Th e blueshift  of the lines was 
only 4 nanometers, but was readily measurable with Slipher’s equipment, 
and gave a velocity that was some three times that of any other object in 
the universe measured so far.43 Slipher could hardly believe his eyes!  Ever 
cautious, he spent two more weeks measuring and remeasuring the plates, 
and for good measure, sent a print to Fath as an independent check. At last 
he was satisfi ed that the result was real. He wrote to Lowell giving his fi nal 
value as 300 km/sec., and it has stood the test of time.44 Lowell wrote back: 
“It looks as if you had made a great discovery. Try some other spiral nebu-
lae for confi rmation.”45
Lowell’s wish was his command. In April 1913, Slipher obtained a 
spectrogram of M104 (NGC 4594), the dark-laned spindle-shaped “Som-
brero” spiral in Virgo. Th is time the absorption lines were shift ed far to the 
red, indicating that the nebula was not approaching but receding from the 
earth, at the almost inconceivable velocity of 1100 km/sec. “Th is nebula is 
leaving the solar system,” he told Lowell.46 By the end of the year, Slipher 
had obtained spectra of two more spirals, M77 (NGC 1068) and NGC 
4565. Th ey were also red-shift ed, 
with velocities of recession that 
were on the order of 1000 km/
sec away from the Earth. By the 
middle of 1914 he had obtained 
spectrograms of several more 
spiral nebulae, making 14 in all. 
He found that M31 and its com-
panion M32 were unique in having 
a negative velocity; the average 
velocity for all 14 was 400 km/
sec and positive. Th e high radial 
velocities for the spirals were pre-
sented in a paper read for him at 
the American Astronomical Soci-
ety meeting in Atlanta in Decem-
ber 1913. Henry Norris Russell, 
when he heard these results, was 
incredulous. Slipher read his own 
paper in August 1914, at its meet-
ing in Evanston, Illinois. He noted 
that some of the highest radial 
velocities had been obtained for 
NGC 3115, M104, NGC 4594, and 
5866, all of which were “spindle 
nebulae—doubtless spirals seen 
 198 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 9.9. Pleiades, “like a swarm of ﬁ reﬂ ies tangled in a 
silver braid.” The famous open cluster, located in Taurus 
at a distance of about 380 light years from us. As V.M. 
Slipher ﬁ rst showed in 1914, the Pleiades nebulosity 
is an example of a reﬂ ection nebula. The light from 
the bright B-type stars of the cluster is being reﬂ ected 
oﬀ  a dark cloud of interstellar dust which, in this case, 
does not represent material from which the stars have 
recently formed but an independent cloud drifting 
through the cluster at a relative speed of about 11 km/
sec. Imaged with a C-11 by Klaus Brasch.

 
 199
Fig. 9.10. (left) “Barnard’s Merope Nebula,” IC 349. This small area of exceptionally bright nebulosity was 
discovered by E. E. Barnard in 1890 with the 36-inch refractor at Lick Observatory. It is a reﬂ ection nebula 
like the other nebulosity of the Pleiades, and appears so bright because it lies extremely close—only 
about 0.06 light year—from the bright Pleiades star Merope.  The cloud is being ravaged by the intense 
radiation from the star. The parallel wisps are produced as radiation pressure from the star decelerates 
dust particles. The smallest particles are slowed the most, so there is a sifting of particles by size. The 
straight lines pointing toward Merope are streams of larger particles that are continuing on toward the 
star while the smaller decelerated particles are being left behind in the lower part of the picture. Courtesy: 
G. Herbig and T. Simon, NASA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
Fig. 9.11. (right) M104, the “Sombrero” Galaxy in Virgo. Image with the Discovery Channel Telescope. 
Courtesy: Lowell Observatory.
edge-on.” Th eir average velocity, 800 km, was greater than for the remaining 
objects. Th is suggested that the spirals might be moving “edge forward,” rather 
like plates, through some kind of resisting medium. At the conclusion of his talk, 
he announced yet another important result: when M104 had been observed with 
the slit parallel to its “spindle,” it had shown inclined spectral lines indicating that 
a measurable velocity of rotation, and he later showed that in nebulae with spiral 
arms, the central part of these nebulae were turning into the arms of the spiral as a 
spring turns in winding up. At the end of his short talk, Slipher received a standing 
ovation. Astronomers at least at that time were a generally staid and undemonstra-
tive bunch; this was the fi rst time any such spontaneous outbreak of enthusiasm 
had happened at an AAS meeting, and it would not happen again until 1951 when 
W. W. Morgan announced the discovery of the spiral arms of the Milky Way (see 
chapter 12). Despite the fact that he had been the star of the meeting, Slipher was 
modest and unassuming; in the group photograph of those in attendance meeting, 
he stands, obscured by others, at the end of the second row from the rear, while the 
young Edwin P. Hubble, who had not even begun graduate studies in astronomy 
yet (see chapter 11), stands self-confi dent and elegantly dressed in the fi rst row, 

 200 
Galactic Encounters
having strategically positioned himself 
near AAS president E.C. Pickering and 
vice presidents George C. Comstock 
and Frank Schlesinger. Th at photo 
speaks volumes about the personalities 
of the two men.
Slipher was, as expected, cau-
tious and tentative in interpreting his 
results, but Lowell, also characteristically, 
was more fl amboyant. According to 
the Chicago Tribune of March 23, 1913, 
Lowell, stopping en route to New York, 
had announced that “recent discover-
ies at the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff , 
Ariz., … tend to confi rm the hypothesis 
of the origin of solar systems… Th ese 
discoveries … show that many nebulae 
shine by refl ected light, and that these 
nebulae consist of clouds of star dust 
enveloped in gas. ‘Th is is the fi rst step in 
the evolution of the solar system,’ says 
Prof. Lowell’s statement.”47 However, as Slipher’s spectrograms accumulated, 
Lowell changed his mind, and in a talk on “Nebular Motion” given to the Mel-
rose Club in Boston on November 23, 1915, he announced that spiral nebulae 
were not solar systems aft er all, but “something larger, and quite diff erent, other 
galaxies of stars.” Th is address was never published, but Lowell said much the 
same in a talk, “Th e Genesis of Planets,” given to the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety of Canada in Toronto in April 1916 and published that summer: 
The birth of our present solar system was probably catastrophic. 
Two suns met and we were the outcome…. As to what subsequently 
occurred, we have no analogy to guide us, for the spiral nebulae indi-
cate themselves to be galaxies, not solar systems in course of construc-
tion.48
Sadly, within months of the publication of this paper, on Novem-
ber 12, 1916, Lowell—apparently just aft er exploding in anger at a ser-
vant—died unexpectedly, of a massive intracerebral hemorrhage. Aft er his 
boss’s death, Slipher continued to add more spectrograms to the database. 
In a 1917 paper tabulating the results for 25 spiral nebulae obtained up to 
that time, he noted that except for M31, M32, and M33 (all Local Group 
objects) the velocities were all positive. On the basis of this limited mate-
rial Slipher worked out that the Sun appeared to be moving in the direction 
Fig. 9.12. AAS group portrait, Evanston, Illinois, 
1914. E.C. Pickering is the stout man in the front 
and center, Edwin Hubble is also in the front row, 
second from right, and V.M. Slipher is in the next 
to last row, second from left (just below and to the 
left of the woman with the white hat). Courtesy: 
American Astronomical Society.

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 201
of right-ascension 22 hours and declination -22 degrees, with a velocity of 
about 700 km/sec. (Th e perceptive reader will note that this point is dia-
metrically opposite the constellation Virgo, whose abundant spiral nebulae 
belong to the Virgo Supercluster of galaxies.) “For us to have such motion 
and the stars not show it means that our whole stellar system [galaxy] 
moves and carries us with it,” he wrote, to which he added this extraordi-
nary conclusion: 
It has for a long time been suggested that the spiral nebulae are stellar 
systems seen at great distances. This is the so-called “island universe” 
theory, which regards our stellar system and the Milky Way as a great 
spiral nebula which we see from within. This theory, it seems to me, 
gains favor in the present observations.49
Slipher’s work provided provided strong evidence in favor of the 
view that spirals were extragalactic systems. He might have received more 
credit than he did at the time but for a new development. Just as his earlier 
work had been overshadowed in part by the controversies involving his boss, 
Slipher’s achievement was now obscured by another astronomer’s mistake. 
Van Maanen’s Detour
In 1916 Adriaan van Maanen, a Dutch astronomer at Mt. Wilson who 
specialized in the precise measurement of star positions on plates, began 
comparing plates of the spiral nebula M101 taken over intervals of sev-
eral years, and thought he could detect motions of knots in its spiral arms 
which suggested that it was in rotation. Subsequently, he published results 
for another spiral, including M33, in which the knots were more clearly 
defi ned than in M101. Th ough a rotational motion was not unexpected—
indeed had been suggested by the spiral form ever since Lord Rosse’s pio-
neering observations—the magnitude of the motions, on the order of 0.02 
arcsec/year, implied that if these spirals were indeed extragalactic systems, 
they must be rotating at speeds at or above the speed of light. Moreover, 
it was eventually realized (but not until 1924) that contrary to Slipher’s 
spectrographic results, van Maanen’s measures implied that the spiral arms 
were not winding up but unwinding.50 Th ough van Maanen’s results are 
now acknowledged to have been as illusory as the canals of Mars,51 they 
sowed confusion in the late nineteen-teens and early ‘twenties, and slowed 
the recognition of the extragalactic nature of the spirals for several years 
aft er Slipher demonstrated their high radial velocities.
During these years Slipher remained prominent in the study of 
nebulae, and in 1921 obtained his “personal record,” a spectrogram show-

 202 
Galactic Encounters
ing that NGC 584 in Cetus was receding at about 1800 km/sec, making it 
the fastest-moving object yet discovered.52 He was now reaching the limit 
of nebulae accessible to his spectrograph and the 24-inch refractor. He 
played a leading role on the Commission on Nebulae of the International 
Astronomical Union but was weighed down by worries he faced as direc-
tor of the Lowell Observatory in the years aft er Lowell’s death. Lowell’s 
litigious widow, Constance, refused to agree to the terms of the founder’s 
will, and started a lawsuit that was not settled until 1925. Of the part that 
remained aft er the lawyers were paid off , half went to her and the other half 
to support the observatory. As a result, for years aft erward, the observatory 
would be famously broke. At times staff  had to work without pay, and living 
conditions for assistant astronomers were appalling. In addition, Lowell’s 
nephew and Sole Trustee of the observatory, Roger Lowell Putnam, was 
urging Slipher and the other staff  astronomers to turn their hand to the 
rather uncongenial task writing a book on Mars (it was never completed, 
and they were granted a reprieve by Putnam on Clyde Tombaugh’s discov-
ery of Pluto in 1930—the fruit of another Lowellian enthusiasm, the search 
for “Planet X”—which probably saved the observatory from oblivion). 
Perhaps the diffi  culty of making ends meet and the fact that he 
had reached the limit of what his instrumentation allowed him to do in 
the nebular fi eld explains Slipher’s increasing neglect of astronomy. He 
continued to be a diligent, if not very creative, director, while at the same 
time turning more and more to business, managing rental properties and 
investing in Flagstaff ’s Monte Vista Hotel. He was very successful in these 
pursuits, and ended life as a very wealthy man (though signifi cantly, he did 
not leave any of his money to the observatory when he died).
Th ough he remained personally loyal to Percival Lowell and contin-
ued to support the idea that conditions on the planet could support lower 
forms of life, perhaps on the order of lichens, Slipher was not unaware of 
the fact that the observatory’s reputation had suff ered because of Lowell’s 
fl amboyance and penchant for controversy. He and his colleagues, E. C. 
Slipher and C.O. Lampland, published sparingly in later years. Th ey argu-
ably overreacted to the criticisms Lowell had faced by becoming overly cau-
tious. But this makes it sound as if Percival Lowell’s infl uence on them was 
entirely negative. Clearly, V.M. needed Percival Lowell’s stimulus. William 
Putnam III, the current trustee, says, “Uncle Percy was the cattle prod that 
kept V.M. Slipher productive.”53 Less colorfully, John S. Hall, in his obituary 
of Slipher in Sky & Telescope, put it this way:
Slipher and Lowell had complementary temperaments. The latter was 
brilliant, enthusiastic, and a driving personality…. Slipher, on the other 
hand, was deliberate, fastidious, patient, and showed a high order of 
technical knowledge.54

 
Chapter 9: The Nebula Is Leaving the Solar System 203
Each possessed something of what the other lacked. Together, 
they achieved one of the most paradigm-shift ing results in the history of 
astronomy. Th e discovery of the large radial velocities of the spiral nebulae 
was as unexpected as Becquerel’s discovery of radioactive, and made in the 
pursuit of an entirely diff erent result.
Th at result was the spectrographic validation of Percival Lowell’s 
now long-forgotten (and probably illusory) markings on the surface of 
Venus. Th e observatory, devoted to the study of the objects of the solar 
system, had come a long way from its eccentric frontier beginnings, and 
had unexpectedly blazed a trail far beyond the solar system in revealing 
the fundamental result that would underpin the modern concept of the 
expanding universe.
*   *   *
 1. Donald E. Osterbrock, “Th e Observational 
Approach to Cosmology: U.S. observatories 
pre-World War II,” in R. Bertotti, R. Balbinot, 
S. Bergia, and A. Messina, eds., Modern Cosmol-
ogy in Retrospect (Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1990), 247-289:289.
 2. Remington P.S. Stone, “Th e Crossley Refl ector: 
a centennial review-I,” Sky & Telescope, October 
1979, 307-311.
 3. For a full-length biography, see: Donald E. 
Osterbrock, James E. Keeler: Pioneer American 
astrophysicist. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1984. For Keeler as astronomical 
“Adonais,” see Donald E. Osterbrock, John R. 
Gustafson, and W.J. Shiloh Unruh, Eye on the 
Sky: Lick Observatory’s fi rst century. Berkeley, 
Los Angeles, and London: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1988.
 4. Osterbrock, “Observational Approach to Cos-
mology,” 255.
 5. Ibid.
 6. Boston Commonwealth, May 26, 1894.
 7. C. Flammarion, La Planète Mars et se conditions 
d’habitibilitè. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1892.
 8. Stephen J. Gould, “War of the Worldviews,” Nat-
ural History, 12/96-1/97, 22-33.
 9. William Graves Hoyt, Lowell and Mars (Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press, 1976), 106.
 10. Percival Lowell, “Detection of Venus’ rotation 
period and fundamental physical properties 
of the planet’s surface,” Popular Astronomy, 4 
(1896), 281-285; “Determination of the rota-
tion period and surface character of the planet 
Venus,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi-
cal Society, 57 (1897),148-149; “Th e rotation 
period of Venus,” Astronomische Nachrichten 
no. 3406 (1897), 361-364; “Venus in the light of 
recent discoveries,” 5 (1897), 327-343.
 11. A.E. Douglass to Daniel A. Drew, October 18, 
1899; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 12. Percival Lowell, ‘Venus in 1903.” Popular 
Astronomy, 12 (1904), 184-190.
 13. A.E. Douglass to W. H. Pickering, March 8, 
1901; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 14. A.E. Douglass to W. L. Putnam, March 12, 1901; 
Andrew Ellicott Douglass Papers, Special Col-
lections, University of Arizona Library.
 15. Percival Lowell to W.A. Cogshall, July 7, 1901; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 16. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, September 20, 
1901; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 17. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, October 7, 1901; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 18. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, January 4, 1903; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 19. Gale E. Christianson, Edwin Hubble: Mariner of 
the Nebulae (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Gir-
oux, 1995), 92.
 20. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, October 21, 
1901; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 21. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, October 28, 
1901; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 22. W.W. Campbell, “Mars” by Percival Lowell; 
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the 
Pacifi c, 51 (1896):207.
 23. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, December 18, 
1901; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 24. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, January 3, 1903; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 25. Percival Lowell to J.A. Brashear, October 6, 
1902; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 26. Percival Lowell, “Th e markings on Venus,” 
Astronomische Nachrichten, no. 3823 (1902), 
129-132.

 204 
Galactic Encounters
 27. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, November 5, 
1902; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 28. V.M. Slipher, “Spectrographic Investigation of 
the Rotation of Venus,” Lowell Observatory Bul-
letin 3, June 1903.
 29. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, March 23, 1903; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 30. Pol Swings, “Venus through a spectroscope.” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Soci-
ety, vol. 113 (1969).
 31. V.M. Slipher to W. W. Campbell, February 6, 
1909; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 32. E.B. Frost to V.M. Slipher, Dec. 24, 1908; Lowell 
Observatory Archives.
 33. V.M. Slipher to E.B. Frost, Dec. 31, 1908; Lowell 
Observatory Archives.
 34. Percival Lowell, Th e Evolution of Worlds (New 
York: Macmillan, 1909), 24.
 35. V.M. Slipher to Percival Lowell, February 26, 
1909; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 36. V.M. Slipher to E.A. Fath, December 5, 1910; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 37. V.M. Slipher to Percival Lowell, November 9, 
1910; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 38. V.M. Slipher, “Spectrographic observations of 
Nebulae”; paper presented at AAS meeting in 
Evanston, Illinois, August 1914.
 39. William Graves Hoyt, “Vesto Melvin Slipher, 
1875-1969,” Biographical Memoirs of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 52 (1980) (Wash-
ington, D.C.: National Academy Press), 411-
449:423.
 40. V.M. Slipher, “On the spectrum of the nebula in 
the Pleiades.” Lowell Observatory Bulletin, 2, 55 
(1913), 26-27.
 41. V.M. Slipher to John C. Duncan, December 29, 
1912; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 42. V.M. Slipher to Percival Lowell, January 2, 1913; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 43. V.M. Slipher to E.A. Fath, January 18, 1913; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 44. V.M. Slipher to Percival Lowell, February 3, 
1913; Lowell Observatory Archives. Th e result 
was published as: “Th e radial velocity of the 
Andromeda Nebula.: Lowell Observatory Bul-
letin, 2, 58 (1913), 56-57.
 45. Percival Lowell to V.M. Slipher, February 18, 
1913; Lowell Observatory Archives.
 46. V.M. Slipher to Percival Lowell, April 12, 1913; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 47. As noted in: Anne Minard, Pluto and Beyond: a 
story of discovery, adversity, and ongoing explo-
ration (Flagstaff , Arizona: Northland Press, 
2007), 41.
 48. Percival Lowell, “Th e Genesis of Planets,” Th e 
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of 
Canada, 1916 (July-August), 281-293:281.
 49. V.M. Slipher, “Nebulae,” Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society, 56 (1917), 403-
410.
 50. On van Maanen, see: Norriss S. Hetherington, 
Science and Objectivity: episodes in the history of 
astronomy (Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University 
Press, 1988), 83-110.
 51. A number of scholarly studies have attempted 
to resolve the question of how van Maanen 
could have erred. Th e most thorough study 
was carried out by Richard. Hart, “Adriaan 
van Maanen’s Infl uence on the Island Uni-
verse Th eory” (Dissertation, Boston University, 
1973). Th is work is summarized in Richard 
Berendzen, Richard Hart, and Daniel Seeley, 
Man Discovers the Galaxies. New York: Science 
History Publications, 1976. See, for instance, 
on p. 143: “the changes he was attempting to 
measure were at the very limits of precision 
of his equipment and techniques.” Also, on p. 
150: “A … computer analysis was performed in 
which various types of errors in measurement 
were assumed and incorporated into the com-
putational scheme actually employed by van 
Maanen. Th e analysis showed that a systematic 
error of only 0.002 mm in measuring the posi-
tions of points on photographic plates (i.e., on 
the order of the accuracy obtainable with the 
measuring engines) could produce the reported 
internal motions, provided the direction of the 
measurement error is such that it is consistent 
with the spiral features of the plate. Th at is, if 
van Maanen had a slight personal bias toward 
believing that the spirals were in rotation (a bias 
easily created merely by looking at a picture of 
a spiral), his results would refl ect this bias. Th is 
could account for the remarkable consistency 
of his results because the measurements made 
at the very limit of perceptibility are extremely 
sensitive to precisely such errors.” Ironically, 
there are many parallels between this sad epi-
sode and that of the canals of Mars. 
 52. V.M. Slipher, “Two nebulae with unparalleled 
velocities.” Lowell Observatory Circular, Jan. 17, 
1921.
 53. Quoted in Minard, Pluto and Beyond, 23.
 54. John. S. Hall, “V.M. Slipher’s trail-blazing 
career,” Sky & Telescope, 39, 2 (1970), 84-86.

205
Make no little plans; they have no magic to stir men’s blood…
 
 
—Daniel Burnham, Chicago architect
A
t the end of the 19th century, the largest telescope in operation was a 
refractor 40 inches in diameter. It ruled for a few years into the 20th 
century, when it was surpassed by the 60-inch refl ector—called the fi rst 
“modern” telescope—of Mt. Wilson Observatory.1 By the century’s end, the 
distinction of the world’s largest telescope would be shared by two giant 
refl ectors, Keck 1 and Keck 2, on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, with mirrors 394 
inches (10.4 meters) in diameter, while its most productive and awe-inspir-
ing would be the Hubble Space Telescope, a 94.5-inch (2.4 meter) refl ector 
orbiting in outer space above the tumultuous sea of the atmosphere of the 
Earth. 
Th e man who oversaw the transition from the era of great refrac-
tors to that of great refl ectors was George Ellery Hale. Undoubtedly the 
greatest astronomical entrepreneur of all time, Hale always dreamed big. 
He built the largest refractor of the refractor era, and the fi rst great refl ec-
tor of the refl ector era. He surpassed the latter with an even larger refl ector, 
and at the time of his death, he had dreamed up—and raised funds for—an 
even larger one. Each telescope he dreamed up and brought into realiza-
tion would be used by astronomers to push farther and farther into space. 
By the middle of the 20th century, those telescopes had surveyed the Milky 
Way and its sister systems, and had set cosmology, hitherto an arena for 
inconclusive speculation, well on the road to becoming an exact science.
Th e tale of how all this came about begins with a devoted father’s extraor-
dinary gift  to an extraordinary son.2 George Ellery Hale was a child of 
the “Gilded Age,” a scion of Chicago’s wealthy aristocracy. He was born in 
10.
Th e “Galactocentric” 
Revolution
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_10, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 206 
Galactic Encounters
Chicago in 1868, three years 
before the Great Fire that 
destroyed much of the city. His 
father, William Hale, “with the 
boundless energy and tenacity 
his son would inherit,” contrib-
uted mightily to building a new 
Chicago. In place of  “everlast-
ing sham, veneer, stucco, and 
putty,” a city of massive steel 
edifi ces, the forerunners of 
modern skyscrapers, rose on 
Lake Michigan. William Hale 
built the elevators that made the 
skyscrapers of Chicago possible.
By contrast, Hale’s 
mother, Mary, lived as a virtual 
recluse. She was always of deli-
cate constitution. Th e nature of 
her illnesses is not clear, but one 
of George’s earliest memories 
was “of the upstairs bedroom 
where his mother, a semi-invalid with thin lips, fi rm chin, and brown eyes 
deeply set in her gaunt face, spent most of her time.”3
George inherited his mother’s high-strung temperament, Calvin-
ist brooding, and depression, in combination with his father’s expan-
sive optimism and superhuman drive for achievement. While his father 
approved of George’s strivings aft er success, his mother fretted over him 
and worried about his stomach troubles, backaches, and fainting spells. At 
the nearby Oakland Public School, where George began his education, he 
was frequently sick, and aft er an attack of typhoid, which his doting par-
ents blamed on the school, they decided he must never return. At the age 
of 12 he was sent to the private Allen Academy, halfway between the Hales’ 
rented home in Kenwood and the center of Chicago.
Already in his pre-adolescence George Ellery Hale became a pre-
cocious dabbler in science, and was busy making observations with small 
microscopes and telescopes. All this activity worried his mother; she feared 
that “with his intensity and precocity, he would burn himself out early.”4 
Nevertheless, when young George decided he couldn’t live without his own 
research laboratory, he persuaded her to turn over to him the small room 
where she kept her dresses. In this “shop” he set up a Bunsen burner, bat-
teries, and galvanometers, and carried out thrilling chemical experiments 
such as pouring hydrochloric acid on zinc to form hydrogen gas.
Fig. 10.1. George Ellery Hale; from The World’s 
Work, 1912; accessed via Wikipedia Commons.

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 207
At 13 he installed a lathe in the shop, which he ran with a home-
made steam engine known as “the demon.” Fed by a second-hand boiler, 
it was capable of generating an eighth of a horsepower. It made the entire 
house shake; the steam pressure mounted “toward forbidden heights … 
the roar of the exhaust, mingled with the vibration of the speeding engine, 
brought joy to the excited engineers.”5 Th ough Hale’s mother, rushing 
on the scene and crying out in horror, was convinced that the speeding 
engine was about to explode, “for years,” as Hale’s biographer Helen Wright 
refl ects, “’the demon’ continued to run the lathe without mishap.”6
Hale too seemed to be driven by an inner speeding engine—a 
“demon,” whose workings were sometimes as terrifying and mysteri-
ous to others as the noisy workings of this steam-engine. Time and time 
again, those who knew him in these early days described him in terms that 
implied boundless energy, enthusiasm, restlessness, and drive. He was a 
perpetual-motion machine, possessed of “a driven power which was given 
no rest until it brought his plans and schemes to fruition,” according to a 
later observation by the British physicist James Jeans. “Excited over every-
thing he was doing, he continued to run from one scheme to the next.”7 
Friends and colleagues spoke always of “his restless energy and intensity,”8 
his hurry to do things, his inexhaustible curiosity, passion, and enjoyment 
of everything.
And yet, as with “the demon,” there was something unnerving 
about all this energy. Th e vibrations and the hissing of the steam engine, 
the shaking of the building, suggested a machine working near the limits 
of its capacity. Too presciently, Hale’s mother worried that, under similar 
high pressure, mounting “toward forbidden heights,” Hale too would break 
down or burn out.
While still in his teens, Hale had already started networking with astrono-
mers and instrument-makers near and far. Th e near included Chicago 
Court Reporter and amateur astronomer Sherburne W. Burnham, who 
spent nights searching for double stars with a 6-inch refractor mounted in 
a dome in South Chicago which his neighbors referred to as the “Cheese-
box,” and Dearborn Observatory’s Jupiter specialist George W. Hough. 
Th e far included Pittsburgh instrument-maker John Brashear, whom Hale 
traveled by train specifi cally to meet. In 1886, on recommendation of his 
father’s associate, the architect Daniel H. Burnham, he enrolled at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (then known as Boston Tech), where his 
classmates recognized him as someone who, on the rare occasions when 
he left  his lab to play tennis, played as he worked, at fever pitch. When he 
walked he seemed to run, and one of his classmates’ most vivid memories 
was of a small, slight fi gure tearing through the halls of “Tech,” across Cop-

 208 
Galactic Encounters
ley Square, his dark cape fl apping in the wind.9 However, he saw himself as 
morose and dissatisfi ed, and complained to a good friend that “though I 
slave steadily, I don’t accomplish a thing.”
Bored with his physics courses at MIT, Hale persuaded E.C. Picker-
ing at the Harvard College Observatory to allow him to spend Saturdays 
working at the observatory as a volunteer researcher. His family had, by 
then, moved into a large mansion at 4545 Drexel Boulevard in the Ken-
wood area of Chicago (it still exists, but has been converted into posh con-
dominiums). By the time Hale was a second year student at MIT, his father 
had built for him a spectroscopy lab on a vacant lot next to the home. His 
fi rst surge of scientifi c creativity occurred during in his last year at MIT. On 
one of his regular visits to Chicago, he was riding a tram past a picket fence, 
and in a fl ash of insight conceived the idea of designing an instrument to 
draw a slit aperture across the face of the Sun while a photographic plate 
was being moved synchronously over a corresponding slit at the other end 
of a spectrograph. Th is was the kernel of the idea of the spectroheliograph, 
which he developed for his senior thesis. It marked the beginning of what 
would be his consuming research interest, the Sun.
Hale graduated from MIT in 1890, and two days aft er his gradua-
tion married Evelina Conklin—their honeymoon included a trip to Lick 
Observatory to see the 36-inch refractor. Writing forty years later, Hale still 
recalled “his fi rst sight of that long tube, the largest telescope in the world, 
pointing up in the darkness of the great round dome toward the slit that 
seemed to him to be an opening into heaven.”10
Aft er considering and rejecting solid but unexciting and traditional 
job off ers to teach astronomy at colleges like Beloit College in Wisconsin 
(and accepting an unpaid position as professor at the latter, just for the title, 
though he was never in residence and never taught there), Hale decided 
that the best off er was to stay in Kenwood, where his father agreed to build 
him a private observatory, equipped with a 12-inch refractor, next to the 
family mansion. As one of the principal experiments of the new “Kenwood 
Observatory,” Hale hoped to perfect his spectroheliograph, which had the 
ability to image the Sun in one specifi c wavelength, such as that of ionized 
calcium or hot hydrogen gas. He was soon using it to photograph promi-
nences in the light of ionized calcium, and recording disturbed areas (fl oc-
culi) all over the solar disk. To follow up these important discoveries would 
have meant long hours at the telescope, but Hale never had the time or 
inclination for this dogged type of observing. Instead, he hired a full-time 
assistant, Ferdinand Ellerman, to do the routine work.
Meanwhile, in Hyde Park just south of the family mansion in Ken-
wood, the University of Chicago was taking shape with the fi nancial help 
of John D. Rockefeller, the most golden of the robber barons of the Gilded 
Age. Hale, the “young man in a hurry,” who was only 24, but whose assets 

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 209
included his own spectro-
scopic laboratory, private 
observatory, and wealthy 
father, naturally came to 
the attention of William 
Rainey Harper. As presi-
dent of the university at 
the age of only 35, Harper 
was hardly more than a 
boy himself, and signed 
Hale on as an associate 
professor in 1892. Hale 
made clear that this was 
only the fi rst—not the 
last—step of his ambi-
tions. “I would not con-
sider the thing for a moment,” he remarked, “were it not for the prospect 
of some day getting the use of a big telescope to carry out some of my pet 
schemes.” Indeed, he was soon angling for funds to build such a telescope. 
Already, he was showing a remarkable ability to raise funds for his 
projects. Somehow he managed to persuade the notoriously tight-fi sted 
elevated train magnate Charles Tyson Yerkes, nicknamed “the Boodler,” to 
pay for the lens of the largest telescope in the world, and one that would 
“lick the Lick.” (However, Yerkes would not pay for the mount or the lovely 
neo-Romanesque building in which the telescope would be installed, and 
John D. Rockefeller had to be “stung” for the remaining funds.) 
While it was being 
built, Hale suff ered from 
a great deal of anxiety 
over his “great observa-
tory,” and during the 
planning and execution 
was continually driving 
himself near the lim-
its of his strength. His 
main consolation during 
those stressful days was 
the Sun. Whenever he 
could, he hurried back 
to his beloved Kenwood 
telescope to observe it, 
and despite the pressures 
of setting up the great 
Fig. 10.3. Detail of masonry: John D. Rockefeller being “stung” 
for the money to complete the observatory. The “bee” was later 
removed. Photograph by William Sheehan, 2007.
Fig. 10.2. Dome of the Yerkes refractor. Photograph by William 
Sheehan, 2007.

 210 
Galactic Encounters
observatory, “in these glorious hours he was excited by everything he did.” 
In 1897, he saw the 40-inch refractor, still the largest telescope of its type, 
standing in its vast dome at the Yerkes Observatory on the shore of Lake 
Geneva in Wisconsin.
Th e offi  cial dedication was delayed aft er the elevator fl oor of the 
giant dome collapsed; miraculously, no one was injured, and the telescope 
survived unscathed, though the fl oor was completely wrecked, and had to 
be rebuilt. Th e dedication took place on October 21, 1897. Trustees, faculty 
(including Hale) and guests of the University of Chicago, 700 in all, arrived 
on special trains, and listened as Yerkes expressed his confi dence that “in 
your attempts to pierce the mysteries of the universe which are spread 
before you by our great Creator, the enthusiasm of your natures will carry 
you to success.” Keeler gave the main address on “Th e Importance of Astro-
physical Research to Other Physical Sciences.”11 “Th ere may be some,” he 
observed, “who view with disfavor the array of chemical, physical, and elec-
trical appliances crowded around the modern telescope, and who look back 
to the observatory of the past as to a classic temple whose severe beauty 
had not yet been marred by modern trappings.” Whatever the regrets, 
change was inevitable; mankind could not help “rushing forward with the 
utmost speed,” and astronomy—or rather its increasingly obstreperous 
stepchild astrophysics—could no longer concern itself entirely with “where 
the heavenly bodies were,” but had begun to consider “what they were.” But 
this was a task which required increasingly technical investigations into the 
structure of matter and the nature of radiation. 
During the fi rst year of the observatory’s existence, Hale joined in 
the work, “with his own boundless enthusiasm for everything he entered 
into … unable … to comprehend the indiff erent or perfunctory.” On one 
occasion, a comparatively laid-back European astronomer commented:
They work too hard at the Yerkes Observatory. Morning, afternoon, and 
night the work seems to go on continuously…. The center of it all is 
the 40-inch, which never rests. The whole performance is splendid, and 
strikes awe into the beholder if he happens to come from lands where 
folk still retain the mistaken idea that one ought to rest every now and 
then.12
As early as 1898, Hale already realized that the new, largest refractor 
in the world was really the wrong telescope in the wrong place at the wrong 
time. Th ough his personal research interest was the Sun, his energies as a 
scientist and entrepreneur of astrophysics encompassed the broader ques-
tion of stellar evolution.
As a youth he had hunted for fossils along the Lake Michigan shore, 
and absorbed the idea of a slowly evolving Earth together with Charles 

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 211
Darwin’s ideas about the origin of species. He imaginatively projected these 
principles on to a universe of evolving stars. Even at his private Kenwood 
Observatory, and more so at Yerkes, he saw the observatory as a special 
kind of physical laboratory adapted to the solution of this great problem. 
He also grasped that the future lay not with the refractor but the refl ec-
tor, and so even before the 40-inch had seen fi rst light, he asked his father 
to purchase for him a huge disk of high-quality glass for a mirror around 
which to build a large-aperture refl ector, which could feed a large, fi xed, 
fl exure-free spectrograph, and which he could erect on a clear-sky moun-
tain-peak. As the last major gift  of a doting father to his son, William Hale 
paid for George to acquire a magnifi cent 60-inch glass disk from the Saint-
Gobain glassworks in Paris. A piece of glass of any size is a far cry from a 
fi nished telescope, and Hale did not know where the money would come 
from to bridge the gap, but he was a gambler with a vision, banking on his 
certainty that a way would be found. 
At least he had some idea of who might fashion the glass disk into 
the mirror of a great telescope. Some years earlier, he had met George 
Willis Ritchey at a local astronomical meeting. Only a few years older than 
Hale, Ritchey at the time was a high-school woodworking teacher with a 
young wife, an infant daughter, and a second child on the way. In the spare 
time remaining aft er work and family he worked in a small home shop he 
called his astronomical laboratory, quietly reinventing the refl ecting tele-
scope. In 1896—the same year Hale acquired the 60-inch glass disk—Hale 
hired him away from his teaching job to join him at Yerkes. An obsessive 
perfectionist, just as one would expect of a meticulous instrument-maker, 
Ritchey brought with him to Yerkes a superb 24-inch mirror he had made 
in his home workshop, and spent the next four years putting it at the heart 
of an exceptionally fast (short focus) telescope with a sturdy fork mount. 
When it became operational, he used it to make a series of astronomi-
cal photographs, some of which surpassed anything that had been done 
before. Clearly, this was a prototype for the 60-inch Hale dreamed of, and 
just as clearly, Ritchey was the man to help him realize his dream.
When, in 1901, the multimillionaire Andrew Carnegie sold the Carnegie 
Steel company to J.P. Morgan for $480 million and then decided to give 
everything away—along with other philanthropies, he proposed to set up 
a lavishly funded “institution” to fi nance research and discovery—Hale’s 
die was cast. He now began planning in earnest to found a remote observ-
ing station of Yerkes Observatory in California, to be centered on the new 
60-inch refl ector. In June 1903, he visited Wilson’s Peak, near Pasadena, 
whose exceptional seeing had been known ever since W.H. Pickering had 
prospected the site for Harvard College Observatory and placed a tempo-

 212 
Galactic Encounters
rary observing station there in 1889-90. Hale decided that this was where 
he wanted to build his new observatory. 
To others at the time, Hale could seem impetuous and mercu-
rial. Lick Observatory double-star astronomer William J. Hussey wrote 
to his director, W. W. Campbell, “It appears that Hale’s characteristic is 
to seize one idea and to forget all the rest; to oscillate from one point of 
view to another. One day he thinks Mt. Wilson the best site in the United 
States—the next he wants Flagstaff  tested; and a day later … he thinks San 
Bernardino Mountains fulfi ll conditions.” Hale returned to Chicago in very 
high spirits indeed, and wrote to John S. Billings: “Th ere is certainly no 
observatory site at present known which seems to off er the advantages … at 
Wilson’s Peak.”13 But soon aft erwards, the executive Committee on Astron-
omy of the Carnegie Institution shelved his recommendation for a “solar 
observatory,” as he had called it, at Wilson’s Peak—in part because the proj-
ect had seemed too “grandiose.” Hale now became gloomy and depressed, 
his future plans “far from clear,” apart from his certainty that wherever they 
led, they would one day lead him back to California. In time, his prospects 
improved again. Carnegie awarded him $10,000— a fraction of what he 
would need, but it kept his dream alive. On arriving back in California in 
December 1903, his depression quickly vanished. His wife and children 
joined him there; henceforth he would not return to Yerkes Observatory 
except during the summers. “I do not believe it possible that I could ever 
tire of such glorious conditions,” he wrote.14 He bloomed with the eternal 
sunshine, the eff ects of which were exhilarating, and was oft en in the com-
pany of the attractive Los Angeles socialite Alicia Mosgrove. When they 
were together, he said, the “problems of his life seemed to vanish.”
At the Mount Wilson Solar Observatory, a self-contained research 
center, which Hale eventually succeeded in separating from Yerkes Obser-
vatory and the University of Chicago, his career paralleled his father’s and 
other industrial capitalists’—though in science rather than in business. Th e 
“second industrial revolution” of the late 19th century, which in America 
spanned the period between the Civil War and the First World War, “was 
entwined with the shift  from the disorganized entrepreneurial capitalism 
of the earlier nineteenth century to the organized capitalism of our time.” 
It was also marked by the “rationalization of economic life—the drive 
for maximum profi ts through the adoption of the most effi  cient forms of 
organization moving into higher gear.”15 Even at Yerkes, he had begun to 
learn how to become a “master of operating a monopolistic observatory.”16 
He recognized that the application of spectroscopy to the study of celestial 
bodies, the emergence of astronomical photography, and the availability 
of silvered mirrors for building large refl ecting telescopes were creating 
“boom” conditions for astrophysics—the new blend of astronomy and 
physics which exhilarated him. It was a period of remarkable opportu-

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 213
nity in science analogous to the one his father and other titans of Chicago 
enterprise had exploited in the post-Civil War era in American business, 
an opportunity that would respond to some of the same methods of large-
scale organization.
In science Hale was, with a few others, such as E. C. Pickering at 
Harvard and W. W. Campbell at Lick, foremost in recognizing the possibil-
ity of creating “a monopolistic observatory, the biggest and most successful 
in the world, and in organizing combines, in the form of scientifi c societies 
and international unions.”17 He would—especially at Mt. Wilson —become 
the chief architect of this transformation of American science, a trans-
formation from a confused and fragmented activity, in which individuals 
such as Burnham, Barnard, Henry Draper and Hale’s own optician Ritchey, 
could still play a role, to big science, corporatized science, in which the 
individual was subordinate to, if not crushed by, large institutions and 
massed resources. It was this transformation of science—paralleled in 
industry and social life—in which Hale emerged as a Promethean fi gure.
At the center of his vision was the 60-inch telescope. Aft er the 
fi rst $10,000 from Carnegie ran out, Hale supplemented it with an addi-
tional $15,000 from his own pocket, betting that the Carnegie Institution, 
of whose scientifi c advisory committee Hale was now himself a member, 
would eventually agree to his plan for a mountaintop astrophysical obser-
vatory to the study of the Sun and the problem of stellar evolution. To 
complement the solar work, it would include a large refl ecting telescope 
for high-resolution spectroscopy of stars. Late in 1904, as his expenses and 
his worries mounted, he had still not received Carnegie’s support. Finally, 
to his great relief, he learned that Carnegie had granted him $150,000 a 
year for two years to establish his observatory, and this Carnegie grant 
opened a fl oodgate. Hale’s California plans, held in abeyance for much of 
the previous year, now tumbled out. Th e “Mount Wilson Station of the 
Yerkes Observatory” became the “Mount Wilson Solar Observatory”; Hale 
resigned as director of Yerkes (and was succeeded by Edwin B. Frost), and 
gave up his faculty post at the University of Chicago. He also took with him 
much of the “fi rst team” at Yerkes: Ritchey, Ferdinand Ellerman, his one-
time assistant at the Kenwood Observatory who became the fi rst of a line 
of legendary observers at Mt. Wilson, and Walter S. Adams, a pioneering 
spectroscopist. He took a 99-year lease on forty acres of the summit, and 
purchased the property on Santa Barbara Street in Pasadena where he built 
a permanent home for the observatory’s support facilities. On the moun-
tain, living quarters were improved, and the Snow solar telescope—the fi rst 
of the mountain’s permanent solar instruments—was moved there from 
Yerkes and put into operation. 
Hale used a 5-foot spectroheliograph with the Snow telescope and, 
with Ellerman, showed that the bright hydrogen fi laments known as fl oc-

 214 
Galactic Encounters
culi, which showed up in H-alpha photographs, oft en clustered around 
sunspots like the iron fi lings around the poles of a magnet. Th e Snow 
telescope, however, proved diffi  cult and balky to use, and was superseded 
by a 60-foot solar tower telescope, completed in 1907 (and still in use). Th e 
60-foot solar tower was used by Hale to make an ingenious series of obser-
vations leading to his greatest discovery—the splitting of spectral lines into 
doublets, known as the Zeeman eff ect, in sunspots, which suggested that 
they were the seat of strong magnetic forces.18 Published in 1908, this result 
was hailed as the greatest discovery in solar physics, and led to his being 
nominated for the Nobel Prize in physics (but he never received it; it was 
the one honor he would never receive).
At the time of the Carnegie grant, the 60-inch mirror—stalled for 
several years aft er Ritchey had completed the fi rst fi ne grinding—remained 
in the optical shop at Yerkes, but the glass belonged to Hale, who had 
off ered it to the University of Chicago on the condition that it provide a 
mounting and a dome. Th e university had plans for neither, and Hale now 
repossessed the mirror. He settled with the university for costs incurred 
for any work done on it thus far, and signed it over to the Carnegie Insti-
tution. He also instructed Ritchey, who had not yet come west, to send it, 
post-haste, to Pasadena. Ritchey did so, aft er designing for it a special case, 
equipped with double sets of heavy steel springs, to smooth its ride over 
the Continental divide as it wended its way from chilly Wisconsin to sunny 
southern California.
Th e contracts for the large steel and cast-iron parts of the mounting 
which Ritchey had also designed were awarded to the Union Iron works of 
San Francisco, which also won the contract for the 60-inch dome. As the 
large pieces were churned out in Union’s factory on the shore of San Fran-
cisco Bay, the mounting was assembled for testing. It survived, miraculously 
undamaged, the devastating 1906 earthquake and fi re that destroyed much 
of the city. Th e telescope was then disassembled, packed, and shipped to the 
Santa Barbara Street shops, where the huge parts were machined to a perfect 
fi t, the intricate driving clock assembled, the gearing cut, and the complex 
mirror support system fabricated, transforming more than twenty tons of 
castings and steel assemblies into an instrument of exquisite perfection. 
When the project had started, the best route up Mt. Wilson was 
a little more than a trail, in places as narrow as two feet, used by hikers 
who wished to spend a few days roughing it at one of two camps near the 
summit (and the occasional itinerant astronomer like E. E. Barnard who 
assailed it with telescopes in tow). Th e trail was now widened to 10 feet to 
make it ready for a specially designed truck, driven by an electric motor 
at each of its four wheels, to carry the heavy pieces of the 60-inch up the 
mountain. Th e truck worked well, though mule teams that continued to 
carry everyday provisions and the lighter parts of the telescope to the sum-

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 215
mit were oft en called in to provide a “power assist.” All the while Ritchey, 
ever the perfectionist, was toiling over the mirror in the optical shop, 
which had been designed with every precaution against contaminating 
dust that could insinuate itself into the polishing and scratch the mirror’s 
surface. Windows were double-sealed, the air fi ltered, walls and ceilings 
heavily shellacked; canvas baffl  es hung above the grinding machine, and 
the fl oor was kept constantly damp—measures that were the equivalent of 
the fi rst sterile surgical operating rooms. On a morning in mid-April 1907, 
just as only fi nishing touches remained, the mirror was found to be covered 
with scratches—a mystery that has never been explained—and Ritchey had 
to rework the mirror to perfection. He was fi nally satisfi ed late in 1908 that 
the mirror was perfect enough to be received in the mounting and dome 
which were fi nished and waiting.
Th e fi rst visual observations were made on December 13; the fi rst 
plates exposed a few nights later. Ritchey knew at once he had achieved a 
masterpiece. Unfortunately, he became possessive of it; he was reluctant to 
open the completed instrument to the scientifi c staff , who for their part were 
chomping at the bit to begin the many long-range scientifi c programs, such 
as obtaining high-resolution spectrographs of stars, they had planned for it. 
Even before the 60-inch 
was completed, Hale had 
arranged for the casting of an 
even larger glass blank, which 
Ritchey was to grind and polish 
for a 100-inch telescope. But 
now strains began to develop 
between the two men, which 
would lead to Ritchey’s dis-
missal aft er he completed work 
on the 100-inch mirror in 1917. 
Hale himself, meanwhile, was 
headed toward a breakdown. 
For several years, his friends 
and colleagues had been con-
cerned about the toll that run-
ning a scientifi c corporation 
had been taking on him. Aft er 
the 60-inch was placed in work-
ing order, his colleagues Geor-
gio Abetti and Harold Babcock 
noted that work on the moun-
tain seemed to be moving “at 
an extraordinarily rapid pace.” 
Fig. 10.4. Sixty-inch reﬂ ector, ready for a night of 
observing Mars at the Newtonian focus. Photo-
graph by William Sheehan, 2005.

 216 
Galactic Encounters
Only to Hale did the progress seem painfully slow. Aft er leaving Yerkes, 
he had once again founded the greatest observatory in the world; he was 
absorbed in research on the magnetic fi elds of sunspots, was full of plans 
to revive the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., and was 
scheming to transform the Th roop Polytechnic Institute in Pasadena into 
a technological university that would be the West Coast equivalent of MIT 
(he did; Th roop became Caltech). He also dreamed of establishing an orga-
nization for astronomy on an international scale (the Solar Union). He had 
been working at top speed, without relaxing. Now, however, the vibrations 
and shaking of the engine, “the demon,” within him were becoming more 
evident. He told staff  astronomer Babcock that he was having “terribly hard 
dreams.” To the pioneer English spectroscopist William Huggins he con-
fi ded: “Last summer I had a great deal of trouble from nervousness, and my 
physician told me I ought to give up my work.” He ignored his physician’s 
advice for a time, seemed to recover for a while, but was soon incapacitated 
again by headaches, bouts of indigestion, and chronic insomnia. He found 
himself unable to concentrate for any length of time.
Th e crisis came in 1910. Mt. 
Wilson benefactor Andrew Carnegie 
and paleontologist Henry Fairfi eld 
Osborn paid a visit to the observa-
tory. Osborn observed with Hale till 
two o’clock in the morning with the 
60-inch. During a pause, Osborn 
turned to Hale and said: “Th is is grand, 
but I am worried about one thing.” 
Hale: “What’s that?” Osborn: “Why, 
the most precious instrument, and 
the one most diffi  cult to replace…. 
George Ellery Hale.” Hale admitted 
he was tired, but was dismissive of 
Osborn’s concerns; all he needed was 
a good fi shing trip, then he would be 
rested and recovered for the Interna-
tional Solar Union meeting he planned 
for August 1910 at Mt. Wilson. But 
he overestimated his powers of recu-
peration. At the meeting, which was 
a virtual “coming out” party for the 
60-inch, with astronomers and astro-
physicists coming from all over the 
world to admire the great telescope, 
Hale appeared for only one day. Unable 
Fig. 10.5. Smiling Hale at the International Solar 
Union meeting at Mt. Wilson, 1910. Soon after this 
photograph was taken, Hale suﬀ ered a mental 
breakdown. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 217
to face work or people, he hid with the shades drawn in his offi  ce, cower-
ing under his desk, before departing precipitately with his wife for a fi shing 
trip to Lake Tahoe where he hoped to pull himself together again. Again, 
he overestimated his powers of recuperation. In a near-panic, he moved 
restlessly on to Oregon and more fi shing before heading off  to Europe with 
Evelina, in order to “travel about as [they] might choose, to new places and 
old, avoiding all scientifi c men and institutions, and renewing youth in a 
second wedding journey.” Th e mention of “renewing youth” sounds almost 
pathetic in a man only 42 years old (the same age as Keeler when he died). 
In fact, he was worse off  than he cared to admit; in England, astronomer 
David Gill found him “looking exceedingly ill and suff ering from severe 
nervous pains and noises in his head, symptoms that demanded rest from 
all excitement.” Having as their eventual destination Egypt, which Hale 
adored, the couple traveled on to Paris, where Hale worried about the 100-
inch disk being cast at the Saint Gobain glass works, and on to Mentone, in 
southern France, where Hale had a strange experience, intimately tied up 
with the severe anxious depression he later referred to as his “breakdown.” 
His biographer Helen Wright described the appearance of a “little elf,” 
which Hale connected with a ringing in his ears.19 Th is phrase suggests a 
hallucinated vision, and Miss Wright seemed to believe he really saw an elf. 
Th ere is, however, little justifi cation for that. What Hale actually had expe-
rienced is described in a 1911 letter written in Rome on the way back from 
Egypt, where he refers to a demon not an elf, and where the term is clearly 
meant to serve as a metaphor for his depression:
I have reached a stage where it seems almost impossible to keep inter-
ested in anything—except, of course, the forbidden things in my own 
line forcing themselves upon me. Until I got back from Egypt I was able 
to read, with pleasure, a great variety of books. But now I can’t keep my 
mind on the subject, as a little demon stands by my side, and every few 
minutes prods me with the suggestion that, after all, the book is not 
interesting, and that all my attention belongs to him…. If I could only do 
a little of my regular work there would be no diﬃ  culty. But work excites 
me and sets the back of my head to aching, and so appears to be out of 
the question.20
On his return from Egypt, Hale fi nally did as Evelina and his 
personal physician, James H. McBride, had been encouraging him to do, 
and checked himself into an asylum in Bethel, Massachusetts run by an 
acquaintance of McBride’s, Dr. John G. Gehring. In the same fanciful vein 
in which he had personifi ed his depression as a “little demon”, Hale wrote a 
rather tormented letter he wrote to McBride soon aft er his arrival in Bethel, 
in which he sounds hardly sane:

 218 
Galactic Encounters
Mon Cher (mais, helas!—ci-devant—) Maître
There can be no doubt that I have fallen into the hands of a most 
dangerous and malevolent Seer and Magician. Whatever sympathy you 
might have for him—your Rival—will be swept away by the logic of my 
narrative, and you will be forced to grind your teeth in impotent rage. 
For willing as I am to admit and to maintain the superiority of the Great 
Muldoon [i.e., William Muldoon, 1852-1933, professional wrestler and 
physical culturist] as the Exalted Head of a Kur Ost, I have yet to learn of 
any pretensions on his part to magic art. Would that he possessed it in 
triﬂ e measure, that he might ﬂ y to my aid and break the shackles that 
bind me to the Fiend!  But I must unfold the tissue of deviltry that has 
been so about me since the ill-fated day I left the Abode of Peace, now 
so far away….
Yesterday morning I made my ﬁ rst visit to my future abode [i.e., Geh-
ring’s sanitarium]. As I approached the end of the street, I saw two great 
gate-posts of stone and on them was written “Per me si na villa citta 
dolente.” But through the Necromancer’s art the meaning of these words 
was hidden, and as I entered I seemed to be in Elysian Fields, decked out 
with four trees and covered with green sward. The grim realities of the 
Dungeons were also concealed by a goodly Castle, with large and pleas-
ant rooms, well set with chairs and couches and not lacking in many 
and good books to charm the unwary reader. Anon the Wizardess [Mrs. 
Gehring] appeared…. Then came the Wizard [Gehring] himself, and his 
piercing eye transﬁ xed my very soul.21
What Hale called his “head troubles” continued the rest of his life, 
and led to his resignation as director of Mt. Wilson Observatory in 1922. 
Walter S. Adams, who had served as assistant director for a number of 
years, succeeded him. In his resignation letter, Hale detailed his medi-
cal history and problems from his “preliminary nervous attack” in 1908 
through his severe breakdown in 1910, and estimated he had not enjoyed 
one-third working capacity during the previous sixteen years. He later 
admitted another reason for stepping down: “I have never been skillful 
in carrying on steady … work,” he told J. C. Merriam, the director of the 
Carnegie Institution. “In fact, I am a born adventurer, with a roving disposi-
tion that constantly urges me toward new long chances.” As soon as he had 
resigned, he set out for his beloved Egypt, and while he was there, Howard 
Carter made the sensational discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamen.
As 1924 began, Hale could only endure life by avoiding other 
people. He did succeed in nerving himself to take part in the dedication of 
the National Academy of Sciences building, but during the fi nal prepara-
tions he was unable to stand the strain; as he had done at the International 
Solar Union meeting at Mt. Wilson, he fl ed—this time to New York City. 

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 219
Th e doctors there diagnosed him as suff ering from high blood pressure 
and being in a “psychoneurotic state.” At the same time, he was fund-
raising again—this time for an even larger telescope than the 100-inch. He 
succeeded in raising a fund of six million dollars for a 200-inch telescope, 
whose completion, as he must have known, he would not live to see.
Hale desperately tried to fi nd relief in travel and by reliving the tri-
umphs of his youth. He  built his own private solar observatory, decorated 
with Egyptian motifs. It was a new version of the Kenwood Observatory 
his father had once built for him. Having earlier tried two stints at Dr. John 
G. Gehring’s sanitarium in Bethel, Massachusetts, without much benefi t, 
in 1927 he gave Dr. Austen F. Riggs’s sanitarium at Stockbridge, Massachu-
setts, a try. It was then as now an asylum for the very wealthy. Th e course of 
treatment included a strict vegetarian diet, which helped his blood pres-
sure; his head, alas, remained “about the same.”
During the last decade of his life, he spent much of his time at his 
private solar observatory; going to his lab there automatically meant get-
ting away from his wife, and with its pleasant library and solar spectrohe-
liograph in the basement, with which he could indulge his own research, it 
became a refuge from the anxieties, bouts of depression, and psychoneu-
roses with which he had so long contended. Th e grail of his research was 
trying to detect  the existence of the Sun’s general magnetic fi eld, which 
he thought he had discovered in the 1910s. It proved elusive (later, when 
Harold and Horace Babcock did detect it, using photomultiplier tubes and 
electronic circuits undreamed of in Hale’s scientifi cally active years, it was 
found to be much weaker than Hale had supposed; his earlier result had 
been an illusion). Happiness proved no less elusive than the Sun’s general 
magnetic fi eld. His checkbooks, found in the solar observatory aft er his 
death, contained receipts of payments almost all of which went to psychia-
trists. Th e psychiatrists seem to have done him no good. He complained 
that he had “very little energy,” and “was accomplishing almost nothing.” 
Aft er suff ering a mild stroke on a train near Toronto in 1936, his wife and 
brother brought him back to Chicago and then on to Pasadena. Described 
guardedly by family members as oft en “disturbed” or “confused,” he spent 
the last year and a half of his life as a patient in Las Encinas Sanitarium. 
Th ere, in 1938, the entrepreneur of modern astronomy passed quietly away. 
One of the fi nest tributes to his almost superhuman achievements was paid 
to him by Allan Sandage, one of the outstanding observers who used the 
Hale telescope at Mt. Palomar: “Th e longer I work in astronomy the more 
overpowering is the conviction that we owe all to Hale and his dreams 
and positive actions to put those dreams into glass and steel. Where would 
world astronomy be today if Hale had not been an ‘empire builder.’”22 But 
there was a price to be paid. His greatness in organizational matters came 
at a tremendous cost in mental anguish—or perhaps the greatness and the 

 220 
Galactic Encounters
anguish were two aspects of the 
same thing, the makeup of his 
own mind. Certainly he had 
breakthrough ideas, and none 
of his contemporaries suc-
ceeded as he did in making his 
dreams of big telescopes and 
great observatories come true.
Until the appearance of the 
60-inch, Mt. Wilson had 
belonged to the daytime astron-
omers who used two large solar 
telescopes that comprised the 
observatory’s fi rst scientifi c 
apparatus. But the arrival of 
the big refl ector initiated a new 
era not only in the scientifi c 
life of the observatory, but also 
in its social life which, as long 
as observing had focused on 
the Sun, had been regulated by 
its risings and settings. Walter 
S. Adams, recounting those early days when work was done by sunset, 
recalled nightly gatherings for cards and conversation in the “Monastery”—
the astronomers’ communal living quarters, whose name was inspired 
by the monasteries of the 
Levant, and from which even 
the astronomers’ wives were 
banished on the grounds that 
their presence would interfere 
with the great work being done 
there. He wrote that “Hale’s 
amazing breadth of interests, 
his great personal charm, and 
his stories of important fi gures 
in science and national aff airs 
make those evenings stand out 
in memory.” But with the arrival 
of the 60-inch, this convivial 
routine was largely undone by 
the introduction of night-work. 
Fig. 10.7. Harlow Shapley. Painting at Harvard College 
Observatory. Photograph by William Sheehan, 2004.
Fig. 10.6. A lovely terra cotta model at Mt. Wilson 
for Caltech bust of Hale. This model makes clear 
the massiveness of Hale’s frontal lobe, a feature 
that may help explain why he was so forward-
looking and such a visionary. Photograph by Wil-
liam Sheehan, 2005.

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 221
Adams recalls the Smithsonian Institution’s solar observer Charles Gree-
ley Abbot’s “pathetic lament” that the 60-inch telescope had “spoiled” the 
mountain.
When the 60-inch refl ector fi rst went into operation in 1908, the 
standard view of the Galaxy was that off ered at the turn of the century by 
the Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn. As William Herschel had done in 
1785 in proposing his “grindstone model of the universe,” Kapteyn relied 
on star counts, but because he did not know about the eff ects of extinc-
tion of starlight by interstellar dust, he could still regard the Galaxy as a 
small disk of stars. He estimated that it measured a mere 4000 parsecs long 
by 100 parsecs wide, and like Herschel’s “grindstone” (and for the same 
reasons) Kapteyn’s universe remained centered on a point at or close to 
the Solar System—a fact that made even Kapteyn himself uncomfortable, 
given how poorly geocentric and anthropocentric models had fared in the 
past (remember Copernicus!). As he wrote in 1909 in an article “On the 
Absorption of Light in Space”:
We may conclude that if there is a thinning-out of the stars for an 
increased distance from the Sun, it must be so in whatever direction 
from the Sun we proceed. This would assign to our Sun a very excep-
tional place in the stellar system, viz., the place of maximum density.
On the other hand, if we assume that the thinning-out of stars is 
simply apparent and due to absorption of light, the apparent thinning-
out in any arbitrary direction is perfectly natural.23
It was Kapteyn’s smallish star-system that Hale set out to investigate 
with the 60-inch refl ector. Between 1909 and 1914, Kapteyn himself spent the 
summers as a research associate on Mt. Wilson, staying in a small residence 
still known as Kapteyn cottage, and served as Hale’s most infl uential adviser.
Th e most important work ever done with the 60-inch refl ector 
was that of Harlow Shapley, who came to Mt. Wilson in 1914 as a recently 
minted Princeton Ph.D. Th en aged 29, he had already traveled “by rugged 
ways to the stars,” the title he would later give to his (rather gossipy) auto-
biography. Born one of a set of fraternal twins in 1885 on a farm outside 
the small town of Nashville, Missouri, on the edge of the Ozarks, Shapley’s 
formal education was acquired in a one-room schoolhouse whose teacher 
was his older sister Lillian and, he recalled, from reading the Sunday edi-
tion of the St. Louis Globe-Democrat. When at 15 he left  home to enter 
business school in Pittsburg, Kansas, he had the equivalent of a fi ft h grade 
education. Aft er fi nishing the course he signed on as a crime reporter for 
a newspaper in the small town of Chanute, Kansas then in the midst of 
an oil boom and boasting a Carnegie Library in which he broadened his 
education. He added a stint as police reporter in Joplin, Missouri, a lead 

 222 
Galactic Encounters
and zinc town, before he decided to do as his sister had urged and get a col-
lege education. Aft er two semesters at the Carthage Collegiate Institute, he 
gained admission to the University of Missouri, in Columbia, intending a 
career as a newspaperman. Finding, however, that the journalism course in 
which he wished to enroll had been delayed a year, he became an “acciden-
tal astronomer”—opening up the university catalogue to decide on a course 
of study, he claimed (but surely in jest) that since he didn’t even know how 
to pronounce the fi rst entry, “archaeology,” he settled on the course listed 
on the next page, “astronomy,” which he could pronounce. 
Aft er a slow start, Shapley’s pace quickened, and he was soon mak-
ing dizzying progress up the ladder of academic success. He completed his 
B.A. with highest honors in 1910, only three years aft er arriving on campus, 
completed his M.A. the following year, and in 1911 went east to Princeton, 
where he studied on a fellowship under Henry Norris Russell, the co-cre-
ator of the HR diagram, who was already emerging as a leader in the study 
of stellar evolution. With Russell, Shapley began to work on a Ph.D. dis-
sertation on binary stars. About half the stars in the sky belong to binary or 
multiple-star systems. Th ese include eclipsing binaries, in which the Earth 
lies nearly in the stars’ orbital plane and so one star can pass in front of (or 
eclipse) the other—the best-known example is Algol, the “Demon,” in Per-
seus. One third of Shapley’s work involved making photometric measures 
of the “light curves” of the eclipses with Princeton’s 23-inch refractor, the 
other two-thirds using a slide rule to calculate the orbits. At fi rst intended 
to be a rather straightforward project, it soon, Shapley found, “got beyond 
thesis size.”24 In addition to data such as the orbital period and inclination 
of the orbit, Shapley and Russell managed to work out the “mean densities” 
of these star systems. Some of them proved to be only a millionth that of 
the Sun—these stars, now known as red giants, were, in Shapley’s phrase, 
“enormous gas bags.”25 Th eir analysis also gave a rough idea of how far 
away these eclipsing binaries were. “Th e one thing that surprised us,” Shap-
ley noted, “… was that the distances were pretty darned big.”26
Shortly aft er completing his Ph.D., Shapley visited the Harvard Col-
lege Observatory, and in the dome of the 15-inch Merz refractor entered 
into a discussion with Solon I. Bailey. Bailey had directed the Harvard 
Boyden Station in Peru since 1892, and had identifi ed on plates taken with 
its 24-inch refractor a number of variable stars in globular clusters. Shapley 
would remember Bailey as “pious and kind, a wonderful sort of man, but so 
New England it made you ache. He said, ‘… We hear that you are going to 
Mount Wilson. When you get there, why don’t you use the big telescope to 
make measures of [variable] stars in globular clusters?’”27
Some of Bailey’s variables were Cepheids. In contrast to eclipsing 
variables, Cepheids (called aft er their prototype, delta Cephei, discov-
ered by a deaf amateur astronomer, John Goodricke, in 1784) are indi-

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 223
vidual stars whose variations 
in brightness are due to actual 
pulsations in the stars. Th ese 
stars undergo regular expan-
sions and contractions, and as 
they do they undergo changes 
in temperature and luminos-
ity. Shapley himself was later to 
suggest, in a paper that was half 
footnotes, that these stars were 
actually “throbbing or vibrat-
ing” in some way; it was an 
inspired guess, and it has held 
up. 
However, the Cephe-
ids had a special property that 
would make them among the 
foundational objects of the cos-
mic distance scale. As Bailey’s 
colleague at Harvard, Henrietta 
Swan Leavitt, had just discov-
ered, the Cepheids with the greatest average brightness also underwent 
their pulsations most slowly. 
In contrast to the fl amboyant and self-centered Shapley, Miss 
Leavitt, who had been born in 1868 of old New England stock on both 
sides of the family, was one of the quiet, steady workers in astronomy. Bai-
ley wrote of her that she had “inherited … the stern virtues of her puritan 
ancestors. She took life seriously. Her sense of duty, justice and loyalty 
was strong. For light amusements she appeared to care little…. [She] was 
of an especially quiet and retiring nature, and absorbed in her work to an 
unusual degree.”28
Aft er graduating from Radcliff e, the all-women’s counterpart to 
Harvard in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1892, Miss Leavitt had worked 
for several years as an advanced student and volunteer research assistant at 
the Harvard College Observatory before becoming a permanent member 
of the staff . She specialized in the determination of photographic magni-
tudes of stars. Among her projects was the careful examination of a large 
number of plates of the Magellanic Clouds that had been taken between 
1893 and 1906 with the Boyden Station’s 24-inch refractor and forwarded 
from Peru to Cambridge for analysis. On these plates, she discovered 1,777 
variable stars. By 1908 she had succeeded in working out the periods of 
several in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Th ey seemed to be just like those 
Bailey had found in globular clusters, diminishing slowly in brightness, 
Fig. 10.8. Henrietta Leavitt. AAVSO photograph; 
accessed via Wikipedia Commons.

 224 
Galactic Encounters
remaining near minimum for the greater part of the time, and increasing 
very rapidly to a brief maximum—their brightness curves thus resembling 
that of delta Cephei and other variables of the Cepheid type. Moreover, she 
noticed that the ones that appeared brightest on the plates also proved to be 
those with the longest periods. For instance, the faintest one on her plates 
varied between magnitudes 14.8 to 16, and had a period of 1.25 days; the 
brightest, varying between 11.2 and 12.1, had a period of 127 days. 
Th is was important because, as Miss Leavitt knew, the breadth of 
the Small Magellanic Cloud is small compared to its distance from us. 
Th us all the stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud are eff ectively the same 
distance from us—just as, say, every person in Times Square in New York 
City is at eff ectively the same distance from everyone in London. Th e stars 
that appeared to be the most luminous really were the most luminous, and 
what’s more, for the Cepheids, their luminosities were keyed to their peri-
ods. She fi rst published this result in a 1908 paper. No one paid any atten-
tion. In another paper published four years later, she added a plot showing 
the magnitudes vs. the logarithm of the periods for a somewhat larger 
sample of Cepheids in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Th e plot was exactly 
linear.29 Th is meant that the Period-Luminosity relationship for Cepheids 
was not just a correlation, it was a law of nature.
Fig. 10.9. Small Magellanic Cloud and the globular cluster 47 Tucanae, imaged by John Drum-
mond with a 200mm lens at Gisborne, New Zealand. Courtesy: John Drummond.

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 225
Th is was a tremendous breakthrough, and in due course the rela-
tionship discovered by this modest unassuming woman would lead to the 
extension of the distance ladder from the nearest stars—those whose dis-
tances had been directly measured through their parallaxes, which at the 
time included only about 60 stars out to a distance of about 30 light years 
or so—to the truly cosmic. Ejnar Hertzsprung was the fi rst to realize this. 
He also realized that in order to use the Cepheids as “standard candles” for 
determining astronomical distances as great as those to the Small Magel-
lanic Cloud, it was necessary to calibrate the zero-point of Miss Leavitt’s 
plot—i.e., identify Cepheids in the Milky Way whose distances were known 
so that the apparent brightnesses of the stars on Miss Leavitt’s plot could 
be turned into an absolute brightness scale. Th e sticking point was that 
all the Cepheids were very far away. Th ere was none near enough to have 
a distance determined by the usual parallax method (involving measures 
using the 2 AU baseline of the Earth’s annual orbit around the Sun), so 
Hertzsprung instead used a clever variation called statistical parallax. Here 
one takes advantage of the fact (found by William Herschel) that the Sun is 
moving relative to the other stars with a speed of 13 km/sec in the direc-
tion of Hercules, and thus travels about 4 AU a year through space. Th is 
furnishes a potentially longer 
baseline for any stars just near 
enough to have a detectable 
proper motion across the line 
of sight. One assumes that since 
Galaxy is neither collapsing 
nor expanding, the random 
motion of a set of stars rela-
tive to the Sun will average to 
approximately zero, and so by 
a statistical treatment one can 
estimate the average distance to 
these stars. It is not necessary 
to go into all the details, other 
than to say that the importance 
of the method is that some 
of the groups of stars whose 
distances were measured in this 
way included Cepheids. Hertz-
sprung’s sample included only 
13 Milky Way Cepheids, mean-
ing his statistical power was 
not great. Nevertheless, he used 
this result to estimate a parallax 
Fig. 10.10. Period-luminosity relation of Cepheids 
in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Henrietta Leavitt 
has plotted the logarithm of the periods in days 
against the apparent magnitudes of 25 variable 
stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud. The straight 
lines have been drawn through the maximum 
and minimum magnitudes. As is evident from 
the apparent linearity of the plots, the absolute 
luminosity is a linear function of the period. From 
Harvard Observatory Circular, No. 173 (1912), 1-3.

 226 
Galactic Encounters
for the Cepheids in the Small Magellanic Cloud. It was 0.0001 seconds of 
arc, meaning that the Small Magellanic cloud was 30,000 light years from 
the Earth. Th is was easily the largest astronomical distance at the time, but 
remarkably (and perhaps because unconsciously he could not bring him-
self to believe in such a large distance) Hertzsprung made an arithmetical 
error, and his paper in the Astronomische Nachrichten gave the distance as 
only 3,000 light years.30 Subsequently, Russell reworked the same problem, 
using the same 13 Cepheids, and found the distance to the Small Magel-
lanic Cloud to be about 80,000 light years. He too was diffi  dent about this 
“enormous distance.” Th e most he would say was that it was “not intrinsi-
cally incredible.”31
In 1918, Shapley would take up the problem yet again. Using 11 of the 
13 variables, he signifi cantly revised the calibration, and his calibration 
seemed so defi nitive it would be universally accepted for over thirty years, 
serving as the basis of the estimates of distances not only within the Milky 
Way, but to extragalactic objects, such as the Magellanic Clouds and the 
Great Spiral of Andromeda, beyond it. (For instance, it was the basis of 
Edwin Hubble’s estimate, based on his discovery of Cepheids in the Great 
Spiral, giving its distance as 700,000 light years.)
Mt. Wilson astronomer Walter Baade later realized that Shapley’s 
calibration of the period-luminosity curve for the Cepheids was fl awed. 
Baade showed in 1952 that globular clusters and extragalactic systems 
such as the Small Magellanic Cloud each have their own pulsating vari-
ables, with diff erent period-luminosity relations. Th ese pulsating variables 
are essentially representatives of two dissimilar types of stars. Shapley did 
not—and could not—know this, and unwittingly mixed together data from 
the two types. But though his miscalibration would lead to gross underesti-
mates of the distances to extragalactic objects, his estimates of the distances 
to globular clusters were essentially correct—and that, at the time, was 
what Shapley was aft er.
Shapley’s main research project at Mt. Wilson involved the globular clus-
ters, and was along the lines he had discussed with Solon I. Bailey. At the 
time he began a systematic study, 93 globulars were known, of which many 
of the brighter ones had been discovered by Messier. Shapley saw that they 
were evenly distributed in latitude above and below the galactic equa-
tor, but almost entirely skewed to one hemisphere in galactic longitude. 
Th ey were, moreover, the only class of objects that showed this skewed 
distribution (galactic or “open” clusters like the Pleiades, by contrast, and 
planetary nebulae were closely concentrated to the galactic circle; they 

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 227
were immersed in rich star fi elds in all parts of the Milky Way band). At 
fi rst he could not account for this distribution. His research project was 
to photograph the globulars with the 60-inch refl ector and scan the thou-
sands of star images on his plates for Cepheids. He later recalled: “I enjoyed 
observing with the 60-inch telescope, especially the novelty of using such a 
big instrument. It was wonderful that a beginner could have such machin-
ery…. But observing was always very hard work for me. I ‘suff ered’ quite a 
bit those long, cold nights.”32
Fig. 10.11. M80, globular cluster in Scorpio, and one of the densest of the 147 known globular 
clusters belonging to the Milky Way, as imaged with the WFPC2 camera of the Hubble Space 
Telescope.  This globular is located at a distance of about 28,000 light years from the Earth. 
Globular clusters can be used to study stellar evolution, since all of the stars in the cluster have 
the same age (about 15 billion years), but a range of masses. M80 is unusual in having a number 
of “blue stragglers” at the core—stars that appear unusually young and more massive than the 
others in the cluster, and thought to occur when two stars merge to produce an unusually mas-
sive single star mimicking a normal young star. The number of blue stragglers in M80 is consis-
tent with crowding and a high collision rate. Novae should also occur with high frequency—but 
though M80 was the site of a nova outburst observed in 1860, Hubble observations have 
revealed far fewer novae than expected theoretically. Courtesy: M. Shara, D. Zurek and F. Ferraro 
and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 228 
Galactic Encounters
Before long Shapley was fi nding variable stars in the nearer globu-
lar clusters, such as M3 and M13. By 1918, he had worked out period-
luminosity curves for 230 variables in the brighter globulars, with periods 
ranging from 5 hours to 100 days. Most were short-period variables—so-
called “cluster” variables or RR Lyrae stars—whose average period was half 
a day. But he also found enough of the longer-period Cepheids, seemingly 
like those Miss Leavitt had discovered in the Small Magellanic Clouds, to 
use his now-calibrated Period-Luminosity plot to work out the distances. 
For instance, for M13, the most celebrated of the globulars in the Northern 
Sky, which had seemed to Messier a 
“nébuleuse sans etoiles” but swarmed 
with tens of thousands of star images 
on Shapley’s plates, Shapley found a 
distance of 30,000 light years. It was 
one of the nearer globulars. Th e typical 
globular, he found, was on the order of 
50,000 light years away.33 Th ese were 
enormous distances, and placed the 
globulars well out of bounds of the 
small Kapteyn universe, which was 
beginning to look very provincial by 
this time. Th us, Shapley concluded, 
“Th ere seems to be reasonably clear 
evidence that M13 and similar globular 
clusters are very distant systems, dis-
tinct from our Galaxy and perhaps not 
greatly inferior to it in size.”34
All along, he later confessed, he 
had been working on the basis of a kind 
of hunch,  “a somewhat bold and prema-
ture assumption,” to explain the skewed 
distribution of the globulars; namely,
the globular clusters are, in a sense, the 
bony frame of the body of the galactic 
system. It was argued that the spatial 
arrangement of fewer than a hundred 
globular clusters shows the distribution 
of the billions of galactic stars. It was 
deduced, therefore, that the center of the 
… Galaxy is in the direction of Sagittarius, 
since there lies the center of the system of 
globular clusters…35
Fig. 10.12. Globular clusters and their aggrega-
tion toward the center of the Galaxy. This single 
patrol-telescope photograph, taken in the direc-
tion of the galactic center, covers an area equal 
to about 2 percent of the entire sky, but shows 
almost one-third of all globular clusters known at 
the time. The circles mark the positions of globular 
clusters for this part of the Milky Way. Courtesy: 
Harvard College Observatory.

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 229
But if this is so, and the distances he was getting for the globulars 
assured him that it was, then the skewed distribution of the globulars was 
not due to the globulars’ being skewed away from the center of the Galaxy. 
Instead it meant that we—the observers—were skewed from the center. 
Instead of being near the center of the sidereal system as in Kapteyn’s 
model, we on the tiny planet Earth were located tens of thousands of light 
years from the center of the Galaxy. Like the Copernican revolution that 
had displaced the Earth from the center of the universe as it was known in 
1543, Shapley had engineered a “galactocentric” revolution: he had boldly 
removed man from the central position he had held in the Galaxy.
Shapley wrote to the leading British astronomer Arthur S. Edding-
ton in January 1918 that the globulars had elucidated the “whole sidereal 
picture” with “startling suddenness and defi niteness.”36 In fact, that was 
true. Eddington himself, just a few years earlier, had estimated the extent 
of the Galaxy as on the order of 15,000 light years; Shapley recalculated its 
breadth at 300,000 light years. Because he failed to take account of dim-
ming by obscuring matter, he underestimated the brightnesses—and thus 
overestimated the distances—of his Cepheids. We now know that the 
Galaxy is only a third as large as he estimated, but the fi gure he gave was 
at least of the right order. Shapley’s Galaxy was so large that he could not 
bring himself to believe that the spiral nebulae could be “island universes,” 
as a number of prominent astronomers such as Heber Doust Curtis of Lick 
Observatory, believed; instead he thought they were fl imsy and insubstan-
tial gas clouds whose high Doppler shift s (as discovered by Slipher) indi-
cated the speed with which they were being driven off  by radiation pressure 
from the Milky Way. Th ey were like puff s of clouds on a windy day. If the 
Milky Way—the “Big Galaxy,” as he called it—was as large as he thought, it 
was inconceivable to him that there could be other such systems; for him, 
the Milky Way and the universe were one.
Curtis, who would engage Shapley in the so-called “great debate” 
(which was actually more like a couple of set speeches with a brief discus-
sion aft erward) at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., 
in April 1920, rejected Shapley’s “Big Galaxy” idea, and in support of the 
“island universe” idea pointed to the fact that he, Ritchey, and others, 
including Shapley himself, had observed in spirals a number of “ordinary” 
novae, which appeared to be identical to those frequently seen in the Milky 
Way. (Novae are faint stars that temporarily increase in brightness by 10 
magnitudes to become prominent for a brief time. As explained in chapter 
9, we now know these outbursts involve white dwarfs in binary systems 
with red giants; fl ow of gas from the red giant builds up on the surface of 
the white dwarf leading to an explosive outburst of nuclear reactions that 
blasts the material into space and causes the star to increase its bright-
ness 100,000 times in a few days.) Since these ordinary novae occurring 

 230 
Galactic Encounters
in spirals appeared very faint compared with those observed in the Milky 
Way, Curtis argued that the spirals had to be very remote. Shapley, on the 
other hand, recalled to mind the exceptional nova in the Andromeda spiral 
in 1885, which had peaked near the 7th magnitude, as well as another, 
equally dramatic, in the galaxy NGC 5253 in Centaurus , which had been 
discovered on a Harvard plate by Mrs. Fleming in 1895. If these “novae” 
were indeed associated with extragalactic systems, he pointed out they 
would have single-handedly outshone all the other stars, which seemed 
inconceivable. (At the time, only Knut Lundmark, a Swedish astronomer, 
had the courage to suppose there might be two classes of novae, ordinary 
and “supernovae,” which of course proved to be the case). But Shapley’s 
thinking was also infl uenced by the measures of rotation in the spiral M101 
by his friend Adriaan van Maanen, discussed in chapter 9, which strongly 
implied that the spirals had to be relatively nearby.
In the “great debate,” which has been mythologized rather like 
Th omas Huxley’s and Bishop Wilberforce’s famous “debate “on evolution 
at Oxford in 1860, both Shapley and Curtis were partly right and partly 
wrong. Shapley was right about the Sun’s noncentral position in the Galaxy, 
and Curtis was right about the spirals being extragalactic systems. From 
today’s perspective—but also from the perspective of most of those pres-
ent—Curtis was clearly the winner. 
By now, Shapley’s tenure at Mt. Wilson was almost over. His ambi-
tions by then aimed for the directorship of the Harvard College Observa-
tory, vacant since E. C. Pickering died a year before. It would make him, 
as he liked to point out, the highest paid astronomer in America. Harvard 
would have preferred to hire Shapley’s teacher, Henry Norris Russell, as 
director, with Shapley—who though possessed of extraordinary assets 
and capabilities was already widely regarded as rather vain and selfi sh, 
and more concerned about his own reputation and advancement than the 
welfare of the organization or of his colleagues—serving as his second. But 
Russell decided to stay on at Princeton, and eventually Shapley had his 
way— he was off ered the Harvard position on a probationary basis (for one 
year) and then named to the position on a permanent basis. All this took 
time to work out, so that Shapley did not actually take his leave from Mt. 
Wilson until March 15, 1921. Th e night-assistant on the 60-inch made the 
following entry in the observing logbook: “Dr. Harlow Shapley leaves the 
observatory today to become identifi ed with Harvard College Observa-
tory.” Probably most of his colleagues were relieved to see him off . Walter S. 
Adams, then serving as assistant director to the ailing (and soon to retire) 
Hale, would recall, simply, “He left  Mount Wilson with little regret on the 
part of staff  members.”38

 
Chapter 10: The “Galactocentric” Revolution 231
Milton Humason, mule driver, janitor, night assistant, research astrono-
mer at Mt. Wilson, and raconteur extraordinaire, related a story to Allan 
Sandage about an incident that is supposed to have occurred before Shap-
ley left  the mountain. According to Humason, Shapley one day came in 
with a handful of plates of M31, the great spiral in Andromeda, taken with 
the 60-inch in a survey Shapley had begun for novae,
and asked if he would like to use the Zeiss stereocomparator to blink 
pairs of them. Humason acceded. After working for several weeks, 
marking the backs of the plates with ink to indicate promising pairs 
of images, Humason informed Shapley that many images seemed to 
diﬀ er from one plate to another. “Could these possibly be Cepheid vari-
ables,” he asked Shapley, “similar to what you have found in globular 
clusters?39” 
According to Humason, Shapley was self-assured, and simply 
lectured him on all the reasons that was impossible, and ended by taking a 
handkerchief from his pocket and wiping Humason’s ink off  the plates!  
Th ough Shapley later denied that this had happened (and Humason 
was rather notorious for telling tall tales), the latter continued to swear by 
it until his death in 1972. Sandage, who later examined Shapley’s plates, 
concluded that several Cepheids in M31 were indeed visible on Shapley’s 
plates, and that by blinking these plates, Humason might have found at 
least a few of them. But he adds: “had Shapley stayed at Mount Wilson 
and continued his survey for novae in M31, he almost certainly would 
have then found the Cepheids himself. [Edwin] Hubble did not begin his 
nova survey until the fall of 1923—three years aft er Shapley had left  for 
Harvard…. By going to Harvard, it is probable that Harlow Shapley—dis-
coverer of the galactocentric eccentricity of the Sun’s position—had denied 
himself his second Copernican-like revolution.”40
*   *   *
 1. See: Anthony Misch and William Sheehan, 
“Th e First Modern Telescope: the Mount Wil-
son 60-inch Refl ector,” in Th e 2008 Yearbook of 
Astronomy, Patrick Moore and John Mason, eds. 
(London: Macmillan, 2007), 192-221.
 2. Th e discussion of Hale that follows is largely 
based on William Sheehan and Donald E. Oster-
brock, “Hale’s ‘little elf’: the mental breakdowns 
of George Ellery Hale. Journal for the History of 
Astronomy, xxxi (2000) 93-114. 
 3. Helen Wright, Explorer of the Universe: a biogra-
phy of George Ellery Hale (New York: E.P. Dut-
ton, 1966), 28.
 4. Ibid., 29.
 5. Ibid., 30.
 6. Ibid., 32.
 7. Ibid., 17.
 8. Ibid., 51.
 9. Ibid.
 10. Donald E. Osterbrock, Pauper and Prince: 
Ritchey, Hale, and big American telescopes (Tuc-
son: University of Arizona Press, 1993), 23.
 11.  Sheehan, Immortal Fire, 312.
 12. Wright, Explorer of the Universe, 135.

 232 
Galactic Encounters
 13. G.E. Hale to J.S. Billings, July 6, 1903; George 
Ellery Hale Papers, California Institute of Tech-
nology.
 14. Wright, Explorer of the Universe, p.197.
 15. T.J.J. Lears, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism 
and the transformation of American culture, 
1880-1920 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1994), 9: 
 16. Osterbrock, Pauper and Prince, 284.
 17. Ibid.
 18. G. E. Hale, “On the probable existence of a mag-
netic fi eld in sun-spots.” Astrophysical Journal, 
28 (1908), 315-343.
 19. Wright, Explorer of the Universe, 264.
 20. G.E.Hale to H.M. Goodwin, March 25, 1911; 
Henry L. Huntington Library, San Marino, Cali-
fornia.
 21. G.E. Hale to James H. McBride, July 30, 1911; 
Henry L. Huntington Library, San Marino, Cali-
fornia.
 22. Allan Sandage to Helen Wright, 1966; forward 
to Wright, Explorer of the Universe.
 23. J. C. Kaptyen, “On the Absorption of Light 
in Space,” Astrophysical Journal, 29 (1909), 
46-54:47.
 24. Harlow Shapley, Th rough Rugged Ways to the 
Stars (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1969), 
34.
 25. Ibid., 36.
 26. Ibid.
 27. Ibid., 41.
 28. Solon I. Bailey, “Henrietta Swan Leavitt,” Popu-
lar Astronomy, 30, 4 (1922), 197-199.
 29. Henrietta S. Leavitt, “Periods of twenty-fi ve 
variable stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud,” 
Harvard College Observatory Circular No. 173 
(1912), 1-3.
 30. Owen Gingerich and Barbara Welther, “Har-
low Shapley and Cepheids,” Sky & Telescope, 
December 1985, 540.
 31. Ibid., 541.
 32. Shapley, Th rough Rugged Ways, 51.
 33. Harlow Shapley, “Globular Clusters and the 
Structure of the Galactic System, “Publications 
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacifi c, 30 
(1918), 42-54.
 34. Harlow Shapley, “Outline and Summary of a 
Study of Magnitudes in the Globular Cluster 
Messier 13,” Publications of the Astronomical 
Society of the Pacifi c, 28 (1916), 174.
 35. Harlow Shapley, Galaxies (Philadelphia: Blakis-
ton, 1943),100.
 36. Quoted in Robert Smith, Th e Expanding Uni-
verse: Astronomy’s ‘Great Debate’ 1900-1931 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1982), 79.
 37. Quoted in Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 151.
 38. Ibid., 306.
 39. Allan Sandage, Th e Mount Wilson Observatory: 
Centennial History of the Carnegie Institution, 
vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2004), 496.
 40. Ibid., 498.

233
Over us, like some great cathedral dome,
The observatory loomed against the sky;
And the dark mountain with its headlong gulfs
Had lost all memory of the world below;
For all those cloudless throngs of glittering stars
And all those glimmerings where the abyss of space
Is powdered with a milky dust, each grain
A burning sun, and every sun the lord
Of its own darkling planets,—all those lights
Met, in a darker deep, the lights of earth,
Lights on the sea, lights of invisible towns,
Trembling and indistinguishable from stars…
—Alfred Noyes, Watchers of the Sky, Prologue: The Observatory
W
illiam Herschel was the fi rst astronomer to push his investigation 
beyond the Solar System and to expressly concern himself with the 
stars and nebulae—the “construction of the heavens.” We now know that it 
was actually his sister, Caroline, who preceded him and who fi rst showed 
how much remained to be done. When he began, about a hundred of the 
nebulae were known, catalogued by Messier and a few others; by the time 
he fi nished, he had added nebulae by the thousands, and noted their aston-
ishing variety.
“I have seen,” he wrote, “double and treble nebulae, variously 
arranged; large ones with small, seeming attendants; narrow but much 
extended, lucid nebulae or bright dashes; some of the shape of a fan, 
resembling an electric brush, issuing from a lucid point, others of cometic 
shape, with a seeming nucleus in the center.”
Faced with this richness and diversity of material, Herschel com-
pared the nebulae to the plants growing in a “luxuriant garden,” and con-
11.
From Olympus
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_11, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 234 
Galactic Encounters
tinued into advanced age to stretch his mind — and his data — to organize 
them into a sequence that showed the infl uence of the invisible hand of 
gravity. Gravity acted across space, reached across time, and therefore 
served as “the cause of every condensation, accumulation, compression, 
and concentration of the nebulous matter.” 
His son, who added many more nebulae and listed them in his 
General Catalogue (the core of the modern catalog, the New General Cata-
logue or NGC, which is still in use today), rather prosaically sorted them 
according to their shapes, degree of condensation at the center, and resolv-
ability into stars—thus the nebulae were “circular” or “round” or “oval” or 
“elongated”;” “stellate,” “nuclear,” “discoid”; “discrete,” “granulate,” “mottled,” 
“milky.” In indicating the characteristics of a particular nebula, a cumber-
some system of capital and lower case letters was used; thus, “vBpLvgmbM” 
meant “very bright, pretty large, very gradual, much brighter in the middle.”1
Th e nature of the nebulae remained unknown. And yet—to name 
a thing is the closest thing to creating it. All of science begins descriptively, 
with categories. A category is, in the fi rst place, a useful distillation of data. 
One hopes that—if carefully and thoughtfully chosen—it may represent a 
well-defi ned, separate, modally discontinuous group, a true species—carv-
ing, as Plato said, nature at its joints.
Classifi cation schemes of all kinds—of snowfl akes, seashells, plants, 
animals, even diseases —involve making judgments. Aristotle — the great 
classifi er of antiquity — approached the taxonomy of organisms by dividing 
them into large, apparently self-evident groups; he then subdivided these 
into smaller and smaller groups. His method was grand — aristocratic — 
top-down; his categories were God-given — once they were ordained, they 
remained intact. Th ey were absolute, indissoluble, necessary.
But modern taxonomy—the science of classifying nature—begins 
not with Aristotle but with John Ray, the 17th-century founder of the mod-
ern concept of species. Ray, a self-taught English naturalist, took a bottom-
up rather than top-down approach, beginning “with awe for the unique-
ness of individuals and the wonderful variety of species.” “Nature,” he 
wrote in Methodus Plantarum (1680), “... makes no jumps and passes from 
extreme to extreme only through a mean. She always produces species 
intermediate between higher and lower types, species of doubtful classifi ca-
tion linking one type with another and having something in common with 
both.” Extreme positions can be defi ned; but they merge with intermedi-
ates, shade into variations. It is a picture of subtlety. Th e point is, however, 
that instead of being dictated from above and eternally unchanging, Ray’s 
species are provisional and open-ended—capable of being “opened and dis-
solved” in the light of new knowledge.

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 235
An important step in the classifi cation of nebulae, which moved beyond 
mere description to their physical properties, had been taken by William 
Huggins, whose spectroscope separated the nebular worlds into the two 
classes of emission (“green”) nebulae and continuous-spectrum (“white”) 
nebulae). Later schemes ranged from lumpers—like Heber D. Curtis of the 
Lick Observatory, who as late as 1919 went on record as saying that all the 
nebulae in the heavens could be conveniently grouped into three catego-
ries, planetaries, diff use nebulae, and spirals—to splitters, of whom the best 
example was Max Wolf, a brilliant German astronomer whose pioneering 
work in astrophotography has been underappreciated, mainly because he 
worked in Europe at a time when the leading developments in the fi eld 
were taking place in the United States. 
Wolf was born in Heidelberg, Germany, in 1863. At age 21, he 
discovered an unusual comet, which was at fi rst taken to be an asteroid. 
In the following year his proud physician-father—in William Hale-like 
fashion— built him his own private observatory, where he observed for 
many years. Aft er taking his Ph.D. at Heidelberg University, he succeeded 
in setting up a new observatory near Heidelberg at Konigstühl, where he 
worked indefatigably until his death in 1932. He was a friendly competitor 
of Barnard in the wide-fi eld photography of the Milky Way, and discovered 
an extremely faint star, Wolf 359, which is the third closest star to the Sun 
aft er alpha Centauri and Barnard’s star. When Barnard died in 1923, Wolf 
paid him the tribute of a true kindred spirit, and much of what he said of 
Barnard could equally well be said (of course) of himself:
He was a virtuoso in seeing and in measuring, he had the talent to rec-
ognize the new, which others carelessly overlooked, and moreover com-
bined indomitable stamina with inexhaustible enthusiasm for research. 
It is a mighty passion that attracts an observer to his work, and satisfac-
tion with the hard-won results obtained with his instrument provides 
him his highest pleasure.2
Th at same year, he published an important paper in which, by 
means of star counts of part of NGC 6960, the “western veil” (part of the 
“Cygnus Loop,” now known to be a supernova remnant) he showed that 
bright and dark nebulae are associated with another, and that the dark 
nebulae Barnard had discovered were indeed dust clouds.3 (Th e “general 
absorption of light in space, a more subtle and general result, was not 
proved until 1930, by Lick Observatory astronomer Robert Trumpler).
Wolf’s scheme of nebular classifi cation was as particular as Curtis’s 
was general. In 1908, on the basis of photographic surveys carried out with 
the 16-inch Bruce photographic telescope at Konigstühl, Wolf devised a 
highly specifi c classifi cation of nebulae that included no less than 23 diff er-

 236 
Galactic Encounters
ent types, each of which was assigned a lower-case letter.4 Purely descrip-
tive, and without any pretense of guessing at the physical nature of these 
objects, it is hardly surprising that Wolf mixed apples and oranges (some 
of his nebulae are obviously planetaries, while most are variations on the 
spiral-nebula theme.) It represented little—if any—improvement over Sir 
John Herschel’s classifi cation system. Th ough it is (justly) all but forgotten 
today, it does represent the state of the art of nebular classifi cations in the 
nineteen-teens when a young astronomer named Edwin P. Hubble began to 
think seriously about bringing some order into this chaotic fi eld and work-
ing toward his own brilliantly elegant solution.
Enter Hubble
Hubble, who “had a romantic, larger-than-life quality that is rare in prac-
ticing scientists,”5 was born in Marshfi eld, Missouri in 1889, the fi ft h of the 
eight children born to John Powell Hubble and Virginia Lee James, who 
moved soon aft erward to Wheaton, Illinois. Details of Hubble’s early life 
are not always reliable; he was not averse to stretching the truth, and in 
some cases fabricating incidents outright, a trait he probably derived from 
his father, who trained as a lawyer but spent most of his career working in 
insurance. Th ough John later claimed to have served as insurance commis-
sioner for the state of Missouri and prosecutor of Webster County, nei-
ther is borne out in the records. Raised in the puritanical values that were 
fashionable in his day, John became “a stern, hard-bitten blend of moral 
high-mindedness and relentless ambition,” a “demanding taskmaster who 
‘ruled the roost’ in no uncertain terms.”6 His son seems to have absorbed a 
good deal of this demanding paternal ego, and the relation of father to son 
may help to account for some of the less lovable aspects of Hubble’s own 
personality, including the careful cultivation of a placid exterior masking “a 
thorough-driving, competitive nature.”7
To others, Edwin always seemed to come easily by his success. He 
never seemed to struggle, never failed at anything. At 16, he went to the 
University of Chicago, and majored in physics and astronomy, working 
part-time one year in the physics laboratory of the future Nobel laureate 
Robert Millikan. Blessed with an awesome physique, and standing over 
six-feet tall, he also won varsity letters in basketball and track. Aft er gradu-
ating in 1910, he applied for a Rhodes scholarship, and won one. He used 
it to spend three years at Queen’s College, Oxford, where—apparently in 
deference to his father’s wishes—he studied law (though again, apparently, 
not very hard) and Spanish. Th ough he may not have learned much during 
his three years at Oxford, he fell in love with everything English—especially 
the manners of the elite aristocratic class. Raising Anglophilia “to the level 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 237
of a faith,” as one of his 
colleagues later put it, he 
developed a persona that 
included smoking a pipe, 
wearing tweed jackets 
and baggy plus-fours, and 
occasionally even don-
ning a cape. He topped 
it all off  with a fashion-
able walking stick. Shap-
ley, who was as liberal 
politically as Hubble was 
conservative and whose 
self-consciously “folksy” 
voice was not always very 
convincing either, wrote 
sarcastically, “He was a 
Rhodes scholar, and he didn’t live it down. He spoke with a thick Oxford 
accent. He was born in Missouri not far from where I was born and proba-
bly knew the Missourian tongue. But he spoke ‘Oxford.’ He would use such 
phrases as ‘to come a cropper.’ Th e ladies he associated with enjoyed that 
Oxford tone very much. ‘Bah Jove!’ he would say, and other such expres-
sions. He was quite picturesque.”8 V.M. Slipher found Hubble’s Oxfordisms 
ridiculous; he thought he tried too hard to pass as a “Limey.” But Hubble 
didn’t seem to care, and in any case never shed his Oxford mannerisms. 
Allan Sandage, a Caltech graduate student who became his assistant 
(and in some ways, his acolyte) as Hubble approached the end of his life, 
found his aging idol still wearing Harris Tweeds, using some of the Brit-
ishisms from the old days at Oxford, and boasting a cane or walking stick 
in the aff ected English manner. In awe, the self-described “hick” from the 
Midwest saw Hubble as “a noble man,” who deported himself as “I imag-
ine a god might.”9 Indeed, Hubble’s aloof demeanor fi t him as the god of 
observational cosmology that he was by then. He always sought to keep 
his distance himself from others. Shapley thought he didn’t care for people 
much. Despite four years of working with him, Sandage admitted that the 
great man “always remained his formal self, never laughing or cracking 
a joke, never attempting to put [him] at ease.”10 Even when Sandage was 
introduced to Hubble’s wife Grace some time later, “the same formality pre-
vailed, causing him to wonder about their conduct when alone together.”11
In the end, even his biographer fi nds him inscrutable. Compar-
ing Hubble to Galileo, Gale Christianson notes that “unlike [the] renais-
sance hero, the astronomer revealed almost nothing of his inner universe.” 
Recalling that Hubble’s favorite pastime was fl y-fi shing, Christianson notes 
Fig. 11.1. Edwin Powell Hubble. Courtesy: Huntington 
Library, San Marino, California.

 238 
Galactic Encounters
that “like the secretive trout of his daydreams, the poetic fl y-fi sherman 
chose to remain elusive.”12
Aft er fi nishing his Rhodes, Hubble never practiced law, though for some 
reason he would later claim to have done so (his biography was as care-
fully groomed as his persona). Instead he taught high school Spanish and 
coached basketball for a year, and despite being popular with students, 
and coaching the basketball team to a championship, never mentioned 
this interlude in his “offi  cial” biography. When John Hubble died, Edwin 
seemed to have felt liberated from the oppression of paternal expectations. 
Always interested in astronomy, and the recipient of a small telescope 
when he was eight, he now decided, “even if I were second- or third-rate 
it was astronomy that mattered.” With sudden clarity of purpose he wrote 
to Forest Ray Moulton, one of his professors at the University of Chicago, 
and to the director of the University’s Yerkes Observatory, Edwin B. Frost, 
about doing his Ph.D. in astronomy. He had made a good impression as 
an undergraduate, and (unlike the less traditional student Slipher) had no 
problem getting accepted. In August 1914, just before he reported to Yerkes 
to begin his studies, he went to Evanston, Illinois, for the American Astro-
nomical Society meeting at which he heard Slipher talk about the large 
radial velocities of the spirals, and as we have seen, put himself prominently 
in the front row in the group photograph, despite not even having started 
his graduate work. (One thing Hubble never lacked was self-confi dence 
and a knowledge of how to position himself.)
In 1914, the Yerkes Observatory was in its doldrums.13 Th e “fi rst 
team” had left  with Hale for Mt. Wilson, and Frost, a well-trained Dart-
mouth University spectroscopist who took over from Hale as director, was 
a pedestrian researcher. He also suff ered from severe congenital myopia, 
and was soon to have a retinal detachment in one eye and then in the other. 
Slowly but surely he was going blind and faced the diffi  cult prospect of 
being a blind astronomer, with many years remaining before he was eli-
gible for retirement. At Yerkes, the most famous astronomer was still E. E. 
Barnard, but Barnard didn’t take students, and was suff ering from diabe-
tes and slowing down. Fortunately, Hubble was a self-starter, and perhaps 
inspired by Slipher’s talk, decided to study the faint nebulae, nominally 
under Frost’s supervision, despite the fact that Frost had never worked on 
the subject himself. With the uncanny intuition that always served him so 
well, the 25 year-old graduate student already sensed that, as Fath had told 
Slipher when they had met at the International Solar Union meeting at Mt. 
Wilson in 1910, that “there are great opportunities in the nebular fi eld.”14 At 
the time, it could hardly have been less overworked; the notables included 
Slipher at Lowell, Heber D. Curtis at Lick, Knut Lundmark in Uppsala, 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 239
Sweden, Wolf in Germany, 
which was now at war, and a 
few others. 
For his thesis, Hubble 
wanted to photograph faint 
nebulae with the 24-inch 
refl ector that Ritchey had 
built at Yerkes Observatory in 
1901, and to fi nd out how the 
various types of nebulae were 
distributed around the sky. Th e 
telescope had been revolution-
ary when Ritchey had fi rst built 
it, and Ritchey had used it to 
obtain the best photographs of 
nebulae taken up to that time. 
But the plate scale was too 
small for Hubble’s purposes. At 
the Newtonian focus, the scale 
of the 24-inch refl ector was 87 
arc seconds per millimeter, so 
that most of the nebulae Hub-
ble marked on his plates were hardly distinguishable from stars (by con-
trast, the plate scale of the Mt. Wilson 60-inch was 30 arc seconds per mm, 
and of the 100-inch would be 16 arc seconds per mm; these larger plate 
scales were to prove essential for Hubble’s eventual success).15
While getting underway on his dissertation project, Hubble became 
intrigued by a comet-shaped nebula, NGC 2261, which envelops the vari-
able star R Monocerotis. Th e nebula had been discovered by William Her-
schel in 1783, and the star’s variability had been noted by Julius Schmidt, 
the director of the Athens Observatory, in 1861. Hubble’s notice was called 
to the object by John E. Mellish, who on the basis of his success discovering 
comets with homebuilt telescopes while working as a farmhand in Cottage 
Grove, Wisconsin, had been invited to Yerkes as a “volunteer” observer, 
and had swept it up thinking it a new comet. Now Hubble decided to do a 
careful study of the object, and obtained sixteen plates of it over six months 
in 1915 and 1916. When he compared them inter alia and with earlier pho-
tographs going back to one by the British astrophotographer Isaac Roberts 
from 1900, he found that not only was the star variable, so was the nebula 
itself. Frost gave a brief presentation about it to the National Academy of 
Sciences in Washington, D.C., which led to Hubble’s fi rst astronomical pub-
lication.16 Ever aft erward, Hubble had a father’s pride in his variable nebula, 
and when, decades later, the 200-inch refl ector at Palomar fi rst went into 
Fig. 11.2. Yerkes staﬀ , 1915. Hubble stands at the 
center of the back row (with bow tie); John Mell-
ish, volunteer observer, is next to him at his right. 
Edwin Frost, the director, is standing in the middle 
row (with beret) to the left, and E. E. Barnard 
stands next to the column in the doorway on the 
extreme right. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 240 
Galactic Encounters
operation, Hubble returned to what he called his “polestar,” and captured it 
on a plate—the very fi rst obtained with the new giant in glass and steel.
In April 1917, the United States entered the European War against Ger-
many. Hubble, ardent Anglophile that he was, rushed through the writing 
and defense of his thesis so he could volunteer for the U.S. Army. It wasn’t 
a very good thesis, but it anticipates some of the themes of Hubble’s mature 
research. In particular, in trying to address the question of how the various 
types of nebulae are distributed in the fi elds taken with the 24-inch refl ec-
tor, Hubble made a start on the classifi cation question. “Little is known of 
the nature of nebulae,” he began, “and no signifi cant classifi cation has yet 
been suggested.” He decided that Wolf’s scheme,  “wholly empirical and 
probably without physical signifi cance,” off ered probably “the best available 
system of fi ling away data,” and concluded that it would likely remain of 
service until “a signifi cant order is established.”17
Th e most important of Hubble’s fi ndings was that many of the faint 
nebulae in his plates were not, in fact, spirals, as Keeler and Curtis had 
believed, but very small round or elliptical nebulae (Wolf’s types e and f; 
the brightest specimen of this type is M60 in Virgo). Th is realization would 
later become fundamental to Hubble’s own classifi cation system.
Before Hubble left  for Europe (he apparently never saw action), 
Hale hired him for the Mt. Wilson staff . Hale himself was involved in war 
work, and sympathized with the young Ph.D.s desire to serve overseas; he 
therefore agreed to keep the position open until Hubble was discharged 
from the Army. When, in 1919, Hubble, by then Major Hubble, had 
received his discharge, he arrived at Mt. Wilson by way of Lick Observa-
tory, where his uniform and his aff ected British accent left  an indelible 
impression on at least one graduate student, C. Donald Shane. He was 
assigned to the recently unveiled 100-inch refl ector, which was then, and 
would remain for the next 30 years until the 200-inch at Palomar became 
operational, the most powerful telescope in the world.
Th ough Hubble’s studies of what he came to call “extragalactic neb-
ulae” (Shapley’s term “galaxies” did not gain universal acceptance until aft er 
Hubble’s death in September 1953) would garner by far the most media 
attention, cosmology was, Allan Sandage notes, “in fact only a small part 
of the early Mount Wilson accomplishments.” Most of the papers issued 
from Mt. Wilson were concerned with stars; only four per cent with galax-
ies and the universe. Nevertheless, Sandage adds, “that four percent was the 
foundation of observational cosmology, and the public spotlight became 
focused on the Nebular Department and remained there throughout the 
1930s and 1940s, providing much of the justifi cation for construction of the 
Palomar 200-inch refl ector—and much of the dismay, jealousy, and dislike 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 241
by the spectroscopists. Part of their animosity toward Hubble was due to 
the overwhelming media attention he received.”18
Despite common belief, the 100-inch refl ector was not the only 
telescope in the world at the time powerful enough to resolve extragalactic 
nebulae into stars. Shapley seems to have been the source of this claim, 
writing in a note on novae in 1917 that in the 60-inch there were no signs 
of resolution in nebulae such as M31, NGC 224, and M33. In fact, however, 
even the earliest plates of M33 taken with the 60-inch by Ritchey in 1909 
show images “resolv[ing] into stars beginning at magnitude 16. Th e images 
are sharp, and they are fully as stellar as the obvious fi eld stars in the outer 
areas of the same plates.”19 Even before that, in 1889, A. C. Ranyard had 
noted that in a celebrated plate of M31 taken the year before by Isaac 
Roberts, a retired builder who set up a 20-inch silver-on-glass refl ector for 
astrophotography at his private observatory at Crowborough, Sussex, the 
outer regions appeared resolved into stars.20 Certainly some of Hubble’s 
discoveries could have been made with the 60-inch, but there is no doubt 
that the 100-inch gave Hubble’s an almost magisterial authority that sorted 
well with the carefully cultivated grandeur of his personality. 
Fig. 11.3. (left) Hubble’s Variable Nebula, a fan-shaped cloud of gas and dust illuminated by R Monocero-
tis (R Mon), the bright star at the bottom end of the nebula. Dense condensations of dust near the star 
cast shadows out into the nebula, and as they move the illumination changes, giving rise to the variations 
ﬁ rst noted by Hubble. The star itself, with a mass of about 10 times that of the Sun and only about 300,000 
years old, cannot be seen directly, but only through reﬂ ected light from dust particles in the nebula that 
surrounds it. Courtesy: W. Sparks and S. Baggett, NASA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
Fig. 11.4. (right) 100-inch reﬂ ector at Mt. Wilson Observatory. Photograph by William Sheehan, 1999.

 242 
Galactic Encounters
In beginning his observations with the 100-inch as a new staff  
member of Mt. Wilson Observatory, Hubble returned to his thesis topic, 
the classifi cation of the nebulae, but with a diff erence—he now had the 
plate scale of the 100-inch rather than the inadequate plate scale of the 
Ritchey 24-inch. Aft er three years of work, in 1922—the same year that F. 
Scott Fitzgerald published Th e Beautiful and Damned, and one year aft er 
Charlie Chaplin appeared in the semi-autobiographical silent fi lm Th e 
Kid—he published two masterful papers on what he called the “galactic 
nebulae,” those whose provenance was the plane of the Milky Way. 
Th ese papers were, apart from his Ph.D. dissertation, Hubble’s fi rst 
publications since 1916-17, when he had written up his work on the vari-
able nebula NGC 2261.21 In the fi rst of these papers, he subdivided the 
galactic nebulae into 1) those with emission (bright-line) spectra and 2) 
those with absorption (dark-line) spectra. In either case, he realized, their 
visibility depended on the presence of a nearby hot star (of spectral type 
B or O). Th e nebula must either shine by refl ected light from the star, in 
which case the refl ecting medium is dust as Slipher had shown, and the 
spectrum contains dark lines, or by fl uorescence due to the star’s excitation 
of gas, in which case the spectrum contains bright emission lines. Clearly, 
gas and dust were mixed together in these nebulae, though as we now 
know, the mass-density of the dust is minuscule compared with that of the 
gas. In the second paper, completed only three months later, he beautifully 
demonstrated that the source of radiation from non-emission nebulae is 
indeed refl ected light from the associated star.
Th e “galactic” nebulae, the subject of these papers, were in turn distin-
guished from the “non-galactic” nebulae, those with an aversion to the plane 
of the Milky Way. So far, his division into “galactic” and “non-galactic” nebu-
lae was neutral on the question of whether the “non-galactic” nebulae were 
relatively nearby, as Shapley believed, or “island universes” as Curtis believed. 
Hubble’s classifi cation did not depend on the answer to that question.
However, without committing himself to their nature, Hubble was 
already proposing a tentative classifi cation scheme for the non-galactic 
nebulae. Building on the result announced in his Ph.D. thesis, he recog-
nized, by inspection of the objects on the deep plates he exposed with the 
100-inch, that not all galaxies were spirals. Some, indeed most, were ellipti-
cal, and clearly of a diff erent type than spirals. (Th e same result had already 
been published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society in 
1920 by John Reynolds, an industrialist-turned-amateur astronomer from 
Birmingham, England, on the basis of photographs taken with a 30-inch 
refl ector at the Helwan Observatory in Egypt; just when Hubble became 
aware of Reynolds’s paper is unclear, but he certainly knew of it, and at 
some point made notes on it in the Mt. Wilson Observatory library in 
Pasadena in which he noted the similarity to his own developing scheme.)22 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 243
Meanwhile, Hubble had been appointed to the International Astro-
nomical Union’s Commission 28 on Nebulae, which was to meet in Rome 
that year. Th e Commission’s chair was a geriatric astrometrist from France, 
Guillaume Bigourdan; other members included the distinguished, but aged, 
Danish astronomer Johann Louis Emil Dreyer, who half a century before 
had drawn up the standard New General Catalogue (the basis of the NGC 
numbers still used for nebulae). Th e American members included Slipher, 
Curtis, Barnard (nearing the end) and W. H. Wright of the Lick Observa-
tory. In February 1922 Hubble sent Slipher, who by now was butting up 
against the limit of the faint nebulae within reach of his spectrograph on the 
24-inch refractor, a fi rst ambitious proposal for nebular classifi cations. “We 
begin fl amboyantly,” he rather grandly and self-importantly announced to 
Slipher.23 Wright, who also received Hubble’s proposal, wrote privately—but 
presciently—to Slipher, “I must confess that I am rather dazed by [Hubble’s] 
letter…. One can see that the nebulae will have no pivate life when he has 
his way…. Besides my habit is to think from one plate to the next, and I 
am afraid I am not much on Empire Building.”24 Slipher agreed. “Hubble’s 
report dazed us too,” he acknowledged. “… We know so little about nebu-
lae today that it is no easy task to lay down a line of study that would be so 
good as not to need very vital alteration in even a few years’ time.”25
By then, Hubble was already tinkering with his own scheme. He 
now broke the non-galactic nebulae into four groups: 1. spirals, 2. spindles 
(a class which, he suggested, might be replaced by “elongated,” including 
spindles proper, i.e., those with spiral affi  nities, and ovates, variants from 
globular form), 3. globular, and 4. irregular, the last including such rela-
tively amorphous objects as the Magellanic Clouds and Barnard’s Galaxy, 
NGC 6822, soon to be an object of his special attention.
At the Rome meeting that year, which Hubble did not attend, the 
Europeans, led by Bigourdan, prevailed. Th ey adopted a plan that largely 
recapitulated the venerable views of John Herschel and proposed mak-
ing his classifi cation scheme the basis of a new catalog of nebulae (updat-
ing the NGC), to be based as far as possible on photographic rather than 
visual observations. Th e project was to require the collaboration of mul-
tiple observatories. Hubble was not enthusiastic. In 1923, he protested to 
Slipher, who had now assumed the I.A.U. Commission 28 chair, “It is surely 
unwise to precipitate a comprehensive program of cataloguing until some 
classifi cation … has been devised and generally acceptable. Th is matter 
is urgent.”26 Meanwhile, he had continued to tinker with his own scheme, 
now adding the class “ovate” between “spindle” and “globular. Rather than 
work up his ideas into an article for publication, however, he told Slipher 
that he thought it preferable to develop the proposal more informally by 
circulating his typewritten notes among the members of the Commission, 
and soliciting their comments in the hopes of eventually gaining for the 

 244 
Galactic Encounters
system the sanction of the I.A.U. Th at same year, he was  stimulated by the 
presence of the British mathematical physicist James Jeans, who had just 
arrived at Mt. Wilson as a research associate and who had been working 
for years on the problem of how masses surrounded by thin atmospheres 
develop under diff erent conditions of rotation. Th e problem was related 
to the Laplace Nebular Hypothesis, for as Jeans tried to demonstrate, as a 
nebula shrinks it passes through a series of confi gurations—from almost 
spherical, it becomes spheroidal, then develops a sharp edge in the equato-
rial plane that begins to eject matter “symmetrically at two antipodal points 
on the equator” so as to form two symmetrical streamers or arms. As the 
process continued, the streamers loping outward from the disk would 
unwind into ever looser, thinner, and expansive arms. Hubble did not fail 
to grasp that Jeans’s theory was just what he needed to provide a thread of 
physical signifi cance on which to hang his linear arrangement of the non-
galactic nebulae from globulars to the most open (grand-design) spirals. 
“We seem to be succeeding with the evolutional sequence of the stars,” he 
observed; “we may look forward with some hope to a time when something 
of the sort can be attempted with nebulae.” 
Hubble’s E, Sa, Sb, Sc and Irr subtypes were similar to Reynolds’s 
classifi cations I-IV. Th e E designation included ellipticals ranging from 
the perfectly circular E0 to the football-shaped E7; his S0 type, introduced 
later, corresponding to lenticular galaxies, was supposed to be the interme-
diate form between ellipticals and spirals (it was not noted until half a cen-
tury later that typical S0 galaxies are typically only half as luminous as typi-
cal E and Sa galaxies, thus providing strong evidence against Hubble’s own 
speculation that they constitute an intermediate evolutionary stage between 
ellipticals and spirals). Th en came the spirals, Sa, Sb, and Sc, labeled 
according to the prominence of the galactic nucleus and the tightness with 
which the spiral arms were wrapped. Th e sequence was clearly informed 
by Jeans’s ideas, and Hubble, who clearly thought of them as unwinding as 
they grew, could not resist referring to them as “early,” “middle,” and “late” 
types. Th us the E-type nebulae were “early,” the Sa type, with bright con-
densed nuclei and closely coiled spiral arms, were “middle,” the Sc type, 
which featured “a fainter almost stellar nucleus” and spiral arms “more 
open—unwound as it were—and conspicuously granular,” were “late.” Th e 
members of Commission 28 in general were qualifi edly positive—Hubble’s 
proposal was “very thorough and complete,” “especially interesting,” “hard 
to improve on”—but they would not endorse it at the I.A.U. meeting at 
Cambridge in 1925 (again, Hubble himself did not attend). A number 
of members complained specifi cally about the introduction of the terms 
“early,” “middle,” and “late.” Slipher complained that this suggested an 
“evolutional signifi cance that the present state of our knowledge hardly 
warrants.”27 Indeed, the way in which the spirals were winding was still 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 245
moot; van Maanen had had the arms unwinding, and so the evolution 
corresponded to that in Hubble’s sense; but Slipher’s spectrograms sug-
gested they were winding up. Moreover, as we now know, galaxy evolution 
is much more complicated than Jeans or Hubble envisaged, and though it 
would be better to avoid such terms altogether, the terms “early,” “middle,” 
and “late” are now rather conventional (rather like Riccioli’s “seas” on the 
Moon) and are likely here to stay.
On his observing runs on the 100-inch, seated in the observing cage, with 
the great metal spars of the giant tube rising against the star-powdered 
night sky like the ribs of a prehistoric beast, Hubble exposed scores of deep 
plates for the nebular classifi cation project. Th ough most of the hundreds 
of thousands of nebulae were mere smudges too small to be useful, several 
hundred were bright enough and showed enough detail to be classifi ed.
Already, John C. Duncan, an Indiana graduate who had worked 
at Lowell Observatory before earning his Ph.D. at Lick Observatory and 
spent the year 1922 at Mount Wilson, had found three variable stars in 
100-inch photographs of the spiral M33 (the only other spiral, with M31, 
visible with the naked-eye). He realized they were variable stars but could 
not determine their periods. In 1923, Hubble began his own detailed study 
of several of the non-galactic nebulae, beginning with the irregular NGC 
6822 (Barnard’s galaxy) in Sagittarius, a system similar to the Magellanic 
Clouds and serving as something of a stand-in for them as they lay too far 
south to be seen from Mt. Wilson. He found several small nebulae within it 
as well as twelve variable stars. Th at autumn, he began taking deep plates of 
the Andromeda Spiral itself, looking for novae of the kind Ritchey, Curtis, 
and others had discovered—by then, over 30 were known. On a night of 
poor seeing, October 4, he exposed a plate (labeled H331) for 40 minutes, 
on which he suspected a “nova.” Th e following night, the last of his observ-
ing run, he enjoyed much better seeing, and exposed another plate (H335). 
He confi rmed the “nova,” and also found two other stars which he sus-
pected were novae and marked them as such on the plate. He then left  the 
mountain and returned to Pasadena. He seems to have put the plates aside 
for a while, but in due course—exactly when he never recorded—he began 
a more detailed study of these plates and realized that one of his three 
“novae” was not a nova aft er all. It was a variable star. He now crossed out 
“N” on the plate and replaced it with “V.” Moreover, unlike the variables in 
M33 Duncan had discovered, he was able to determine its period—31.45 
days. Th is made it a Cepheid, like those Shapley had used to estimate 
the distances to the globulars. However, its apparent magnitude—which 
ranged from 18.25 to 19.5—meant that the star system to which it belonged 
had to be very far away indeed. Using the period-luminosity relation for 

 246 
Galactic Encounters
Cepheids as calibrated by Shapley in 1918, Hubble worked out that its 
distance was a staggering 930,000 light years. (As we now know, Shapley’s 
calibration, which was used between 1918 and 1952, was incorrect, and 
Hubble greatly underestimated the distance to the Great Spiral M33; it is 
now known to be 2.51 million light years.).
Hubble capped a triumphal year in February 1924, when he mar-
ried Grace Leib, the widow of a geologist who had been killed in a mining 
accident, and set out with her on a honeymoon to Europe, which included 
a visit to his beloved Oxford. Before he left , Hubble penned a note to Shap-
ley, “You will be interested to hear that I have found a Cepheid variable 
in the Andromeda Nebula (M31). I have followed the nebula this season 
as closely as the weather permitted and in the last fi ve months have net-
ted nine novae and two variables.”29 He included a rough diagram of his 
fi rst variable’s light curve, which showed it to behave in the usual Cepheid 
fashion. Shapley was stunned. Supposedly—according to his graduate stu-
dent Cecilia Payne, who happened to be in the offi  ce when Hubble’s letter 
arrived—exclaimed, “Here is the letter that has destroyed my universe!”30 
Th at certainly sounds like the kind of thing Shapley would have said.
Shapley was not the only one to learn of Hubble’s results. He shared 
them informally with Heber D. Curtis, Henry Norris Russell and others, 
and while on his honeymoon, discussed them at the Royal Astronomical 
Society in London, and in November, they even fi gured in a report in the 
New York Times. But he was holding back. As he confi ded later to Russell: 
“the real reason for my reluctance … was, as you may have guessed, the 
fl at contradiction to van Maanen’s rotations.”31 Only on January 1, 1925 did 
Hubble allow Russell to read a short paper, “Cepheids in Spiral Nebulae,” 
to a meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. 
For all practical purposes, the “great debate” was over. Th e spirals 
were “island universes,” true galaxies. Admittedly, van Maanen contin-
ued to stand fi rmly behind his rotations, and never would retract, but at 
least everywhere except on Mt. Wilson, the matter was settled. Even van 
Maanen’s close friend Shapley publicly conceded when Hubble published 
a paper giving light curves for twelve variables, all of the normal Cepheid 
type, in NGC 6822—thus it was this rather inconspicuous object in Sagit-
tarius, discovered by E. E. Barnard while hunting for comets in Nashville, 
and not the Andromeda Spiral deserves to be remembered as “the fi rst 
object defi nitely assigned to a region outside the galactic system.”32 It is a 
dwarf galaxy, a minor member of the Local Group, whose distance has now 
been set at 1.63 million light years.
Hubble published his paper on NGC 6822 and another, similar one, on 
Cepheids in M33 in 1926. Th at year, also, he published his classifi cation 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 247
system—though without the I.A.U.’s imprimatur. Having been criticized by 
his colleagues on Commission 28 for introducing unjustifi ed evolutionary 
terms, such as “early,” “middle” and “late,” he tacked with the winds, and 
took pains to emphasize that what he proposing was meant to be “descrip-
tive and entirely independent of any theory.”33 Th e published classifi cation 
was, in fact, very similar to the draft  he had circulated in 1923, featuring 
ellipticals, spirals, and irregulars, but he had waited so long to publish that in 
the event he was forestalled. A similar classifi cation scheme was published 
a few months before his by the Swedish astronomer Knut Lundmark, who 
had been working on the problem since at least 1922 and knew nothing of 
Hubble’s private correspondence with Slipher or the other members of the 
I.A.U. Committee. Lundmark likewise divided his nebulae into ellipticals, 
spirals, and the small group of irregulars which did not fi t into the other cat-
egories and which he termed “magellanic.”34 By this time, Hubble was clearly 
coming to regard the “non-galactic” nebulae—henceforth referred to as 
“extragalactic”—as his exclusive province, and went so far as to accuse Lun-
dmark of plagiarism; he was always intensely competitive, and jealous of his 
prerogatives. He could well have aff orded to be more magnanimous, since 
by 1926, with his discovery of the Cepheids in the spiral nebulae, he was like 
Fig. 11.5. (left) Hubble’s negative plate, showing the star he at ﬁ rst thought was a nova but later realized 
was a Cepheid variable (VAR!). Courtesy of The Carnegie Observatories (the copyright holder and doing 
business as “The Carnegie Observatories”)
Fig. 11.6. (right) Cepheid variable V1, indicated by red arrow. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
247

 248 
Galactic Encounters
Zeus on Olympus towering over his rivals. In Hubble’s hands, the 100-inch 
telescope was achieving the “Manifest Destiny” that Hale, with his dream of 
a monopolistic and dominant factory observatory, had always planned for it.
Hubble would never repeat the plagiarism charge, though in future 
publications he did relegate mention of Lundmark’s work to brief mention 
in a footnote, and said no more about it. A footnote it would remain. But 
it is at least worth noting that Walter Baade, the greatest observer on Mt. 
Wilson aft er Hubble, said long aft erward, “In the early 1920s, two classifi ca-
tion schemes were proposed almost simultaneously, one by Lundmark, one 
of by Hubble. Both were based on the large collections of plates that had 
been made at the Lick and Mt. Wilson Observatories. Th ere was not much 
diff erence between the two systems.”35
In Hubble’s 1926 version of his classifi cation scheme, there were ellip-
ticals (E-type galaxies) as before, but now the spirals were separated into two 
branches, “normal” spirals (S-type) and “barred” spirals (SB-type). Barred spi-
rals, to which attention had been fi rst called by Curtis, were a subfamily of gal-
axies of the basic spiral type in which the nucleus appeared to be surrounded 
by a ring, across which a more or less prominent bar extended. Curtis, who 
had majored in classics before taking up astronomy, had compared the form 
to the Greek letter ; to Hubble they resembled the Greek letter . 
Th e fi nal fl ourish, the famous tuning-fork diagram, appeared only 
in 1936. Again, Hubble was borrowing from Jeans, who had already pub-
lished a similar Y-shaped diagram in his 1929 book Astronomy and Cos-
mogony to show the diff erent forms assumed by his rotating masses. Hub-
ble’s diagram was basically a musical tuning-fork laid onto its side. From 
the base of the tuning fork to the beginning of the prongs are the ellipticals, 
ranged from globular to increasingly fl attened. Along one prong lie the 
normal spirals opening up from Sa to Sb to Sc, along the other the barred 
spirals, opening up from SBa to SBb to SBc. Infl uenced by Jeans—and also, 
perhaps unconsciously, even by his arch-enemy van Maanen, whose rota-
tions had the spirals unwinding rather than winding up as Slipher had 
them—he seems to have believed the direction of galactic evolution was 
from the base of the tuning fork to the ends of the prongs. As we now know, 
both ways are possible, though not in the exact sense of an evolution along 
the Hubble sequence. Spirals merging to form ellipticals is not the generally 
accepted idea anymore, and ellipticals can sometimes form into spirals, not 
in the way that Jeans and Hubble thought, but by accreting new gas. 
Th ough evolutionary schemes tied to it have been abandoned, the 
tuning-fork diagram certainly proves the adage that a picture is worth a 
thousand words, and rescued Hubble’s classifi cation system from the dan-
ger of being buried (and forgotten) in the back issues of the Astrophysical 
Journal. It served, as Sandage notes, as a device from which generations of 
astronomers would learn to classify galaxies:

Why did the diagram become so overwhelmingly important?  Despite 
the excellence of Hubble’s 1926 word descriptions of the classiﬁ cation, 
the diagram is much easier to understand and remember. It became the 
visual mnemonic. Indeed, we all learned to classify from it. Only later did 
we read the verbal descriptions in the 1926 fundamental paper. That 
was true in my generation. It is true now.36
Despite imperfections, Hubble’s classifi cation has stood the test 
of time and remains as a monument to his genius. A number of astrono-
mers—including Reynolds, Shapley and others at the time, and much later, 
in the 1960s, Vorontsov-Velyaminov and his colleagues—complained that 
Hubble’s system was too simple to accommodate the wide diversity of spi-
ral forms. Th e fact is, however, to quote Sandage again, “their work failed to 
advance any ideas of the physics of galaxies.” Of Hubble’s system, he writes 
appreciatively:
The great merit of Hubble’s system is the bin size of the classiﬁ cation 
boxes. It is so large that it can accommodate all the general forms of 
the spirals in a continuous sequence using only … three parameters 
isolated by Hubble. These are (1) the relative sizes of the nuclear bulge 
Fig. 11.7. Barnard’s Galaxy, NGC 6822, in Sagittarius. This is a typical dwarf galaxy, and a member of the 
Local Group. Imaged by Stephen Leshin, Sedona, Arizona, for the “Little Things Survey” at Lowell Observa-
tory. Courtesy of Stephen Leshin.
 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 249

 250 
Galactic Encounters
and the disk for the spirals; (2) the openness of the spiral pattern, or the 
“pitch angle” of the spiral arms; and (3) the degree of resolution of the 
arms into stars and gaseous nebulae. Of course, these parameters focus 
on gross features only, ignoring the ﬁ ne detail that Reynolds desired.37
Another of Hubble’s Mt. Wilson colleagues, the legendary observer 
Walter Baade, paid a similar tribute in a lecture at Harvard in 1958. Having 
used Hubble’s classifi cation system for 30 years and searched “obstinately” 
for extragalactic systems that did not fi t it, Baade confessed, “the number of 
such systems that I fi nally found—systems that really present diffi  culties to 
Hubble’s classifi cation—is so small that I can count it on the fi ngers of my 
hand.”38 
In anticipation of later discussions, we ought to point out here that 
the limitations of Hubble sequence have become much more apparent since 
the 1950s. In particular, the Hubble sequence does not reproduce well the 
vastly diff erent structures seen in galaxies in the distant universe (which 
abounds in “peculiar” types). On the other hand, for local galaxies, Hub-
ble’s system still does quite a good job, and is likely here to stay.
Although Hubble no doubt assimilated ideas from others in devising his 
classifi cation system, its very success is a tribute to his judiciousness and 
forceful advocacy of his ideas, the discovery of the Cepheids in NGC 6822 
and M31 and M33 were furthermore a tribute to the power of the 100-inch 
refl ector, and guaranteed him astronomical immortality. Today, however, 
Hubble is best remem-
bered for his velocity-dis-
tance relation for galaxies, 
known as Hubble’s law. 
It was declared, by Otto 
Struve and Velta Zebergs 
in 1962, “the most spec-
tacular discovery that has 
been made in the past 60 
years,”39 and has become 
inextricably entwined 
with the idea of the 
expanding universe. But 
here also matters become 
a bit more complicated. As 
historians of astronomy 
Hilmar Duerbeck  and 
Waltraut Seitter point out,
Fig. 11.8. Hubble Tuning Fork Diagram. Image by: Wikipedia.

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 251
Hubble has been put into the foreground by a glorifying historiography 
in such a way that astronomers who had in their hands equally large 
parts of the truth (or better, conﬁ rmation of a model by measurements) 
now live a shadowy existence [in the historians’ consciousness].40
Th is story begins, of course, with Slipher’s discovery of the large 
radial velocities of spiral nebulae. Already by 1914, when Hubble heard 
the wild applause for his paper at the A.A.S. meeting in Evanston, Illinois, 
Slipher had measured radial velocities of 13 spiral nebulae, most of which, 
he found, showed large recessional velocities. Up to that time, his greatest 
redshift  was for M104 in Virgo, and corresponded to a recessional velocity 
of 1180 km/sec. In 1921 he obtained a spectrogram of the spiral NGC 584 
in Cetus that required an exposure of 28 hours spread over the clear and 
Fig. 11.9. The giant elliptical galaxy ESO 325-G004, at the center of the cluster of galaxies known 
as Abell S0740, located at a distance of 450 million light years in the direction of the constella-
tion Centaurus. This giant elliptical has a mass of 100 billion solar masses. In this Hubble Space 
Telescope image thousands of globular clusters are noted, which appear as pinpoints of light 
contained within the diﬀ use halo. Other fuzzy elliptical galaxies dot the image, and several spiral 
galaxies are also present. Credit: J. Blakelee and NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team. 

 252 
Galactic Encounters
moonless parts of all the nights from December 31 to January 14; the red-
shift  was half again as large as for M104, and gave a recessional velocity of 
1800 km/sec. Slipher announced his result, of which he seems to have been 
justifi ably proud, in an article in the New York Times for January 21, 1921, 
registering his satisfaction with it by clipping it and carefully preserving it 
in a personal scrapbook, which is something he always did rather sparingly.
In this article he noted that if NGC 584 had started out in the region of the 
Sun when the Earth had formed, it would have traveled to a distance of 
“many millions of light years.” Th is was, as Donald E. Osterbrock notices, 
“one of the fi rst published statements by an observational astronomer on 
the expansion of the universe or the separation of the galaxies.”41 
At the same time the observers were making such headway, another 
chapter in the evolution of cosmology was being written by the theoreti-
cians. As historian Norriss S. Hetherington writes, “Cosmology, for cen-
turies consisting of speculation based on a minimum of observational 
evidence and a maximum of philosophical predilection,” was now reaching 
a point where “its theories [were] subject to verifi cation or refutation to 
Fig. 11.10. M101, in Ursa Major, at a distance of 22 million light years is the classic example of 
Hubble’s open Sc-type spiral. M101 is a large system, nearly twice the size of the Milky Way. The 
bright knots of glowing gas (HII regions) highlight regions of active star formation (marked by 
the hot, brilliant blue stars of Population I) along M101’s spiral arms. The dark dust lanes are also 
visible in this image, and are colder and denser regions where interstellar clouds may collapse to 
form new stars, while the softer, less-bright areas near the core and between the spiral arms con-
sist mainly of older Population II stars. Courtesy: K.D. Kuntz, NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage 
Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 253
a degree previously unimaginable.”42 Th e observational part of this grand 
project arguably began with the 1914 observations of V.M. Slipher, the 
theoretical part with the 1916 publication by Albert Einstein, then at the 
Friedrich-Wilhelm University in Berlin, of his General Th eory of Relativ-
ity, which featured a profound re-interpretation of gravitation in terms 
of the curvature of space-time. Within only a year, Einstein himself and 
Willem de Sitter, a Dutch astronomer who had studied under Kapteyn at 
Groningen and was now on the faculty at the University of Leiden, pub-
lished pioneering papers on the cosmological implications of Einstein’s 
theory.43 Th eir solutions were based on assumptions that the universe was 
homogeneous and isotropic. Einstein, on encountering problems fi nding 
meaningful “boundary conditions” at infi nity, had the remarkable idea to 
circumvent these problems by envisioning space as curved and closed. De 
Sitter, on the other hand, took time as completely equivalent to space, and 
assumed a constant curvature of space-time.
Both solutions were “static,” since it was assumed (according to 
the understanding of the time) that the universe was constant in size and 
Fig. 11.11. M109 , an outstanding example of a barred spiral galaxy (Hubble classiﬁ cation SBc), 
is also the brightest member of the M109 group in Ursa Major. Image obtained with the Discovery 
Channel Telescope, Lowell observatory.

did not vary systematically over time. When Einstein fi rst began working 
on the problem, he found that his solutions caused the universe either to 
collapse or expand; he couldn’t get it to stand still without introducing a 
cosmological constant (lambda) that was not present in the original Gen-
eral Relativity. If he had simply accepted the result he was getting, he might 
have predicted that the universe was expanding and—as one wag has put 
it—he might have been famous!
In Einstein’s matter-fi lled universe, the cosmological constant counter-
acted the gravitational attraction of masses, and was needed to avoid a gravi-
tational collapse (or indefi nite expansion) of the universe. In de Sitter’s model, 
the matter-density was taken to be zero, and only the cosmological constant—
which de Sitter in 1917 interpreted as the “vacuum energy density,” something 
not connected with matter but a property of the vacuum itself—was present. 
In de Sitter’s universe, the vacuum energy density produced the curvature. 
Th ese solutions were each special cases of the general solution; the Einstein 
universe contained matter and no motion, the de Sitter universe contained 
motion and no matter. Th ey represented the extreme cases, and obviously 
Fig. 11.12. NGC 1300, a prototypical barred spiral, at a distance of 69 million light years away in the con-
stellation Eridanus. Barred spirals diﬀ er from normal spirals in that the arms of the galaxy do not spiral all 
the way into the center but are connected to the two ends of a straight bar of stars containing the nucleus 
at the center. The nucleus of NGC 1300 shows an extraordinary “grand-design” spiral structure that is 
about 3,300 light years in diameter. Only galaxies with large-scale bars appear to have these grand-design 
inner spiral disks. Models suggest that the gas in a bar can be funneled inwards, then spiral into the center 
through the grand-design disk, where it can potentially fuel a central black hole. However, NGC 1300 is 
not known to have an active nucleus; either there is no central black hole, or it is not accreting matter at 
the present time. Courtesy: P. Knezek, NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
 254 
Galactic Encounters

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 255
would have to be abandoned once 
more realistic models were found.
At a time when the extra-
galactic nature of the spirals was 
still in doubt, de Sitter far-sightedly 
suggested that they might serve 
as “probe particles” whose masses 
were too small to infl uence the 
curvature of space-time. Th is idea 
was to become especially suggestive 
in light of Slipher’s radial veloc-
ity data, which neither Einstein 
nor de Sitter knew about in 1917. 
Th e Einstein universe could not 
explain the redshift s at all, but the 
de Sitter universe, as it turned out, 
with positive cosmological constant 
and negligible matter, possessed an 
overwhelming tendency to expand. 
Th e galaxy “particles” in the de Sit-
ter universe would appear to be moving away from each other and from the 
observer—i.e., they would show accelerated motion away from the observer 
(large redshift s). As soon as he learned about Slipher’s velocities, de Sitter 
concluded:
If … continued observation should conﬁ rm the fact that the spiral neb-
ulae have systematically positive radial velocities, this would certainly 
be an indication to adopt the hypothesis B (de Sitter-universe) in prefer-
ence to A (Einstein-universe).
Th e fi rst models to avoid the arbitrary and oversimplistic assump-
tions of the Einstein and de Sitter universes were proposed by the Russian 
mathematician Alexander Friedmann in 1922 and the Belgian priest-astron-
omer Georges Lemaître in 1925. However, de Sitter’s model remained very 
infl uential during much of the 1920s. Several astronomers who “now live a 
shadowy existence,” in Duerbeck’s and Seitter’s phrase, including the Ger-
man astronomer Carl Wirtz at the Strasbourg Observatory and the Swedes 
Knut Lundmark and Gustav Strömberg (Lundmark always did seem to just 
miss out), attempted to confi rm what was called the “de Sitter eff ect” (large 
redshift s at cosmologically great distances) by mapping distance (mainly 
based on apparent brightnesses of galaxies) against Slipher’s radial-velocity 
measures. Because of the limitations of their data, their results were sug-
gestive rather than defi nitive. By then, moreover, Hubble had decided to 
Fig. 11.13. Albert Einstein in 1921. From: 
Wikipedia Commons/F. Schmutzer.

 256 
Galactic Encounters
pile Pelorus on the Etna of his earlier 
achievements. On one of his regular 
trips to Europe, in 1928, he met de Sit-
ter in Leiden, and (at least according to 
his wife Grace’s notes made during the 
trip), the Dutch astronomer persuaded 
him to extend Slipher’s scale of velocity 
measurements out to greater depths in 
space.44 Slipher had by then reached the 
limit of the capability of his instruments. 
More data were clearly needed, spe-
cifi cally radial velocities of more distant 
galaxies, and this required both a larger 
telescope than the 24-inch Clark and a 
faster spectrograph. Hubble then had his 
hands full with direct photographic work 
on galaxies with the 100-inch, but he was 
able to assign the spectrographic work he 
needed to Milton L. Humason, who had 
had only an eighth grade education, and was probably the last person with an 
eighth grade education to become a professional astronomer. Humason had 
been a one-time mule driver on the Sierra Madre trail up Mt. Wilson but was 
eager to be involved in the work being done amidst the pines on the peak, 
and in 1917 caught on as janitor. He was then promoted to night assistant on 
the 100-inch, where he proved to be “careful, conscientious, and skillful with 
the mechanical tasks of observing.”45 In 1921 became a full-fl edged member 
of the research staff . Hubble and Humason together made an excellent team. 
“Almost the exact opposite of Hubble,” Osterbrock, who knew him well, has 
written, “the quiet, careful, self-eff acing Humason was outstanding as a spec-
troscopic observer who studied and understood the mechanical details of 
his instrument and techniques completely, and could sit for endless hours in 
the dark, quiet telescope dome, concentrating his entire attention on getting 
all the light of faint ‘nebulae’ through the slit and onto the plate in perfect 
focus.”46
In 1929, Hubble published his fi rst paper on the velocity-distance 
relation, the important result that came to be known as Hubble’s law. Hubble 
estimated distances on the basis the assumption that each type of galaxy in 
his classifi cation scheme obeyed a simple relationship—that of constant sur-
face brightness—so that fainter objects were physically similar to brighter 
ones, but at larger distances. He further assumed that for each type the dif-
ference in apparent magnitude between the entire “nebula” and it brightest 
stars was a constant. For radial velocities, almost all that he used had already 
been published by Slipher (whom he notoriously did not credit). Th ere was 
Fig. 11.14. Willem de Sitter. Courtesy: Yerkes 
Observatory.

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 257
only one measurement by Humason using the 100-inch, of the nebula NGC 
7619, a member of a cluster of galaxies in Pegasus, but it was an important 
one, as the redshift  (relative change in wavelength of spectral lines, denoted 
by z) was twice anything Slipher could get and yielded a radial velocity 
of +3779 km/sec. It was this data point that allowed the linear velocity-
distance relation of Hubble to emerge from the scatter-plots of his data-
defi cient rivals. Hubble thus came up with a linear plot
V = HD,
where V is the velocity of the galaxy, D its distance, and H the slope of the 
line, known as the Hubble constant, which Hubble gave as 500 km/sec per 
megaparsecs of distance (where 1 million parsecs = 1 megaparsec). 
At the time, it was still believed that the redshift s of galaxies were 
velocities due to their motion through space. We now know that they are 
actually due to the general expansion of the universe, and that Hubble’s law 
states that redshift  is proportional to distance. Since Hubble’s constant is 
the ratio of a galaxy’s distance to its redshift  “velocity,” it implies that a gal-
axy (using Hubble’s value for the moment) shows a redshift  velocity of 500 
km/sec for every Megaparsec (million parsecs) of distance from us.
In fact, it turns out that Hubble’s own value for this constant was 
much too large, partly because his “bright stars in distant galaxies” are not 
stars at all but HII regions of high absolute magnitude but mostly because 
he used, as everyone did until 1952, Shapley’s incorrectly calibrated period-
luminosity relation for the Cepheids. In 1952, Hubble’s Mt. Wilson col-
league Walter Baade showed that Hubble’s distance scale was in error by a 
factor of 2, while later in the 1950s, using the 200-inch refl ector at Palomar, 
his successor Allan Sandage revised the value still further, and found a 
value for Hubble’s constant that made the universe not twice but more like 
fi ve to ten times larger than Hubble had thought it. 
Note that the inverse of the Hubble constant, 1/H, has the units of 
time. Indeed, this Hubble time, gives the expansion age of the universe, the 
approximate time since the beginning for everything to spread out to its 
current state. Since Hubble’s value for H was too large, his value for 1/H was 
too small; in fact, his work implied a Hubble time of only 2 billion years, 
which made the universe much younger than the Earth as determined from 
radioactivity studies like those of Rutherford. (Th e currently accepted age 
of the Earth is 4.6 billion years.) Th is was a something of a paradox, since 
obviously the Earth cannot be older than the universe, so astronomers were 
long doubtful that the Hubble time could have anything to do with the age 
of the universe. Only with Sandage’s revisions, which made the universe 
fi ve or ten times older than Hubble had made it—in other words, 10 to 20 
billion years—was the paradox resolved, by making the universe comfort-

 258 
Galactic Encounters
ably older than the Earth. Cosmologist Steven Weinberg has gone so far to 
say, “Th e removal of the age paradox by the tenfold expansion of the extra-
galactic distance scale in the 1950s was the essential precondition for the 
emergence of the big bang cosmology as a standard theory.”47
Th e latest value of the Hubble constant is in the range of 67-74 km 
per sec per Megaparsec, which means that a galaxy shows a redshift  velocity 
of around 70 km/sec for each Megaparsec of distance from us. Th e expan-
sion age of the universe now becomes 13.8 billion years, and the inconsisten-
cies involving the age of the Earth and the ages of everything else (including 
the oldest stars in globular clusters, at 12 billion years) are reconciled.
In the 1930s, Hubble and Humason were busy pressing the 100-inch across 
greater and greater distances of space. First Hubble would fi nd a faint clus-
ter of galaxies on a direct plate, then Humason would obtain a spectrogram 
of one of its members. “Until lately,” Hubble wrote in 1936 in the Silliman 
lectures at Yale (published as the classic book Th e Realm of the Nebulae),
the explorations of space had been conﬁ ned to relatively short distances 
and small volumes—in a cosmic sense, to comparatively microscopic 
phenomena. Now, in the realm of the nebulae, large-scale, macroscopic 
phenomena of matter and radiation could be examined. Expectations 
ran high. There was a feeling that almost anything might happen and, in 
fact, the velocity-distance relation did emerge as the mists receded. This 
was of the ﬁ rst importance for, if it could be fully interpreted, the rela-
tion would probably contribute an essential clew [sic.] to the problem of 
the structure of the universe.48
Humason, meanwhile, was measuring larger and larger redshift s. 
One for a galaxy in the Coma cluster gave a redshift  velocity of +7500 km/
sec; another in the Gemini cluster gave +23,000 km/sec; fi nally, for galax-
ies in clusters in in Boötes and Ursa Major, he obtained velocities of 39,200 
km/sec and 41,600 km/sec, respectively. Th e latter were, as he noted, a 
seventh of the velocity of light itself.
Humason’s spectrograms were now reaching distances 35 times greater 
than the distance of Virgo cluster—some of the galaxies measured had mag-
nitudes of 17.5, making them, entire galaxies, almost as faint as the individual 
Cepheids in M31 that had fi rst betrayed the extragalactic nature of the spirals.
By leapfrogging their way to redshift s of galaxies in clusters at 
greater and greater distances, Hubble and Humason by 1936 had pushed 
the 100-inch was reaching the refl ector to the limits of its capability and 
had extended the linear relation of the Hubble diagram out to distances 
thirteen times that of the original diagram of 1929. 

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 259
Hubble’s superb biographer Gale Christianson refers to Hubble as 
the “Mariner of the Nebulae.” Th e reference to a mariner is obvious, and 
certainly apt; commanding a great telescope and tacking (no doubt on the 
starboard side!) for the shoals of distant space is like skippering one of the 
great vessels of the Age of Exploration. But perhaps Hubble himself would 
have preferred a diff erent analogy, one to his favorite pastime of fl y-fi sh-
ing. Fly-fi shing is indeed the “high church” of fi shing, and requires great 
patience and detailed skill and knowledge of the habits and habitats of one’s 
particular quarry. Hubble was the fl y-fi sherman of the nebulae, and cast his 
line across hundreds of millions of light years.
By the 1930s, Hubble was a celebrity, and with little more to do on 
the 100-inch, was more interested in hob knobbing with Hollywood’s elite 
(for a time, Charlie Chaplin was especially in vogue) than with his fel-
low astronomers, who either envied him his celebrity or regarded him as 
enigma. He was eager for the completion of the 200-inch Palomar refl ec-
tor, which would allow him to push even farther into space, but it was 
delayed by the war. Hubble volunteered, as he had in World War I, and 
left  Mt. Wilson for the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland, where he 
was put in charge of ballistics and wind tunnels. (According to L.S. Ded-
erick, who shared an offi  ce with him, he was “mildly ineff ective” as well as 
poorly informed when it came to ballistics).49 Gradually, over 1948-49, the 
200-inch “Hale” telescope at Palomar became operational, and on his fi rst 
run with the nebular spectrograph on the telescope, in 1950-51, Huma-
son obtained a spectrogram 
for a galaxy belonging to a 
cluster in Hydra which was 
so redshift ed that the cosmo-
logical velocity came out as 
nearly 20% the speed of light. 
By then, however, Hubble’s 
health was rapidly failing. In 
July 1949, while fl y-fi shing 
his favorite stream at Rio 
Blanco Ranch in northern 
Colorado (west of Rocky 
Mountain National Park), 
he suff ered a major heart 
attack. He gradually recov-
ered to the point where he 
could return to work, though 
no longer able to smoke his 
signature pipe on doctor’s 
orders. Prematurely aged, 
Fig. 11.15. A diagram depicting Hubble’s law, the linear Hub-
ble Law relation between galaxy distance and redshift. The dia-
gram shown here is a modern version of Hubble’s original one, 
which was based almost entirely on Slipher’s spectrograms and 
included, as shown here, a large number of galaxies belonging 
to the Virgo cluster. From Wikipdeia Commons/W.C. Keel.

 260 
Galactic Encounters
clearly slowing down, he began turning over his cosmological program of 
extending the velocity-distance relation farther and farther out into space 
largely to Sandage, who became his scientifi c heir (and was the only person 
who could in any sense claim to have been his student). Th e “mariner of 
the nebulae” died suddenly of a cerebral thrombosis while riding in the car 
with Grace in September 1953. Aft erwards, his wife Grace destroyed most 
of his personal letters and papers.
His biographer has done his best to invest him in a human quality. 
But it is not entirely doable. Similarly, even his portraits have an “offi  cial” 
quality—there is none like the one of Einstein sticking his tongue out. In 
fact, they rather resemble the Greek portrait busts of the sort that art histo-
rian William M. Ivins, Jr., has described as 
“idealized” or “ennobled” … i.e., abstractions with only the faintest per-
sonal character and no psychological value. … As by deﬁ nition, the 
hallmark of “idealized” and “ennobled” representation is vacuity. This is 
the common “stuﬀ ed shirt” quality of most oﬃ  cial portraits, ancient and 
modern. That it should be an outstanding quality of by far the greater 
part of classical sculpture should be and probably is indicative of many 
things, as is also the fact that it is a quality that is most frequently singled 
out for enthusiastic approbation…. [And yet] I, personally, in spite of the 
portrait busts, cannot believe that Pericles had a vacant face.50
Fig. 11.16. Coma Cluster galaxies. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 261
Acquaintance with Hubble—or with Isaac Newton, to give another 
example, whose portraits have the same “stuff ed shirt” quality —makes one 
wonder whether, perhaps, Pericles did, aft er all.
From his fi rst result with the 200-inch for the cluster in Hydra, Humason, 
now in collaboration with Sandage, tried to get redshift s to still more dis-
tant clusters, only to encounter what appeared, at the time, to be an insu-
perable barrier: on long-exposure plates the sky brightness swamped the 
faint H and K lines of the distant galaxies’ spectra on which the distance 
measures depended. New techniques—electronic spectrographs, which 
allowed astronomers to perform sky subtraction techniques—allowed 
astronomers, including Sandage himself, to surpass each barrier in turn—
we have already referenced Sandage’s fi ve to ten times expansion of the 
extragalactic distance scale in the 1950s. But even then, the end was not yet 
in sight. Before he died in 1972, Humason noted that “there is apparently 
no horizon, at least as far as the 200-inch goes—it just continues… the 
nebulae go on, they get fainter and fainter.”51
Th e latest iterations of the 
Hubble diagram combine data not from 
a couple dozen redshift s like Hubble’s 
fi rst in 1929 but from millions of red-
shift s. His graph has now been extended 
deeper and deeper into space (and its 
extension has brought some surprises, 
described in chapter 15). We are now 
almost reaching the horizon Humason 
referred to. 
Th e progress of astronomy in 
the past sixty years can be read from the 
successive records for redshift s, which 
went from the z = 0.2 of the Hydra clus-
ter in the early 1950s, to z=0.461 for the 
radio galaxy 3C295 by the early 1960s, 
to z=2 for the quasar 3C9 in 1965. By 
the late 1980s, quasars were being regu-
larly found with z greater than 4. Th e 
current record, for the galaxy UDFj-
39546284, imaged in 2009 in the Ultra 
Deep Field obtained with the Wide 
Field Camera 3 (WFC3) on the Hubble 
Space Telescope, is claimed to be at z = 
11.9.
Fig. 11.17. From left to right in this 1986 image: 
Olin Eggen, Donald Lynden-Bell, and Allan 
Sandage. Their inﬂ uential 1962 paper suggested 
that the Milky Way formed by collapse of a large 
proto-galactic nebula. Sandage was the closest 
thing to a student that Hubble ever had. Courtesy: 
Professor Kenneth C. Freeman.

 262 
Galactic Encounters
We hasten to add that z=2 or z=4 does not mean that the quasar or 
galaxy is fl ying away from us at a velocity twice or four times the speed of 
light. Velocities of greater than about 0.3 cannot be thought of as velocities 
in the ordinary sense; instead the relative wavelength redshift s are almost 
entirely due to the cosmological expansion, and the calculations of expan-
sion velocities now require a correction involving the special theory of 
relativity, according to which nothing can travel faster than c, the speed 
of light. For a relative wavelength redshift  of 2, the corresponding cosmo-
logical redshift  is z=0.8 (the expansion velocity is 80 percent the speed of 
light), for a relative wavelength redshift  of 4, z = 0.9 (expansion velocity is 
90 percent the speed of light), and so on. For these distant objects, the light 
is shift ed from the optical into the near-infrared—and even, in the case of 
the remnant radiation from the Big Bang known as the Cosmic Microwave 
Background (see chapter 14), for which the relative wavelength redshift  is 
1100, with the peak emission all the way into the microwave.52
In some ways, it is true, we are now entering the post-Hubble era. Th e 
Hubble classifi cation system fails for galaxies in the distant universe, and the 
resolutely straight-line of the Hubble diagram has now begun to bend for 
galaxies with cosmological redshift s. Einstein’s cosmological constant is non-
zero aft er all. Moreover, as discussed later, we now have not only ordinary 
baryonic matter to contend with, but dark matter and dark energy as well. 
Nevertheless, the basic framework remains, and will always remain, 
Hubble’s. Observational cosmology is now opening up exciting frontiers of 
which Hubble never dreamed, but it still rests majestically on the shoulders 
of the Olympian.
*   *   *
 1. Richard Berendzen, Richard Hart, and Daniel 
Seeley, Man Discovers the Galaxies (New York: 
Science History Publications, 1976), 145-146.
 2. Quoted in Raymond S. Dugan, “Max Wolf,” 
Popular Astronomy, 41, 5 (1933):239.
 3. Max Wolf, “On the dark nebula NGC 6960,” 
Astronomische Nachrichten, 219 (1923), 109-
116; translated by Brian Doyle and Owen Ging-
erich in Kenneth R. Lang and Owen Gingerich, 
eds., A Source Book in Astronomy and Astro-
physics, 1900-1975 (Cambridge, Mass. and Lon-
don, England: Harvard University Press, 1979), 
568-570. Th e region chosen by Wolf for analysis 
is the so-called Cygnus Loop, now recognized as 
a supernova remnant. Wolf correctly shows by 
star counts that the obscuration here is caused 
by dust rather than by gas.
 4. M. Wolf, “Die Klassifi zierung der Kleinen 
Nebelfl ecken,” Publ. Astrophys. Inst. Konigstühl-
Heidelberg, 3 (1909), 109-112. 
 5. Osterbrock, “Observational Approach to Cos-
mology,” 270.
 6. Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 14.
 7. Ibid., 331.
 8. Shapley, Th rough Rugged Ways, 57.
 9. Quoted in Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 326-
327.
 10. Ibid., 326.
 11. Ibid. 
 12. Ibid., 248.
 13. Donald E. Osterbrock, Yerkes Observatory, 
1892-1950: the birth, near death, and resurrec-
tion of a scientifi c research institution. Chicago: 
University of Chicago, 1997.

 
Chapter 11: From Olympus 263
 14. E.A. Fath to V.M. Slipher, Feb. 16, 1917; Lowell 
Observatory Archives.
 15. Sandage, Mt. Wilson Observatory, 483.
 16. E. P. Hubble, “Changes in the Form of the 
Nebula NGC 2261,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 2 (1916), 230.
 17. E. P. Hubble, Photographic Investigations of Faint 
Nebulae (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1920) (Hubble’s Ph.D. dissertation).
 18. Sandage, Mt. Wilson Observatory, 481.
 19. Ibid., 493.
 20. On Roberts, see: Lee T. Macdonald, “Isaac Rob-
erts, E.E. Barnard and the Nebulae,” Journal for 
the History of Astronomy, xli (2010), 239-259.
 21. E.P. Hubble, “A General Study of Diff use Galac-
tic Nebulae,” Astrophysical Journal, 56 (1922), 
162-199; and “Th e Source of Luminosity in 
Galactic Nebulae,” Astrophysical Journal, 56 
(1922), 400-435.
 22. For details about Reynolds, see: David L. Block 
and Kenneth Freeman, Shrouds of the Night. 
New York: Springer, 2008.
 23. E. P. Hubble to V.M. Slipher, Feb. 23, 1922; Low-
ell Observatory Archives.
 24. W.H. Wright to V.M. Slipher, March 7, 1922; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 25. V.M. Slipher to W.H. Wright, March 14, 1922; 
Lowell Observatory Archives.
 26. E. P. Hubble to V.M. Slipher, April 4, 1923; Low-
ell Observatory Archives.
 27. V.M. Slipher, note on Hubble manuscript, “Th e 
Classifi cation of Nebulae,” Lowell Observatory 
Archives.
 28. J. C. Duncan, “Th ree Variable Stars and a Sus-
pected Nova in the Spiral Nebula M33 Trian-
guli,” Publications of the Astronomical Society of 
the Pacifi c, 34 (1922), 290-291
 29. E.P. Hubble to Harlow Shapley, Feb. 19, 1924; 
Hubble manuscript collection, Henry L. Hun-
tington Library, San Marino, California.
 30. Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, An Autobiography 
and Other recollections (ed. Katherine Hara-
mundanis (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1984), 209.
 31. Richard Berenzden and Michael Hoskin, “Hub-
ble’s Announcement of Cepheids in Spiral Neb-
ulae,” Astronomical Society of the Pacifi c Leafl et 
No. 504 (June 1971), 11.
 32. E.P. Hubble, “NGC 6822, a remote stellar sys-
tem,” Astrophysical Journal, 62 (1925), 409.
 33. E.P. Hubble, “Extra-galactic nebulae,” Astro-
physical Journal, 64 (1926), 321-369.
 34. Knut Lundmark, “A Preliminary Classifi cation 
of Nebulae,” Arkiv for Matematik Astronomi och 
Fysik, Band 19B, no. 8 (1926).
 35. Walter Baade, Evolution of Stars and Galaxies 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1963), 12.
 36. Quoted in Block and Freeman, Shrouds of Night, 
204.
 37. Sandage, Mt. Wilson Observatory, 489.
 38. Baade, Evolution of Stars and Galaxies, 18.
 39. Otto Struve and Velta Zebergs, Astronomy of the 
20th century (New York: Macmillan, 1962), 469.
 40. Hilmar W. Duerbeck and Waltraut C. Seit-
ter, “In Hubble’s Shadow: early research on 
the expansion of the universe,” in C. Sterker 
and J. Hearnshaw, eds., 100 Years of Observa-
tional Astronomy and Astrophysics (Brussels: C. 
Sterker, 2001), 238.
 41. Osterbrock, “Observational Approach to Cos-
mology,” 275.
 42. Norriss S. Hetherington, “Hubble’s Cosmology,” 
in Norriss S. Hetherington, ed., Cosmology: 
historical, literary, philosophical, religious, and 
scientifi c perspectives. (New York and London: 
Garland Publishing, 1993), 366.
 43. A. Einstein, “Kosmologische Betrachtungen 
zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie,” SB Prus-
sian Akademie Wissenschaft en, Berlin, phys.-
math. Kl. No. 6; and W. de Sitter, “On Einstein’s 
theory of gravitation, and its astronomical con-
sequences.” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, 78 (1917), 3.
 44. Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 198.
 45. Osterbrock, “Observational Approach to Cos-
mology,” 276.
 46. Ibid., 276-277.
 47. Steven Weinberg, Th e First Th ree Minutes: a 
modern view of the origin of the universe (New 
York: Bantam Books, 1977), 26.
 48. E.P. Hubble, Th e Realm of the Nebulae (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1936), 120.
 49. Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 305.
 50. William M. Ivins, Art and Geometry: a study 
in space intuitions (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1946), 26-27.
 51. Christianson, Edwin Hubble, 347.
 52. A very clear exposition of this is found in Maria 
Luiza Bedran, “A comparison between the Dop-
pler and cosmological redshift s, American Jour-
nal of Physics, 70, 4 (April 2002), 406-408.

Dear Book, what a strange thing the unbridled mind is. A sequence of 
thoughts can develop—move rapidly from stage to stage, and end in 
a conclusion (a deﬁ nite, unique conclusion) in a few eye-closings. And 
what is the “unique conclusion” worth?  Perhaps absolutely nothing. 
Conclusion may not result from premise; there may be spaces—inﬁ ni-
ties wide—between successive steps.
—W.W. Morgan, personal notebook; December 29, 1956
I
t is now common knowledge that the Milky Way is a vast spiral star 
system which we view edgewise from just outside one of the spiral arms. 
Th e fi rst clear demonstration of the fact, by Yerkes Observatory astronomer 
William Wilson Morgan, occurred only in 1951. Th is was one of the grand-
est discoveries in the history of astronomy, and when Morgan presented it, 
in a fi ft een minute talk at the American Astronomical Society Society in 
East Cleveland, Ohio, the day aft er Christmas 1951, he received a resound-
ing ovation, that included not only clapping but stomping of feet. (It was 
the fi rst time that had happened at an A.A.S. meeting since V.M. Slipher 
announced the large radial velocities of the spirals in 1914.) But for vari-
ous reasons—not least that Morgan suff ered a nervous breakdown that led 
to hospitalization only a few months later—no defi nitive account of his 
discovery appeared at the time.1
Morgan had used optical methods to detect the nearer spiral arms. 
When he left  Billings Hospital at the University of Chicago, Morgan was 
determined to reconstitute himself and reorganize his psyche through a 
systematic program of self-help and psychoanalysis which he would docu-
ment in a remarkable series of personal notebooks he kept for the rest of 
his life (fi rst studied in detail by one of us, W.S., in preparation for a full-
scale biography of the great astronomer). By the time he returned to Yerkes, 
the Dutch astronomer Jan Oort and his Dutch and Australian collaborators 
had independently announced the discovery of the spiral-arm structure 
12. W.W. Morgan
and the Discovery of 
the Spiral Arms
of the Milky Way
264
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_12, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 265
of the Milky Way on the basis of radio telescope observations. At the time 
their results seemed more far-reaching, since whereas Morgan had only 
identifi ed the nearby spiral arms, radio astronomers were able to detect 
structures on the optically hidden far side of the Galaxy.
At fi rst, the discoveries of Oort and his collaborators overshadowed 
Morgan’s work. Only later, in about 1970, was it realized that the radio 
distances were not as accurate as had been assumed because of large-scale 
systematic deviations from circular orbits of the hydrogen gas clouds on 
which they had relied for their measurements. Th us, the radio maps were 
not very reliable, and the uniqueness of Morgan’s achievement began once 
more to be fully appreciated.2
Recall that at the beginning of the 20th century, the standard model of the 
Galaxy was that off ered by the Dutch astronomer J.C. Kapteyn who, much 
as William Herschel had done in 1785, regarded the Galaxy as a small 
disk of stars. Since Kapteyn ignored the eff ects on starlight of interstellar 
dust, his model, like Herschel’s, included only the nearer stars; as a result, 
his disk measured a mere 4000 parsecs long by 1000 parsecs wide, and 
remained centered on or near the Solar System. As we have seen, Kapteyn’s 
model was eventually undermined by Harlow Shapley’s work on globular 
clusters, while it was also becoming clear, from Barnard’s wide-angle pho-
tographs of the Milky Way, that there were dust clouds scattered along the 
Galactic Plane that would redden and obscure more distant stars. Mean-
while, Heber D. Curtis, then at Lick Observatory, making a careful study 
of spiral nebulae on images with the Crossley refl ector, noted their fam-
ily resemblance—they appeared to him to form a class of similar objects 
distributed at diff erent angles and at diff erent distances. Moreover, where 
they were seen edge-on, dark rift s divided them, which Curtis recognized 
as similar to the dark dust clouds of the Milky Way that Barnard had pho-
tographed. Th ough Curtis was sure that the spirals were “island universes,” 
it was only with Edwin Hubble’s discovery of the Cepheid variables in the 
Andromeda Nebula in 1923-24 that this result was accepted as proved by 
most astronomers. Th us, within only a few years Kaptyen’s rather quaint 
model of the Galaxy had been discredited, and the Milky Way itself now 
seemed one of countless millions of “star systems” strewn throughout 
the Universe. It might well be a majestic spiral in its own right (as had 
been suggested as early as 1900 by a Dutch amateur astronomer, Corne-
lis Easton), though it might also be a fl attened elliptical. Determining its 
actual structure would prove to be one of the most daunting problems of 
20th century astronomy.

 266 
Galactic Encounters
For many years, optical astronomers continued to tackle the problem by 
means of brute-force star counts and methods of statistical analysis such 
as those used by Kapteyn. Th ese were basically refi nements of the methods 
introduced by William Herschel when he carried out his star-gages at the 
end of the 18th century. Th e basic idea was simple: as one counted stars, 
the number of stars was expected to rise in the vicinity of a spiral arm and 
then drop off  beyond it. Unfortunately, though a number of astronomers 
made enormous eff orts in these directions, it became increasingly apparent 
that brute-star counts wouldn’t lead to the desired result. 
Kapteyn died in 1921. Largely as a result of his infl uence, Dutch 
astronomers continued his work on the problems of galactic structure. 
Th e most brilliant of them was Jan Oort, who during the 1920s refi ned 
knowledge of galactic rotation and modifi ed Kapteyn’s model by introduc-
ing the notion that there must be much more interstellar absorption by 
dust than had been realized. He noted that because of galactic rotation, 
“there was a well-defi ned relationship between radial velocities, distances 
and angles, which meant that measured systematic radial velocities could 
be converted to approximate distances in a straightforward way.”3 Unfor-
tunately, Oort did not have the telescopes to provide the kinds of data he 
needed – aft er all, the Netherlands, whose mean elevation is below sea-
level, is one of the worst imaginable places on Earth for optical astronomy!  
On the other hand, the electromagnetic spectrum includes far more than 
just the optical window. Beyond the red, there are the infrared, microwave 
and radio regions of the spectrum; beyond the violet, the ultraviolet, X-ray, 
and gamma-ray regions. Radio was the fi rst area outside the optical to be 
exploited by astrono-
mers in their studies 
of the Galaxy. In 1931, 
radio emissions from the 
center of the Galaxy were 
detected serendipitously 
by the Bell Telephone 
Labs engineer Karl Jansky 
using an antenna on a 
“merry-go-round” track 
at Holmdel, New Jersey, 
while just before the war, 
detailed radio maps, 
which included such 
powerful radio sources as 
Cygnus X-1 and Cassio-
peia A for the fi rst time, 
were made by an amateur 
Fig. 12.1. W. W. Morgan inspecting M31 plate. Courtesy: Yerkes 
Observatory.

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 267
radio operator and amateur astronomer, Grote Reber at Wheaton, Illinois, 
using a homebuilt steerable radio dish he set up in his own backyard. Oort, 
however, was the professional astronomer to fully realize the great poten-
tial of a new and powerful technique, and grasp that it would potentially 
allow penetration even of the interstellar dust clouds. 
Unfortunately, Oort’s research was disrupted by the war, during 
which Holland came under German occupation. Nevertheless, there a 
conceptual breakthrough occurred aft er a wartime seminar in which he 
posed to a brilliant Utrecht student, Henrik C. van de Hulst, the question 
of whether there was any spectral line at radio frequencies that could in 
principle be detected with a radio receiver. Aft er a few months of studying 
the question, van de Hulst announced that indeed there was—the 21-cm 
line of the ground state of hydrogen (neutral hydrogen, HI). Given the 
vast abundance of hydrogen in the gas in the Galactic Plane, Oort at once 
realized that mapping interstellar hydrogen would likely lead to the dis-
covery of the Galaxy’s spiral arms. However, there were delays in getting 
the proper equipment—not least the tragic loss of one of Oort’s receivers, 
which was destroyed in a fi re.
Meanwhile, optical astronomers were unfolding their own strategy. 
Noting the failure of the brute star-counts approach, historian Owen Ging-
erich has noted, “the solution to this puzzle lay elsewhere, with the observa-
tional analysis of the Andromeda Nebula and other nearby galaxies.”4 Th is 
observational analysis was emerging at almost the very same time that Oort 
was fi rst exploring the use of radio astronomy to unravel galactic structure. 
Th ough it would add a touch of drama to suggest there was a race, in fact 
radio and optical astronomers pursued their research quite independently; 
neither was particularly concerned with the other’s methods or results. 
An Artist, and a Philosopher of the Stars
Among the optical astronomers researching the structure of the Galaxy, the 
key fi gure was William Wilson Morgan.
Like Barnard, Morgan was a native of Tennessee. He was born on 
January 3, 1906 in the tiny hamlet of Bethesda, which no longer exists. 
With his parents, who were home missionaries in the Southern Method-
ist Church, he was constantly on the move. From Bethesda, he moved to 
Crystal River, Florida; then to Starke, Florida, where he claimed to have 
seen Halley’s Comet in 1910 (though it may actually have been the much 
brighter Great Comet of 1910); to Punta Gorda; to Key West; to a farm 
near Punta Gorda; to Perry, Florida; to Colorado Springs, Colorado; to 
Poplar Bluff , Missouri; to Spartanburg, South Carolina; and fi nally, at age 
12, to Washington, D.C., with his mother (his father, a rather domineering, 

 268 
Galactic Encounters
volatile, and sometimes violent man, was away much of the time working 
as a kind of itinerant inspirational speaker). He hardly spent two succes-
sive years in the same place, and what education he received was through 
homeschooling by his mother. As with others who have suff ered from 
unhappy and abusive childhoods, Morgan found a refuge in the stars. In an 
interview, he recalled:
The stars gave me something that I felt I could stay alive with. The stars 
and the constellations were with me, in the sense that on walks in the 
evening, I was part of a landscape which was the stars themselves. It 
helped me to survive.5
Morgan’s fi rst formal encounter with astronomy occurred in the win-
ter of 1918-19, when the deadly infl uenza epidemic was raging. His father 
was as usual gone for an extended period and Morgan, with his mother and 
sister, moved to Frederickstown, Missouri, where a Methodist junior col-
lege (Marvin College) and an attached high school were located in a cow 
pasture. Morgan entered high school there in the fall of 1919. He received 
his fi rst astronomy book (a collection of star maps) from his Latin teacher, 
Alice Witherspoon, and she arranged his fi rst view through a telescope: of 
the Moon. At the same time, Morgan was discovering his father’s set of the 
Harvard Classics—“Dr. Eliot’s six-foot shelf of books,” so-called because 
Harvard president Charles W. Eliot (the same man who had hired E. C. 
Pickering to direct the Harvard College Observatory) had selected them. 
One of these books included the Elizabethan play Doctor Faustus by Chris-
topher Marlowe, and 67 years later Morgan recalled the electrifying eff ect 
the play had on him:
The picture of the partially legendary Faustus, the man who longed to 
press outward toward the horizons of knowledge—and beyond to the 
stars—has been the ruling passion of my life.6
Morgan fi nished his last two years of high school at Central High 
School in Washington, D.C. His father, who had apparently started out as a 
fi re-and-brimstone preacher who took a rigid and literal-minded interpre-
tation of the Scriptures, viewed the prohibition against working on the Sab-
bath literally, so that when Morgan was in school he was strictly forbidden 
to do any work on Sundays at all. As a result, he was always falling behind:
I remember late in high school, in Washington, D.C., I always dreaded 
Sunday night because I never was prepared for Monday. So it was a 
question of just survival. Just passing was all. And that’s what it was like 
through these years.7

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 269
In the fall of 1923 Morgan enrolled at Washington and Lee University in 
Lexington, Virginia. Although he was interested in astronomy, he had no 
idea that it would become his profession. Instead, he decided to specialize 
in English, in preparation for becoming a teacher. However, he performed 
well in mathematics, physics, and chemistry, and even talked his physics 
teacher, Benjamin Wooten, into acquiring a small astronomical telescope, 
so he could observe sunspots. 
Th en in the summer of 1926, a year before Morgan was to fi nish his 
degree, Wooten, during a vacation to the Midwest, paid a visit to Yerkes 
Observatory. When he went up the stairs and rang the doorbell, the direc-
tor, Edwin B. Frost, happened to be just inside. Wooten told Frost about 
the student who had pressed him to buy a telescope. Frost, meanwhile, was 
just then looking for an assistant to operate the Observatory’s spectrohe-
liograph and use it for the routine work of obtaining daily images of the 
Sun (the previous incumbent had just left  to take a job as chair at North-
western University in Evanston, Illinois). Morgan was to be off ered the 
job, but there were still diffi  culties, not least the fact that Morgan’s father 
was violently opposed, thinking that he would “end up just in a laboratory 
working for somebody else, [and] that’s nothing.”8 Th at was to be the last 
conversation Morgan had with his father about anything; his father, who 
had been absent for long periods previously, now decided to abandon the 
family completely—Morgan would never see him again, and could not 
even fi nd out what happened to him or where or when he died.
Th e rage and disappointment Morgan felt toward his father was 
refl ected in a symbolic act. Aft er his father left , Morgan appropriated the 
set of Harvard Classics, and savagely ripped his father’s name plates out 
of all the books save one (where he missed the name plate because it had 
been accidentally affi  xed to the back rather than to the inside front cover of 
the book, like all the rest). One has a sense that with this act Morgan was 
symbolically attempting to tear his father out of his life.
At Yerkes, Morgan lived at fi rst in the basement of the Observatory, 
but soon aft erward married Helen Barrett, the daughter of Yerkes astrono-
mer and librarian Storrs Barrett (who had also been E. E. Barnard’s closest 
friend on the staff ), and the couple moved into a small house 30 meters 
east of the Observatory. Morgan would remain there for the rest of his life.
In 1931, Frost fi nally retired, and was replaced by Otto Struve, a 
Russian immigrant descended from a very distinguished family of Russian 
astronomers. Struve was an imposing, hulking man whose eyes were not quite 
congruent—you could never quite tell if he was looking at you. He had a gruff , 
bearish manner, but he was also possessed of enormous drive and an incred-
ibly hard worker, and he became something of a father-fi gure to young Mor-

 270 
Galactic Encounters
gan. Struve was an astrophysicist who was interested in using stellar spectra 
as a tool to understand what was going on physically in stars, while Morgan 
was from the fi rst temperamentally drawn to problems of stellar classifi cation. 
Struve once remarked that he had never looked at the spectrum of a star, any 
star, where he did not fi nd something important to work on. Th e remark made 
a lasting impression on Morgan, and as early as 1935, he produced his fi rst 
paper on stellar classifi cation, “A descriptive study of the spectra of A Stars.”9
A year later, Bart Bok, a Dutch-American astronomer who had 
studied with Oort in Leiden but did most of his work at Harvard, gave a 
series of lectures at Yerkes. Bok had been making heroic attempts to solve 
the problem of galactic structure by means of brute-force star counts and 
methods of statistical analysis but, aft er ten years of hard slogging, had 
begun to think the task of tracing out the spiral arms of the Milky Way 
was almost hopeless. “In public lectures during that period I oft en said it 
was unlikely the problem would be solved in my lifetime,” he aft erward 
recalled.10 In his lectures at Yerkes, Bok inspired Morgan “… to improve the 
distances of the hotter stars and to investigate the structure of the Milky 
Way with the help of these distances.” Th ese hotter stars included stars of 
spectral type B and their even brighter, much rarer cousins, the O stars. 
Unfortunately, none of the closer stars are B stars, and there are only a few 
within a distance of 300 light years. Nevertheless, these stars, which include 
such splendid suns as Rigel, Achernar, beta Centauri, Spica, alpha and 
beta Crucis, and Regulus, are so intrinsically bright that they dominate the 
naked-eye sky all out of proportion to their numbers.
Th e B stars are young hot stars, and are very bright in ultraviolet. 
Th ey are rapidly rotating stars, and in some of them the velocities of rota-
tion can be as high as 200 km/sec, so that they eject matter into equatorial 
rings that radiate bright emission lines. Th ey had been grouped together in 
a spectral classifi cation in the Henry Draper Catalog. Th e Draper Catalog’s 
familiar categories—OBAFGKM—was a one-dimensional classifi cation 
which, as suspected by the Harvard classifi ers themselves but proved at Mt. 
Wilson in 1908—was keyed to temperature. (In the hotter stars—those of 
classes A, B, and O—the spectral type is determined largely by the strength 
of the hydrogen lines (Balmer lines; see chapter 8) and the increasingly 
dominant presences of lines of singly or doubly ionized helium. In the 
even hotter O stars, these include not only absorption but emission lines.)
As early as 1897, Antonia Maury had realized that there were dis-
tinctly diff erent spectra for stars of a given temperature. In some stars of a 
given type—her “c” stars—the hydrogen lines were sharper; in others they 
appeared broadened and more diff use (showing “wings”). Between 1905 
and 1907, Ejnar Hertsprung showed that the stars in which the lines were 
sharp were much more luminous than the corresponding main sequence 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 271
stars. Th ey were supergiants. Th e stars with lines broadened into wings 
were main sequence stars—dwarfs; the wings being produced by eff ects of 
surface gravity and pressure.
Th e Henry Draper Catalog was based on the way spectra appeared 
to Annie Jump Cannon, and were based on low-resolution objective-prism 
spectra. When good high-resolution spectra of stars began to be obtained 
with the Mt. Wilson 60-inch refl ector, there was much more fi ne structure 
visible, and beginning in 1914, Mt. Wilson spectroscopists W. S. Adams 
and Arnold Kohlschütter began to document in great detail the eff ects of 
luminosity on line strengths and line ratios in the spectra of these stars. In 
contrast to the one-dimensional (temperature-keyed) Harvard classifi ca-
tion system, the Mt. Wilson astronomers were developing a two-dimen-
sional classifi cation system combining temperature and luminosity criteria. 
Inevitably, the classes they assigned oft en diff ered markedly from Annie 
Jump Cannon’s, and this produced some tension between the Harvard and 
Mt. Wilson groups.
It turns out that line strengths and line ratios in stellar spectra are 
very sensitive to the precise physical conditions in stars and their atmo-
spheres. Since they are luminosity-dependent, the spectral classifi cations 
will be very sensitive to calibration eff ects. As with Shapley’s Cepheids, the 
determination of absolute magnitudes depends on accurate measurements 
of the distances of a few stars, but since these stars are distant, direct paral-
laxes are not available and the distances must be estimated in more indirect 
ways. Each recalibration of luminosities for these stars might change the 
spectral classifi cations (since numerical values were assigned to absolute 
luminosities), and diff erent groups—those at Mt. Wilson versus those at 
the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, 
for instance—used diff erent calibrations. It was beginning to seem that 
the whole fi eld of spectral classifi cation might forever remain in a state of 
confusion and fl ux.
Th e classifi cation of O and B stars was especially problematic. Th ey 
have weak spectral lines, and because of the great distances of these stars 
the Harvard astronomers oft en had diffi  cult seeing the lines at all. Th us, 
Miss Cannon had classifi ed some heavily-reddened O and B stars as A or 
even F. In 1936, when Morgan became interested in spectral classifi cation, 
he shift ed his interest to high-luminosity stars because they were precisely 
those where, as Donald Osterbrock notes,
… the Harvard classiﬁ cation was so bad. Before Morgan, people were 
using spectral types out of the Henry Draper Catalog that were not very 
good. If you take the spectral types as published in the HD and try to use 
them today, they’re terrible.11

 272 
Galactic Encounters
Morgan wanted to fi nd away around this, and in the end, he 
decided to take what Allan Sandage calls “… the drastic step of abandon-
ing the assignment of numerical values to absolute luminosities.”12 With his 
colleagues Philip Keenan and Edith Kellman (the latter providing clerical 
assistance), he began work on a new classifi cation scheme. It was a huge 
project, and was fi nally published in 1943 as the Yerkes Atlas of Stellar Spec-
tra, with an Outline of Stellar Classifi cation (known as the MKK and, more 
recently, as the MK Atlas).
Instead of the continuous absolute magnitude numbers of the 
Mt. Wilson continuum, Morgan and Keenan sorted the Mt. Wilson 
main sequence into discrete bins forming five luminosity classes: 
Ia and Ib supergiants, II bright giants, III giants, IV subgiants, and 
V dwarfs (later a category VI, for subdwarfs, was added). Thus the 
Sun, a yellow dwarf, was classed as G V. Morgan—with some of the 
psychological craving for permanence and security of one who had 
endured a childhood of constant change and uncertainty—wanted a 
classification system that would remain secure, true for all time. He 
achieved this by choosing a set of standard stars—“specimens,” he 
called them—main sequence stars whose spectra were obtained using 
the same dispersion, depth of exposure on the photographic plate 
and method of development. These stars defined a “box” or reference 
frame. All other normal stars could then be classified by comparing 
them to these standards. 
Since only temperature (or color equivalent) and luminosity 
were needed to uniquely locate a star’s spectrum, Morgan insisted that 
by simple visual inspection of a spectrogram these parameters could be 
determined and the star appropriately binned or boxed. There was no 
need to measure anything. If the standard spectrum of the star looked 
like a 08Ia, then it was intrinsically like his standard 08Ia star. It was 
up to the astrophysicists to turn these spectral types into temperatures 
and gravities—after their luminosities had been calibrated using his 
method.
Morgan’s essentially qualitative approach was unusual in a fi eld that was 
dominated by quantitative methods, and he was once savaged by a col-
league who referred to what he was doing as “celestial botany.” But Mor-
gan himself always considered himself as much artist as scientist, and his 
method (like Hubble’s tuning-fork diagram for galaxies) withstood the test 
of time. Stellar astronomer James Kaler writes:
The standards become embedded in memory, and the typing of stars 
can proceed with impressive speed. There is a very important place for 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 273
quantitative methods…. Visual classiﬁ cation, however, is at present still 
useful in surveying in a reasonable amount of time the vast numbers of 
stars readily accessible to us.13
A Passion for Pattern-recognition
One fi nds countless examples in Morgan’s notebooks of his keen passion 
for visual pattern-recognition tasks (among other things, he used to like to 
put together jigsaw puzzles, and was famous for making them more chal-
lenging by turning the colored sides of the pieces face down and assembling 
them from their shapes alone). As soon as he could aff ord it, in the 1930s, 
he began acquiring art books, and made deep philosophical comments—all 
completely confi dential and private—which oft en convey a sense of loneli-
ness, on the artists or art-works which were most meaningful to him:
Sunset. May 19 [1942]. I want to be the man of the Rembrandt self por-
traits no 40, 41, and 58. I want to look at women the way he looked at 
Hendrickje Stoﬀ els and at the woman in no. 366. [The numbers refer to 
drawings in John C. Van Dyke, Rembrandt Drawings and Etchings, New 
York: Scribner, 1927.]
I want to look at the earth as Ma Yuan … and to feel like the sculp-
tors of the Tang Bodisattuas and to feel as does the head of Buddha.
Sunday afternoon. June 7 [1942]. Elementary images can be created 
only by sacriﬁ cing the individual phenomena, the individual value of the 
human ﬁ gure, the tree, the still-life subject. There is one characteristic of 
Cezanne’s mode of representation which one may describe as aloofness 
from life, or better, as aloofness from mankind. In Cezanne’s pictures the 
human ﬁ gure often has an almost puppet-like rigidity, while the coun-
tenances show an expression bordering almost on the mask.
July 25 1943. Everything—objects and people—are shadows 
enduring for an instant. No one can come inside where I am. Where I 
live nothing can touch me. 14
Th roughout his long career he remained deeply responsive to the pat-
terns and forms he saw in the breathtaking environs around Yerkes Observa-
tory, which he attempted to document in numerous photographs and paint-
ings. Th e following passage, written in later years while awaiting his daughter’s 
arrival at Walworth train station, is typical of countless passages written by 
Morgan, which really are unlike the writing of any other astronomer we know:
June 16 [1963]. Ah, another enchanted, cool-brilliant day; another 
communion; another sharpening of the senses, the vision, the physi-

 274 
Galactic Encounters
cal response. How like delicate ﬂ ower stems are these distant telephone 
posts. A progressive entrance into the world of reality—the World of the 
Self—during the past hour. Deeper and deeper, more and more removed 
from the ordinary. How far will it go?—how far can it go?  There seems to 
be no limit in the Possibility—and no limit set by Time.15
Another Problem in Calibration
In 1939, while using the 40-inch Yerkes refractor with a low-dispersion 
spectrograph that had been at Yerkes since the 1920s and had largely been 
abandon aft er failing in its fi rst intended application, the measurement 
of the radial velocities of stars, Morgan realized that he could identify 
the diff erent luminosity classes of B-type stars even from low-dispersion 
spectrograms. Th is was a major breakthrough since, as noted above, B-type 
supergiants, together with their even brighter but rarer cousins the O stars, 
are true stellar beacons visible, in principle, from great distances. Morgan 
and other astronomers grasped that these stars might be used to map galac-
tic structure, provided the calibration problem could be solved, i.e., their 
absolute brightnesses needed to be matched to their spectral type. 
Unfortunately, this is not so easy to do in practice. Because there are 
so few of these stars–and only a few within a few hundred light years–they 
are all dimmed and reddened by interstellar dust. Th e current belief is that 
the dust component of the interstellar medium is actually very small—only 
about 0.1% of the total mass density. Its low abundance means that the dust 
distribution is essentially determined by the distribution of gas in which 
it is embedded, and the gas is best described as being concentrated to the 
plane of the Milky Way. Since the O and B stars, being young hot massive 
stars which form in discrete molecular dust clouds, also hug the galactic 
plane, even these luminous stars cannot be seen much beyond the near-
est spiral arms—farther out, they are completely obscured—while even 
the relatively near ones we do see are more or less reddened by dust, and 
appear dimmer than they really are. Attempts to adopt them as “standard 
candles” to estimate distances across the Galaxy lead, therefore, to overesti-
mates of their distances. 
Th is dimming (or extinction) by dust must somehow be corrected 
for if we are to use these stars (even the relatively nearer ones) as distance 
indicators, and fortunately there are reasonably good ways of doing so. It 
turns out that extinction doesn’t occur uniformly across the spectrum—it 
occurs about twice as effi  ciently at the blue end as at the red—by measur-
ing the stellar magnitude in two diff erent wavelength regions and taking 
the diff erence (i.e., the Color Index) one can, at least in principle, work 
out the eff ect of the dust and estimate the brightnesses of the stars were 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 275
they not reddened, and Morgan applied this correction to all his O and B 
stars. 
Baade’s Breakthrough
In 1944, as Morgan fi nished his Atlas and was mulling the problem of cali-
brating the absolute luminosities of his B stars, a crucial breakthrough took 
place at Mt. Wilson. Th e war in Europe was raging on. Hubble had left  for 
the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland. In his absence, the 100-inch 
telescope was left  in the hands of Walter Baade, a gift ed observer who had 
done solid work with a 1-meter refl ector at the Hamburg Observatory but 
had yearned to work with the large American instruments.16 He had come 
to the United States in 1931 with the intention of applying for citizenship 
but lost his paperwork and never followed up. In a way, that was fortu-
nate, since as a German national Baade was classifi ed as an enemy alien, 
which precluded him from taking part in war work as so many astrono-
mers including Hubble did. By using the remarkably fastidious observing 
techniques for which he was famous, during nights when the lights of Los 
Angeles and Hollywood were turned out because of wartime blackout 
conditions, Baade used the 100-inch to obtain deep plates which resolved 
the faint red stars in the nucleus of the Andromeda Nebula (M31) and its 
elliptical companions M32 and NGC 205. 
He described this work in a paper submitted to the Astrophysical 
Journal in 1944.17 Morgan at the time was assisting Otto Struve as editor, 
and realizing that Baade’s plates would not reproduce well, he did as Bar-
nard had done with his Atlas of Selected Regions of the Milky Way, person-
ally producing and inspecting direct photographic prints of Baade’s plates 
which he then bound into every individual copy of the journal (its circu-
lation at the time was between 600 and 800). Th ese plates showed what 
Baade described as two stellar populations. In the spiral arms were large 
complexes of nebulae, later identifi ed as HII regions (diff use nebulae of the 
Orion type consisting of regions of hot, ionized, interstellar hydrogen) and 
hot massive bright young O and B stars. Th ese hot young stars made up 
what Baade called Population I. By contrast, the faint red old stars of the 
galactic nucleus and globular clusters made up his Population II.
As we briefl y discussed in chapter 10, Baade’s discovery of the two 
stellar populations would lead to his realization that Shapley’s calibration of 
the period-luminosity relation of the Cepheids, universally adopted since 
1918 and used by Hubble in setting up the extragalactic distance scale, was 
wrong. Admittedly, there were already growing reasons for being suspi-
cious about it. Its adoption had led to the conclusion that the Milky Way 
was much larger than any other known galaxy, and that the globular clus-

 276 
Galactic Encounters
ters of M31 were systematically fainter than those in the Milky Way; also, 
in a conundrum disturbingly similar to that posed by Lord Kelvin about 
the age of the Earth before the discovery of radioactivity, the expansion 
age of the universe derived from Hubble’s constant yielded an age much 
smaller than the age of the Earth determined from radioactive isotopes. But 
as Baade showed in 1952, each population had its own pulsating variables, 
with diff erent period-luminosity relations. Th e Population I variables were 
the classical Cepheids, like delta Cephei and those studied by Henrietta 
Leavitt in the Magellanic Clouds. Th e Population II Cepheids, also known 
as W Virginis stars, aft er their prototype the variable star W Virginis, are 
the ones found in globular clusters. Both follow a period-luminosity rela-
tion, but for a given period, the classical Cepheids are about two magni-
tudes brighter than the other type. Unwittingly, Shapley had combined 
data from the two. By recalibrating the zero point of the classical Cepheids, 
Baade showed that the distance to M31 found by Hubble had been under-
estimated by a factor of 2, which meant that the great spiral was larger than 
had been believed—in fact, it would prove to be somewhat larger than the 
Milky Way—and also its globular clusters were just as bright as those of 
the Milky Way. Th e time scale of the universe was also doubled and the 
expansion age of the universe was now consistent with the age of the Earth 
determined from radioactive isotopes. Scientists could breathe easier again.
Th ese developments still lay in the future. For now, let’s go back to 1944 
and to Morgan. A crucial point, revealed clearly in Baade’s plates, was that 
concentrations of the O and B stars—the very same bright young host stars 
that Morgan had been studying in the Milky Way for several years—were 
the tell-tale markers that defi ned the spiral arms. Th e reason they were con-
centrated in the spiral arms was that they were very young. As extremely 
bright and massive stars, they would burn out before they had time to 
migrate very far from their place of formation (as less massive, older stars, 
of the kind Kapteyn and Bok had been statistically crunching, had done). 
Th us they remained close to the swaddling clothes of gas and dust in which 
they had begun. Th is connection between stellar evolution and galactic 
structure was the essential clue that would ultimately produce the break-
through leading to the recognition of the Milky Way’s spiral-arm structure.
In the fall of 1946, Oort was a visiting professor at the Yerkes 
Observatory, and gave a series of lectures that Morgan attended. Th e lat-
ter’s pencil notes still exist, so it is possible to follow Oort’s reasoning at the 
time Morgan was rapidly beginning to formulate his own ideas. Oort was 
interested in identifying spiral arms in the Milky Way. He was just begin-
ning to study the possibility of using the methods of radio astronomy for 
the purpose (by mapping neutral hydrogen gas by means of van de Hulst’s 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 277
21-centimeter line) but continued to explore the possibility of doing so by 
optical observations. He focused on the high-luminosity B stars, and had 
been corresponding with Baade about the problem. Baade had already 
suggested to Oort (in a letter dated September 23, 1946) that an extraordi-
nary aggregation of B stars in Scorpius and Centaurus (now known as the 
Scorpius-Centaurus OB association) might be “in reality a short section of 
a spiral arm, the more so because in its orientation and motion it would fi t 
perfectly into the expected picture (the arms trailing).”18 Oort responded in 
early 1947:
I quite agree that a study of the early B-type stars would be one of the 
most important steps for ﬁ nding the spiral structure of the Galactic Sys-
tem. I have been discussing this subject with Van Rhijn [Kapteyn’s suc-
cessor at the Kapteyn Astronomical Laboratory at Groningen for some 
time], and when [Gale Bruno] Van Albada left Holland in order to pass 
a year at [Warner and Swasey Observatory in] Cleveland we suggested 
to him that he should try to star a program with the [24-inch] Schmidt 
camera for ﬁ nding faint [i.e., dust-reddened] B-type stars in the Milky 
Way…. This is a large programme, however, and I don’t think the Warner 
and Swasey people are suﬃ  ciently interested yet to start it on a suﬃ  -
ciently big scale.19
Unbeknownst to Oort, Morgan had already been teaming up with 
Jason Nassau from the Warner and Swasey Observatory on that very proj-
ect. Morgan began to spend part of each year as a Visiting Professor of 
Astronomy in Cleveland, where he and Nassau identifi ed the stars on plates 
with the Schmidt camera. Back at Yerkes, Morgan used the 40-inch refractor 
to obtain spectrograms and to classify the stars rigorously by spectral type 
and luminosity. (Th is work was later extended to more southerly regions of 
the Milky Way by astronomers at Mexico’s Tonantzintla Observatory.)
Morgan and Nassau had hardly gotten underway with this ambi-
tious survey when, in December 1947, Baade spoke on the two stellar 
populations at an American Astronomical Society meeting at the Perkins 
Observatory in Ohio. By then it seemed increasingly likely that the spiral-
arm structure of the Milky Way—if it existed—could best be mapped using 
the B stars. Baade later confi ded to Michigan astronomer Leo Goldberg 
that star-counts and statistical analysis had not led astronomers “… much 
beyond old William Herschel.” Nassau and Morgan were of the same mind 
as everyone else at the time, and fully expected that once they had mapped 
the B stars they would have a good chance of working out the spiral arm 
structure.
Nassau and Morgan were fi nishing their “galactic survey for high-
luminosity stars” in the spring of 1949 when Morgan visited Pasadena 

 278 
Galactic Encounters
and discussed his progress with Baade. Shortly aft er he returned to Yerkes, 
he wrote a long and detailed letter to Baade which summarized how far 
his thinking had progressed by then. Th e letter, not published until 2008, 
shows that Morgan already had the solution almost within his grasp:
… After thinking the matter over, it appears that the high luminosity 
stars which are observed within a fairly narrow range of true distance 
modulus [a formula relating absolute and apparent magnitudes directly 
to the distance] may well deﬁ ne a spiral arm located at a distance around 
2-2.5 kpc. outside of the Sun. I have always been puzzled at the extent 
of the super giants surrounding the double cluster in Perseus; the con-
centration is probably explicable in terms of a spiral arm rather than as a 
physical cluster. In this respect, the region of Cepheus appears to be dif-
ferent in that high luminosity objects are observed over a greater range 
in the distance; this might be explained as a foreshortened eﬀ ect for the 
outer spiral arm…
Could the nearby extended dark nebulosity in Ophiuchus and 
diametrical[ly] opposite in Perseus and Taurus be considered the tat-
tered outer remnants of the general extinction stratum of the spiral arm 
immediately within the position of the Sun?
It seems to me that within the next year it should be possible to 
reach a deﬁ nite answer…20
Baade, absorbed in trying to arrange a great sky survey using the 
new 48-inch Schmidt camera at Palomar, did not write back for several 
months, but when he did he made it clear he thought Morgan was on the 
right track:
… Your interpretation of the large number of supergiants surround-
ing the double cluster in Perseus would be in line with the ﬁ ndings in 
the Andromeda nebula. There supergiants of very high luminosity are 
always bundled up in large groups which stand out as prominent con-
densations in the spiral arms.
The nearby extended dark nebulosities in Scorpius-Ophiuchus and 
Perseus-Taurus seem to be indeed manifestations of a single dark cloud 
(“streamer”) which is tilted against the plane of the Milky Way and partly 
engulfs the solar neighborhood (both the Ophiuchus and Taurus dark 
cloud are at a distance of only 100 parsecs).
The distribution of the B stars which you ﬁ rst pointed out to me … 
leaves no doubt that the Sun is either in or close to the inner edge of the 
nearest spiral arm… I still think that the B-star program will be the ﬁ rst 
to lead to deﬁ nite information about the spiral structure in our neigh-
borhood and that you will push it as far as you can.21

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 279
In July 1950, a symposium on galactic structure, led by Baade, was 
held at the University of Michigan Observatory. Morgan and Nassau were 
both there, and reported on the progress of their survey. Within a galac-
tic belt 16° wide, they had identifi ed 900 O and B stars. For most of these 
stars, the distances had not been determined, but for 49 OB stars and 3 OB 
groups they had been able to estimate distances. When Morgan and Nassau 
plotted these stars, however, they were disappointed—expecting to detect 
defi nite signs of the Milky Way’s spiral-arm structure, they found only 
the well-known distribution of “Gould Belt” stars, a ring of brighter hot 
stars tilted at about 16° to the galactic plane that had been fi rst described 
by John Herschel and then by Benjamin Apthorp Gould in the 19th cen-
tury. As we now know, these are hot young massive stars that have formed 
Fig. 12.2. One of Don Osterbrock and Stewart Sharpless’s 120-degree wide images with the 
Greenstein-Henyey camera, that helped Morgan work out the distribution of HII regions and OB 
associations in the Perseus Arm. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 280 
Galactic Encounters
recently in a “spur” of the Orion Arm of the Galaxy (the reason for the sud-
den effl  orescence of these hot young massive stars about 40 million years 
ago isn’t entirely clear, and continues to be debated).
Eureka!
It was hardly a breakthrough to have replicated a result that was over a 
century old. Th e frontal assault on the spiral arms by using reddening-cor-
rected B stars had failed. Morgan quickly regrouped, however, and formu-
lated a grander strategy that he hinted at in another paper presented at the 
same meeting. From its title, “Application of the principle of natural groups 
to the classifi cation of stellar spectra,” its importance was hardly likely to 
have been apparent to the other participants.22 Here Morgan coined the 
expression “OB stars” to designate a category—a “natural group,” he called 
it—consisting of both O supergiant and early (young) B stars. What he 
realized was that these stars occupy a very small narrowly-defi ned area of 
the HR diagram, and he could tell even from low-dispersion spectra, “by 
just a glance, [by looking] just a few seconds at each spectrum … to tell if 
a star was located…” there.23 Remember, the HR diagram relates color or 
temperature to luminosity. Crucially, stars in this narrowly-defi ned part of 
the HR diagram varied by only 1.5 or 2 magnitudes on either side of the 
means, which were around absolute magnitudes -5 or -6. Th us he didn’t 
have to use color-corrected spectra for the distant ones at all. 
Morgan was groping toward the concept of “OB star associations” 
(the term itself was introduced later by the Armenian astronomer, Victor 
Ambartsumian). Th e O and early B stars are found in loose aggregations, 
typically consisting of a few dozen stars, the majority of type B, which 
might be spread over a volume as small as an ordinary cluster or as much 
as a few hundred parsecs across. With a fair-sized group of moderately dis-
cordant values of the luminosities Morgan could pick the mean  (-5 or -6) 
and end up with a fairly reliable distance for the group as a whole. In this 
manner he was able to plot their positions along the Galactic Plane out to 
much greater distances than he and Nassau had reached with their earlier 
survey. At the same time, Morgan added another component to his quest. 
He was solving a puzzle, like the jigsaw puzzles he put together with the 
faces down. He needed another clue. He now remembered the complexes 
of nebulae like those imaged in the spiral arms of Andromeda. Th ese com-
plexes of nebulae had been identifi ed as regions of hot ionized hydrogen 
glass, their ruby-red glow being that of the emission line of ionized hydro-
gen (H-alpha) of the Balmer series; among notable examples in the Milky 
Way were the California Nebula close to  Persei, the so-called Barnard 
Loop in Orion, and the Rosette Nebula in Monoceros. Th e HII regions 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 281
Fig. 12.3a. Morgan’s original model of the spiral arms, in which sponge rubber was 
used to depict OB groups.
Fig. 12.3b. Legend identifying features represented. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 282 
Galactic Encounters
and the OB associations would, Morgan hoped, reinforce one another, and 
fi nally allow him to put the puzzle together by tracing out the Milky Way’s 
spiral arms. 
At Yerkes at the time there was a wide-angle camera with a fi eld of 
140°, which had been developed during the war by Jesse L. Greenstein and 
Louis G. Henyey for use as a projection system to train aerial gunners. It 
could equally well be used the other way around, as a camera, and under 
Morgan’s direction two graduate students, Donald E. Osterbrock and Stew-
art Sharpless, began using it to photograph the Milky Way with narrow-
band (hydrogen alpha) fi lters (which had become available only aft er the 
war) in the search for HII regions.24 Many of the HII regions were already 
well known, but some were new; moreover, because of the very wide-fi eld 
of the photographs, they showed up as the important, extended objects 
they are.
By the fall of 1951, Morgan had been immersed in the problem of 
trying to fi nd the spiral arms of the Milky Way for at least four years. He 
had laid out what was, essentially, the correct approach to be taken to the 
problem, and since then had pursued it in a diligent and systematic way. 
Already at the time he wrote about the B stars to Baade, he was getting 
close to the solution. According to his recollection, however, the pieces of 
the puzzle fi nally fell into place rather suddenly, in a sudden fl ash of rec-
ognition, as he walked from his offi  ce to his house on an October night. 
Figs. 12.4. The moods of a genius: a. (left) Morgan concentrating at playing cards, b. (right) Morgan 
ecstatic. Informal snapshots. Courtesy: Judith Bausch, Yerkes Observatory.

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 283
His most complete account of what happened that fall evening is given in 
an August 1978 American Institute for Physics interview with David De 
Vorkin:
This was in the fall of 1951, and I was walking between the observatory 
and home, which is only 100 yards away. I was looking up in the sky … 
just looking up in the region of the Double Cluster [in Perseus], and I 
realized I had been getting distance moduli corrected the best way I 
could with the colors that were available, for numbers of stars in the 
general region…. Anyway, I was walking. I was looking up at the sky, 
and it suddenly occurred to me that the double cluster in Perseus, and 
then a number of stars in Cassiopeia, these are not the bright stars but 
the distant stars, and even Cepheus, that along there I was getting dis-
tance moduli, of between 11 and 12, corrected distance moduli. Well, 
11.5 is two kiloparsecs … and so, I couldn’t wait to get over here and 
really plot them up. It looked like they were at the same distance…. It 
looked like a concentration…. And so, as soon as I began plotting this 
out, the ﬁ rst thing that showed up was that there was a concentra-
Fig. 12.5. Morgan’s second model. juxtaposed with a section of one of Baade’s 100-inch plates 
of OB associations in a spiral arm in M31. This composite image appeared on the cover of Sky & 
Telescope in 1952. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 284 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 12.6. Star clusters and HII regions showing their distribution among the nearby spiral arms to the 
Sun. Image: Wikipedia.
tion, a long narrow concentration of young stars…. There are HII regions along 
there too … And that was the thing that broke [the problem] down.25
Th is fi rst spiral arm – the Perseus arm – was traced between galactic 
longitudes about 100 and 17° (according to the modern convention of galactic 
longitudes). As he plotted the OB stars out, Morgan found that in addition to this 
arm there was another, the Orion arm, extending from Cygnus through Cepheus 
and Cassiopeia’s chair past Perseus and Orion to Monoceros, i.e., between galactic 
longitudes 50° and 210° or 220°. Th e so-called Great Rift  of the Milky Way marked 
a part of the inner dark lane of this arm; the Sun lay not quite at the inner edge but 
100 or 200 light years inside it. It was the Sun’s proximity to – almost immersion 
in – this arm that had made it so diffi  cult to identify. Indeed, Morgan pointed out: 
“Th e hardest thing is to know what’s going on if you’re in the middle of something, 
or if it’s going right through you.”
Th ere is no reason to doubt Morgan’s account of that October night at Yer-
kes. As he walked home from the observatory under the autumn stars, he experi-
enced a “revelation-fl ash,” a moment of sudden pattern-recognition. As so oft en 
happens with those who have experienced a “Eureka!” of “aha!” experience (an 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 285
insight-based solution to a seemingly impossible problem), Morgan came 
to see it as something impossible to defi ne in words, an inspiration break-
ing through in a fl ash from the subconscious mind.26
Morgan’s discovery was incarnated at fi rst in a model in which old 
sponge rubber was used to depict the OB groups he had identifi ed. Later he 
added some concentrations of early B stars from the southern hemisphere 
(stars Annie Jump Cannon had classifi ed as BO stars, those with hydrogen 
lines weak in their spectra that turned out to be a close approximation to 
Morgan’s OB stars). Th is more detailed scale model, constructed using 
balls of cotton, he presented in a slide shown at the American Astronomi-
cal Society in Cleveland—the meeting at which he received the standing 
ovation. Morgan, who was a profoundly insecure individual (understand-
ably, given the circumstances of his childhood), had fi nally received the 
recognition of his astronomical peers—and yet, paradoxically, within a few 
months of the most ecstatic moment of his life he suff ered a mental col-
lapse, a “complete personal crisis.”
Th at spring he was so depressed he was unable to work, and his 
condition deteriorated to the point 
where he was admitted to Billings Hos-
pital that summer. He never published 
a complete account of his discovery of 
the spiral arms (brief notices appeared 
in early 1952 in the Astronomical Jour-
nal and in the popular magazine Sky 
& Telescope; the latter including on the 
cover an image juxtaposing Morgan’s 
cotton-ball model with a section of one 
of Baade’s plates of OB associations in 
a spiral arm of M31). By the time he 
could return to work again, the radio 
astronomers had rushed in and stolen 
much of his thunder. 
Oort, fi nancially-strapped aft er 
the war in which Holland had been 
occupied by the Germans, was delayed 
in getting hold of the proper equip-
ment, but the Americans, benefi cia-
ries of a crash wartime radar research 
program, were under no such limita-
tions. Th e fi rst detection of van de 
Hulst’s 21-cm line of neutral hydrogen 
was thus accomplished by Americans, 
Edward M. Purcell and H.I. McEwen 
Fig. 12.7. Donald Osterbrock in older age, as his 
many friends and associates remember him. Pho-
tograph by William Sheehan, 2005.

 286 
Galactic Encounters
Fig. 12.8. The North America nebula (NGC 7000), discovered by William Herschel in 1786 and 
named by German photographic pioneer Max Wolf, and nearby Pelican nebula (IC 5070), in 
Cygnus near the 1st-magnitude star Deneb (outside the ﬁ eld of this image). These are part of the 
same emission nebula (HII region). Deneb itself, at a distance of 1800 light years, is thought to 
be the star responsible for ionizing the hydrogen so that it emits light, and if so, its diameter is 
about 100 light years across. Imaged by Klaus Brasch from Flagstaﬀ , Arizona, on September 29, 
2013, with a TMB-92 at f/5.5 apo refractor, an IDAS LPS-V3 ﬁ lter, and Hutech modiﬁ ed Canon 6D. 
Courtesy: Klaus Brasch.
at Harvard, in the early spring of 1951; six weeks later Oort, in collabora-
tion with the radio engineer C.A. Muller, emulated the feat with an antenna 
at Kootwijk. Now that the 21-cm line had been detected, the mapping of 
galactic structure using radio was no longer theoretical, and Oort, together 
with Dutch and Australian colleagues, began working in earnest. Th ey 
systematically mapped clouds of neutral hydrogen gas, including those in 
hitherto inaccessible regions on the far side of the Galaxy. Morgan’s accom-

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 287
plishment was overshadowed, at least until 1970 when it was fi nally real-
ized that the radio maps were not as defi nitive as they had seemed in the 
early 1950s.
Morgan returned to Yerkes—now keeping up, as therapy, the fasci-
nating personal notebooks (which he personalized as his “Dear Book”), in 
which he undertook a kind of Freudian self-psychoanalysis, set down his 
thoughts about philosophy (Nietzsche and Wittgenstein were particular 
infl uences) and recorded his responses to the great works of art that moved 
him (especially those of the Trecento, the period from Cimabue to Giotto, 
that he believed had gone furthest in probing “deepest reality”). In astron-
omy, he grappled heroically with the classifi cation of the galaxies through 
Fig. 12.9. OB associations and HII regions in spiral arms in the barred spiral galaxy M83 in Hydra. The outer 
reaches of this galaxy are undergoing vigorous star-formation. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 288 
Galactic Encounters
altering cycles of creative elation and let-down, struggled, not entirely suc-
cessfully, to be a good husband to his wife Helen, who suff ered from chronic 
ill-health and died in 1963, and father to his daughter and son. Th ough he 
was happier aft er he remarried in 1966 (his second wife, Jean Doyle Eliot, 
was a teacher),27 he continued to struggle with self-doubt and low self-
esteem, the legacies of his traumatic childhood, all his life. In the last decade 
of his life (he died in 1994) he fi nally gave up writing his personal note-
books as he succumbed to Alzheimer’s disease. Before the darkness closed 
12.10. The background reconstruction of the structure of the Milky Way, based on infrared observations 
by the Spitzer Space Telescope, clearly showed two main arms, Scutum-Centaurus and Perseus, emerging 
from the ends of the central bar. However, more recent work, involving a 12-year radio survey of 1,650 
young massive stars (OB stars, like those included in Morgan’s optical survey), indicated by red dots, 
clearly show in addition the Sagittarius and Norma arms. The reason the OB stars give such good delinea-
tion of the spiral arms is that, as Morgan realized, in contrast to cooler low-mass stars like the Sun the 
young massive stars haven’t had time to move from their birthplaces in the spiral arms. This makes them 
better tracers. Courtesy: OB star data J.S. Urquhart et al., Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society/
background R. Hurt, Spitzer Science Center. 

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 289
in, he recorded a conversation he had with Donald Osterbrock, who had 
collaborated on the discovery of the spiral arms so long before:
He [said] he would like to write my life… In the following conversation, 
I said I was not a genius; he said he was not sure I was right—that I had 
made “Conceptual Breakthroughs.” The implication seemed to be that I 
might be… I told him that he had just given me the highest honor of 
my entire life.28
Edmond Halley said on discovering the comet bearing his name, “if it 
comes to be discovered, be it known that it was fi rst seen by an English-
man.” Let it be remembered likewise that the spiral arm structure of the 
Milky Way was fi rst recognized by an optical astronomer.
Th e association of molecular clouds, HII regions, and star form-
ing regions (and brilliant young OB associations) is a leitmotif repeated in 
many other spiral galaxies, not just in the Milky Way. As for the Perseus 
arm, the quintessential spiral arm Morgan pieced together, it is (accord-
ing to the most recent measures) 6400 light years farther from the center 
of the Galaxy than the Local Spur inhabited by the Sun and all the bright 
naked-eye stars that form the familiar constellations—those are all fore-
ground objects. Th e Perseus Arm appears in projection far beyond these 
neighboring suns, and stretches – through condensations and star-knots 
among its dusty lanes— from the Rosette Nebula and its OB association 
in Monoceros, which includes the sparkling jewel-like cluster NGC 2244, 
through the splendid open clusters of Auriga (including Messier clusters 
M36, M37, and M38), across the relatively dust-free regions of Cassiopeia 
and Perseus itself, with lovely HII regions like NGC 281, the open cluster 
M52, and fi nally the unrivalled double cluster h- Persei  in the sword 
handle of Perseus, containing a host of OB stars, each a rival to Rigel in 
the foot of the Giant. It is also, according to data from the Spitzer Galactic 
Legacy Infrared Mid-Plane Survey Extraordinaire (GLIMPSE), one of two 
main arms that emerge from the ends of the central bar of the Milky Way; 
the other, the Scutum-Centaurus arm, is partly visible from the Southern 
Hemisphere, but mostly hidden from view as it swings behind the Galaxy’s 
central hub.
Morgan, walking that night under the stars, measured the distance 
to them with his mind. He received an inspiration worthy of the great art-
ists he so much admired, which took place, in his words, in  “… the hours 
of stillness—with supple brain—deep in the vistas of space, time, and 
form—that Heavenly World of Form.”29
*   *   *

 290 
Galactic Encounters
 1. But see: Anonymous, “Spiral arms of the Gal-
axy,” Sky and Telescope, April 1952, 138-139; 
and W.W. Morgan, S. Sharpless and D.E. Oster-
brock, “Some features of galactic structure in 
the neighborhood of the Sun,” Astrophysical 
Journal, 57 (1952), 3.
 2. W.B. Burton, “Th e morphology of hydrogen 
and other tracers in the Galaxy,” Annual reviews 
of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 1976, 275-306.
 3. Donald E. Osterbrock. Walter Baade: a life in 
astrophysics (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 2001), 147
 4. Owen Gingerich, “Th e discovery of the spiral 
arms of the Milky Way,” in H. van Woerden, R. 
J. Allen, and W. Butler Burton, eds., Th e Milky 
Way Galaxy: proceedings of the 106th sympo-
sium of the International Astronomical Union 
held in Groningen, the Netherlands, 30 May-3 
June 1983 (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985), 61.
 5. Ken Croswell, Th e Alchemy of the Heavens: 
searching for meaning in the Milky Way (New 
York: Anchor Doubleday, 1995), 75.
 6. W. W. Morgan, Personal Notebook No. 242, 
1987; contains a short autobiography; Yerkes 
Observatory Archives.
 7. Ibid.
 8. W. W. Morgan, 1978; Interview with David 
DeVorkin on August 8. Niels Bohr Library, 
American Institute of Physics.
 9. W.W. Morgan, “A Descriptive Study of the Spec-
tra of the A-type Stars,” Publications of Yerkes 
Observatory, 7 (1935), 133-250.
 10. Croswell, Alchemy of the Heavens, 74.
 11. Ibid., 78.
 12. Sandage, Mount Wilson Observatory, 254.
 13. James Kaler, Stars and their Spectra (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002), 112.
 14. W. W. Morgan, Journal, 1942; Yerkes Observa-
tory Archives. 
 15. W. W. Morgan, Personal Notebook No. 104; Yer-
kes Observatory Archives.
 16. Th e authoritative biography of Baade is: Donald 
E. Osterbrock, Walter Baade: a life in astrophys-
ics. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press, 2001.
 17. Walter Baade, “Th e Resolution of M32, NGC 
205, and the Central Region of the Andromeda 
Galaxy,” Astrophysical Journal, 100 (1944), 137-
146.
 18. W. Baade, letter to Jan Oort, September 23, 
1946; Jan Oort fi le, Niels Bohr Library, Ameri-
can Institute of Physics.
 19. J. Oort to W. Baade, January 11, 1947; Jan Oort 
fi le, Niels Bohr Library, American Institute of 
Physics.
 20. W.W. Morgan to W. Baade, July 12, 1949; Yerkes 
Observatory Archives.
 21. W. Baade to W.W. Morgan, August 20, 1949; 
Yerkes Observatory Archives.
 22. Th e paper was published as: W.W. Morgan, 
“Application of the principle of natural groups 
to the classifi cation of stellar spectra,” Publi-
cations of the Observatory of the University of 
Michigan, 10 (1951), 43-50.
 23. DeVorkin interview with Morgan, 1978.
 24. Th e camera and another of its early applica-
tions, photography of the gegenschein, are well 
described in: Otto Struve, “Photography of the 
Counterglow,” Sky and Telescope, July 1951, 215-
218.
 25. DeVorkin interview with Morgan, 1978.
 26. Ibid.
 27. Jean’s fi rst husband had been Henry Ware Eliot, 
brother of T.S.Eliot the poet and cousin of 
Charles Eliot the president of Harvard Univer-
sity.
 28. Morgan, personal notebook no. 230; Yerkes 
Observatory Archives. Osterbrock was true to 
his word. He did write Morgan’s biography. See: 
Donald E. Osterbrock, “William Wilson Mor-
gan, 1906-1994,” Biographical Memoirs of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 72 (1997), 289-
313. 
 29. W.W. Morgan, personal notebook no. 15, 1956; 
Yerkes Observatory Archives.

The eternal silence of these inﬁ nite spaces frightens me.
—Blaise Pascal, Pensées
Edith Sitwell recalled [an] afternoon in Hubble’s study, when he showed 
her plates of “universes in the heavens” millions of light years away. 
“How terrifying!” she had remarked. “Only at ﬁ rst,” he replied. “When you 
are not used to them. Afterwards, they give one comfort. For then you 
know that there is nothing to worry about—nothing at all.”
—Gale E. Christianson, Mariner of the Nebulae, p. 359
A
s noted in previous chapters, the discovery of the universe of galaxies 
was accomplished through slow but steady progress. However, since 
1945 the pace of change in understanding galaxies has increased at a rapid 
rate. In the earlier days, as we have been discussing so far, certain individu-
als—for example, Messier, the Herschels, Rosse, Huggins, Barnard, Shapley, 
Hubble—made towering contributions, and therefore command the atten-
tion of the chronicler of the nebulae. 
In more recent years—the subject of this chapter—progress has 
depended less on individual astronomers and more on the development 
of a large and very specialized group of expert individuals in the rather 
technical areas that need to be mastered in order to put together a com-
plete pictures of galaxies, and how they form throughout cosmic time.
Since the end of World War II, astronomers and cosmologists have
been trying in a quantitative way not possible before, to address some
of the oldest and most profound questions humans have ever asked, such
as: where do we come from? And how did the universe we see around us 
originate?
13. 
To Forge a Galaxy
291
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_1 , © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang
3

 292 
Galactic Encounters
Th e idea of what defi nes the 
universe has constantly changed 
through time. For centuries, 
up until the end of the 18th 
and early 19th centuries, it was 
mostly the Solar System that 
concerned astronomers, as the 
stars were so far away that their 
distances were immeasurable. 
Even at the beginning of the 
20th century, the universe was 
still generally thought to consist 
only of what we now call the 
Milky Way Galaxy (admittedly, 
there were always a few who 
believed that the spiral nebu-
lae were “island universes” in 
their own right, but this was probably never the majority view until the late 
1910s or even the 1920s). 
Beginning with Hubble’s great investigations with the 100-inch 
refl ector, it was established that the universe is, in fact, a universe of galax-
ies, and that galaxies in a practical and real sense defi ne our universe, just 
as cells defi ne the structure and function of living tissues, or neurons the 
structure and function of the brain. As with the discovery of stellar evolu-
tion and the properties of our own Galaxy, the discovery of the Universe 
of galaxies in the 20th and 21st century has led  —and still is leading—to a 
new revolution in our understanding of our place in the universe.
When galaxies were fi rst recognized as distinct objects they were 
mostly used as cosmological probes by those with access to large optical 
telescopes, namely at Mt. Wilson and Palomar, as described in detail in 
previous chapters. Th e way that astronomers used galaxies as test parti-
cles—like the marks on the balloon—to gauge the expansion of the uni-
verse was by using either the total brightness of galaxies, or of the brightest 
stars (like the classical Cepheids) within them. Th e role that galaxies played 
in this phase of cosmological thinking was similar to that of point masses 
in celestial mechanics, or ideal gases in gas theory.
In these early days of galaxy studies, little thought was given to the details 
of galaxies’ structure, or to the way galaxies formed or evolved through 
time. Th e exception was the Hubble-Jeans formulation of “early-,” “mid-
dle-,” and “late-type” galaxies, which was one possible interpretation of the 
sequence presented on the Hubble tuning fork; but it was not the only one, 
Fig. 13.1. Hubble Space Telescope, as photographed during the 
fourth servicing mission by the Space Shuttle. Courtesy: NASA.

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 293
and it was criticized as premature even at the time—and it was. As we now 
know, things are much more complicated than the tuning fork. In any case, 
in the face of criticism, even Hubble abandoned his original evolutionary 
model. Not much progress or work on this topic occurred for the next few 
decades.
Th e very fact that we can refer to galaxies as probes or point-masses 
shows just how far away they are, and how faint and small they appear to 
Earth-based observers. Th ough one or two—M31 and M33—are visible 
with the naked eye from dark sites (hard to come by these days!) it takes 
a fairly large telescope before one begins to appreciate their sheer num-
bers. However, a deep photographic image like those of the “Hubble Deep 
Fields”, discussed later in this chapter, reveals them swarming the fi eld 
like the single-celled organisms in a drop of pond water. By talking about 
distances as astronomers do, referring to Megaparsec-this and Megaparsec-
that, it is possible to become inured to the sheer vastness of the cosmos. 
Another way to think about it is that the Milky Way is itself but one galaxy 
out of the hundred—or two hundred—thousand million that exist in the 
observable universe. A typical galaxy like the Milky Way is on the order of 
1021 meters across, which makes the large scales of even just our own gal-
axy vastly more remote from human scales of reference than even atoms, 
which are about 10-10 m. Or, to put it another way, if the Milky Way were 
reduced to the size of the North American continent, the Earth would not 
only be much smaller than the period at the end of this sentence, it would 
be invisible without an electron microscope. It’s hard to get too big a head 
when one spends one’s time thinking about such things—which is more or 
less the gist of Hubble’s remark to Edith Sitwell cited in the headnote to this 
chapter.
Our Local Universe – Realm of the Spirals
Th e Milky Way is a typical example of a “disk galaxy.” Th ese are common—
about 70 percent of all bright galaxies appear to be of this type. Elliptical 
galaxies make up about 25 percent. Th e irregular galaxies of the Magellanic 
Cloud or Barnard’s Galaxy type come far to the rear, making up about 5 
percent. (Needless to say, as with stars, dwarf galaxies are by far the most 
common.)
In disk galaxies, the central part usually consists of a central bulge 
of cool red stars (Population II stars, mostly M- and K-type dwarfs). Th e 
central bulge is surrounded in turn by a fl attened disk of material made up 
of a variety of diff erent types of stars, among which are bright young hot 
stars of Population I, which for all their brilliance and mass as individu-
als, make up only about 2% of all stars, together with gas and dust. Th e 

 294 
Galactic Encounters
proportions of the bulge to the disk are roughly those suggested by the 
analogy of the yolk and white of two fried eggs slapped together back-to-
back; the homely visual savored by many an astronomy lecturer proves, 
at least on this occasion, to be remarkably apt. Th ough many disk galax-
ies resemble the Milky Way and show a spiral arm pattern among their 
disk stars, not all of them do. In some disk galaxies, the central bulge is 
very prominent, and surrounded by tightly wound spiral arms (these are 
Hubble’s Sa-type spirals); in others, the bulge is inconspicuous, and the 
galaxy appears to be all disk, with long loping spiral arms fl ung far and 
loosely wound (Hubble’s Sc-type). In many of these, a “grand design” is 
displayed, sometimes “extending over the whole galaxy, from the nucleus 
to its outermost part and consisting of two arms starting from diametri-
cally opposite points.”1
Th en there are the disk galaxies known as barred spirals, in which 
the spiral arms seem to twist outward from a thickish bar crossing the 
center (Hubble’s SB-type galaxies). But many galaxies appear barless, with 
the spiral arms emerging directly from the center without the intervention 
of any bar. According to present thinking, the Milky Way—whose thickish 
bar has been discovered only in the last few years—is best classed as an SBb 
galaxy.
As had been evident as far back as when Lord Rosse obtained the fi rst 
really good view of M51, the Whirlpool Galaxy, the spiral-form suggests 
rotation. Th e disks are in fact rotating; in the case of the Milky Way, the 
orbits of disk stars, like the Sun that are located far from the center, and so 
beyond most of the Galaxy’s mass, are rather straightforwardly Keplerian 
(though at very great distances, because of dark matter, things become 
more complicated, as we shall see in the next chapter). Th e Sun orbits at a 
distance of some 27,000 light years from the center of the Galaxy (give or 
take a thousand light years or so). Th e center of the Galaxy, located in the 
direction of the constellation Sagittarius, is anchored by the presence of a 
monster Black Hole, whose position lies close to the “bright” radio source, 
Sagittarius “A,” which may be either an accretion disk or a relativistic jet 
associated with the acceleration of gas into the Black Hole; the Black Hole 
itself is referred to as Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*). Th e huge gravitational fi eld of 
the Black Hole sucks in gas, dust and stars, and within only 23 arc-seconds 
(3 light years) of the Black Hole itself, there is a rich cluster of hot, massive, 
young stars attesting to a recent burst of star formation. By tracking the 
motion of stars within only 1 arc second of Sgr A*, the Black Hole has been 
weighed—its mass is 4 million solar masses, all compacted into a small 
pocket of space only 15 times the width of the Sun. Clearly, this is a rough 
and violent neighborhood, and we are lucky to be well out from it. As we 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 295
shall see in the following chapter, most galaxies have one of these massive 
black holes lurking in their centers.
Our knowledge of these dense inner regions of the Galaxy depend 
entirely on observations made in infrared, radio, and X-ray, i.e., entirely 
outside of the optical window, since a curtain of dust completely hides the 
inner sanctum from our view. Indeed, among the greatest factors contribut-
ing to our recent understanding of the galaxies has been our ability to scru-
tinize galaxies (including the Milky Way) in regions of the electromagnetic 
spectrum outside the virtual sliver of the optical range. It is, aft er all, largely 
chance that galaxies were discovered by humans at optical wavelengths. If 
for some reason our eyes were more sensitive to ultraviolet light or to infra-
red (as is, in fact, the case with some insects and birds’ eyes), it is likely that 
the fi rst telescopes would have been most sensitive at these wavelengths, 
and our classifi cation of galaxies would have been much diff erent.
Starting with radio in the 1930s and ‘40s, detectors have been 
devised that are sensitive to infrared, microwave, ultraviolet, X-ray, and 
gamma-ray regions of the spectrum. Th ese detectors have oft en needed to 
be set up on the peaks of high mountains in very dry conditions in order 
to avoid absorption in the Earth’s atmosphere (especially by water vapor 
for infrared). Now they are routinely loft ed above the atmosphere alto-
gether, and make their observations from orbiting spacecraft . Th e 1990s 
and the 2000s saw the era of great space telescopes, including the Hubble 
Space Telescope (launched in 1990), the Compton gamma-ray observatory 
(1991), Chandra X-ray (1999), GALEX ultraviolet, and Spitzer infrared 
(both 2003).
The Dirty, Dusty Universe
We emphasize that what we see of galaxies, including our own, is critically 
dependent on the part of the spectrum used. Th e Milky Way, viewed in the 
optical range, is dominated by the dark obscuring bands of dust that cut 
through the central bulge and extend out into the surrounding disk, and 
spiral arms. Similar dust bands are prominent in other galaxies—such as 
the edgewise spiral NGC 891 in Andromeda. In the case of the Milky Way, 
the obscuring dust we  see is located not far from the Sun, which lies on a 
spur of the Orion Arm, and hides much of the northern part of the bulge 
of the Galaxy from our view. We may get the impression when we see the 
Galaxy with the naked eye, and notice these towering, thick and massive 
dark markings that Barnard photographed, that we are witnessing dense 
clouds of something like coal-dust (as suggested by names such as the 
Great Rift  or Coalsack). In fact the dust that does such an eff ective job of 
obscuring light beyond it is in actuality little more than a fog—dust makes 

 296 
Galactic Encounters
up only 0.1% of the total mass density of the interstellar medium, the rest 
being gas.2
Th e dust, being concentrated in the galactic disk, was always a 
major obstacle to the investigation of the structure of the Galaxy, as well as 
other galaxies. It blocked Herschel’s view, which was accordingly confi ned 
to the 1% of the stars in the Galaxy represented in the grindstone. As we 
saw in chapter 12, it required nothing less than a tour de force eff ort by a 
genius like Morgan to use even the visually luminous spiral-arm tracers 
such as the O and B supergiant stars to make out the neighboring arms. 
Th e stars of the bulge and the inner disk, and the galactic center, are virtu-
ally completely hidden from us by dust. Admittedly, there are a few “win-
dows,” where the dust is sparse enough for some bulge stars to be visible. 
Th e largest, Baade’s window, discovered by Walter Baade with the 100-inch 
Fig. 13.2. M51 and its companion in infrared. This Spitzer Space Telescope image is a four-color compos-
ite showing emissions from wavelengths of 3.6 microns (blue), 4.5 microns (green), 5.8 microns (orange) 
and 8.0 microns (red). At shorter wavelengths (3.6 to 4.5 microns), the light comes mainly from stars, while 
in longer wavelengths (5.8 to 8.0 microns), we see the glow from molecular clouds. Of special interest 
is the contrast in the distribution of dust and stars between the spiral and its companion, NGC 5195. 
Whereas the whirlpool is rich in dust, bright in infrared wavelengths, and actively forming new stars, its 
blue companion shows little infrared emission and hosts an older stellar population. Courtesy: Education 
and Public Outreach team at the Spitzer Science Center, California Institute of Technology.

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 297
refl ector in the mid-1940s, is about a degree wide, and centered on the 
globular cluster NGC 6522. But in order to see really well what the Galaxy 
looks like beyond the dusty “mask,” in order to see the old and much more 
numerous stars in the disk that form the structure’s backbone, we need to 
view it in near-infrared light, at a wavelength of about 2 microns. 
In the near-infrared, as if by magic, a kind of open sesame to the 
beyond occurs! Th e dust becomes almost transparent. In the Milky Way, we 
see the bulge and inner disk clearly, and discover that the bulge has a boxy 
shape, something that would never have been suspected from views in the 
optical window. 
Other spirals—some quite messy looking, with spurs and extra octopus-
like arms—come clean, and show backbones that look like neat “grand-
design” spirals. A particularly dramatic case, but a fairly typical one, is that 
of the 12th magnitude galaxy NGC 309, in Cetus. Its distance is 300 million 
light years, and its diameter, at 260,000 light years, makes it one of the larg-
est spirals known. In optical wavelengths, this galaxy has multiple narrow, 
well-defi ned, highly branched, and seemingly interwoven arms, but in the 
infrared, all of this is revealed to be little more than froth, overlying a nor-
mal two-arm grand-design spiral, with a small central bar barely hinted at 
in the optical images.3
Clearly, our views of the Milky Way and other spiral galaxies in 
optical images are heavily weighted in favor of regions of star formation 
and spiral formation. Th e HII regions, dust, and the bright young stars of 
the spiral arms dominate our view of other spirals no less than of the Milky 
Way. But these bright young stars make up less than 2% of the stellar popu-
lation. Th ey are, in Walter Baade’s phrase, like the candles and frosting on 
the birthday cake. When we look at galaxies in the near-infrared, the dust 
becomes transparent, and our view is no longer skewed to the exceptional 
stars but instead reveals the “backbone” of older stars. Th us near-infrared 
images, though not in general as pretty as those that emphasize the star-
forming regions, provides us with a view of the distribution of the stars that 
constitute most of the galaxy’s mass. Th at this kind of dramatic transfi gura-
tion wreaks complete havoc with the optical-biased Hubble classifi cation is 
obvious. We’ll say more about that in a moment.
From whence the Spirals?
Th e beauty and majesty of galaxies lies in the beautiful spirals exhibited by 
so many of them. Th e form is not only ubiquitous in the realms beyond, 
it is ubiquitous in the manifestations of nature in the plants and animals 

 298 
Galactic Encounters
of Earth—to give but one example, consider the Nautilus, whose shell is 
formed on the logarithmic spiral. A whole book—and not a short one—has 
been written on these spirals in nature, and its author, in introducing the 
vast subject, notes that “with very few exceptions the spiral formation is 
intimately connected with the phenomena of life and growth.”4 By anal-
ogy, it is natural to ask what signifi cance the spiral pattern may have in the 
phenomena of life and growth of galaxies.
At some level, the spiral form seems inevitable. Any linear feature 
in a galaxy’s disk will wind up into an ever-tighter spiral if the disk under-
goes diff erential rotation—in which the inner portions of the disk orbit the 
center of the galaxy more frequently than the outer ones. Th us, spiral arms 
might seem to be a natural consequence of diff erential rotation of the disk. 
However, as was noted in the 1950s by the Swedish astronomer Bertil Lind-
blad, the problem with this explanation was that the galaxy should simply 
wind up on itself aft er a few turns. Unless, then, they were extremely eva-
nescent, astronomers had to explain not only what formed, but also what 
sustained, them.
Th ese fundamental problems of galactic structure proved to be sur-
prisingly intractable. In the 1950s and 60s, it was thought that spiral arms 
were tubes of ionized gas magnetically bound by the interstellar magnetic 
fi eld. However, when the interstellar magnetic fi eld was fi nally measured, 
it was found to be too weak to accomplish this. Since the mid-1960s, the 
most promising idea, based on earlier (not very well articulated) insights 
by Lindblad, has been that spiral arms in galaxies are gravitational “spiral 
density waves.” Th is theory, fi rst developed in detail by two Chinese-Amer-
ican physicists at MIT, Chia-Chiao Lin and his then undergraduate student 
Frank Shu, was that the spiral arms aren’t material entities at all; instead the 
arms trace gravitational “density waves,” traveling zones of compression—
the analogy that is usually given is to the cars in a traffi  c jam. Th ough there 
is an increased density of cars in the area of the traffi  c jam, the cars are 
diff erent at any given time. Instead of cars moving along the freeway, in the 
disk of the galaxy stars we are looking at waves of stars moving in and out 
of the disk. Th e increased density along the wave gravitationally attracts 
passing stars, gas and dust, and causes some of the gas and dust to collapse 
into dense molecular clouds that may give birth to the bright, young hot 
stars highlighting the spiral arms—the “candles and the frosting” on the 
birthday cake.
Lin and Shu predicted that the spiral patterns should be relatively 
long-lived, and that basic characteristics such as the number of arms 
should last over most of a galaxy’s lifetime. Th is is because they assumed 
that the waves were standing waves. Standing waves arise wherever waves 
refl ect off  a barrier. A wave refl ected from the barrier reinforces one 
approaching, and wherever there is a steady supply of mutually reinforcing 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 299
waves going both waves, there will be a seemingly frozen pattern of crests 
and troughs. In the case of a galaxy, it was presumed that the waves were 
being refl ected off  the inner bulge of stars at one end, producing construc-
tive and destructive interference patterns.
In contemplating the beautiful spiral patterns of galaxies, one thinks 
back to Pythagoras of Samos, the Greek mathematician and mystic of the 
6th century B.C. and his wonderful discovery of the octave—the relation 
between simple ratios in the lengths of vibrating strings and musical tones. 
As Pythagoras learned, a string can be used to produce a set of harmon-
ics. If you touch it at the nodal point, dividing the string in half, you pro-
duce A, the fundamental harmonic. If you subdivide the string again, you 
produce the fi ft h, and so on. Of course, the same principle applies to other 
instruments—a piano, or a violin. When the musician, the pianist or violin-
ist, hammers or plucks his instrument, he or she generates waves—pulses 
of energy.
In a fi eld perhaps too long dominated by the analogy of the tuning 
fork, we hesitate to make the following observation, that as in music, so in 
spiral galaxies, we seem to encounter fundamental modes or harmonics in 
Fig. 13.3. The Local Group. Image: Wikipedia.

 300 
Galactic Encounters
the spiral patterns. Is it possible to imagine the Milky Way as a Stradivar-
ius, 100,000 light years across, and the disk of stars as the vibrating string 
that is plucked, giving rise to the wavelets that, wherever they reinforce, 
give rise to the standing spiral density waves?
Perhaps, but if so who is the Maestro, who—or what—does the 
plucking? Lin and Shu were always a bit vague about what caused the spiral 
density waves in the fi rst place. Basically, they left  it to other investigators 
to sort that out. It has become clear that there isn’t any one thing that pro-
duces the spiral density waves in galaxies. Just about any odd disturbance, 
if it is large enough, will do, which explains why the majority of the large 
galaxies we fi nd in the local universe are spirals. For a while it seemed that 
the bars near the centers of many galaxies including the Milky Way might 
be doing the plucking, since galaxies with bars are more likely to have bold 
and beautifully symmetric spiral arms like the Milky Way’s. Bars are tube-
like structures within which the stars are marching in lockstep. Th ey look 
rather like rotating lawn sprinklers, with streams of stars seeming to shoot 
out of the ends into the spiral arms, though since the spiral arms are wind-
ing up, the stars are presumably moving inward—toward the center of the 
Galaxy—rather than shooting out. 
It is not yet clear how bars form, or what role, if any, they may play 
in spiral-arm formation. Moreover, they are probably not the major cause 
of spiral density waves. Recently, astronomers have realized that interac-
tions with smaller galaxies—including outright collisions—are likely the 
most important plucker of the galactic disk and generator of the splendid 
harmonics we see as spiral arms, as well as other phenomenon associated 
with these galaxies. We will return to this topic shortly.
Our Galaxy: Love it or Leave it
Naturally, since the Milky Way is our home Galaxy, we’re rather partial to 
it. It simply wouldn’t do to print a message on a t-shirt, “Our Galaxy—love 
it or leave it”—as the slogan would be utterly unactionable. We must accept 
the Galaxy as our one and only galactic home, the only one we’ll ever 
know from the inside-out—and may well say, as the bilious Scottish writer 
Th omas Carlyle did when he heard that the New England transcendentalist 
Margaret Fuller’s favorite phrase was, “I accept the universe!”—“Gad, she’d 
better!” 
Of course, we know many other galaxies much better than we know 
our own Milky Way. We will probably never see it from the outside looking 
in, only from the inside looking out, so that our predicament is rather like 
that evoked by the Scots poet Robert Burns,

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 301
O wad some Pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as ithers see us.
As far as we can tell, though, the Milky Way is a rather nice typical 
galaxy. It’s not only an excellent example of a barred spiral, but it’s also an 
unusually elegant and attractive one—as radio astronomers have recently 
determined by mapping clouds of neutral hydrogen gas on the other side 
of the galactic center from us, the Milky Way has rare symmetry, with one 
half being a mirror image of the other. Th e major star-forming arm our 
side of the Galaxy, the Perseus arm, has an exact counterpart on the other 
side of the Galaxy, the Scutum-Centaurus arm. Surprisingly, the latter was 
identifi ed as a complete arm only in 2011. Th e arm segment leading to its 
identifi cation was so long delayed because it turns out that the Milky Way 
is warped in its outer reaches, so that this outer arm segment did not line 
up exactly with the midline of the Galaxy.
At present, the Milky Way’s structure is believed to look like what is 
shown in the map, though admittedly, given the diffi  culty of piecing things 
together, it’s probably not quite as symmetric as appears there. Th e reality is 
likely to be much messier. Nevertheless, as viewed from somewhere far out 
in extragalactic space, with its imperfections smoothed out with distance, 
it would doubtless appear as a lovely object indeed—a spiral of the classic 
grand-design type.
Fig. 13.4. One of the dwarf galaxies belonging to the spiral M101. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 302 
Galactic Encounters
To complete the picture, the disk of the Milky Way is embedded 
in a spherical halo of ancient Population II stars that include the globu-
lar clusters that, as Shapley realized, form a kind of scaff olding to it. It is 
generally thought that the halo was the fi rst part of the Galaxy to form, and 
so contains many of the oldest stars of the Galaxy—a typical age for stars 
in globular clusters is 12.7 billion years, which makes them almost as old as 
the universe itself. Naturally, these stars have been relatively little enriched 
by the contributions of puffi  ng and huffi  ng dying dwarf stars like the Sun 
and supernovae, and so are lower in heavier elements (metals) than the 
younger disk and the Sun. In addition to the visible stellar halo, the galax-
ies are immersed in a far more substantial, but until recently unsuspected 
because invisible, dark-matter halo (see below).
Th e Milky Way is not solitary as it travels through the universe. It travels in 
the company of a small association of other galaxies, which Hubble named 
the “Local Group.”
Th e Milky Way, together with the Great Spiral in Andromeda, are 
by far the most massive and dominant members. Th ere is one other spiral, 
the smaller (but more average) M33. Th ere are also numerous low-lumi-
nosity (dwarf) galaxies, raising the total number of members of the Local 
Group to about 54 at present count, although this number seems to rise 
every year or so.
Th e galaxies in the Local Group are gravitationally bound; in other 
words, the gravity between members is suffi  cient to resist the general 
expansion of the universe. Th us, rather than dispersing into the general 
fi eld, the galaxies stay together like a fl ock of geese or a school of fi sh.
Some of the dwarf members are satellites of the Milky Way, including the 
Sagittarius Dwarf, Canis Major Dwarf, Ursa Minor Dwarf, Draco Dwarf, 
Carina Dwarf, Sextans Dwarf, Sculptor Dwarf, Leo I, Leo II, Ursa Major 
I Dwarf and Ursa Major II Dwarf; the Magellanic Clouds are also usually 
mentioned as satellites of the Milky Way, though the situation is actually 
complicated, and the orbits of the Clouds relative to the Milky Way are not 
yet known with certainty. Th ey also have many of the earmarks of systems 
that are remnants of past collisions. Andromeda’s satellite system is even 
more numerous, and includes several galaxies visible in amateur-sized tele-
scopes—M32, M110, NGC 147, and NGC 185. A fi gure of the Local Group 
clearly shows the smaller systems tending to cluster around the dominant 
Milky Way and Andromeda systems.
As numerous as the members of the Local Group are, in terms of its 
mass, it is a small and sparse association. One might describe it as rather 
rural. Th ere are much larger and richer associations—true metropolises of 
galaxies, which may contain thousands of disk galaxies (in contrast to the 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 303
Local Group’s three) and 
giant ellipticals. Th ese 
are clusters of galax-
ies of which the nearest 
is in Virgo—the home 
of several of Messier’s 
objects, and of the rich 
fi elds of nebulae discov-
ered by William Herschel 
in his sweeps. Th e Virgo 
cluster contains some 
2000 bright member 
galaxies, centered on the 
giant elliptical M87. It 
marks, in turn, the heart 
of an even larger associa-
tion, the so-called Virgo 
supercluster, a cosmic 
structure so massive that 
its gravitational eff ect 
slows the rate with which 
nearby galaxies (including 
the Local Group, which 
appears to be an outlying 
member) recede with the 
general expansion of the 
universe. 
It was for a member of the Virgo cluster, M104, that V.M. Slipher 
fi rst measured a large redshift  in 1913, thus supplying the fi rst evidence 
of the expanding universe. It lies at a distance of 29,350,000 light years—a 
fantastic distance. (It is sobering to think that light from M104 just reach-
ing us now left  it when the Great Rift  Valley of Eastern Africa was begin-
ning to open up.) Almost half of V.M.’s redshift s plotted by Hubble in his 
fi rst velocity-distance diagram in 1929 were to Virgo cluster objects, while 
the detection of Cepheids in galaxies as far out as the Virgo cluster so as to 
better calibrate the velocity-distance relation was a chief motivation of the 
Hubble Space Telescope. 
Hubble was lucky, by the way, that he lived in a sparse association 
like the Local Group, and not in a large cluster like that in Virgo. Otherwise 
he might never have recognized his law. As Iowa State University astrono-
mer Curtis Struck points out, “If the Milky Way resided within a giant clus-
ter of galaxies, as about half of all galaxies do, the observations might have 
realized the simple expectation of just as many galaxies coming toward us 
Fig. 13.5. M87, the giant elliptical galaxy marking the center of the 
Virgo cluster and located 50 million light years from the Earth. A jet 
of high-energy electrons and sub-atomic particles streams out of 
the active galactic nucleus at nearly the speed of light, originating in 
a disk of superheated gas swirling around a supermassive black hole 
with a mass equivalent to 2 billion solar masses. Courtesy: J.A. Biretta, 
W.B. Sparks, F.D. Macchetto, and E.S. Perlman, NASA and the Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 304 
Galactic Encounters
as moving away. Th is is because the enormous self-gravity of such a cluster 
overcomes the universal expansion, and most member galaxies are moving 
randomly (and at high speed) relative to one another.”5 With all this data 
about galaxies we can start to ask how and when these systems formed in 
the universe.
Currently, there are two major theories for explaining how galaxies formed. 
Th e fi rst theory is simply that galaxies form like stars, only on a much 
larger scale, through the collapse of gas. Th is theory predicts that the gas is 
converted into stars in a very short time, and also—and this is the critical 
feature—that very little or no addition mass is added to a galaxy once it is 
Fig. 13.6. Optical image of M51 and its companion NGC 5195. The two curving arms of M51 are the 
hallmark of “grand-design” spiral galaxies. The prominence of the Whirlpool’s spiral arms is thought to 
be due to the eﬀ ects of its close encounter with the smaller galaxy, which at ﬁ rst glance appears to be 
tugging on the arm; however, the Hubble Space Telescope’s clear view shows it is actually passing behind 
the Whirlpool, and has been gliding past it for hundreds of millions of years. As it passes, it stirs up spiral-
density waves in the Whirlpool, squeezing the molecular clouds along each arm’s inner edge (which look 
like gathering storm clouds); the clouds collapse, and give rise to a wake of star birth, which is taking place 
in the bright reddish HII regions. Eventually the large massive blue stars sweep away the dusty cocoons 
within which they form in a torrent of hurricane-like stellar winds, and emerge as bright blue star clusters 
along the Whirlpool’s arms. Courtesy: S. Beckwith, NASA, ESA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 305
formed in the very early universe. In this model there is some star forma-
tion occurring in galaxy disks, such as we see within the Milky Way in HII 
regions and molecular clouds, but the basic size and parameters of galaxies 
in this model are set very early in the universe. Th e other idea is that galax-
ies form through the accretion and merging with other galaxies throughout 
time.
Th is competition is a bit like the classic nature/nurture controversy: 
does a person’s characteristics, such as intelligence, personality, etc., depend 
merely on the genetic inheritance they receive at birth, or is it a product of 
one’s experiences, education, etc? Viewed in terms of this analogy, the gas-
collapse theory stands on the side of nature. Th e collapse of gas occurs, and 
the galaxy is set on its course for the rest of its evolutionary lifetime. Th is 
was the dominant idea about how galaxies formed up until the 1980s.
In the 1950s, it seemed reasonable to believe that galaxies including 
our own Milky Way formed in a rapid collapse. Th is model—which was 
top-down—was given classic form in an infl uential research paper written 
in 1962 by Olin Eggen, Donald Lynden-Bell and Allan Sandage who com-
Fig. 13.7. An early computer model of the tidal production of spiral arms in the M51 system by 
Alar and Juri Toomre. The large shaded dots represent the centers of the gravitational potentials 
of the two galaxies, and representative stars, initially in circular orbits around the center of the 
primary galaxy, are shown by open circles. Courtesy: Professor Alar Toomre, MIT.

 306 
Galactic Encounters
bined theoretical ideas and data to deduce that the Galaxy formed in one 
of these ”monolithic” rapid collapses. While this mode of thinking about 
galaxy formation is now passé, there is evidence that this process is poten-
tially partially correct for some galaxies, especially the fi rst to form in the 
universe.
Th e second major theory off ered to explain the formation of galaxies is 
what might be described as the nurture theory. Here, the galaxy’s experi-
ence, and “personal history,” do matter, because galaxies don’t exist in 
splendid isolation from one another; they interact gravitationally, and two 
galaxies may even merge to form a new more massive system. Th ese kinds 
of interactions are still going on in the nearby universe—and even in the 
Local Group itself. Some of these might be described as “minor interac-
tions,” an interaction of a smaller galaxy with a larger one, where others 
appear rather cataclysmic. Th e classic case of an interaction is our old 
friend M51, the “Whirlpool,” and its satellite NGC 5195. We can see at a 
glance what’s going on: NGC is clearly moving past, and giving a torque to 
M51, twisting it. Material has been fl ung out and scattered around during 
their extended interaction, triggering starbursts both in M51 and in the 
satellite (which appears like a wreck in optical wavelengths, but as a small 
and surprisingly regular barred spiral in the infrared). Th e interaction 
between M51, the classic spiral fi rst recognized by Lord Rosse, and its sat-
ellite have oft en been studied by researchers using computer simulations.7 
In fact, it proves quite easy to set up parameters that accurately model the 
observed features, such as the greatly intensifi ed and boldfaced arms of 
M51, which make it such a beautiful system. 
Th e Milky Way’s own lovely arms, in one of which the Sun travels 
around the center of the Galaxy, may owe something to a satellite galaxy 
whose existence was not even identifi ed until Rodrigo Ibata, Mike Irwin 
and Gerry Gilmore discovered it in 1994. Th e satellite galaxy is Sagittarius 
Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy (SagDEG) (not to be confused with the Sagittarius 
Dwarf Irregular Galaxy (SagDIG), a Local Group member a safe 3.4 mil-
lion light years away). Th e reason it was so diffi  cult to discover is that most 
of the constituent stars, though covering a large area of the sky, are on the 
far side of the galactic core, and therefore very faint. SagDEG has four 
known globular clusters, of which one, M54, resides in its core. It moves in 
a highly elliptical orbit around the Milky Way, and appears to have made 
several brushes through the Milky Way, the fi rst 1.9 billion years ago and 
the second 0.9 billion years ago. Th ough the Milky Way’s eff ect on SagDEG 
are obvious—tidal forces from the larger Galaxy have wrenched it apart, 
leaving in the wake of its destruction a faint trail of old red giant stars—
SagDEG’s eff ect on the Milky Way are far from insignifi cant. Simulations 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 307
have shown that its plunges through the Milky Way have likely stirred 
powerful spiral density waves that have enhanced the strength of the Milky 
Way’s spiral arms. A number of other stellar streams have been identifi ed in 
the Milky Way that may be remnants of other small galaxies now merged 
with it—thus the Milky Way really is like an archaeological site. It is even 
possible that some globular clusters may be remnants of early mergers, 
although most do not have the dark matter content associated with true 
galaxies.
Th e Milky Way’s counterweight in the Local Group, M31, has 
undergone perhaps even more violence than our galaxy. Infrared astrono-
mers have found evidence of structures that could have been produced in a 
head-on collision with M32, an anomalous, and perhaps disturbed, dwarf 
elliptical companion. Th ere is also a faint gas bridge between M31 and its 
large companion M33, so that, quite possibly, M31, M32, and M33 are all 
actively involved in collisions at present.
Collisions between a large galaxy and one of its satellites, or a smaller 
dwarf system, typically leaves the larger galaxy intact. In fact, the stars of 
the one galaxy pass through those of the other system, and most of the 
pile-up involves gas. Th e exact nature of the interaction, however, depends 
on the relative motion of the galaxies. If two galaxies collide but do not 
have enough momentum to keep traveling aft er the collision, they will 
fall back into each other and eventually merge, forming one galaxy. Th is, 
in fact, is expected to occur to the Milky Way and M31. As V.M. Slipher 
found in 1913, M31 is approaching the Milky Way; this is a result of the 
mutual gravitational pull between them, and eventually—about four bil-
lion years from now—they will embrace and form a single massive galaxy, 
perhaps even transforming into an elliptical. Th e Sun will still be on the 
Main Sequence by then (though nearing the depletion of its hydrogen-
burning phase), and so will experience this major merger event from the 
inside, assuming it isn’t ejected from the system in the process. Fortu-
nately, it’s far enough in the future that we don’t need to worry about it 
much.
Interacting and “colliding” galaxies, if the galaxies involved are 
both large ones, may appear to be enmeshed with one another in a deadly 
embrace, or distorted into bizarre forms. Hubble didn’t know where to put 
them on the tuning fork, and so tossed them aside into a bin of “peculiars.” 
At the end of his classic 1943 book Galaxies, Harlow Shapley summed up 
the thinking at the time:
There are … frankly “pathological” types (as Baade calls such freaks) like 
NGC 5128 [in Centaurus] … and the ring-tail system, NGC 4038[-39]. 

 308 
Galactic Encounters
The theories that suﬃ  ciently explain the relatively simple looking 
Sc spiral Messier 33, and the most common galaxies in Virgo, must have 
suﬃ  cient ﬂ exibility to take care of these aberrant types. The interpreter 
may need to resort to the assuming of collisions to ﬁ nd satisfactory 
causes. He will ﬁ nd some justiﬁ cation, because the individual galax-
ies are not so far separated but that encounters may have been fairly 
numerous, if the time scale has been long enough.8
The First Objects in the Universe
So, what do we know about the formation of the fi rst structures in the 
universe? Th e fi rst stars are thought to have formed about 100 or 200 mil-
lion years before the fi rst galaxies. As explained in chapter 9, theories of 
star formation in the present-day universe assume that stars form from the 
collapse of Molecular Clouds. In the very early universe, however, there 
was no dust; there were giant blobs of dark matter (see next chapter) and 
hydrogen and helium, initially mixed with the dark matter, that were cre-
ated in the Big Bang, 13.8 billion years ago. All heavier elements, or metals 
(again, in the astronomers’ sense of elements heavier than hydrogen and 
helium) and dust formed in later generations of stars. 
Fig. 13.8. M101 in Ursa Major. This is a close cropping of the image shown in Fig. 11.10. Individual dust 
lanes are clearly visible, and bright, hot HII regions where star formation is taken place dot the spiral arms. 
K.D. Kuntz, NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 309
As the universe cooled by expanding rapidly, the ordinary baryonic 
matter contracted, whereas the dark matter remained dispersed. Denser 
regions of gas contracted into star-forming clumps hundreds of times as 
massive as the Sun, and began to collapse into the fi rst generation of stars. 
Th ey were very massive, 100 times as massive as the Sun and far more mas-
sive than any stars found today. Th e very large, massive, brilliant stars of 
this fi rst generation, many of which may have originated as binary systems, 
evolved rapidly, as such stars are bound to do, and ended up, aft er only 
perhaps 2 million years or so, exploding as supernovae and strewing their 
guts into space. Th e most massive among them collapsed into black holes 
(see next chapter). A mix of heavier elements, with silicate- and carbon-
dust, was scattered in a wispy dust-veil across these galaxies—dust which, 
using infrared imaging devices, has actually been detected in very-early 
galaxies. Some of the earliest black holes perhaps merged to form super-
massive black holes, and gravitational attraction pulled clouds gas and dust 
toward one another, and as they collided, presumably they began to trigger 
the formation of new generations of stars just as galactic mergers still do. In 
this way, the fi rst generation of massive stars may have laid the groundwork 
for the fi rst galaxies. 
Th is scenario is probably right in its broader features although the 
details still have to be worked out. For the earliest galaxies, at least, rapid 
collapse must have been involved, broadly along the lines deduced in the 
Eggen-Lynden-Bell-Sandage paper for the initial formation of a galaxy’s 
halo. 
However, for a long time this rapid-collapse concept dominated 
our thinking about the way all galaxies evolved. It was thought that, once 
formed, a galaxy was set for life. If they started out an Sa or Sb or Sc, or 
an SBa, SBb, or SBc, or an elliptical or an irregular galaxy, that is what 
they remained (barring the occasional collision or merger event). Th eir 
characteristics and further evolution were completely determined by 
their initial mass, angular momentum, and the like. Th ey were, like Vic-
torian children, born little adults. However, astronomers now think the 
situation is considerably more complicated, and that biography is destiny 
for galaxies as for people; a great deal of what has gone into the mak-
ing of the galaxies we fi nd populating today’s universe occurred over the 
entire course of the universe’s history, not just in the quick initial forma-
tion stage
In our own Galaxy, we can indeed observe stellar population and 
kinematic features fi tting the ‘monolithic’ collapse model, and any idea 
about galaxy formation must account for the fact that there are old stars 
in every galaxy that has been studied in any detail thus far. However, there 
are many features of galaxies, including our own, which are not explainable 
by a quick formation, but require a continuous one of star formation and 

 310 
Galactic Encounters
assembly that we can see in nearly all galaxies that we can study in detail. 
It is in fact clear that galaxy formation is not a simple process, but one that 
started early and continues even today. 
Part of the reasoning behind the idea that galaxies form in a rapid 
and early collapse is due to the fact that in the nearby local universe nearly 
all galaxies have a shape or morphology which is either that of a disk galaxy 
or an elliptical. Both of these are relatively stable structures and therefore 
could have existed in their present form for more than 10 billion of years or 
so.
Fig. 13.9. (left) M66, the largest member of the Leo “triplet,” and notable for its unusual anatomy, 
consisting of asymmetric spiral arms and an apparently displaced core. The peculiar anatomy is most 
likely caused by the gravitational pull of the other two members of the trio, M65 and NGC 3628. (For an 
amateur view of the triplet, see Fig. 2.10.) Courtesy: S. Van Dyk and R. Chandar, NASA, ESA and the Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScI/AURA)
Fig. 13.10. (right) M64, a Virgo cluster member known as the “Black-eye” galaxy and notable for its unusu-
ally prominent dust lanes. Detailed studies in the 1990s showed that, while all the stars in M64 are rotat-
ing in the same direction (clockwise as seen in this Hubble image), interstellar gas in the outer regions of 
M64 is rotating in the opposite direction from gas and stars in the inner regions, and active formation of 
new stars is occurring in the shear region where the oppositely rotating gases collide. In this image, hot 
blue young stars and HII regions of hydrogen gas ﬂ uorescing when exposed to ultraviolet light from these 
newly formed stars can be clearly seen. Astronomers believe the oppositely rotating gas is left over from a 
satellite galaxy that collided with M64 perhaps a billion years ago. Though the small galaxy has now been 
completely destroyed, signs of collision persist in the backward motion of gas at M64’s outer edge. Credit: 
S Smartt and D. Richstone and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).
.

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 311
Galaxy Evolution becomes a Science
Th e fi rst really convincing evidence that galaxies may not be static systems 
aft er all was provided by the PhD thesis work of the New Zealand/Ameri-
can astronomer Beatrice Tinsley. As a PhD student at the University of 
Texas in the 1960s, Tinsley showed that over time the brightness of galaxies 
should change, and signifi cantly so, due to the evolution of their constitu-
ent stars. Tinsley showed that, by making simple assumptions about the 
star formation history of a galaxy, the initial light would be dominated by 
massive blue and bright O and B stars. 
Since, however, as we noted in chapter 8, these massive and 
bright OB stars do not live for very long, and because they are massive 
enough, they end cataclysmically in supernova explosions. As they self-
destruct, their light essentially is subtracted out. As the blue stars are 
removed, the galaxy becomes fainter and redder than before, dominated 
Fig. 13.11. NGC 2841, located at a distance of 46 million light years away in Ursa Major. An 
example of the remarkable variety of galaxies. In contrast to some of the galaxies featured here, 
blazing with HII regions (emission nebulae), NGC 2841 currently has a low rate of star formation, 
probably because radiation and supersonic winds from hot young blue stars cleared out the 
remaining gas and hence shut down further star formation in the regions where they were born. 
Courtesy: M. Crockett and S. Kaviraj, R. O’Connell, B. Whitmore, and the WFC3 Scientiﬁ c Oversight 
Committee, NASA, ESA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 312 
Galactic Encounters
eventually by the Popu-
lation II stars—the long-
lived M and K dwarfs. 
Th e luminosity of 
a star is in fact propor-
tional to its mass to the 
power of 3 or 4. In other 
words, for the most mas-
sive stars, if you double 
the mass, the luminos-
ity of the star increases 
by 23=8 times or even 
24=16 times. Also, since 
the brighter a star is, the 
more energy it uses up, 
the most massive stars 
also have the shortest life-
spans. (Th ey are like the 
Greek hero Achilles, who 
chose glory and a short 
life over obscurity and a 
long one.) As time pro-
gresses, the next lower-
mass stars will die and 
subtract out their light, 
and the next, and the 
next, and so on. Tinsley 
used this process to try to 
explain why elliptical galaxies, which have very few young stellar popula-
tions, are so red, while spiral galaxies and especially galaxies with active 
star formation such as irregulars and peculiar, are oft en very blue.
Tinsley fi rst carried out calculations along these lines in the late 
1960s and established that a galaxy over a relatively short time span, cosmi-
cally speaking, may come to have a very diff erent brightness. Th is meant 
that none of these systems could be used as a “standard candles.” (We will 
say more about that particular problem and how it was eventually sur-
mounted in chapter 15.) Th is fact was not fully appreciated by Sandage and 
his collaborators, who continued to do as Hubble had done, assuming that 
galaxies or features within galaxies have a constant luminosity, which they 
clearly do not. With Tinsley’s important work it became clear that before 
galaxies could be used as probes of cosmic distances, a detailed under-
standing was needed of the evolution and the properties of their stars. Th is 
is still an active area of research even today.
Fig. 13.12. Interacting galaxies Arp 273, in Andromeda, at a 
distance of about 300 million light years. The large spiral galaxy, 
UGC 1810, has a disk distorted into a roseate shape by gravitational 
tidal interactions with the companion galaxy below it, UGC 1813. 
Detailed analysis indicates that the smaller companion actually 
dived deep, but oﬀ -center, through UGC 1810. The inner set of 
spiral arms is highly warped out of the plane, with one of the arms 
going behind the bulge and coming back out the other side. Cour-
tesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 313
Enter Hubble – The Telescope
Th e Hubble Space Telescope, which was launched in 1990, also challenged 
and eff ectively destroyed the view that galaxies formed quickly, in a rapid 
collapse, when it began to take photographs of the distant universe in the 
mid-1990s (aft er an embarrassing focusing problem caused by the primary 
mirror being polished to the wrong curve by contractor Perkin-Elmer was 
corrected by a Space Shuttle servicing mission in 1993). Until Hubble, we 
were only able to study in detail galaxies in the nearby universe, and for 
the more remote ones—those that appeared as little more than dots on 
Hubble’s deep plates—we could learn no more than how much light they 
were emitting. To get at the kinematic motions of their stars, which is 
needed to study their dark matter haloes, as well as their morphologies and 
internal structures, such as bars, star forming regions, and even individual 
Fig. 13.13. Interacting galaxies NGC 2207 and IC 2163, in Canis Major. Here, tidal forces from the larger 
and more massive galaxy, NGC 2207 (left) has distorted the smaller one, IC 2163, on the right, ﬂ inging out 
stars and gas into long streamers stretching out a hundred thousand light years toward the right edge 
of the image. Computer simulations by Bruce and Debra Elmegreen have shown how leisurely these 
collisions are; IC 2163 is swinging past NGC 2207 in a counterclockwise direction, having made its closest 
approach 40 million years ago. It does not have suﬃ  cient energy to escape from the gravitational pull of 
NGC 2207, and is destined to be pulled back and swing past the larger galaxy in the future. Trapped in 
their mutual orbit around each other, these galaxies will continue to distort and disrupt each other until, 
billions of years ago, they will merge into a single more massive galaxy. It is believed that many present-
day galaxies, including the Milky Way, were assembled through such a process of coalescence of smaller 
galaxies occurring over billions of years. Courtesy: D.M. Elmegreen and B.G. Elmegreen, NASA and the Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 314 
Galactic Encounters
stars, we needed much higher resolution than was available from ground-
based instruments. What we have learned from Hubble, and other large 
telescopes, has given us our modern view of how galaxy formation has 
occurred over cosmic time.
Th e Hubble Space Telescope discovered in the years 1994-1998 that 
distant galaxies were most certainly very diff erent from nearby galaxies. 
Indeed, as ought already to have been clear by the dramatic shift  of Hubble 
type when a galaxy like NGC 309 (described above) was viewed in infrared 
instead of optical wavelengths, the Hubble classifi cation is heavily beholden 
to the froth, the bright young stars, HII regions, and spiral arms, which are 
decoupled from what’s going on in the backbone of older stars representing 
most of a galaxy’s mass.
Th e Hubble classifi cation, as convenient as it is, is thus merely 
descriptive and does not provide useful information about a galaxy’s evolu-
tion. Even Hubble’s terms “early,” “middle,” and “late” are merely conven-
Fig. 13.14. A hit, a palpable hit. This galaxy, AM 0644-741, lies at a distance of 300 million light years away 
in the southern constellation Volans. It is an example of a ring galaxy, a striking example of how collisions 
can dramatically change their structure while triggering formation of new stars. In ring galaxies, one 
galaxy (the “intruder”) plunges directly through the disk of another (the “target”). In the case of AM 0644-
741, the “intruder” is outside the ﬁ eld of the image. The resulting gravitational shock imparted due to the 
collision drastically changes the orbits of stars and gas in the target’s disk, causing them to rush outward 
rather like ripples in a pond after a large rock has been thrown in. As the ring plows outwards, gas clouds 
collide and are compressed, leading to the formation of new star (which explains why the ring is so blue). 
Courtesy: J. Higdon and I. Jordan, NASA, ESA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 315
tions in the descriptions, and nothing more. Moreover, even as description, 
the Hubble classifi cation fails completely when it comes to galaxies in the 
distant universe—out past a relative wavelength redshift  of z=1, when the 
universe was roughly half its current age, and even more so when we get 
out past a relative wavelength redshift  of z=6, where we are observing the 
universe’s early days indeed. 
Th e most important survey for showing this was the Hubble Deep 
Field, a single deep pointing of the sky (taken in optical wavelengths) taken 
by Hubble over ten days in December 1995. Th e Hubble Deep Field is a 
very deep look at a tiny, apparently empty, area of the sky, 2 ½ minutes 
of arc across, in Ursa Major, which is a composite of 342 separate images 
taken with the Wide Field and Planetary Camera-2 – probably Hubble’s 
most scientifi cally productive camera to date. It is one of the iconic images 
of modern astronomy, and has been cited, as of this writing (August 2013), 
in nearly a thousand publications. Despite the smallness of the fi eld—it 
covers only 1/24-millionth of the whole sky, and it contains several thou-
sand galaxies. What is seen aft er a quick examination is that the fainter, 
presumably more distant and younger galaxies, look stunningly diff erent 
from the galaxies in the modern universe, as we describe below.
Th ere were several other successor “Deep Fields” with Hubble over the next 
15 years, each requiring several weeks of telescope time and largely due 
to the initiatives of the Space Telescope directors who used their personal 
director’s ‘discretionary’ time to carry out these large public programs.
Th e galaxies imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope in these deep 
fi elds (whose spectra were eventually measured, confi rming their great 
distances back to when the universe was only a few hundred million years 
old) appear to be very distorted and irregular in appearance. Th ey look 
like slivers, twisted shapes, crescent moons, fuzz-balls among other hard 
to describe shapes and forms. We might almost imagine that we have the 
optics reversed, and that we are looking through a microscope rather than 
a telescope, at the protozoa, foraminifers and infusoria in a drop of pond 
water. It is hard to believe that these tiny little beasties are actually galaxies, 
not animalcules locked in one another’s grips. Th ey look to be engaged in a 
feeding frenzy, a fi erce and ferocious fi ght to the death. Th ese are the deni-
zens of the very early universe; these—the pathological ones, the freaks—
and not the stately and majestic and well-behaved systems we see in the 
modern universe, ruled the era of cosmic dawn.
Understanding what these observations of peculiar galaxies in the 
distant universe mean, and how we can understand the physics of galaxy 
formation from these observations, has been a major goal in astronomy 
ever since. One idea is that these galaxies are actively forming either 

 316 
Galactic Encounters
through intense star formation and/or interactions with other galaxies. 
Th e most obvious hypothesis is that these are galaxies smashing into other 
galaxies by their mutual gravity.
Astronomers refer to these events as galactic collisions or merg-
ers—rather placid terms for what actually seems to be going on out there. 
We might more aptly refer to grasping, clawing, disemboweling, chewing, 
grinding. It appears to be natural selection—survival of the fi ttest—writ 
large. Th e strong prevail, the weak perish. Th e early universe was (or 
should we say is?—aft er all, in the telescope we are reading messages in the 
light from an eternal present, where it is always now) is dominated by a few 
Fig. 13.15a. (left) The Interacting galaxies, the “Antennae,” NGC 4308/4309, are among the nearest and 
youngest examples of a pair of colliding galaxies. This image, by John Drummond using a 25-cm Schmidt-
Cassegrain, whose the antenna-like “arms,” which extend far out form the nuclei of the two galaxies. They 
are tidal tails formed during the initial encounter of the galaxies some 200 to 300 million years ago, and 
give a preview of what may happen when the Milky Way and Andromeda collide in a few billion years 
from now. Courtesy: John Drummond.
Fig. 13.15b. (right) Detail of the above, from the Hubble Space Telescope. Nearly half of the faint objects 
in the Antennae image are young clusters containing tens of thousands of stars; the orange blobs to 
the left and right of the image are the two cores of the original galaxies and consist mainly of old stars 
criss-crossed by ﬁ laments of dust. Only a fraction of the newly formed star clusters will survive the ﬁ rst 
10 million years; the vast majority will disperse, with the individual stars becoming part of the smooth 
background of the galaxy. It is believed that about a hundred of the most massive clusters will survive to 
form regular globular clusters, similar to those that form the framework of globular clusters found in our 
own Milky Way. Courtesy: B. Whitmore, NSA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 317
(relatively) gargan-
tuan specimens. 
Th ose behemoths, 
the leviathans of 
deep space, seem to 
be trying to suck the 
rest into their insa-
tiable gravitational 
maws.
We are 
allowing ourselves 
a fair amount of 
poetic license here, 
but a large fraction 
of what we know 
about the formation 
of the galaxies we 
see today originates 
from these precious 
observations of the 
most distant galax-
ies. Th is understand-
ing comes from 
interpreting the 
distribution of the 
stars in them, and 
examining their ages 
and star formation 
histories.
Finding the Most Distant Objects
Unfortunately, this is not as easy as it sounds, as in modern astronomy—in 
all of science for that matter—understanding the biases and errors in our 
calculations are critical for making progress. Th is was clearly relevant to 
studies throughout the history of astronomy, including Herschel’s eff orts to 
map the Galaxy due to the ”bias” of dust. It is even more relevant to study-
ing distant galaxies, as there are many eff ects that can distort our view of 
the early universe. Much of what we now know about the early formation 
of galaxies has involved trying to remove this bias from our observations, 
just as much of what we know about galactic structure has come from 
viewing the galaxies in wavelengths that “remove” the dust.
Fig. 13.16. A collision involving the spiral galaxy pair NGC 
3314, in Hydra, at a distance of 140 million light years. By a 
chance alignment, a face-on spiral galaxy lies precisely in front 
of another larger spiral. This allows an unusually clear view of 
the dust belonging to the foreground galaxy as it absorbs light 
from the more distant system. The bright blue stars that form a 
pinwheel shape near the center of the foreground balaxy have 
recently formed from interstellar gas and dust, but in addition, 
one sees numerous additional dark dust lanes not associated 
with bright young stars. William Keel, NASA, and the Hubble Heri-
tage Team (STScI/AURA).

 318 
Galactic Encounters
It is, however, easy to be fooled. Th is is particularly so when we are 
trying to study the fi rst galaxies in the universe. Even the fi rst step in study-
ing these systems is diffi  cult—which is to locate them reliably. 
When we examine distant galaxies what we seeing are not neces-
sarily representative ancestral forms of the galaxies we fi nd in the local 
Fig. 13.17. Hubble Deep Field. Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA). This color image, one of the 
deepest images ever taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, combines images in four diﬀ erent 
optical wavelengths taken by the WFC2 camera. Dating from 1995, it was the ﬁ rst true “deep” 
image taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, one where it took exposures of the same part of 
a blank portion of the sky for ten days reaching a depth into the universe that had never been 
achieved. The size of this image is 2.5 arcmin on a side, giving it an area about 0.1% of that of 
the full moon. Nearly every source in this ﬁ eld is a distant galaxy, with some seen at just a billion 
years after the big bang, with others in the nearby universe, and everything in between. Astrono-
mers have used this image, and other similar follow up ones, such as the Hubble Ultra Deep Field 
(UDF), to redeﬁ ne our view of how galaxy formation and evolution has occurred. 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 319
universe. We are in fact biased to the brightest systems, the cosmic celebri-
ties, as those are the easiest to fi nd. Th e situation is not that diff erent from 
going out on a dark night in a city and seeing only the brightest stars. Th ese 
stars are not the typical or average ones, and so the naked-eye sky—with all 
the bright Gould Belt stars—might make us imagine that A-type and B and 
O-type giants and supergiants are the commonest stars in the Galaxy, when 
they are actually very rare.
What we need is a way to connect galaxies we see in the distant uni-
verse with those we see today. One way to do this is to examine the lumi-
nosities of these galaxies. Th is method can be applied by simply fi nding 
galaxies that emit the same amount of light at diff erent distances, and then 
assuming that these are statistically the same galaxies. Ideally this would 
work, but there are a few things that hinder this approach. One is that until 
recently—we will explain the caveat presently—we had no choice but to 
view distant galaxies using optical light instruments, the traditional wave-
length in astronomy.
As a result, measuring galaxy stellar masses has become the stan-
dard way to trace galaxy evolution through time. Th e reason for this is 
that a galaxy cannot lose its stellar mass—it can gain stellar mass through 
various processes, but it cannot lower its stellar mass over time. Th is makes 
the stellar mass a very robust quantity in which to fi nd statistically the same 
galaxies over many cosmic epochs.
As an aside, we know that galaxies have two other types of masses 
besides that represented in its current complement of stars: the amount of 
mass in gas which can form into stars which can increase or decrease with 
time, and the dark matter mass. Th ese two types of mass are however diffi  -
cult or impossible to measure in many distant galaxies, unlike stellar mass, 
which can be measured for even the most distant galaxies. 
Because distant galaxies are extremely faint it is hard to study 
them in any detail. Typically distant galaxies have magnitudes of 25 in the 
blue, which is about 100 million times fainter than the faintest stars that 
can be seen by the human eye (by comparison, the limiting magnitude 
of the galaxies Hubble and Humason were studying with the 100-inch 
refl ector was 17.5 or so). We are, however, able to study in detail the most 
massive galaxies—again, this is a bias eff ect, and due to the fact that these 
systems are typically much brighter than lower mass systems at the same 
distances.
Indeed, and rather incredibly, with the Hubble Space Telescope, and 
with 8-10 meter ground-based telescopes, we are able to study these distant 
systems with a level of detail needed to determine a great deal about how 
galaxy evolution in the early universe occurred. 
What the Hubble imaging surveys described above showed is that 
structurally, faint galaxies look “peculiar,” that is, they are not spirals or 

 320 
Galactic Encounters
elliptical, as in the Hubble Sequence, but look as if they are “train-wrecks” 
or galaxies in some obvious formation mode.
Th ese galaxies have structures and shapes which show they are 
fundamentally diff erent from galaxies we fi nd in the nearby universe. Th e 
formation process clearly produces the distorted structures we see, struc-
tures which gravitationally are not in equilibrium. When this was fi rst 
discovered, it was one of the biggest clues for trying to answer how these 
galaxies formed.
Fig. 13.18. Close up of galaxies in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field from a color image of this ﬁ eld. 
Shown are some of the closer galaxies in this ﬁ eld, which are at z = 0.5 or thereabout, to when 
the universe was several billion years younger than it is today. Most of these brightest galaxies 
are spiral type systems but diﬀ er from nearby systems in that they have intense star formation, 
and show the location of massive star formation knots in their structure.  Some tidal interactions 
can also be seen between some galaxies. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScl/AURA).

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 321
When we measure the number of stars in these distant galaxies 
we fi nd that they contain a similar amount of mass (to within a factor of a 
several-fold) to the most massive galaxies in today’s universe, and therefore 
these systems must somehow manage to evolve over time into the normal 
galaxies we see in our immediate cosmic surroundings. Furthermore, kine-
matic studies of these galaxies show that many of these systems do not have 
an ordered internal motion similar to nearby disks and ellipticals—strong 
evidence for a violent origin. 
The role of mergers and acquisitions in galaxy formation 
Detailed studies of these galaxies reveal that a signifi cant fraction of these 
peculiar systems in the distant universe are undergoing some type of mass 
Fig. 13.19. (left) A closer view of some of the spiral galaxies seen in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. 
This ﬁ eld shows one of the few stars found in this Ultra Deep Field. Nearly every other point of 
light in this ﬁ eld, even the faintest barely seen ones, are distant galaxies, some of which are only 
a few hundred million years old. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage Team (STScl/AURA).
Fig. 13.20. (right) Another close up view of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, showing in this case 
some examples of galaxies involved in interactions and mergers, which are much more common 
in the distant past than they are today. The bright white areas in these galaxies show the location 
of intense star formation. Note the diversity in color of these galaxies, showing how the star 
formation histories for these systems can diﬀ er by signiﬁ cant amounts. Courtesy: Hubble Heritage 
Team (STScl/AURA).

 322 
Galactic Encounters
assembly, producing their distorted structures. It was hypothesized early 
on by the fi rst observations that these structures were produced through 
a merger process. What this implies is that the galaxies that we see in the 
distant universe become the larger massive galaxies in the nearby uni-verse 
simply through smashing together to create larger and more massive galaxies. 
One primary way that this hypothesis has been tested is through 
examining the quantitative structures of these galaxies using new imag-
ing analysis tools to quantify how these structures evolve through time. As 
mentioned, Hubble observations, beginning with the Hubble Deep Field, 
showed that galaxies were very distorted compared with today. Distorted 
structures can however arise from several causes. 
Clumpy star formation can produce structures like the ones seen in 
distant galaxies, as can the smashing together of already existing galaxies. 
Th ere is, however, one key diff erence between these two modes, and that is 
that within mergers, the older stellar populations are in a non-equilibrium dis-
tribution, as well as the younger stars that may be forming. For mature galax-
ies with ongoing star formation the older stellar populations are not distorted, 
but symmetrical, as equilibrium in a stellar system is reached rather quickly.
Starting in the 1990s astronomers were able to develop imaging 
tools using data from the new CCD imagers to determine whether a galaxy 
is undergoing a major merger based on its structure. Th e primary way this 
is done is through using the distribution of light within these distant galax-
ies resolved by Hubble, and by analyzing them in a quantitative way. Th at is, 
with this method we can quantify the structures of galaxies rather than use 
visual estimates of morphology as has been done for decades previously. 
By using these imaging methods we can measure which galaxies are 
undergoing mergers with other galaxies. From this we can measure directly 
the merger history of galaxies. Th e main parameter used to determine this 
is the ‘asymmetry’ parameter, which quantifi es how much a galaxy deviates 
from perfect symmetry. It turns out that the higher this parameter is, the 
more likely a galaxy will be in a merger state.
However, using these structural parameters requires that we have 
the right kind of data to analyze distant galaxies with. As mentioned earlier, 
galaxies can look very diff erent, particularly distant ones, when examining 
their structures in ‘rest-frame’ optical and ultraviolet light. What is needed 
for examining distant galaxies is therefore an instrument that allows us to 
probe the rest-frame optical light originating from these young galaxies.
Th is was possible due to advanced near-infrared instruments on the 
Hubble Space Telescope – the fi rst of which was the Near-Infrared Camera 
and Multi-Object Spectrograph (NICMOS) installed on a space shuttle 
mission in 1998, which allowed astronomers for the fi rst time to examine 
galaxies in the fi rst half of the universe in terms of the bulk of their stellar 
mass, as opposed to simply examining the location of their star formation, 

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 323
as revealed in the ultraviolet. Using this camera to take deep exposures of 
the distant universe, astronomers were able to examine forming galaxies in 
terms of their bulk structure for the fi rst time.
What astronomers found was rather astounding. A large fraction of 
the massive galaxies— similar in mass to the Milky Way or Andromeda— 
seem to be undergoing mergers a few billion years aft er the Big Bang. For 
the most massive galaxies, the fraction is as high as 40%. In comparison, 
the fraction of similar mass galaxies undergoing a merger in the nearby 
universe is less than 1%. Between the peak merger rate which occurred 
a few billion years aft er the Big Bang until today, we can clearly see the 
merger history decline. Th at is, most of the assembly history for galaxies 
occurs early in the universe’s history in the fi rst few billion years.
How else do galaxies in the early universe diff er from those we see 
today in great abundance in the local universe? Another important diff er-
ence is that these distant galaxies are undergoing vigorous star formation 
dwarfi ng what we see occurring in galaxies today. 
Galaxies need to produce and contain stars for them to be seen, and 
this process does not happen quickly in the early universe. Observations 
show that this star formation spans the history of the universe, and is in 
fact still occurring in many galaxies even today. Th e star formation history 
is such that it ramps up from the start of the universe, and peaks at around 
2-3 billion years aft er the Big Bang, aft er which it gradually declines. Today 
the star formation rate is roughly a tenth of what it was at its peak. Under-
standing why the star formation rate is so high in the early universe is an 
important question. So is why it later declines. 
For example, our own Milky Way produces on average about a sin-
gle solar mass unit of stellar mass on average per year, while these distant 
galaxies are oft en star forming at over 100 to one thousand times this rate. 
Integrated over a few billion years, this star formation adds a signifi cant 
amount to the masses of these systems. 
Another major clue, still not totally understood, is that galaxies in 
the distant universe are much smaller, by up to an order of a magnitude, and 
have stellar mass densities around 50 times higher, than galaxies of similar 
mass we see today. Furthermore on average, the masses of these early galaxies 
are also lower than galaxies of similar luminosity in today’s universe. Th ese 
are two observables that show how galaxies are evolving signifi cantly. What is 
producing this evolution is debated still, but we have some good ideas. 
It is easy to show that the observed merging between galaxies will 
allow the small, lower mass systems we see in the early universe to become 
in due course the more massive and larger systems that we see today, i.e., 
the bulk of galaxy formation for some galaxies is occurring through the 
merger process. Th is merger process is also potentially the trigger for the 
intense star formation seen in the early universe, as well as the way gas 

 324 
Galactic Encounters
is driven into the centers of galaxies to drive the formation of the central 
black holes universally found in these systems (as discussed in more detail 
in the next chapter).
While mergers can account for the bulk of galaxy formation for 
some massive galaxies late in their history (as will be the case with the 
Milky Way and Andromeda, which as we noted above may merge to form 
a massive elliptical galaxy several billion years from now), there are galaxy 
formation modes that are just starting to be investigated. Th ese include the 
accretion of gas from the intergalactic medium onto galaxies, which is later 
converted into stars, as well as minor mergers  (involving dwarf systems 
like those drawn like moths to a lamp around the Milky Way and Androm-
eda in the Local Group), a process which can also build up the masses 
of galaxies. Understanding the relative role of these processes, as well as 
observing the very fi rst galaxies, will be the focus of galaxy studies over the 
next ten years or so, using new telescopes and instrumentation, many of 
which are just now in the planning stages. 
Fig. 13.21. Close up view of one of the highest redshift galaxies known as of late 2013.  This 
image shows a ﬁ eld from the Hubble Space Telescope CANDELS survey, the largest Hubble 
program ever carried out. The close up view shows the location and zoomed in structure of this 
system, which is at redshift z = 7.51 or 700 million years after the Big-Bang. Credit: V. Tilvi, S.L. 
Finkelstein, C. Papovich, CANDELS Team and Hubble Space Telescope/NASA

 
Chapter 13: To Forge a Galaxy 325
 1. J.H. Oort, quoted in Giuseppe Bertin, Dynamics 
of Galaxies (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002), 26.
 2. For an excellent text on dust, at a high technical 
level, see: D.C.B. Whittet, Dust in the Galactic 
Environment. Bristol and Philadelphia: Institute 
of Physics Publishing, 2nd ed., 2003.
 3. D.L.Block and R.J. Wainscoat, “Morphological 
diff erences between optical and infrared images 
of the spiral galaxy NGC 309,” Nature, 353 (Sept. 
5, 1991), 48-50.
 4. Th eodore Andrea Cook, Th e Curves of Life 
(London: Constable and Co., 1914), viii.
 5. Curtis Struck, Galaxy Collisions: forging new 
worlds from cosmic crashes (New York: Springer, 
2011), 9.
 6. O.J. Eggen, D. Lynden-Bell, A.R. Sandage, “Evi-
dence from the motions of old stars that the 
Galaxy collapsed,” Astrophysical Journal, 136 
(1962), 748-766.
 7. A classic paper on the subject is: A. and J. 
Toomre, “Galactic bridges and tails,” Astrophysi-
cal Journal, 178 (1972), 623-666.
 8. Shapley, Galaxies, 172-173.
One particularly important project that is addressing detailed issues 
in galaxy formation, gas accretion and galaxy merging is the CANDELS 
survey, among others. Th is is a survey being carried out with the new near-
infrared camera on the Hubble Space Telescope, known as the Wide-Field 
Camera-3 (WFC3) and installed by Space Shuttle astronauts in 2009. Th is 
camera is exquisitely sensitive in the infrared, and has been used to obtain 
two Ultra Deep Fields—the fi rst in 2009, the second in 2012—which show 
galaxies so remote, and so redshift ed by cosmic expansion, that visible 
and ultraviolet light from them has ended up in the infrared. Th ese galax-
ies appear as they were only 560 million to 780 million years aft er the Big 
Bang, and yet (according to the eff ect Tinsley described) they are redder 
than expected and so are already somewhat evolved, showing that galaxy 
formation must have occurred extremely early. Th ey consist of stars that 
are already at least 100 million to 200 million years old, which means that 
the galaxies imaged by Hubble had already been in existence for at least 
that long. We are getting close to looking so deep in the universe that we 
are seeing the very fi rst galaxies—approaching the horizon that Milton 
Humason looked for in vain.
We will not reach them with the Hubble Space Telescope. However, 
Hubble is due to be superseded by the James Webb Space Telescope. With 
a 6.5-meter (21 foot) diameter mirror, it will represent a huge step up from 
Hubble. It is scheduled for launch in 2018. Th ough the WFC3 results of 
Hubble have given us a few whiff s of insight into what the fi rst galaxies 
may have been like, the James Webb Space Telescope will allow us to push 
back into the period “when Beldam Nature in her cradle was,” the period 
from 200 million years to 500 million years, to see how the earliest ances-
tral forms of galaxies—including our own Milky Way—formed stars and 
assembled into the prototypes of the majestic systems we see around us in 
the universe today. Th at will allow us to be practically present at, if not the 
fi rst day of the Creation, the second or third.
*   *   *

Now is the time, the walrus said, to talk of many things…
—Lewis Carroll, “The Walrus and the Carpenter”
I
n the previous chapter we outlined the story of how galaxies have likely 
assembled into the forms we see in the modern universe. Th is formation 
is largely based on observational properties of these systems that allow us 
to construct how these galaxies were put together. 
However, astronomers are interested in much more than the way 
galaxies assemble and form. Th e problem of galaxy assembly ultimately ties 
in with some very deep physics, including the existence and type of dark 
matter contained in these systems, as well as to the existence of black holes. 
Th e last few decades have seen an explosion in our understanding of the 
internal physics of galaxies as well as learning how they form.
Galaxies it turns out are not simple systems in the way that, say, 
stars are. Th e formation histories of galaxies covers over 13 billion years, 
and involves around at least a dozen diff erent processes that happen at vari-
ous times over the course of the history of a galaxy, and many of these are 
still going on today. In some ways it makes as much sense to ask when and 
how a galaxy forms as it is to ask when and how large cities such as London 
or New York assembled. 
However, there are major clues to how the process has occurred, 
and we can identify some of the major aspects, detailed in the last chapter. 
However it is possible, if not likely, that there are still galaxy formation 
processes we have not yet identifi ed.
One of these is that galaxies do not form in a random way, but fol-
low the structure of the universe, and their assembly is largely determined 
in a bulk way on the properties of the universe. One of the major ways this 
is done is through the dark matter, which provides the structure or scaf-
folding in which galaxy assembly takes place. 
14. Over to the Dark 
Side: Dark Matter, 
Black Holes, and the 
Origin of the Universe
326
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_14, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  327
In fact, it has become clear in the last few decades that the vast 
majority, up to 90% or more, of the mass in a galaxy is in a dark form, 
whose nature is unknown, but whose gravitational force can profoundly 
infl uence the way that galaxy formation has occurred. 
Dark Matter Takes the Stage
Hints for the existence of dark matter in galaxies have been around almost 
as long as we have known about galaxies. Historically, the fi rst clue that 
there was something else within the universe beyond the stars, dust, and 
light that can be detected directly originated from measurements of the 
motions of, and within, galaxies. 
Shots in the Dark
Th e fi rst time astronomers found something amiss in the observations 
of galaxies that suggested there was a dark component to galaxies was in 
1933. In that year, the astronomer Fritz Zwicky, in one of his fi rst observa-
tional astronomy papers, took deep spectra of galaxies in the Coma cluster 
to measure the motions of individual galaxies. 
Zwicky came relatively late to astronomy and had started his 
research career as a physicist. Born in Bulgaria in 1898 to a Swiss father, 
he attended the Eidgenossiche Technische Hochschule (ETH) in Zurich, 
the same institution where Einstein was a student two decades earlier, 
completing his diploma thesis (fi rst degree) under mathematician Her-
man Weyl and his Ph.D. dissertation in the theory of crystals under future 
Nobel laureate Peter Debye. In 1925 he moved to Caltech at the invita-
tion of its president Robert Millikan (earlier, Millikan had been one of the 
young Edwin Hubble’s teachers at the University of Chicago, and had won 
the Nobel prize in physics two years earlier for his measurement of the 
charge on the electron by studying the behavior of oil droplets in electrical 
fi elds). Th ough Zwicky spent nearly his entire career in the United States, 
he remained a Swiss citizen, once remarking that “a naturalized citizen is 
always a second-class citizen.” 
Th ough Millikan had expected Zwicky to work on the quantum 
theory of solids and liquids, which was closer to his dissertation topic, 
Zwicky already showed his independent streak, and though he did some 
work along the lines expected, his interests gradually turned to astrophys-
ics. At fi rst he was interested in trying to understand the origin of cosmic 
rays—high-energy protons and atomic nuclei coming from outside the 
Solar System. Th en, aft er Hubble published his 1929 paper on the velocity-

 328 
Galactic Encounters
distance relation, he proposed the fi rst of the many unorthodox ideas for 
which he would become famous—he suggested that the redshift s of distant 
galaxies might be explained by “tired light,” that is, the photons simply 
became less energetic aft er covering great distances. Th is was an idea that 
could not fi nally be ruled out for sixty years, when it was fi nally shown that 
the light curves of Type Ia supernovae are all broadened (time-dilated) as 
expected according to the predictions of the expanding universe.1 Th ough 
Zwicky himself remained suspicious of large redshift s throughout his 
career, much of his own work tacitly accepted that the standard redshift -
distance relation was cosmological.
In 1933—the fateful year in which Hitler came to power in Ger-
many—Zwicky married Dorothy Vernon Gates, the daughter of a Califor-
nia state senator and successful businessman and railroad man. Th ough 
the marriage later ended in divorce, Gates’s money helped fund the fi rst 
telescope at Palomar, the 18-inch Schmidt, in 1936. Meanwhile, Zwicky was 
now becoming active in observational astronomy. He joined forces with 
Walter Baade, the German national who had joined the Mt. Wilson staff  in 
1931. Baade was the meticulous observer, Zwicky the ideas man. In 1933-
34, they studied the subset of fourteen or so exceptionally bright novae 
that had been observed up to that time (going back to S Andromedae in 
1885) and concluded, as had Knut Lundmark a few years earlier, that these 
were no ordinary novae; they were far more energetic events, involving the 
annihilation of an appreciable fraction of a star’s mass, and Zwicky even 
realized—correctly, as it turned out—that they might be a fruitful source of 
at least some of the cosmic rays. In their paper summarizing their results, 
Zwicky and Baade introduced the term “supernova” for these extraordi-
nary celestial confl agrations, and as an aft erthought suggested that their 
energy source might be the collapse of massive stars into neutron stars, 
cores consisting entirely of neutrons.2 (Discovered only in 1932, neutrons 
are neutrally charged particles of about the same mass as the proton found 
in the nuclei of atoms.) Like many of Zwicky’s ideas, neutron stars long 
remained a theoretical construct; their actual existence was confi rmed only 
with the discovery of pulsars in 1968. Th e most celebrated case is the pulsar 
in the Crab Nebula, a neutron star remnant left  over from the supernova 
event observed by Chinese astronomers in 1054. Strange as neutron stars 
are, even stranger are black holes, produced in the collapse of more massive 
stars still. We shall discuss these objects a bit later.
More important for our story, Zwicky also tackled the clusters of 
galaxies. With the Mt. Wilson 100-inch refl ector, he measured Doppler 
redshift s for galaxies in the Coma Cluster, and found that there was a large 
spread (dispersion) in their velocities. Th e average velocity dispersion was 
1000 km/sec (very close to the modern value), and Zwicky used this result 
to eff ectively “weigh” the Coma cluster, giving a kinematic measure of the 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  329
cluster’s mass. Th e calculation is quite straightforward and involves basic 
Newtonian physics of the same kind used to determine the mass of the 
Sun by observing how fast the Earth and other planets revolve around it. 
However, when Zwicky performed this calculation, it didn’t come out as 
expected:  the amount of mass needed to hold the Coma Cluster galaxies 
together, he found, was 400 times more than expected from the stellar mass 
estimated from the amount of light visible from galaxies in the cluster. It 
seemed a strikingly anomalous result for the early 1930s, but it has stood 
the test of time. Revised estimates of the distance to the Coma cluster 
obtained since then have reduced this to a factor of 50, but the problem 
Zwicky identifi ed has not gone away– only 2% of the Coma Cluster is made 
of stars we can see.
In a paper published in a Swiss journal (and hence not as widely 
read as it might have been), Zwicky tried to explain the discrepancy by 
invoking what he called dunkle materie (German for “dark matter”).3 He 
did not know what this dark matter might be, but suggested it might con-
sist of some combination of small faint galaxies and diff use gas. In any case 
it meant that the average mass of a galaxy must be much greater than was 
generally believed at the time. Zwicky followed this insight up in 1937 by 
Fig. 14.1. Gravitational lensing: light from galaxies in the background is being bent by dark 
matter associated with the giant elliptical galaxy in the center of the ﬁ eld. Hubble Heritage Team 
(STScI/AURA).

 330 
Galactic Encounters
proposing that galaxies might even be massive enough to give rise to gravi-
tational lensing—an eff ect Einstein had predicted, though he knew that it 
would be very diffi  cult to actually observe. Indeed, a case of gravitational 
lensing was not fi nally observed until 1975.
As productive as Zwicky was, he was not as widely recognized or honored 
during his lifetime (he died in 1974) as he perhaps deserved. In part, this 
was because he was always so far ahead of his time—it oft en took decades 
for his contemporaries to catch up with his ideas. But also, like many men 
of his type, he had a violent temper—he once called Baade a “Nazi” to his 
face, and routinely referred to colleagues who crossed him as “spherical 
bastards” (in other words, they remained bastards from whatever angle 
they were viewed). His colleagues, for their part, were tempted to dismiss 
him as something of a crackpot. In later years, aft er he had moved on to 
Palomar, he routinely groused that he was being denied observing time 
proportional to his merits, and once, notoriously, proposed a scheme that 
literally involved fi ring shots in the dark at Palomar (somehow Zwicky had 
worked out that fi ring artillery shells into the air in front of the shutter of 
the 200-inch dome would improve the seeing!). 
In retrospect, Zwicky seems one of the great astronomers of the 
20th century, who made many contributions to the fi eld but whose great-
est achievement remains his 1930s era recognition of the existence of dark 
matter. 
More evidence
Zwicky’s anomalous result did not stand quite alone. As early as 1936, 
Sinclair Smith, also at Mt. Wilson—an instrument-man whom Virginia 
Trimble has called a “widgeteer par excellence,” but is little remembered 
today partly because he died so young, of cancer, at age 39—used a fast 
spectrograph of his own design on the 60-inch refl ector, which allowed him 
to record spectra of galaxies even fainter than those being obtained at the 
time by Milton Humason with the 100-inch. With this set-up, he analyzed 
the spectra of a number of Virgo members relative to the cluster’s center 
and found the same large mass-to-light ratio that Zwicky had found for 
the Coma cluster. In order to account for the enormous amount of missing 
mass, Smith concluded that there must be either large quantities of “inter-
nebular” material or enormous faint extensions of the visible galaxies.4 
Around the same time Horace Babcock, then a graduate student at Berke-
ley, whose thesis study at Lick Observatory involved obtaining large-slit 
spectra to investigate the trailing nature of the spiral-arm pattern of M31, 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  331
found a similar result for the HII regions in a single galaxy. His thesis was 
published as a Lick Observatory Bulletin, and met with distrust—so much 
so that Babcock never worked again in extragalactic astronomy. He turned 
instead to solar astronomy, and succeeded in discovering the general mag-
netic fi eld of the Sun (Hale’s long-sought holy grail). His contribution to the 
history of dark matter is only a footnote to a long and distinguished career. 
Shedding Light on Dark Matter
Th e observations of Zwicky, Smith, and Babcock were all decades ahead 
of their time. Most astronomers ignored them, and continued to act as if 
the only matter in the universe was the ordinary, baryonic (atomic) type 
that can be directly observed from electromagnetic radiation they emit 
and which makes up the gas in the diff use nebulae and the substance of 
solid bodies such as stars, planets, and comets. As a case in point: one of 
us remembers that the advanced astrophysics curriculum at the university 
he attended in the early 1970s had only two off erings, “Astrophysics of 
diff use matter” and “Astrophysics of condensed matter.” At the time, that 
seemed to cover the waterfront. How far away that era seems now!  We’ve 
become inured to the existence of dark matter now, but in the 1970s, when 
evidence for it fi nally became too overwhelming to ignore, it seemed a 
shock—as with the 1930s discovery in cosmic rays of particles (muons) 
with masses between electrons and protons and neutrons that seemed to 
have no role at all in nuclear reactions, many an astronomer and astro-
physicist must have seconded the spirit of I.I. Rabi’s famous remark, “Who 
ordered that?”
When it fi nally came, the acceptance of another kind of matter 
that, unlike ordinary baryonic matter, was not directly visible, was largely 
owing to measures of rotation curves of galaxies similar to that Babcock 
had found for M31. Th e astronomer most closely associated with this 
breakthrough was Vera Rubin. Aft er receiving a BA degree at Vassar, an all-
women’s college in upstate New York, Rubin attempted to enroll at Princ-
eton, but never even received the graduate catalog. Women were simply 
not  allowed in Princeton’s graduate program in astronomy until 1975. 
Instead Rubin went to Cornell, where she received a Master’s degree in 
physics—among the outstanding teachers she had there were Hans Bethe 
and Richard Feynman. She obtained her doctorate at Georgetown, where 
her thesis adviser was George Gamow, a professor at George Washing-
ton University nearby. It had been Gamow who, among other things, had 
helped put Georges Lemaître’s speculative 1920s “primordial atom” theory 
of the origin of the universe—now referred to as the Big Bang theory—on 
a quantitative basis by showing that it could explain the observed cosmic 

 332 
Galactic Encounters
abundances of hydrogen and helium. In Rubin’s thesis, completed in 1954, 
she proposed that galaxies clumped together rather than being distributed 
randomly through the universe, an idea that was generally pooh-poohed 
by others in the fi eld. Being a woman astronomer at the time was diffi  -
cult—she later refl ected that getting ahead in astronomy “required more 
luck and perseverance for a woman than a man.”5 She bided her time. For 
a while she taught at Montgomery County Junior College, then worked at 
Georgetown as a research assistant. By 1962, she was an assistant professor 
there, teaching a course in statistical astronomy to six students, and already 
deeply interested in understanding the motions of stars in galaxies and the 
motions of galaxies in the universe. She proposed to her students that she 
and they try to obtain a rotation curve for stars distant from the center of 
the Milky Way. Th e paper—submitted to the Astronomical Journal—was 
accepted, then withdrawn when the editor refused to publish the names 
of the students that had worked on it with her, at which point the editor 
relented and accepted it again. It contained the result that for a radius from 
the center of the Milky Way greater than 8.5 kiloparsecs, “the stellar curve 
is fl at, and does not decrease as is expected for Keplerian orbits.” Th is was, 
in fact, Rubin’s fi rst fl at rotation curve. However, the result was not widely 
accepted. “Following its publication,” Rubin recalled, “the many comments 
I received were negative and some very unpleasant; it couldn’t be correct, 
or the data were not good enough.”6
She turned to observational astronomy, and tried to study the rota-
tion properties of the Milky Way by obtaining radial velocities of stars in 
the anticenter of the Galaxy. Her early work was done at Kitt Peak National 
Observatory in 1963, and two years later, at the beginning of 1965, real-
izing that observing was her priority, she gave up teaching and became an 
astronomer in the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism at the Carnegie 
Institution of Washington. Th ere she began to collaborate with another staff  
member at Carnegie, W. Kent Ford, Jr., who had developed an image-tube 
spectrograph that decreased observing time by a factor of ten compared to 
the conventional photographic plate. Th at summer Rubin and Ford  tested 
the device on galaxies with the Lowell Observatory’s 69-inch (soon to be 
72-inch) Perkins refl ector at its remote site Anderson Mesa, and by the end 
of the year—through the intervention of Allan Sandage—Rubin was invited 
to observe with the telescopes at Palomar. (Until then, continuing a tradi-
tion dating back to Hale and the “monastery” at Mt. Wilson, women had 
never been “allowed” to use the telescopes there. She was the fi rst.).
When Rubin, Ford and their colleagues set out to determine the 
rotation curves for galaxies, the expectation was that they would fi nd very 
simple dynamics—basically, material just going around in circles, as with 
the planets going around the Sun. In the case of the Solar System, since 
99.99% of the mass is in the Sun, the velocities of bodies in orbit around it 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  333
drop off  according to a very simple relation (from Kepler’s third law,
the velocities fall off  proportional to √(1/r); thus Mercury’s velocity in its 
orbit is 47.88 km/sec, and Pluto’s 4.74 km/sec). Th e material in the disk of a 
galaxy like the Milky Way is also undergoing diff erential rotation—in other 
words, the speed is a function of distance. In the case of a star like the Sun, 
whose orbit is far from the galactic center and which lies outside the bulk 
of the mass of the Milky Way, it will even be roughly Keplerian (similar to 
the case of that of the planets circling the Sun). Th e upshot is that as one 
gets farther and farther out in the disk, the velocities should fall off , and 
very far out the rate of drop off  should be proportional to √(1/r).
Th at, at any rate, was the expectation, and it could hardly have been 
any clearer. But as Rubin had shown in 1962 for the Milky Way and now, 
using Ford’s image-tube spectrograph to determine rotation curves for 
nearby galaxies, she and her colleagues showed that this was not the case at 
all. Th e rotation curves did not decline at large distances from the centers of 
galaxies, but either remained at the same maximum velocity or continued 
to rise out to larger and larger radii.7 Th is result, fi rst established by Babcock 
for M31, was now found to be a general result, holding for all spirals. In 
other words, far from the center, the galaxies were rotating much too fast.
Moreover, this rise in the rotation curves occurred well beyond 
the light-emitting part of these galaxies. Th e only explanation for this 
fi nding—unless one wanted to throw out the Newtonian law of gravity 
altogether, which was unthinkable—was that the gravitational fi eld of the 
stars was too small by a factor of 10 or so to explain how fast the galaxies 
were rotating. But that meant that there must be a lot of material out there 
(what kind of material one couldn’t say). Th is ”dark matter” not be detected 
directly, but was considerably more preponderant than ordinary dark 
matter, and furthermore, if there were some kind of telescope that allowed 
imaging of mass without imaging light, the galaxies would look completely 
diff erent than the pictures of them we were used to. Th ere was the disk of 
stars, which is on the order of 20 parsecs across, and then far outside that 
would be this enormous thing extending out to maybe 150 parsecs.
Th e preponderance of dark matter in galaxies—and indeed, in 
the universe—has been confi rmed in measure aft er measure ever since. 
According to the most recent measures of the Cosmic Microwave Back-
ground radiation by the Planck satellite, ordinary baryonic (atomic) matter 
accounts for only 4.9% of the mass-energy of the universe. Dark matter 
accounts for 26.8%, with the rest, 68.3%, being in the form of the even 
more mysterious dark energy (described later). We can now speak of the 
everyday, ordinary (baryonic, i.e., atomic) universe as the 4—or 5% uni-
verse.8 Clearly, in the jargon of accountants, early astronomers and astro-
physicists had been guilty, in assuming that what they saw was all that was, 
of what might be called a “signifi cant rounding error.”

 334 
Galactic Encounters
The Preponderant Form of Matter in the Universe
Th anks to Rubin and her collaborators, by the 1980s, there was no longer 
any doubt as to the existence of dark matter, even though astronomers 
could only speculate about what it might be. Th e observers had done their 
part, splendidly. Now it was time for the theorists set to work. 
Th ey were soon able to show that large dark matter ”haloes” – big 
blobs of dark matter in which galaxies were embedded—were necessary to 
keep the structures of many spiral galaxies stable. Moreover, the recogni-
tion of the existence of dark matter had many implications beyond the sim-
ple idea that the light we see from galaxies is just a small part of the mass in 
these systems. Indeed, not only is it now clear that it is the dark matter that 
determines when and how galaxies are formed as well as their distribution 
across the universe, it even seems to be the case that without dark matter, 
the earliest galaxies, whatever they were, could never have formed at all, or 
would have formed in a much diff erent way 
Even without knowing the identity of the dark matter particle, 
astrophysicists can ascertain some of its features. It does not emit or absorb 
electromagnetic radiation to any signifi cant degree (hence it is “dark”). It is 
also “collisionless,” in the physicist’s jargonish sense; the interaction cross-
section of particles is so low that collisions between dark-matter particles 
have no signifi cant eff ect on the system as a whole (in this sense, stars in 
a galaxy can also be described as collisionless). But the most important 
feature concerned the temperature of dark matter. Is it “hot,” or is it “cold”? 
Th is question has a bearing on the distribution of galaxies across the uni-
verse, which astronomers refer to as its “large-scale structure.”
The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe
In his longest but perhaps least infl uential paper, Hubble wrote in 1934, 
on the basis of deep studies with the 100-inch over 1000 small fi elds thinly 
distributed over the sky north of declination -30°, that the distribution of 
galaxies on very large scales is homogeneous, i.e., there was no indication 
of a super-system of the galaxies.9 But though there was no such  “super-
system,” it was clear that the galaxies associated in clusters and groups 
rather than existed as individual systems. Th is is nothing less than a tribute 
to the fact that gravitation is the prime actor in astronomy and cosmology, 
and acts and isolates clumps of matter on all scales. Hubble himself bore 
witness to this trend, and in the Realm of the Nebulae concluded that “the 
groups (such as the Local Group) are aggregations drawn from the gen-
eral fi eld, and are not additional colonies superposed on the fi eld.”10 Th ese 
groups and clusters ranged from small associations like the Local Group, 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  335
with three galaxies large enough to be spirals, and a couple score dwarf 
systems, up to gigantic clusters containing thousands of large galaxies, such 
as the Virgo cluster. 
Th at was as far as anyone could say in the 1930s. But since Hubble’s 
survey—his nebula-gages, the counterpart of William Herschel’s star-
gages—sampled only small fi elds that were very widely distributed, he was 
not able to address the question of the large-scale structure and the dis-
tribution of the clusters themselves. Th e question remained: on the large 
scale, did they tend to form large associations—Superclusters—or were the 
clusters randomly distributed in the universe?
Other imaging surveys of distant galaxies, including an important 
one done by Lick Observatory showed through the next few decades that 
galaxies were indeed very clustered into the groups and clusters Hubble 
found. An important result  towards answering this question in more detail 
came through the Center for Astrophysics (CfA) redshift  survey, carried 
out at the Harvard-Smithsonian center for astrophysics led by Margaret 
Geller and John Huchra in the 1980s.11 With data mostly coming from the 
CfA 1.5 meter telescope on Mt. Hopkins (near Amado, Arizona), Geller 
and Huchra and their collaborators surveyed the redshift s of several thou-
sand galaxies in a thin slice of the sky. When they looked at this distribu-
tion of galaxies in redshift  space (a parameter kindred to distance) relative 
to sky-location, they found that, instead of a random distribution of gal-
axies and galaxy clusters, as they expected to fi nd, an intricate patterned 
structure emerged consisting of well-defi ned “walls” and “bridges” of galax-
ies,, nestled between large empty “voids” where few galaxies were found. 
Th e discovery of this astonishing fi lamentary structure in turn 
inspired theorists to try to understand what produced it. It turned out that 
the structure they got was highly dependent on the type of dark matter they 
assumed in their models. At fi rst, there was a strong suspicion that dark 
matter might be made up of massive neutrinos, which were referred to “hot 
dark matter” because these particles would be characterized by very large 
(relativistic) velocities. However, by the mid-1980s it was clear that hot dark 
matter produced a universe that looked very diff erent from what the CfA 
data suggested. Th e dark-matter particle could not be a heavy neutrino, 
even if a neutrino with the desired mass could be found (which proved not 
to be the case). Whatever it was, the dark-matter particle had to be cold—
i.e., a particle more massive than 1 keV. Th us the concept of Cold Dark 
Matter was born, which remains the dominant idea in cosmology today. 
Th ough the specifi c identity of the dark-matter particle remains unknown, 
the best candidates were, until recently, the theoretical particles known as 
WIMPs (an acronym for weakly interacting massive particles). Unfortu-
nately, WIMPS are extremely diffi  cult to detect in the laboratory, because 
they rarely interact with ordinary matter, and in their search for them 

 336 
Galactic Encounters
physicists have built giant underground experiments, in which detectors 
are shielded by soil and rock from other particles. Such detectors have been 
located in the Tower Soudan mine in Northern Minnesota, USA and under 
a mountain located between the towns of L’Aquila and Teramo, Italy. A few 
potential WIMP detections were reported from those experiments, but they 
seem to have been false positives; the most sensitive experiment to date—
the Large Underground Xenon detector, or LUX, in which the detector is 
located in a former gold mine 1.5 kilometers beneath Lead, South Dakota—
has turned up empty-handed. Th e nature of dark matter remains a mystery. 
Fortunately, for our present purposes, we are interested only in how dark 
matter—whatever it may turn out to be—aff ects galaxy formation.
Simply put, if the dark matter particle is moving quickly, near the 
speed of light, as  neutrinos do, then the fi rst structures in the universe 
would have been relatively larger than any of the superclusters found today. 
Th ese large structures would then condense and fragment to form smaller 
systems as the universe aged. Th is would imply that structures such as 
galaxy clusters would form fi rst, then the most massive galaxies would 
form next, and fi nally the smallest low mass galaxies would form last. It’s a 
top-down approach similar to that envisaged in the Eggen-Lynden Bell-
Sandage scheme described in the previous chapter.
If, on the other hand, the dark matter particle—WIMP, or what-
ever it turns out to be—is cold, meaning it is moving slowly with respect 
to the speed of light, then the fi rst structures to form will be lower mass. 
Th e evolution of the universe will then proceed in such a way that large 
structures are built up from the merging of these smaller ones. Th at is, the 
universe’s history will be one of building up larger and larger galaxies and 
galaxy clusters through the assembly of already existing systems. Th e fi rst 
galaxies should therefore be mostly small, lower mass systems that merge 
and assemble into larger galaxies and clusters over time. Cold matter gives 
us a bottom-up approach.
Already during the early days of looking at galaxies at high redshift s 
with the Hubble Space Telescope, there was circumstantial evidence favor-
ing this picture of ‘bottom-up’ formation. Not only were the earliest galax-
ies lower mass systems on average, but also the most massive structures in 
the universe—galaxy clusters—do not seem to exist then, although they 
are common today. Th e overall scheme has been supported by subsequent 
and more detailed modeling as well as direct observations in the Hubble 
Deep, Ultra Deep, and Extremely Deep Fields. But if the massive clusters 
we see today did not exist in the early universe—say, the universe in the 
fi rst few billion years aft er the Big Bang—it follows that these clusters had 
to grow through time. All this goes to prove that the bottom-up formation 
of structure was the rule in the universe, and that the dark matter is Cold 
Dark Matter.

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  337
Building on these fi ndings, theoretical astrophysicists have pro-
ceeded to create more and more models, based on diff erent initial assump-
tions about the temperature of dark matter in the early universe and using 
basic equations of the physics of gases to produce star formation. With 
only these modest ingredients, a Cold Dark Matter universe can be mod-
eled that will predict correctly or nearly so, properties of nearby galaxies 
such as their stellar masses and luminosity distributions, how fast these 
systems are rotating, how these galaxies are distributed, even their star for-
mation rates. Th e success of these models gives us confi dence that we are 
on the right track. Th e fi rst of these models was by Martin Rees and Simon 
White from the University of Cambridge published in a paper in 1978 in 
the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Th ese types of mod-
els have been refi ned over the years and are now one of the dominant ways 
that galaxy evolution and formation is studied theoretically. 
Dark Matter—to Black Holes
Admittedly, the models are still a bit wobbly when it comes to accurately 
predicting the observed changes in the galaxy population at high redshift s, 
probably because their assumptions are a bit too simplistic. Real galaxies 
consist of more than just dark matter and stars. Th ey also contain gas and 
black holes, which can profoundly aff ect their formation. In particular we 
know that the formation of galaxies is driven in signifi cant ways by black 
holes—the remnants of the collapse of even more massive stars than those 
that form neutron stars, and, in supersized form, the mysterious denizens 
lurking in the centers of large galaxies.
As exotic and even mildly frightening as they are, black holes are 
oft en the subject of science fi ction, and have always stirred the imagination 
of the public. Th ese objects are entrees into realms where the laws of phys-
ics are completely dominated by gravitation. Th ey are created whenever a 
large amount of mass is compressed into an extremely small volume, and 
the only force able to do this is gravity. 
Black holes are a consequence of Einstein’s General Th eory of Rela-
tivity, which was completed at the end of 1915. Th e fi rst calculations related 
to these strange objects occurred within months of when Einstein’s theory 
began circulating among European physicists, and were carried out by a 
German astrophysicist, Karl Schwarzschild. Solving Einstein’s gravitational 
equations would be a tremendous achievement under any circumstances, 
but to do so under the conditions Schwarzschild was faced with—he was 
then serving with the German Army on the Eastern Front—seems almost 
incredible. Despite being comfortably ensconced as director of the Pots-
dam Astrophysical Observatory, where among other things he had put the 

 338 
Galactic Encounters
problem in Ejnar Hertzsprung’s way that would lead to the HR-diagram, 
and being already in his forties, Schwarzschild saw it as his patriotic duty 
to volunteer for the German army when war broke out in August 1914, 
and spent the year 1915 as a technical artillery expert, fi rst in Belgium and 
France (fast sliding into a black-hole like morass of the Western Front) 
before being transferred to Russia. 
Somehow, Schwarzschild managed to remain in touch with scien-
tifi c developments in Germany, and followed Einstein’s work well enough 
to penetrate the complex mathematical formalism of Einstein’s theory to 
achieve an exact solution to Einstein’s equations—admittedly, it was for 
an idealized case, that is, for the gravitational fi eld surrounding a static, 
spherical, symmetric mass. By the time he did so, he was already suff ering 
with an incurable skin disease (pemphigus), which led to his being inva-
lided out of the army, hospitalized, and completing his work literally on 
his deathbed. He sent this paper, with others, to Einstein, who read it at a 
meeting of the Berlin Academy of Sciences in early 1916, just weeks before 
he died, at the age of only 43. 
Schwarzschild was the fi rst person to calculate the formula for the 
radius of the “event horizon” around a black hole (though the term “black 
hole” was coined only in 1967, by Princeton astrophysicist John Archibald 
Wheeler). Th e event horizon or Schwarzschild horizon is the distance from 
the black hole’s center from which light cannot escape. Th is distance—the 
Schwarzschild radius R—is given by R = 2GM/c2, where G is the gravi-
tational constant, M the mass of the black hole, and c the speed of light. 
Schwarzschild himself did not expect that any such object could actually 
exist in nature, and neither did Einstein, since there was no known object 
in the universe as small as the Schwarzschild radius. However, we now 
know that they not only exist but are common throughout the universe, 
and play a critical role in the formation and evolution of galaxies. 
For our purposes a black hole is simply an object that is so dense 
that even light cannot escape from its gravitational hold, and thus is not 
directly detectable. In this respect, black holes are similar to dark matter 
in having a non-electromagnetic presence, but there the similarity ends. 
Unfortunately, we cannot follow the detailed physics of black holes here—
given the attractiveness of the subject matter, there is an extensive literature 
for the reader who wishes to pursue the subject further—but must confi ne 
ourselves to the eff ects on the galaxies harboring them.12 (We only briefl y 
advert here to the fact that in general, in contrast to the idealized case 
Schwarzschild solved, real-world black holes are in rotation. Th e solution 
to this more general case was published only in 1963 by the New Zealand-
born theoretical astrophysicist Roy Kerr. Since then, astronomers defi ne 
black holes by the two characteristics of mass and spin. Astronomers have 
long known how to measure black holes’ masses, by the gravitational eff ect 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  339
on the orbits of nearby star; but measuring spin is more diffi  cult, since no 
light escapes from the black hole’s event horizons.) Th ough the black hole 
itself cannot be seen, its eff ects on the fabric of space-time around it—out-
side the Schwarzschild radius—are dramatic. Within the central 2-kilo-
parsecs or so of the black hole, large quantities of gas swirl inward toward 
the black hole, to form an accretion disk. Th rough violent collisions of its 
particles, this material becomes superheated to the point where it can emit 
high-energy electromagnetic radiation such as X-rays. It is here—in the 
accretion disk—that the powerful gravitational fi eld of the black hole drives 
the highly energetic processes in galaxies astronomers have observed.
Black holes can exist in many diff erent forms and have a variety of 
masses. Th e traditional theoretical way to form black holes is through the 
collapse of a very massive star. Just before World War II, J. Robert Oppen-
heimer and Harland Snyder calculated that if a massive star collapsed into 
a neutron star of above 3 solar masses, it would continue to collapse still 
further, forming a bizarre object so dense that it would become eff ectively 
a singularity—a point of infi nite density—whose space time would remain 
forever disconnected from the outside world. Th e collapsed star case is in 
fact the explanation for very bright X-ray sources in our own galaxy, such 
as Cygnus X-1, oft en considered the fi rst black hole to be identifi ed and 
discovered only in 1964. Th ese isolated black holes resulting from col-
lapsed stars typically have masses a few times that of the Sun.
However, lurking in the centers of nearly all galaxies (including 
the Milky Way) are supermassive black holes with masses up to 10 million 
times that of the Sun. Th ey are monsters, like the Cretan Minotaur lying 
deep within the entrails of the labyrinth of their home galaxies, or like a 
black widow waiting in the coils of its tangled, sticky web. Clearly these 
monster black holes could never form from the collapse of a single star. 
Even the most massive stars fall short by a factor of 100,000 times of having 
enough mass to produce such oversized systems
In fact, a big unanswered question is how these supermassive black 
holes form and furthermore why there are no “middle mass” black holes. 
All the black holes we know of are either a few times the mass of the Sun, 
like the collapsed stars (including Cygnus X-1), or a few tens of thousands 
to a few million times the mass of the Sun, like those found in the centers 
of galaxies. So far there appears to be nothing between these extremes. A 
possible clue is found in the fact that some of the supermassive black holes, 
which can be estimated from the X-rays emitted by their accretion disks, 
seem to be spinning at more than 90% of the speed of light or more. Th is 
suggests that they must have gained their mass through major galactic 
mergers.
Yet another curious fact is that the mass of black holes found at the 
centers of galaxies are  tightly correlated with the properties of the host 

 340 
Galactic Encounters
galaxy to an amazing degree—so much so that we can say that whatever 
process formed the galaxy also formed the black hole or vice-versa, and that 
the process is highly regulated. It turns out that the ratio of the central black 
hole’s mass to the total galaxy mass is about 1 to 1000, and this relationship 
tends to be similar at all galaxy masses and is robust enough to make us 
suspect that it must hold at earlier times in a galaxy’s lifetime as well.
Th is tight relationship implies that the black holes in the centers 
of galaxies grow along with the galaxy that hosts them. Th e relationship is 
so good that the correlation must be a law of nature, fundamental to how 
galaxies form and evolve, but it is still largely unexplained. Moreover, the 
black holes in the centers of galaxies are still growing, even in galaxies in 
the nearby universe.
Black Holes show their hand: Seyfert Galaxies, AGNs, and Quasars
Th e reader at this point may be wondering how we can identify these grow-
ing the black holes in the centers of galaxies at all. And how can we possibly 
know whether they are still growing or not? Th e answer is not immediately 
obvious. However, for decades there have been important clues right before 
astronomers’ eyes, whose signifi cance we have only recently come to recog-
nize.
Starting in the 1940s, astronomers discovered that the centers of 
galaxies were very energetic. As in many cases in the history of astron-
omy—V.M. Slipher’s discovery of the large redshift s of galaxies, for instance, 
or Zwicky’s of dark matter—this discovery was serendipitous. Th e result 
was completely unexpected, and for a long time remained unexplained. 
By taking spectra of nearby galaxies taken with the Mt. Wilson 100 
inch, Carl Seyfert, then a National Research Council Fellow, later a profes-
sor of astronomy at Vanderbilt, discovered that the cores of many nearby 
galaxies have intense energy output and unusual emission lines. Seyfert 
outlined his discovery in 1943. It is the one thing  Seyfert did for which he 
will always be remembered.
Emission lines had, of course, been observed in nebulae within the 
Milky Way going back to Huggins’s pioneering study of the Cat’s-eye neb-
ula in Draco in the 1860s. Th ey are produced wherever gas is being excited 
into higher ionization states. Most typically, they are associated with young, 
hot, massive stars in star-forming regions, like the O stars of the Trape-
zium that excite the gas in the Orion Nebula. Some examples of important 
emission lines are the H-alpha line [HII], which is given off  when hydrogen 
ions recombine with electrons, H-beta [HIII], and [OII] and [NII] (two 
‘forbidden’ transitions from Oxygen and Nitrogen which were interpreted, 
back in William Huggins’s day, in terms of an as-yet unknown element he 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  341
called “nebulium,” as described in chapter 6). Emission lines had even, on 
occasion, been observed in spectra of extragalactic systems. As we saw in 
chapter 9, Edward A. Fath discovered them in a galaxy, M77 (NGC 1068), 
in 1908, without knowing what to make of them. Indeed, M77 happens to 
be the nearest Seyfert galaxy to the Earth. But Seyfert was the fi rst to study 
such galaxies systematically; he realized that in the very central parts of 
these emission-line galaxies the lines were not only blooming bright, but 
also their line ratios appeared to be diff erent from what would be expected 
if they originated in star-forming regions (in other words, if they were sim-
ply HII regions like the Orion Nebula). Something else was going on. 
Seyfert also noticed that the light from the very centers of these 
galaxies was sometimes, though not always, bright in photographic plates, 
suggesting some kind of violent activity was going on there. Th is obser-
vation led to the recognition that the nuclei of these galaxies are active, 
and “Active Galactic Nuclei” (AGNs) has been a major area of research in 
astronomy ever since.
Fig. 14.2. The nearest Seyfert galaxy (i.e., galaxy with emission lines superimposed on the stellar 
spectrum, denoting an active galactic nucleus), M77 in Cetus. Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 342 
Galactic Encounters
The Quasar connection
Th en there were the curious objects 
known as quasars—“bright” radio 
sources originally known as quasi-stellar 
objects, because they appeared star-
like on photographic plates. Th ey were 
shown, by Maarten Schmidt using the 
200-inch refl ector at Palomar in 1963, to 
have highly redshift ed spectra, so they 
were also, obviously, extremely energetic 
objects. Eventually they were also found 
to be associated with active galactic 
nuclei, and powered by supermassive 
central black holes, though it took lon-
ger since generally they are much more 
remote than AGNs. With the Hubble 
Space Telescope it has at last become 
possible to visualize their host galaxies, 
and it has been found that, in addi-
tion to being more distant, quasars are 
generally much brighter, intrinsically, 
than the nearby AGNs. However, for 
the most part, they seem to be funda-
mentally the same kind of objects, with 
intensity being the only major diff erence
We now know that the light 
from the quasars and active galactic 
nuclei all originate from matter falling 
into black holes at the centers of galaxies. Th e way this works is that as gas 
falls toward the black holes, it becomes excited and emits light at various 
wavelengths. Th is produces fl ux that oft en dominates the galaxy, and is 
oft en variable on short time-scales. When we see this activity in the central 
parts of galaxies, it is an indication that the system at the center is accreting 
matter. Th is implies the black hole is of course growing in mass. At pres-
ent, the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way, Sagittarius 
A*, is quiescent, but we know that the Milky Way has been an AGN in the 
past. A lacy fi lament of mostly hydrogen gas, called the Magellanic Stream 
because it trails behind the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, has recently 
been identifi ed as a fossil relict of an eruption at the center of the Galaxy—
known as a Seyfert fl are—that took place some 2 million years ago.
Fig. 14.3. Active galaxy Centaurus A. See also 
Fig. 4.9. Located in the constellation Centaurus 
at a distance of 11 million light years, Centaurus 
A contains the closest active galactic nucleus to 
the Earth. The warped shape of Centaurus A’s disk 
of gas and dust is evidence for a past collision 
and merger with another galaxy; the resulting 
shockwaves have triggered a ﬁ restorm of new star 
formation, in the HII regions (the pinkish patches 
shown in this close-up). Courtesy: R. O’Connell and 
the WFC3 Scientiﬁ c Oversight Committee. NASA, ESA 
and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  343
One of the important questions we want to resolve is how black holes and 
galaxies can have such tightly coupled masses. What might be going on to 
produce this correlation?
One major idea involves feedback. Feedback is most familiar to 
people in the form of feedback in a musical concert or a microphone at a 
conference/speech, where sound from a speaker goes back into a micro-
phone producing a unique (and usually unappealing) noise eff ect. (Th at 
is known as positive feedback; negative feedback can also occur—and is 
familiar in awkward social situations.) 
Some kind of energy feedback may be occurring in galaxies. Th e 
radiation (including light) emitted from the black holes at the center of gal-
axies is oft en very intense and energetic. However, even simple calculations 
show that the amount of energy being emitted from these active nuclei is 
on the order of several times the so-called binding energy of the galaxy. 
Th is means that the energy from just the central black hole in the galaxy is 
enough to remove all the stars from its potential well  several times over. 
Fig. 14.4. Active galaxy NGC 1275 
in Perseus, located at a distance of 
235 million light years. The traces 
of spiral structure, accompanied 
by dramatic dust lanes and bright 
blue areas of active star formation, 
belong to a spiral nearly edge-on in 
the foreground, which lies in front 
of a giant elliptical with peculiar 
faint spiral structure in its nucleus. 
These galaxies are involved in a 
collision, in which gas and dust 
in the central bright galaxy swirls 
into the center of the object. This 
galaxy emits a strong signal at both 
X-ray and radio frequencies which 
indicate the probable existence 
of a black hole. M. Donahue and 
J. Trauger, NASA and the Hubble 
Heritage Team (STScI/AURA).

 344 
Galactic Encounters
Possibly what is happening is that the energy from these black holes 
heats up and removes gas belonging to their respective host galaxies. For a 
galaxy to continue to grow it must form new stars. For stars to form there 
must be cold gas in the galaxy. By cold gas we mean gas which is not mov-
ing around much and thus can collapse into dense molecular clouds, like 
those that form the dark silhouettes on Barnard’s Milky Way photographs, 
and these dense molecular clouds can then collapse still further and form 
into stars. A galaxy which is full of hot gas cannot form stars until that gas 
cools, and if the gas is kept hot enough, close to 106 K, then the cooling 
time-scale of the gas will sometimes be much longer than the age of the 
universe. Th e result: no new stars.
In active nuclei, the black holes can in principle cause the gas in the 
galaxy to become so heated that it cannot cool and form new stars. Th is 
essentially ends new star formation and keeps the galaxy from developing 
further. Th e galaxy may, of course, be rejuvenated through interactions or 
mergers with other galaxies, in which large quantities of gas may be chan-
neled inwards and, under the right circumstances, trigger massive bursts 
of star formation, known as starbursts. Th is has recently been observed in 
the galaxy NGC 253 in Sculptor.14 Meanwhile, material that is ejected may 
not be driven all the way from a galaxy’s reach. Instead it may remain in the 
halo, cool, and then rain down at a later time to trigger a fresh starburst, 
as seems the case in M82, the “starburst galaxy” that is close companion to 
the majestic “grand spiral” M81 in Ursa Major. How these processes may 
square with the problem of coupling of the black hole with the galaxy’s 
growth and development remains, however, far from clear.
Th ough the details of what is going on remain sketchy, there 
remain many good reasons for believing that black holes and galaxies form 
together. One is that the activity seen in black holes, through quasars and 
active galactic nuclei, peak at largely the same time as does the star forma-
tion history of galaxies. Th at is, the amount of star formation occurring in 
galaxies in the early universe reaches its higher rate of activity at the same 
time that the activity in these active nuclei does. Th is may mean that the 
two processes are related; it may also just be telling us that, whatever it 
is, the same overall process drives the formation of both the stars and the 
active nuclei in these galaxies.
Another—and perhaps the most tantalizing clue—is that the peak 
epoch of star formation and active nuclei occurs at the same time that 
galaxies are forming rapidly through the mergers of galaxies, as described 
in chapter 13. Th is epoch, roughly 2 billion years aft er the Big Bang, is 
clearly the critical time in galaxy formation, yet at the present time we do 
not understand any of the details. It is possible we have not even begun to 
ask the right questions. It is hard to escape the sneaking suspicion that, as 
so oft en in the history of science, when we fi nally do start asking the right 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  345
questions, the answer nature gives us may lead us on to something new and 
strange and unexpected. In any event, understanding the underlying causes 
of all this formation activity in the early universe will be enough to occupy 
astronomers happily for decades to come.
The Cosmic Microwave Background radiation
As the velocity with which galaxies are receding increases with distance, 
because of the expansion of the universe, it follows that as we rewind the 
tape back toward the early universe, the galaxies become more and more 
crowded together (by crowded together, we mean simply the distance 
between any pair of typical galaxies was correspondingly less than it is 
now). Th is, by the way, supplies the obvious explanation for why collisions 
and mergers were so common then. And if we go back all the way (how 
far back we are told approximately by the inverse of the Hubble constant, 
which gives us the expansion age of the universe, now estimated at 13.8 bil-
lion years), we come to the very origin of the graph, the point at which all 
the matter and energy of the whole universe would have been compressed 
into no space at all. 
As with Schwarzschild’s solution to Einstein’s gravitational equa-
tions for a mass point, which led us to the concept of the black hole, we 
fi nd ourselves confronted here with one of those singularly awkward 
mathematical things called a singularity—in this case, we refer to it as the 
initial singularity. It is awkward because here everything—mass-energy 
density, pressure, temperature, etc.—becomes infi nite. In fact, Einstein’s 
gravitational equations lead to the same kind of result for the universe 
itself as they do for the case of the black hole; they actually do say that you 
can go back all the way to a time when all the mass-energy in the universe 
emerged from a point of zero size. Th at’s obviously very awkward—in gen-
eral, mathematicians dislike such things as infi nities and divisions by zero. 
We can only say that physicists now insist that time and space no longer 
have meaning for times less than 10-43 sec from time zero (the Planck time, 
the smallest unit into which we can subdivide our concept of time), and 
Einstein’s gravitational equations no longer apply.
Th e pioneering Belgian cosmologist Georges Lemaître, who inde-
pendently of (and a little later than) Alexander Friedmann introduced the 
fi rst realistic (non-static) cosmological models based on Einstein’s equa-
tions in the 1920s, avoided the problem by pushing the solutions of the 
relativistic equations not to the singularity itself but to a later time when 
the entire contents of the universe were pictured as squeezed into a sphere 
some 30 times the diameter of the Sun, which he called the “primeval 
atom.” (Obviously, it couldn’t have been a sphere in the usual sense, since 

 346 
Galactic Encounters
there would have been 
no container “outside” it.) 
Inside the primeval atom, 
everything was incred-
ibly hot and dense, and 
for unknown reasons the 
primeval atom exploded 
(again, keep in mind that 
this is only a fi gure of 
speech, since there was 
nothing for it to explode 
into), scattering the con-
tents forcefully outward. 
Eventually these disjecta 
membrae formed the con-
stituents of the universe 
such as stars and galaxies 
and the general expansion 
has been going on ever 
since.
Th is model was adopted in the late 1940s, by George Gamow and 
his colleagues Ralph Alpher and George Herman, who realized that it 
implied the universe would have started out incredibly dense and hot, and 
would have produced radiation that would still be around and nuclear 
reactions that might have produced all the elements in the periodic table.  
Gamow’s idea was ridiculed on a B.B.C. radio program by the British 
astrophysicist Fred (later Sir Fred) Hoyle, who called it the “Big Bang” and 
regarded it as “about as elegant as a girl jumping out of a birthday cake.” At 
the time Hoyle was advocating for what he thought was a much more ele-
gant and dignifi ed way the universe might have evolved, the “steady-state 
theory,” but by the 1960s—partly as a result of some of his own calcula-
tions—he was forced to resign himself to the idea that the birth of the uni-
verse really was as inelegant as all that, and the term “Big Bang” has stuck. 
(Th ere was a contest a few years ago run by one of the popular astronomy 
magazines in which the public was asked to propose a better term; in the 
end, there were no winners. No one could improve on “Big Bang.”)
Gamow, Alpher, and Hermann could explain from Big Bang con-
ditions the abundances of hydrogen and helium in the universe, but their 
theory for the creation of heavier elements broke down. It turns out that 
are no stable nuclei with a total of either fi ve or eight neutrons and protons, 
so it is not possible to build heavier nuclei simply by adding protons and 
neutrons to helium nuclei, or combining helium nuclei together.  In fact, 
this is one of the reasons that astronomers concluded that, though hydro-
Fig. 14.5. The 15-meter horn antenna at the Bell Telephone 
Laboratories near Holmdel, New Jersey, used by Robert Wilson and 
Arno Penzias (looking up at the antenna) to discover the Cosmic 
Microwave Background Radiation. From: Wikipedia Commons. 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  347
gen and helium (and a trace of lithium), formed in the Big Bang, heavier 
nuclei formed in stars. Th e major breakthrough here was E. E. Salpeter’s 
demonstration in 1952 of the triple-alpha process, which could occur in 
the dense helium-rich cores of stars. In the triple-alpha process collisions 
between two nuclei of helium formed an unstable and extremely short-
lived nucleus of beryllium (Be8), which because of the high density was 
able to survive long enough to collide with another helium nucleus form-
ing a stable nucleus of carbon (C12). A few years later, Geoff rey and Mar-
garet Burbidge, Willy Fowler, and Hoyle showed how the heavy elements 
of the periodic table (those heavier than iron) could form in supernovae. 
Nevertheless, despite these successes, the stellar theory of nucleosynthesis 
also had shortcomings; most notably, it could not explain the large abun-
dance of helium in the present universe (hydrogen, the primordial stuff  
of the universe, makes up about 73 percent, and helium 24 percent of the 
nuclear matter in the universe; all the other elements make up less than 2 
percent). Th is much helium could not have been produced in the stars but 
could be explained if the universe passed through a hot dense Big Bang.
Apart from the helium abundance, the other important prediction 
of the Big Bang theory—but not the steady state—was that there ought to 
be background microwave radiation (later known as the Cosmic Micro-
wave Background (CMB), left  over from the time when the universe was 
very hot and dense. 
A number of theoretical cosmologists, beginning with Alpher and 
Herman, considered the possibility, and according to Steven Weinberg, 
Alpher and Herman even made some inquiries about trying to observe 
this background radiation with radar experts at Johns Hopkins University, 
the Naval Research Laboratory, and the National Bureau of Standards, but 
were told that the 5 to 10K radiation they expected would be undetect-
able with techniques available at the time. In 1961, a Soviet scientist, Yakov 
Zel’dovich (coinventor of the Soviet hydrogen bomb with André Sakharov), 
also concluded that there should be a background radiation left  over of a 
few degrees. However, aft er Zel’dovich read a Bell System Technical Journal 
report by E. A. Ohm, who with the supersensitive 6-meter horn antenna 
at the Bell Telephone Laboratories site at Crawford Hill in Holmdel Town-
ship, New Jersey, had reported a radiation temperature of less than 1 K, he 
gave up the idea. 
By 1964, the Princeton physicist Robert Dicke and his colleagues 
David Todd Wilkinson and Peter Roll were fi nishing the construction of an 
antenna at Princeton that they planned to use to measure the CMB. Before 
they could get started, however, the CMB was discovered serendipitously. 
Two Bell Labs radio astronomers, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, using 
the same antenna Ohm had used, began in 1964 an eff ort to detect radio 
waves from high galactic latitudes (well above the plane of the galaxy).

 348 
Galactic Encounters
Preliminary tests seemed to 
show more background noise than 
expected, but it could be due to excess 
noise in the amplifi er circuits or a 
similar problem. All instrumental 
sources of noise had to be carefully 
eliminated. Nevertheless, even aft er 
taking all precautions (including using 
a “cold load,” i.e., comparing the power 
coming from their antenna with that 
from an artifi cial source cooled with 
liquid helium), and removing some 
pigeons that had nested in the anten-
na’s throat, they continued to register 
microwave noise at a wavelength of 
7.35 centimeters. It was independent 
of the direction the antenna pointed, 
and—in contrast to what Jansky had 
noted in discovering radio waves from 
the center of the Milky Way—did not 
change with the time of day or the 
season. Th is meant that it could not be 
coming from the Milky Way; instead, 
it was coming from a larger volume of 
the universe, but its nature remained 
mysterious to the two men until 1965, 
when Penzias called another radio astronomer, who had recently heard 
a talk given by a young colleague of Dicke at Princeton, P.J.E. Peebles, in 
which a 10K microwave radiation from the Big Bang was predicted. (Aft er 
receiving a call from Crawford Hill, Dicke is said to have quipped, “Boys, 
we’ve been scooped.”) Soon aft erward, there could be no doubt that the 
microwave radiation detected by Penzias and Wilson was really coming 
from the distant universe, though the temperature was more like 3K rather 
than 10K. Also, it was remarkably smooth and isotropic across the sky. 
It was this discovery that fi nally convinced even Fred Hoyle that the Big 
Bang, for all its inelegance, was right aft er all, and to abandon the steady 
state theory. Penzias and Wilson were awarded the Nobel Prize for physics 
in 1978 for their discovery. Th ey were the fi rst scientists to receive this rec-
ognition for a strictly observational discovery in astronomy (Hans Bethe’s 
1967 Nobel had been for his calculations of the thermonuclear reactions 
by which stars produce energy). Th e discovery of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation (sometimes poetically described as the “aft erglow of 
Creation”) was a decisive triumph for the Big Bang theory. 
Fig. 14.6. The Belgian priest and cosmologist 
Georges LeMaître. Courtesy: Yerkes Observatory.

 
Chapter 12: W.W. Morgan and the Discovery of the Spiral Arms of the Milky Way 349
Subsequent research, notably that based on data from the brilliantly 
successful COBE satellite of 1990, whose team leaders George Smoot of 
Berkeley and John Mather of  NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, were 
also awarded the Nobel Prize in physics in 2006,15 showed that, as pre-
dicted, the CMB represents an almost perfect blackbody spectrum. Its pre-
cise temperature has been determined: 2.7260 ± 0.0013K. Th e temperature 
will, of course, continue to decrease as the universe continues to expand. 
Once the motion of the Earth through the radiation is corrected for, the 
CMB proved to be completely anisotropic and remarkably smooth across 
the entire sky—the intensity of the variation is only about one part in 
100,000—a fi nding that at the moment seems best explained by the “infl a-
tion” theory, proposed by Alan Guth, now at M.I.T., in 1981.16 According 
to infl ation, this remarkable smoothness is a result of a phase of exponen-
tial expansion the universe underwent very early in its history, causing 
it to double in size every 10-34 secs. Th e infl ationary era was over by 10-32 
secs aft er the Big Bang, by which time it had (as rather bravely described 
by John Gribbin) grown in size from smaller than a proton to the size of 
a grapefruit.17 It obviously lies outside the scope of this book to describe 
infl ation any further, but one intriguing idea to emerge from it is that in a 
modifi ed form of the theory, called chaotic infl ation (due to Andrei Linde, 
now at Stanford), seems to suggest that the universe might have grown 
out of a quantum fl uctuation in some pre-existing region of space-time, in 
which it would appear that equivalent processes can create other regions 
of infl ation in our own universe—in eff ect, budding new universes off  
our universe, and suggesting that our universe may have budded off  from 
another universe, and so on without beginning or end.
Th e most important thing Penzias and Wilson’s discovery in 1965 accom-
plished was, as Steven Weinberg points out, “to force us all to take seriously 
that there was an early universe.”18 It also, as Leon Lederman and David 
Schramm note, changed astronomy “from being a parasite to physics, using 
the physics in laboratories and applying it to stellar situations, to being able 
to make predictions about fundamental physics, telling physicists things as 
yet unmeasured in the laboratory.”19 In particular, it was appreciated that 
the kinds of collisions involving elementary particles produced in earthly 
accelerators (produced in small quantities and at great expense) occurred 
freely in the early universe in the instants aft er the Big Bang.
Th e rate of the expansion of the universe is a balance between 
the gravitational fi eld, whose energy source is supplied by the photons, 
electrons, positrons, etc., and the outward momentum of the universe. 
Moreover, the energy source depends essentially on temperature alone. We 
can say specifi cally that the time it takes to cool from one temperature to 

 350 
Galactic Encounters
another is proportional to the diff erence of the inverse squares of the tem-
peratures, so that “the cosmic temperature can be used as a sort of clock, 
cooling instead of ticking as the universe expands.”20
From well-known theories of physics involving the known prop-
erties of matter and radiation in thermal equilibrium, we can calculate 
these temperatures, and work out, with a high degree of confi dence, what 
the state of matter and radiation would have been at each stage. Th us, at 
10-6 sec. aft er the Big Bang, the temperature of the universe had cooled to 
about 1013K, allowing the quark soup of the earlier universe to condense 
into a hot plasma of photons, electrons, and baryons. Th e density of the 
whole universe was about that of the atomic nucleus today. Th ree min-
utes, two seconds aft er the Big Bang, the universe had cooled to 109K, and 
nuclear interactions were able to take place resulting in the synthesis of 
deuterium, helium 3, helium 4 and lithium. Aft er this, the universe contin-
ued to expand, though nothing interesting happened for several hundred 
thousand years. Moreover, we cannot even see directly into this era, since 
electrons in the hot matter remained free, and continually scattered pho-
tons. Th e universe remained completely opaque until some 380,000 years 
aft er the Big Bang, when the temperature dropped to around 3000K, the 
temperature at which protons and electrons are able to combine to form 
neutral hydrogen. Henceforth, photons could travel unimpeded without 
interacting constantly with charged particles, and the thermal glow of the 
hot plasma of photons, nuclei, and electrons that existed just before neutral 
hydrogen formed could radiate throughout the universe without interfer-
ence. What we observe as the CMB is the relict of the radiation from that 
time, but redshift ed by a factor of 1100 as the universe expanded by a factor 
of 1100.
Th e decoupling of matter and radiation occurring with the forma-
tion of neutral hydrogen occurred rather suddenly. Th is was the decisive 
moment when, in Steven Weinberg’s memorable phrase, “the contamina-
tion of nuclear particles and electrons [were able] to grow into the stars and 
rocks and living beings of the present universe.”21 However, much of this 
happened out of sight. Th e neutral atoms created a light-absorbing haze, 
leading the universe into a period, lasting several hundred million years, 
which are known as the cosmic “dark ages.” We know that this cosmic haze 
was almost perfectly uniform, but not quite; there were small ripples in 
temperature, fl uctuations of about one part in a hundred thousand, which 
were also mapped by the COBE satellite in 1990. Th ese fl uctuations were 
due to chaotic sound waves in the matter of the early universe. As the uni-
verse expanded, the lumps and ripples served as seeds for future structures. 
In due course gravity caused material—the one-sixth consisting of ordinary 
baryonic matter and also the fi ft h-sixths consisting of dark matter which 
does not emit or absorb light—to clump together. Aft er several hundreds of 

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  351
millions of years, the densest of the clumps formed galaxies, which without 
the dark stuff  would have rapidly fl own apart as the universe expanded. 
Indeed, as we have realized only recently, the dark matter dominates galax-
ies, and clusters of galaxies, so that, as Martin Rees puts it, “Th e beautiful 
pictures of discs or spirals portray what is essentially just ‘luminous sedi-
ment’ held in the gravitational clutch of vast swarms of invisible objects of 
quite unknown nature. Galaxies are ten times bigger and heavier than we 
used to like to think. Th e same argument applies, on a larger scale, to entire 
clusters of galaxies, each millions of light years across.”22 Th e massive stars 
formed in these early galaxies must have ionized the neutral intergalac-
tic hydrogen gas that fi lled space in these early epochs, thereby gradually 
bringing the cosmic dark ages to an end as the gas became transparent 
again. (Confusingly, this era is referred to as the “re-ionization era”; obvi-
ously, the term is a poor one, since the gas had not previously been ion-
ized.) Th e earliest stars, 100 times as massive as the Sun, end by destroying 
themselves in supernova explosions aft er only a couple million years. It 
might be supposed that these explosions would disrupt the star-forming 
Fig. 14.7. Minute ﬂ uctuations in the nearly homogeneous Cosmic Microwave Background radiation, 
which will eventually grow (with the expansion of the universe) into large-scale structures in the universe, 
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Image from the European Space Agency’s Planck Space Telescope. Cour-
tesy: ESA.

 352 
Galactic Encounters
process in the interstellar gas clouds from which the next generation of 
stars forms, but Hubble Ultra Deep Field (HUDF) images, which show the 
largest and brightest galaxies of their era, from 560 to 780 million years 
aft er the Big Bang, suggest that there was little or no time-lag between the 
death of the fi rst generation of stars and the birth of the second. Appar-
ently even galaxies from this early time—when the universe had reached 
only 5% of its current age—were chemically enriched with dust and met-
als (elements heavier than hydrogen and helium), which must have been 
produced by an earlier generation of stars. 
Th ere do not appear to be enough of the larger and brighter galax-
ies in the HUDF images to have completed the “reionization” process. Th is 
implies that there must have been many more small galaxies at the time, 
which completed most of the work. Th ough untangling what exactly went 
on will be the work of future large telescopes, it is clear, at any event, that 
the cosmic “dark ages” were fi nally over by about 1 billion years aft er the 
Big Bang. Th ereaft er, the universe entered upon the normal era, in which it 
has been mostly transparent to starlight—the era that continues up to the 
present-day.
Stars, galaxies, planets, perhaps on some of the planets life, belong 
to the story of that era. Th ese are the things with which we are familiar, and 
view with awe—and pleasure—on dark starlit nights. But at their basis is 
the profoundly unfamiliar and the terrifyingly strange. At the end of his 
book Th e First Th ree Minutes, Steven Weinberg refl ects:
It is almost irresistible for humans to believe that we have some spe-
cial relation to the universe, that human life is not just a more-or-less 
farcical outcome of a chain of accidents reaching back to the ﬁ rst three 
minutes…. It is very hard to realize that this all is just a tiny part of an 
overwhelmingly hostile universe. It is even harder to realize that this 
present universe has evolved from an unspeakably unfamiliar early con-
dition, and faces a future extinction of endless cold or intolerable heat. 
The more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems 
pointless.23
Th at is the hard sentence of modern cosmology.
*   *   *
 1. G. Goldhaber, S. Deustua, S. Gabi, D. Groom, I 
Hook, A. Kim, M.Kim, J. Lee, R. Pain, C. Penny-
backer, S. Perlmutter, et al. (Th e Supernova Cos-
mology Project: III), “Observation of Cosmo-
logical time dilation using Type IA supernovae 
as clocks,”; arXiv:astro-ph/9602124v1 (1996).
 2. Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky, “On Super-
novae,” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 20 (1934), 254-259.
 3. Fritz Zwicky, Die Rotbershiebung von extra-
galaktischen Nebeln. Helvetica Physica Acta, 6 
(1933), 110-127.

 
Chapter 14: Over to the Dark Side  353
  4. Sinclair Smith, “Th e Mass of the Virgo Cluster,” 
Astrophysical Journal, 83 (1936), 23-30.
 5. Vera C. Rubin, “An Interesting Voyage,” Annual 
Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 49 
(2011), 1-28: Abstract 
 6. Ibid., 7.
 7. Among the seminal papers establishing this 
result are: Vera C. Rubin and W. Kent Ford, 
Jr., “Rotation of the Andromeda Nebula from 
a spectroscopic survey of emission regions,” 
Astrophysical Journal, 159 (1970), 379-402 and 
Vera C. Rubin, W. Kent Ford, Jr. and Norbert 
Th onnard, “Extended Rotation Curves of High-
Luminosity Spiral Galaxies, IV; Systematic 
Dynamical Properties, SA→SC,” Astrophysical 
Journal, 225 (1978), L107-L111.
 8. See: Richard Panek, Th e 4% Universe: dark mat-
ter, dark energy, and the race to discover the rest 
of reality. Boston and New York: Houghton Mif-
fl in Harcourt, 2011. 
 9. E.P. Hubble, “Th e Distribution of Extra-galactic 
Nebulae,” Astrophysical Journal, 79 (1934), 8-76.
 10. E.P. Hubble, Realm of the Nebulae, 82.
 11. Margaret J. Geller and John P. Huchra, “Map-
ping the Universe,” Science, 246 (1989), 897-903.
 12. A good non-technical overview is: Kip Th orne, 
Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s outra-
geous legacy. New York: W.W. Norton, 1994.
 13. See: Fulvio Melia, Cracking the Einstein Code: 
relativity and the birth of black hole physics. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
 14. A.D. Bolatto, S.R. Warren, A.K. Leroy, F. Wal-
ter, S. Veilleux, E.C. Ostriker, J. Ott, M. Zwaan, 
D.B. Gisher, A. Weiss, E. Rosolowsky and J. 
Hodge, “Suppression of star formation in the 
galaxy NGC 253 by a starburst-driven molecu-
lar wind,” Nature, 499 (July 25, 2013), 450-453.
 15. Popular accounts include George Smoot and 
Keay Davidson, Wrinkles in Time: witness to the 
birth of the universe. New York: Harper, 1993 
and John C. Mather and John Boslough, Th e 
Very First Light: the true inside story of the sci-
entifi c journey back to the dawn of the universe. 
New York: Perseus, 2nd ed., 2008.
 16. A very accessible account is: Alan H. Guth, Th e 
Infl ationary Universe: the quest for a new theory 
of cosmic origins. Reading, Massachusetts: Helix 
Books, 1997.
 17. John Gribbon, Companion to the Cosmos (Bos-
ton: Little Brown and Company, 1996), 219.
  18.  Weinberg, First Th ree Minutes, 123.
 19. Leon M. Lederman and David N. Schramm, 
From Quarks to the Cosmos: tools of discovery 
(New York: Scientifi c American Library, 1995), 
153.
 20. Ibid., 79.
 21. Weinberg, First Th ree Minutes, 69.
 22. Martin Rees, Just Six Numbers: the deep forces 
that shape the universe (New York: Basic Books, 
2000), 74-75.
 23. Weinberg, Th e First Th ree Minutes, 144.

Come, an you get it, you shall get it by running.
—King Lear, Act IV, scene 6.
O
ne of the noteworthy features of Hubble’s law is that, with the excep-
tion of the static universe with which Einstein and de Sitter began in 
1917, it is the only redshift  distance law that is isotropic and homogeneous 
(i.e., looks the same) for every galaxy in the universe. It is this feature that 
gives rise to attempts to explain it by means of a balloon with marks on it 
being infl ated, where, from the perspective of any mark, all the other marks 
appear to be receding. Th e marks on the balloon represent galaxies in the 
expanding universe.
Obviously, the real universe isn’t being infl ated, like the balloon, 
into a surrounding space, or being baked in an oven. Instead we are dis-
cussing expansion of the metric of space-time. In general terms, metric 
refers to the way that distance can be measured between two points in 
space. In Euclidean (plane) geometry, the distance is obtained simply by 
measuring a straight line between the two points. Since the 1920s, it has 
been clear that Einstein’s fi eld equations of general relativity imply a non-
Euclidean geometry, in which space-time has a curvature that is described 
by the Friedmann-LeMaître-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) metric. Th is 
metric gives the distance between galaxies that are far separated from one 
another—cosmological expansion actually means expansion of over the 
scale factor and distance over time. (Parenthetically, we have to specify that 
the galaxies be far separated because on smaller scales, such as those that 
hold in clusters of galaxies, the gravitational attraction of the galaxies for 
one another is able to overcome the expansion forces; this is why things 
that are gravitationally bound together remain bound together and why 
even in the present universe, where things are much less crowded than they 
once were, galaxy collisions and mergers continue to take place.)
15.
Dark Energy
354
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_15, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  355
Th e universe’s current expansion presumably started with the infl a-
tionary period described above—indeed, Alan Guth once wrote an article 
with the title “Was Cosmic Infl ation the ‘Bang” of the Big Bang.”1 But once 
the Big Bang gets underway, what happens as the universe evolves over 
time depends crucially on the density of matter energy in the universe. 
Several scenarios can be envisaged: 
 
1. If the density of matter-energy in the universe  is greater than 
some critical value c, which turns out to be only about 5 atoms 
per cubic meter, the universe’s current outward expansion will slow 
until it begins to contract and collapse back onto itself. Th is has 
sometimes been referred to as the “big crunch” prediction. It cor-
responds to the case where the universe is unable to escape its own 
gravity. Th is scenario was regarded as consistent with an oscillating 
universe scenario where, aft er each collapse, the density, pressure 
and temperature of the universe again would again reach the point 
where another Big Bang would occur, the universe would begin 
expanding again, and so on, forever and ever. 
 
2. If the density of matter energy  is equal to or less than c, although 
the expansion of the universe is slowed by gravitation, there isn’t 
enough matter in the universe to overcome the expansion. Th e 
universe thus escapes its own gravity, and the universe continues to 
expand forever.
 
3. In the case of  equal to c, the expansion continues forever but 
the speed of expansion slows to zero as time progresses). Th is is 
sometimes referred to as the “big chill” prediction, since as the 
expansion continues the constituents of the universe end in ther-
modynamic death and the universe, aft er a trillion years or so (the 
time that the lowest-mass stars can live before running out of fuel) 
becomes cold and dark. (Note that this happens if  is less than c 
too.)
What we are describing is obviously rather similar to the case of, 
say, a large asteroid or small planet shattered by an impact. If the impact 
is extremely violent, and the debris are scattered at high speeds, they will 
essentially go sailing off  forever. But if the impact is less violent, and there 
is enough material, gravity may be able to hold them together, and the frag-
ments may fall back together into a sphere. For the universe as a whole, we 
know the rate of expansion at present; what we need to determine, in order 
to know the universe’s fate, is whether there is enough gravity to cause it to 
recollapse, or whether the material in it will just keep fl ying apart forever.
Here the key parameter is , the ratio of actual density to critical density 
(ratio of  to c). In general relativity,  is related to the curvature of space-

 356 
Galactic Encounters
time. Th e case where  > 1 corresponds to positive curvature (e.g., a closed 
or spherical universe); the case where  < 1 to negative curvature (an open 
or saddle-shaped universe); and  = 1 is the knife-edge between the two, 
and corresponds to a fl at universe. 
Clearly, then, density is destiny. 
Th e value of  at the present era is now thought to be 1, to within 
1 percent. In other words, the diff erence between omega and 1 is currently 
less than 0.01. Th e tiny diff erence defi nes what is called the fl atness prob-
lem, which was fi rst pointed out by the Princeton physicist Robert Dicke—
the same person who had been scooped by Penzias and Wilson in the 
experiment that led to the detection of the Cosmic Microwave Background 
radiation, and so had missed winning the Nobel Prize—in 1969. In 1978, 
he gave a series of lectures at Cornell in honor of Hans Bethe. In one of the 
lectures he discussed what values for mass-energy density at 1 second aft er 
the Big Bang would lead to a universe that in any way resembles our own 
universe. He deduced that whatever its value now, in the early universe it 
had to be exquisitely close to 1, because unless the energy of expansion and 
gravitational energy were in exact balance,  any departure of  from 1 in 
the early universe, no matter how minuscule, would have been magnifi ed 
during the billlions of years of expansion. (As we now know, the universe 
has expanded in volume by an order of 1060 from its volume in the Planck 
era, so the diff erence between omega and 1—now less than 0.01—would 
have had to have been less than 10-62 during the Planck era.) As discussed 
above, for  > c, the universe would have been so overdense it would have 
rapidly collapsed into an incredibly compressed state as in the Big Crunch 
scenario; for  < c, the universe would have been so underdense that it 
would have thinned out so fast that the galaxies would never have been able 
to form. 
Dicke’s argument was inescapable at the time, and is still more 
so today. It was this flatness problem that led Alan Guth, then a post-
doc who was present at that lecture, to propose the inflationary theory, 
in which the universe expands exponentially quickly during a short 
period in its early history. Guth jotted in his diary after hearing Dicke’s 
lecture:
Colloquium by Bob Dicke on cosmology—fascinating—most outra-
geous claims: velocity [of Hubble expansion] at 1 sec tuned to 1 part in 
1014 to allow for star formation.2
Guth’s infl ationary theory, which was introduced in 1979, 
accounted not only for the “fl atness” problem but also showed how tiny 
quantum-mechanical fl uctuations in the early universe could grow into 
galaxies and clusters of galaxies in the universe today. Its successes have led 

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  357
many theorists to believe that  must be exactly 1 and that the universe 
was precisely fl at.
Unfortunately, it was already clear at the time that there wasn’t 
nearly enough matter energy density to make the universe fl at. Th e matter 
in the universe that we actually see—galaxies, stars, glowing gas clouds—
make up at most 0.05 of the matter-energy density needed to satisfy the 
fl atness criterion.3 Where was the other 0.95 to come from? Th is became 
known as the “missing mass” problem, and its solution became the holy 
grail of observational cosmologists for 50 years (Once the existence of dark 
matter was identifi ed, the value of the matter-energy rose to 0.3 of the criti-
cal density; still not enough. On the face of it, it still appeared that the uni-
verse was a hyperbolic, underdense universe, that would expand forever.)
Th e geometry of the universe—hyperbolic, underdense for  <1), 
fl at for  = 1, and spherical for  <1—can in principle be probed by mea-
suring standard candles and standard yardsticks throughout the universe. 
However, it is not so easy to do in practice. To begin with, fi nding stan-
dards that are reliable enough is very diffi  cult. For a long time, beginning 
with Hubble himself, galaxies themselves were used as standard candles 
for the distant universe. Hubble had assumed that galaxies had constant 
surface brightness, so that fainter objects could be considered physically 
similar to brighter ones but located at larger distances. Th is was admittedly 
rough, but it was good enough to show the Hubble distance-velocity rela-
tion for the nearer universe. Later, astronomers used some of the brightest 
galaxies in rich clusters as “standard candles,” but because galaxies evolve 
over time—and the evolution of the brightest galaxies is a subject of inter-
est in itself—there was no reason to believe that galaxies in the distant 
universe closely resemble those in the nearby universe. 
By the 1970s researchers were considering using supernovae as 
candles for probing the contents of the universe out to very large dis-
tances.4 Th ese staggeringly violent events involving the demise of massive 
stars (as discussed in chapter 8) and produce a sudden fl are across the 
universe whose brightness can exceed, briefl y, the combined light of all its 
host galaxy’s other stars. (Th e peak blue absolute brightness of a supernova 
averages about -19.2, which compares well with the absolute magnitude 
of -20.3 estimated for our own rather larger-than-average Milky Way.) 
Unfortunately, however, supernovae are very rare. In a typical galaxy, one 
visible supernova is expected perhaps once every hundred years. Zwicky, 
again, was the fi rst to systematically search for supernovae in other galax-
ies. He and a colleague, J.J. Johnson began exposing plates with the 18-inch 
Schmidt telescope at Palomar and comparing them with a binocular 
microscope. Between 1936 and 1941, they discovered 14, and  later, using 
the 48-inch Schmidt telescope at Palomar, they discovered many more, 
some 200 in all. Each time one was discovered, Zwicky’s long-time col-

 358 
Galactic Encounters
laborator Baade made careful 
observations of the light curves 
showing the rise and fall of the 
star’s brightness, while another 
associate, Rudolph Minkowski, 
obtained spectra with the 100-
inch telescope. Th ese observa-
tions led to the recognition of 
several subtypes of supernovae. 
Types Ib, Ic, and II involve 
core collapse of a massive star. 
Th ose of Type Ia, on the other 
hand, are unique and proved 
to be particularly important; 
they appear to occur in binary 
systems in which one of the 
stars is a carbon-oxygen white 
dwarf with a slow rotation. 
Th ese white dwarfs are limited 
to below 1.38 solar masses, and 
if such an object merges with its 
companion (a very rare event), 
the Chandrasekhar limit  is 
surpassed in which electron degeneracy pressure is able to prevent cata-
strophic collapse. At this point nuclear fusion is triggered, and within a few 
seconds a substantial fraction of the matter in the white dwarf undergoes a 
runaway reaction leading to a supernova explosion. 
Th ough the Zwicky-Baade-Minkowski program was highly suc-
cessful, typically there was a delay between the exposure of a plate and the 
recognition that a supernova had occurred, meaning the light curves and 
spectra were seldom as good as the astronomers would have liked. Th ere 
were not enough observations early in the development of the explosions, 
as the supernovae were discovered by accident only aft er peak brightness.
Moreover, the search for supernovae was extremely laborious and 
time-consuming, and so for a long time astronomers dreamed of using 
automated telescopes to search for supernovae. Th e fi rst person to do so 
was Stirling Colgate, scion of the toothpaste family, then at the New Mexico 
Institute of Mining and Manufacturing, who in the 1960s and early 1970s 
set up a 30-inch telescope on a surplus military radar mount at Baldy 
Mountain. Unfortunately, having to contend with TV tube imagers and 
ineffi  cient room-sized computers, his telescope never worked. However, 
his work inspired astrophysicists at the University of California’s Lawrence 
Berkeley Lab to make a new attempt. 
Fig. 15.1. Carl Pennypacker, the ﬁ rst leader of the 
Supernova Cosmology Project. Here he is strik-
ing a thoughtful pose as he tests a new device 
for infrared in vivo imaging of the human brain. 
Photograph by William Sheehan, 2008.

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  359
Th e original inspiration came from Berkeley physicist Luis Alva-
rez. Th e son of a famous Mayo Clinic physician, Alvarez, in the late 1950s, 
had used an innovative detector to discover many new elementary par-
ticles, work which earned him a Nobel Prize, and was soon to introduce 
the idea—at fi rst highly controversial but now generally accepted—that 
an asteroid or comet hit the Earth 65 million years ago, and wiped out the 
dinosaurs. In 1978, he learned that the Air Force used automated tele-
scopes to monitor missile launches, and with his protégé  Richard Muller 
wanted to use those on the Kwajalein atoll in the Pacifi c to search for 
supernovae in galaxies. Th e plan was simple. Alvarez and Muller would 
send Kwajalein a list of galaxy coordinates, and receive back pictures of a 
few thousand galaxies a week. Comparing the new images with reference 
images, the team would fi nd out if a supernova had gone off . Discussions 
with Kwajalein were still underway and seemed promising enough for a 
team leader to be hired. He was Carleton R. Pennypacker, a cosmic-ray 
physicist who arrived at Lawrence Berkeley lab in October 1979, and was 
signed to serve as the project’s day to day leader.
Th ough the Kwajalein idea eventually fell through—not least because the 
Air Force decided it had no interest in switching equipment every few 
days—a number of promising technological developments had occurred in 
the meantime, including the increased availability of automated telescopes, 
cameras built around CCD chips, and inexpensive personal computers that 
allowed the utilization of new, more powerful image-processing soft ware 
to help analyze galaxy images. Proposals for funding were sent out, and 
were promptly rejected. As Ronald N. Kahn, a member of the Berkeley 
team during its early years, has recalled: “Some reports from referees were 
full of praise: ‘the basic concept is excellent … this kind of search is clearly 
the necessary way to proceed … the planning has been thoughtfully done.’ 
Others were clearly negative: ‘previous eff orts have all failed … the authors 
are basically physicists with virtually no experience in optical astronomy.’”5
During an era of tight budgets, there were some lean years for the 
initiative which eventually evolved into the Supernova Cosmology Proj-
ect, and the funding to keep it alive was largely provided out of Muller’s 
MacArthur “genius” grant (he had been recognized as one of the top young 
physicists in the U.S.) In the fall of 1981, there was a rare success, when 
Pennypacker successfully tested a CCD chip that had cost $6,000—the 
team was on such a tight shoestring budget it could aff ord only one. For-
tunately, it worked. Th ere followed several discouraging years in which 
Pennypacker searched for a suitable telescope. For a while they tried to use 
the Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy (MIRA) 36-inch refl ec-
tor, which had been built and run by Ph.D. astronomers who had struggled 

 360 
Galactic Encounters
to fi nd permanent academic positions and wanted to carry on their own 
research, but logistical problems—including Monterey’s distance from 
Berkeley—intervened. Not until the spring of 1983 did the team obtain its 
fi rst galaxy picture!Kahn notes, “Th e team was observing only one galaxy 
every two years. Th ey needed hundreds per night to succeed. To some the 
sky seems like a cold and objective place, to others it seems romantic, but 
to the supernova searchers it was simply their constant source of very per-
sonal anguish.”6
Meanwhile, as the Berkeley team struggled, the Rev. Robert Evans, 
an Australian amateur astronomer, suddenly burst onto the scene. With a 
visual memory so remarkable he merited a mention in one of Oliver Sacks’s 
books, An Anthropologist on Mars, Evans had committed to memory the 
patterns of 700 galaxies, and spent 30 or 40 hours a month searching for 
supernovae with a 10-inch homebuilt refl ector in his backyard. He discov-
ered his fi rst, in 1981. From then on he was turning up several new ones 
every year—a record that demonstrated that amateur astronomers could 
still contribute important data to astronomy but whose success rather high-
lighted the Berkeley group’s slow progress.
It was only aft er the Berkeley team gained access to the University 
of California’s 30-inch Leuschner refl ector, not as powerful as the MIRA 
telescope but much more conveniently located in the Berkeley hills, that 
its fortunes began to improve. Aft er four years without a useful result, they 
were soon obtaining 50 galaxy images a night, and by January 1986 they 
had collected some 2000 reference images of galaxies—more even than the 
Rev. Evans had stored in his memory—and were collecting new images at 
a rate of about 200 a month. Th ough they began using soft ware to try to 
locate a few pixels, out of a hundred million or so they obtained each night, 
at fi rst they were frustrated by “false alarms”—artifacts—that would need 
new soft ware to fi lter out. In the meantime, humans—fi ft een or so volun-
teers—began scanning galaxies on a computer screen; even Luis Alvarez, 
now 78, spent a few hours a week in front of the screen. At last Frank 
Crawford, a Berkeley physics professor who joined the team about a year 
aft er Pennypacker had come on board, discovered the group’s fi rst super-
nova—in the spiral galaxy M99. 
Th at June, Pennypacker’s picture appeared on the cover of Sky & 
Telescope, in association with Kahn’s article, “Desperately Seeking Super-
novae,” with a subtitle added by the Sky & Telescope editorial staff : “the 
gulf between a good idea and a successful project can be very wide.”From 
this fi rst success, they went on to many more. In the next four years, they 
discovered more than 20 supernovae with their prototype system, and were 
ready to take their search to the next level. Th e discoveries so far had been 
at non-cosmological distances. What they were really interested in were 
Type Ia supernovae in very distant galaxies—those whose cosmological 

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  361
redshift s due to the expansion of the universe were a third and more of the 
speed of light. Th e reason was that the Type Ia supernovae really are stan-
dard candles. Th e straightforward nature of these explosions is what makes 
them so useful: they do not depend at all on the evolutionary history of 
the star, are independent of the age of the universe at the time and on such 
conditions as the mass of the star from which the white dwarf began or the 
nature of the companion star. (Th ey may, admittedly, depend somewhat 
on such parameters as the metallicity of the white dwarf—i.e., the propor-
tion of elements heavier than helium—but these are hopefully details that 
don’t aff ect their brightness.) Eventually, during the 1990s, Mark Phillips, 
an astronomer working in Chile, showed that, aft er correcting for some 
variations empirically, Type Ia supernovae really are remarkably uniform. 
In general, all of them have very similar peak magnitudes and light curves. 
Th is makes them ideal  “standard candles,” provided one can discover and 
follow them up early enough, because then, simply by reading off  how 
bright it is from the light curves, one can work out the distance.
But that required a larger telescope than the one in the Berkeley 
Hills. Pennypacker managed to achieve something of a coup by gaining 
access for the 4-meter Anglo-Australian Telescope at Siding Spring, Aus-
tralia, and he and his colleagues began using it to start the fi rst search for 
supernovae at cosmological distances (i.e., at expansion velocities greater 
than about 0.3 times the speed of light). Th ey needed as large a fi eld as they 
could get. At the time, the largest CCD available had only a 1000 x 1000 
pixel CCD. Th at is minuscule by today’s standards; it is hard to believe that 
it was the biggest CCD on a large telescope at the time. Indeed, it could 
only be used by inserting custom optics to de-magnify the image onto the 
tiny CCD. 
Bad weather and other issues at AAT hampered that initiative, and 
led Pennypacker to transfer what was now known as the Supernova Cos-
mology project to the 2.5-meter Isaac Newton telescope at La Palma in the 
Canary Islands. Th is telescope had had a long and rather troubled history, 
which has been recently told by astronomical historian Lee T. Macdon-
ald.7 Inspired by Hubble’s comment that “the conquest of the Realm of the 
Nebulae is an achievement of great telescopes,” a Royal Society committee 
on the needs of British astronomy recommended the acquisition of a large 
telescope, to be set up in Britain (as regards to doubts about the climate, 
the work that William Herschel had done with the 48-inch telescope at 
Slough was mentioned). Th e new telescope was to be at Herstmonceux 
Castle, where the Royal Observatory was slated to be moved from Green-
wich, and in honor of the tercentenary of Isaac Newton’s birth—postponed 
from 1943 to 1946 because of the War—the telescope was to be named the 
Isaac Newton telescope. Funding for the telescope was quickly approved 
by the Government, but the telescope took 21 years to build.8 Originally, it 

 362 
Galactic Encounters
was meant to be an interchangeable Schmidt and Cassegrain instrument, 
but eventually it was made as a conventional Cassegrain. Because of cracks 
in the glass, the mirror took a long time to grind; it was fi gured to an f/3 
spherical instrument in 1954, and later reground to a parabolic fi gure, but 
because of the cracks, left  at f/3. Th is made it, in the words of Fred Hoyle, 
“a little runt of an instrument.” Th at was meant as a pejorative statement—
like “Big Bang”—but the littleness proved to be a virtue. Th e telescope was 
offi  cially dedicated by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II at Herstmonceaux 
on December 1, 1967—a foggy day, so nothing was seen. Th at, alas, would 
prove portentous. As soon as the telescope went into regular use, the bad 
observing conditions became so frequent that it was fi nally agreed to move 
it to the Canary Islands. Dismantled at Herstmonceaux in 1979, it reopened 
on La Palma in 1984. 
Th e telescope—precisely because it was a runt—had a very wide 
fi eld, and proved to be a good fi t to the needs of the Supernova Cosmology 
Project. It was used to make the group’s fi rst discovery of a cosmological 
Type Ia supernova in 1992 (cosmological redshift  z = 0.0457).9 At this point 
Pennypacker turned the reins over to his colleague, another young Berkeley 
Fig. 15.2. Prime focus camera on the Isaac Newton Telescope, used to observe supernovae at 
cosmological redshifts for the Supernova Cosmology Project and leading to the discovery of 
dark energy. Courtesy: Carl Pennypacker.

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  363
astrophysicist, Saul Perlmutter, and turned his eff orts over to something 
else, the educational project, “Hands on the Universe.” Having devoted over 
a decade and a half of his life to the project, and endured some of the years 
of great frustration, he had seen it mature with the advent of technologi-
cal advances (notably the exponential increase in the size of CCD arrays) 
to the point where it was ready to take off , and within a few years, scores 
of cosmological supernovae were being registered by the Supernova Cos-
mology Project led by Perlmutter and the rival High-z Supernova Search 
Team, organized by Brian Schmidt, a post-doc at Harvard, and Nicholas B. 
Suntzeff , a staff  astronomer at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in 
Chile, who began searching for cosmological supernovae with the 4-meter 
Victor M. Blanco telescope. Preliminary results from the teams began to 
trickle out from both teams between 1995-97, but they contained large 
errors. It was not long, however, before defi nitive results were published. 
Perlmutter, in a talk in 1997, announcing the discovery of a supernova with 
expansion velocity z = 0.83, concluded, “We may live in a low mass-density 
universe.” Th e High-z Supernova Search Team published a defi nitive paper 
in 1998,10 followed almost at once by one from the Supernova Cosmology 
Project.11 Th e results startled the astronomical world. Th ese papers, which 
quickly became among the most oft en cited in physics, are likely to prove 
as revolutionary as Max Planck’s late 1899 paper introducing the quantum 
Fig. 15.3. Hubble diagram for 42 high-redshift Type Ia supernovae from the Supernova Cosmol-
ogy Project, and 18 low-redshift Type Ia supernovae from the Calan/Tololo Supernova Supervey, 
plotted on a linear redshift scale to display details at high redshift. The accelerating expansion of 
the universe emerges from the high-redshift data. Courtesy: Carl Pennypacker.

 364 
Galactic Encounters
theory. Th e supernova surveys would earn Riess, Schmidt, and Perlmutter 
the 2011 Nobel Prize in physics. 
It was evident at once that the rival teams, working independently, 
had obtained corroborative results. From their analysis of cosmological 
redshift s for about 50 Type Ia supernovae (with expansion velocity z from 
0.16 to 0.83), they found something that was—as much as Slipher’s dis-
covery of the large redshift s or Zwicky’s discovery of “dark matter”—com-
pletely unexpected. Once again, it seemed, nature had surprised us. 
Th ough when astronomers fi rst started thinking about using super-
novae as probes of the very distant (early) universe in order to determine its 
fate, they expected to determine the “deceleration” of the universe—in other 
words, they sought evidence favoring either the “Big Crunch” or the “Big 
Chill—when the experiment fi nally came to be done, they found—neither. 
Th e main observational result of the supernovae surveys was that 
the supernovae discovered by both teams were fainter than what would 
have been expected for what was then the standard low matter density 
universe. When analyzed in detail and combined with constraints from 
measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background, it was further deter-
mined that the universe not only has a low matter density, but a total den-
sity equal to the critical density. In other words,  still equals 1. Because of 
this, the space between us and a distant supernova is larger than expected 
on the basis of the low matter density universe. Hence the shocking conclu-
sion: the universe is not only expanding, its expansion is accelerating. It fol-
lows that there must be another source of density than matter. Both super-
nova search teams interpreted this as a non-zero cosmological constant. 
By analogy to Zwicky’s “dark matter,” University of Chicago theoretical 
cosmologist Michael Turner called this cosmological constant term “dark 
energy.” Dark energy, whatever it is, is opposed to the attractive force of 
gravity, and involves a repulsive force driving the galaxies farther apart. Its 
eff ects (acceleration of the expansion of the universe) have become evident 
only in the last 5 billion years of the history of the universe,  since only then 
has the expansion of the universe has reached the stage where the repulsive 
force of Dark Energy exceeds the attractive force of gravity. 
Berkeley theoretical cosmologist Eric V. Linder has pointed out that 
even in a universe without matter or radiation but just the positive cosmo-
logical constant (this is called a de Sitter universe; see chapter 11—admit-
tedly it sounds a bit bizarre) one still has acceleration. In that case, there is 
nothing but a positive uniform energy. But when matter and radiation are 
added back in, things become more interesting:
Matter and radiation have the usual gravitational attraction that pulls 
objects together, ﬁ ghting against expansion. They act to decelerate 
the expansion. Depending on the relative contributions then between 

 
Chapter 15: Dark Energy  365
matter etc. and the vacuum, the ﬁ nal result can be either a decelerat-
ing or accelerating universe. One of the great paradigm shifts in cos-
mology was the realization [from the supernova surveys] that we live 
in a universe that accelerates… This is really a striking development… 
After Copernicus we have moved beyond thinking that the Earth is the 
center of the Universe; with the development of astronomy we know 
that the Milky Way Galaxy is not the center of the Universe; through 
physical cosmology we know that what we are made of—baryons and 
leptons—is not typical of the matter in the Universe; and now we even 
realize that the gravitational attraction we take as commonplace is not 
the dominant behavior in the Universe.12
What is dark energy? We do not yet know, though there are some 
intriguing surmises. One of the things that astronomers are trying to do 
now, and will work on for at least the next 20 years, is to formulate some 
basic questions about dark energy. If it indeed is real, and many observa-
tions suggest that something is causing an acceleration in the expansion of 
the universe, one of the fi rst things we would like to know is whether dark 
energy is constant or if it evolves over time. Constant dark energy corre-
sponds to the the cosmological constant (which Einstein fi rst introduced 
in his 1917 cosmological solution of the gravitational fi eld equations, in 
order to produce a static universe; his greatest blunder!). However, it is 
also possible that  pressure from dark energy may vary with time, so that 
it increases in relative importance as time goes on. It may also be that dark 
energy refl ects an outward pressure from space itself (or more precisely 
the vacuum; the vacuum is the lowest energy state of a quantum fi eld) to 
expand, so that as more and more space is created by the universe’s expan-
sion, the greater becomes the corresponding energy of the vacuum and the 
greater the acceleration. Th ere are many theoretical ideas for how this can 
happen. Most of these ideas arise from particle theory and some are based 
on string theory. What we may ultimately fi nd is that the eff ects we see on 
the largest structures in the universe and even the universe itself comes 
down to the smallest particles. Th is would not be the fi rst time, and prob-
ably not the last, that a connection was found between large features of the 
universe and atomic/particle physics. Dark energy does more, however, 
than determine the overall structure of the universe. It also profoundly 
aff ects its constituents, namely: clusters of galaxies, individual galaxies, 
even, perhaps, stars and planets. Simply put, if the universe is accelerating 
due to dark energy, it becomes more diffi  cult for structures to form in the 
universe, and when they do form, it becomes more diffi  cult for them to 
form even larger structures. If the universe were dark-matter dominated, 
then we would expect to fi nd even larger galaxies and galaxy clusters than 
is actually the case. It might turn out that most of the properties we see 

 366 
Galactic Encounters
in the universe today are due to the interactions between entities that are 
unseen, namely dark energy and dark matter. Th e nature of these interac-
tions constitutes one of biggest unsolved problems in astronomy today, and 
though the answers are still obscure, it seems that the universe is providing 
us tantalizing shadows into a still unknown truth and reality that seems to 
grow, in the words from Alice in Wonderland, “Curiouser and Curiouser.”
*   *   *
 1. Alan Guth, “Was Cosmic Infl ation the ‘Bang’ of 
the Big Bang?” Th e Beamline, 27, 14 (1997).
 2. Guth, Infl ationary Universe, 26.
 3. For a very accessible discussion, see Martin 
Rees, Just Six Numbers: the deep forces that shape 
the universe. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
 4. See: Robert V. Wagoner, “Determining qo from 
Supernovae,” Th e Astrophysical Journal, 214 
(1977), L5-7.
 5. Ronald N. Kahn, “Desperately seeking superno-
vae,” Sky & Telescope, June 1987, 594-597.
 6. Ibid., 596.
 7. Lee T. Macdonald, cited in: “Meeting of the 
Royal Astronomical Society, January 13, 2012,” 
Th e Observatory, 132, 1229 (August 2012), 220-
223.
 8. Ibid.
 9. C. Pennypacker, S. Perlmutter, G. Goldhaber, A. 
Goobar, et al., “Supernova 1992i in anonymous 
galaxy,” IAU circular no. 5652 (November 12, 
1992).
 10. Adam G. Riess, Alexei V. Filippenko, et al., 
“Observational evidence from supernovae for 
an accelerating universe and a cosmological 
constant,” Astronomical Journal; arXiv.astro-
ph/9805201v1 (May 15, 1998).
 11. S. Perlmutter, G. Aldering, G. Goldhaber et al., 
“Measurements of [omega] and [lambda] from 
42 high-shift  supernovae,” Astrophysical Journal; 
arXiv.astro-ph/9812133v1 (Dec. 8, 1998).
 12. Eric V. Linder, “Frontiers of Dark Energy,” in 
Adventures in Cosmology, David Goodstein, ed. 
(Singapore: World Scientifi c, 2012), 357-358.

367
When I heard the learn’d astronomer,
When the proofs, the ﬁ gures, were ranged in columns before me…
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick, 
Till rising and gliding out I wander’d oﬀ  by myself,
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars.
—Walt Whitman, “When I heard the learn’d astronomer”
T
he Milky Way consists of 100,000 million stars. It appears sedate, placid, 
unchanging as it curves, a river of stars across the bowl of the night-sky. 
We know, however, that it is a dynamic structure; it must have had a violent 
youth in which it was cobbled together from various bits and pieces, from 
blobs of dark matter, streams of gas, and smaller stellar systems.
Majestic winding spiral that it is now, it was a ragged and untidy 
thing once, like the galaxies we see now when we look into deep space and 
deep time of the universe, their collisions and rip-tides being visible in the 
Deep, Ultra Deep, and Extremely Deep fi elds of the Hubble Space Telescope.
We can see what the Milky Way was once from what the galaxies 
in those fi elds are now. Indeed, a telescope is a time-machine, and we look 
not into the past but into an eternal present. From the edge of our universe 
looking back, to anyone who happens to be out there, the Milky Way is 
still unformed, still shaped, or misshaped, as it was 12 billion years ago 
(there would be, needless to say, be nothing to distinguish it to that distant 
viewer).
We puzzle for a moment over the resemblance of the stars in the 
Galaxy to the neurons in a microscopic cross-section of brain. It is easy to 
imagine that in the microscopic view, we are  looking across great rhythmic 
patterns like the spiral-density waves of galaxies, tides of neurons whose 
numbers are of the same order as stars in the Milky Way – 100,000 mil-
16.
Aft erglows
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5_1 , © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang
6

 368 
Galactic Encounters
lion. Th ey follow defi nite whorls and gyri. Th ey seem in places to consist 
of dramatic starbursts. Th ere are clusters of neurons no less than there are 
clusters of stars. We call these neuron-clusters in the brain, nuclei. As we 
know that in the Milky Way the regions of star-formation, giving rise to 
the diamond-like clusters that bejewel the Galaxy, occur in the dust and 
molecular clouds associated with the spiral arms, it is impossible not to 
imagine that some similar density-wave – associated with chemotactic fac-
tors, hormones, and other chemical tracers– pulses through the developing 
nervous system to orient or commit cells to their eventual specializations 
and functions.
Th ere have been numerous analogies to explain the human mind, none 
perhaps grander than the one we just described, and which we illustrate by 
juxtaposing bursts of neurons in the medulla as shown in microscopic view 
(Figure 16.1) with the bursts of stars along the dust-lanes of the Andromeda 
Spiral (Fig. 16.2). Th ere is an astounding symmetry in these structures, and 
perhaps between the cosmography of inner and outer worlds. In both, we are 
presented with complexity, in both what we see must be explicable in part in 
terms of complexity theorists’ “ideas of heterogeneous mixtures, of multiple 
levels and scales, of intricate connectivities, and of nonlinear dynamics.”1
Fig. 16.1. Neurons in the human medulla. Nissl stained micrograph. Courtesy: William Meller, M.D., Univer-
sity of Minnesota Medical School. 

 
Chapter 16: Afterglows 369
Obviously, only something as complicated as the brain—which 
we are told is “among the most complicated natural objects in the known 
universe”2—can understand something as complicated as the universe. To 
the great Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal is attributed the 
saying, “the universe is the refl ection of the structure of the brain.”3 Per-
haps, however, it is the other way around, and the structure of the brain is a 
refl ection of the universe. Perhaps both are true.
Th e brain is, in a real sense, the ultimate scientifi c instrument. It was not, 
of course, “designed” for doing astronomy and cosmology—anymore than 
the eye, which we considered in the fi rst chapter, was “designed” to be 
an astronomical detector. Th e brain—and the eye—are modifi cations of 
ancestral structures, organs that go back to primitive mammals, reptiles, 
fi shes. Th ey have been adapted to the exigencies of the here-and-now—the 
immediate pressures of tracking game, getting enough food to eat, fi nd-
ing mates, and the like. Th ey represent the tinkering of natural selection 
over thousands of millennia. Our ability to use them to see into the remote 
corners of the Galaxy, or to solve the equations of General Relativity, are 
Fig. 16. 2. Detail of spiral arm structure in the Andromeda Galaxy. The view is dominated by NGC 206, the 
brightest star cloud in the Andromeda Spiral and similar to M24, the Sagittarius star cloud in the Milky 
Way, but much larger. Credit: William Sheehan, University of Minnesota Medical School.

 370 
Galactic Encounters
ex-aptations—to use the term evolutionists have coined to describe shift s 
in the function of a trait over the course of evolution. Th e traits we rely on 
were originally subservient to more immediately practical purposes. But 
it is no accident that survival of the species was well served by the passion 
for knowledge of the natural and social worlds. Acquisition of knowledge 
would have conferred advantages in the struggle for survival, as the animal 
who had the keenest sense of touch or smell or hearing, the most developed 
ability to determine the color of a surface or the expression of a face, would 
have the upper hand in the great struggle for survival. Moreover, the one 
that was best able to acquire that knowledge would have needed in greatest 
degree what we would call intelligence; for, as the neuroaestheticist Semir 
Zeki has said, “it takes but a moment’s thought to realize that obtaining 
that knowledge is no easy matter. Th e brain is only interested in obtaining 
knowledge about those permanent, essential, or characteristic properties of 
objects and surfaces that allow it to categorize him.” So, because informa-
tion reaching the brain from objects and surfaces is in continual fl ux, vision 
“is an active process that depends as much upon the operations of the brain 
as upon the external, physical environment; the brain must discount much 
of the information reaching it, select only what is necessary in order to 
obtain knowledge about the visual world, and compare the selected infor-
mation with its stored record of all that is seen. A modern neurobiologist 
should approve heartily of Matisse’s statement that “’Voir, c’est déjà une 
operation creatrice, qui exige un eff ort.’”4
Humans being—well, human—we have always been tempted to 
consider ourselves the acme of Creation. Th e mind of man seems to exhibit 
astonishing perfections that range beyond animal-nature; so much so as to 
make us believe that man is separate, alone, other—the only creature God 
created in his image, the only one into which he breathed a soul. Some-
how it has always seemed (to us) that our nature comprehends the rest of 
nature; that we are, in one, what all the other animals are separately, a point 
of view well attested in Sophocles’ Antigone:
Manifold are the marvels of the earth,
And none more marvelous than man appears.
Through the grey sea on southern storms,
Through the swells that raven around him he roams;
And eldest of gods, earth enduring
And all unwearied, he works away,
As yearly he follows the yoke and the plowshare,
Scarring the sod with the stallion’s foal….
 A thing of wisdom this wile of his craft,
And thus he holds it, all hope surpassing,
As he wields it now ill, now well, and aspires…5

 
Chapter 16: Afterglows 371
Man’s sense of his own uniqueness must be qualifi ed, however, 
when one turns from the impressive workings of his mind to a consider-
ation of the substance of his brain. Th at brain has some remarkable attri-
butes, indeed, but they are such as to make it diff erent in degree rather than 
in kind from those of primates and other mammals. Indeed, the human 
brain is more like that of a lizard than a circuit-board is to a vacuum tube. 
Emerson had it nearly right when he said: 
A mollusk is a cheap edition [of man] with a suppression of the costlier 
illustrations, designed for dingy circulation, for shelving in an oyster-
bank or among seaweed.6
One of the authors (W.S.) well remembers his fi rst introduction to 
the brain in medical school. He had seen pickled brains—a bit unimpres-
sive, like jellyfi sh lying on the beach, desiccated, collapsed, blue-lipped, life-
less. He even dissected them. Th e fi rst real living brain he saw was during 
a neurosurgery rotation: an operation was underway, and he looked on, in 
equal parts fascinated and repulsed. What was this pia-mater and menin-
ges-wrapped, convoluted, three pounds’ worth of fatty fl esh, this computer 
made of meat? Well might he have said with Hamlet, “My gorge rises at it!”
It was hard to believe, even as a medical student, that there could be 
any relation at all between what we know, immediately, as mind—the mys-
terious realm of thoughts, moods, dreams, actions—and brain. And yet—
though we know the brain only from the inside-out—the thoughts, moods, 
dreams, and actions are what we perceive immediately—only the brain can 
understand the brain. If indeed the universe is a refl ection of the structure 
of the brain, or vice versa, then, as Cajal again is supposed to have said, “as 
long as our brain is a mystery, the universe … will also be a mystery.” Th e 
brain, in bootstrapping its way to understanding the structure and evolu-
tion of the Galaxy, must use the brain to study the brain itself.
It is common to point out that the universe is conscious of itself only 
through us. In other words, insofar as we are conscious of the universe, it 
is in some measure conscious also of itself. Obviously, consciousness did 
not come about for that purpose. It cannot have been the purpose of the 
universe, which undoubtedly was (as Steven Weinberg implied in the quote 
at the end of chapter 14) blind and purposeless, to produce conscious 
beings like ourselves. For that matter, even consciousness is really only the 
tip of the iceberg of the brain’s activity; most of what goes on in the brain 
is that of which we are not consciously aware. Consciousness is the frost-
ing and the candles of the brain, as the bright young stars and HII regions 
are of the Galaxy; it is only the froth, but it is what we notice. Underlying 

 372 
Galactic Encounters
consciousness are all sorts of processes of which we are never aware, just as 
the backbone of the Galaxy consists of the old red stars of the bulge (to say 
nothing of dark matter).
Equipped with all these caveats, and divested of all the grandiose notions 
that have had the stuffi  ngs knocked out of them by Copernicus, Darwin, 
Shapley, and Steven Weinberg—we nevertheless return to the small obser-
vatory on the North Fork of the Crow River, and open again our dome 
to the sky. Th e telescope swivels to the point where we direct it, the CCD 
imaging session begins—and we behold images that astonish and delight.
To the extent that we are conscious beings—and capable of for-
mulating questions about the nature of the universe—we are also feeling 
beings. Underlying the conscious mind—the intellectual and decision-
making centers of the prefrontal cortex—are deeper, older structures; those 
in which lie the pacemakers that govern the oscillations and rhythms of life 
(many of which are tied in with the cosmos, and swing in diurnal, lunar, 
or circannual phases) and those that connect us with the viscera, anchor 
brain to body, give rise to a rich palette of emotions, including fear and awe 
and the thrill of discovery. Th e impulse to study the stars—the tremblings, 
trepidations, aspirations, excitements—that drive us to open up the dome 
to the heavens and to capture the remote galaxies on a CCD chip may seem 
immediate but they are founded in a far longer and more mysterious ances-
tral past. Th e writer Lafcadio Hearn, who followed Percival Lowell to the 
Far East and once said, “we owe more to our illusions than to our knowl-
edge,”7 has put this as well as anyone can:
It is now certain that most of our deeper feelings are superindividual,—
both those which we classify as passional, and those which we call sub-
lime. The individuality of the amatory passion is absolutely denied by 
science; and what is true of love at ﬁ rst sight is also true of hate: both are 
superindividual. So likewise are those vague impulses to wander which 
come and go with spring, and those vague depressions experienced in 
autumn,—survivals, perhaps, from an epoch in which human migra-
tion followed the course of the seasons, or even from an era preceding 
the apparition of man…. The delight, always toned with awe, which the 
sight of a stupendous landscape evokes; or that speechless admiration, 
mingled with melancholy inexpressible, which the splendor of a tropi-
cal sunset creates,—never can be interpreted by individual experience. 
Psychological analysis has indeed shown these emotions to be prodi-
giously complex, and interwoven with personal experiences of many 
kinds; but in either case the deeper wave of feeling is never individual: 
it is a surging up from that ancestral sea of life out of which we came.8

 
Chapter 16: Afterglows 373
It is that which keeps us coming back to our little dome on the 
North Fork of the Crow River—that feeling which is among the most sub-
tle and valuable we can experience, of something oceanic, unfathomable, 
cosmic. We know that the universe is crushingly vast, fearfully violent, 
strangely wrought, utterly impersonal; it is indiff erent to us and to our fate,
And we are here as on a darkling plain,
Swept with confused alarms of struggle and ﬁ ght,
Where ignorant armies clash by night.9
It cannot care for us; but why should it? If we were not too long 
steeped in our own arrogance, we would not presume upon the role of 
being a central actor in the drama of Creation. And yet—it still moves us. 
We leave the lecture room and wander out into the mystical moist night 
air. Th ere is intoxication in moonlight we feel still even if in some sense 
we know that the Moon is a dead world; there are charms in the light of 
distant suns.
We look up at the stars, ponder the powdery precincts of the Milky 
Way (whose image, sadly, cannot even be glimpsed by billions on the globe, 
obscenely defaced by the unnecessary glare of artifi cial lights erected to 
keep at bay our primal fear of night; we are lucky here, and can see it, and 
our spine tingles). Th e image builds on the screen, as the CCD does its 
work. Again and again—like Monet painting the haystacks, the water lilies, 
or the façade of the Cathedral of Rouen—we keep returning time and time 
again to the objects which have always enchanted; to the Orion Nebula, 
centered on the hot young massive star 1 Orionis, to the Pleiades, tangled 
like Nerea’s hair in the dust of its refl ection nebula, to the jeweled splendor 
of the Double Cluster in Perseus, to the twisty tendrils of the Crab, and on 
through endless night. 
We know, thanks to the journey we have trod in these pages, that 
these splendors are merely a souffl  é, the frosting and candles; the dust and 
gas and bright young hot stars which dominate our view of the universe 
making up only 2% of the mass of the Galaxy. We are merely looking at the 
surface of things. And yet we continue to enjoy our surface, our canvas, 
and to paint again and again, unwearyingly, the ever-varying light—prefer-
ring the romanticism of Monet to the hard and sharp realities of the cub-
ists.
With Marcus Aurelius, we feel resigned: “Whatever is right with 
you, O Universe, is right with me!”  
We suppose—now that planetary systems have been found around 
thousands of others stars, and no end in sight—there must be many worlds 
which harbor life, and some which harbor viscoelastic brains out there, 
pondering as we ponder, conscious of the universe as we are. How many? 

 374 
Galactic Encounters
We don’t know. But the universe is vast, so perhaps billions and billions. 
How many of them know an equation similar to the following:
How many of our cohorts in the Milky Way realize that the 
Andromeda Spiral is headed toward us, and that in several billions of years 
the two will collide, and merge into a giant elliptical system? 
How many of those cohorts have worked out the nature of dark 
matter, or discovered that the universe’s expansion is accelerating (thus that 
the cosmological constant is not zero but corresponds to something we can 
call, till we understand it better, “dark energy”)? How many have worked 
the expansion of the universe back to the fi rst 10-43 sec aft er the big bang; 
how many have determined what happened before that, or worked through 
the intricacies of string theory? 
It is something to be able to say that, if there are intelligent creatures 
elsewhere in the Galaxy, or in the universe, they will come to know some of 
these things (and perhaps, who can say, others that go far beyond what we 
know). Th e human brain is a notoriously unreliable instrument of knowl-
edge; its construction is elaborate and imperfect—in some ways its multi-
modular structure, consisting of several brains jerry-rigged and strapped 
together rather like the Space Shuttle which is precariously confi gured 
around solid-state and liquid-fuel boosters. It has its makeshift  joints, its 
O-rings; we cannot trust its knowing implicitly. Its unreliability is attested 
by the numerous illusions, misperceptions, even frank delusions and hal-
lucinations, that its visco-elastic fl esh is heir to (it is sobering, for instance, 
to note that seventy percent of schizophrenics have no insight into their 
illness, and do not believe they are ill). One of the brain’s features is that the 
virtual reality it produces, a performance we call “mind,” consistently mixes 
up inner and outer worlds. Ever since those internally-visioned ancestors 
of ours who painted the Great Beasts of the Ice Age on the cave walls of 
Chauvet, Lascaux, and Altamira—lighting the darkness around them with 
the emanations of the inner light of dreams—we, as a species, have been 
only too apt to confuse our inner visions with outer realities, and to regard 
our conceptual categories, predilections or dispositions, with the word or 
will of God. It is no doubt true, as Francis Bacon said in the Novum Orga-
num (writing of the Idols of the Tribe, fallacies natural to humanity in 
general): 
For man’s sense is falsely asserted to be the standard of things: on the 
contrary, all the perceptions, both of the senses and the mind, bear ref-
erence to man and not to the universe; and the human mind resembles 
 
1  
8G
Rμ –- – gμ R + gμ = —— Tμ
 
2  
c4

 
Chapter 16: Afterglows 375
those uneven mirrors which impart their own properties to diﬀ erent 
objects … and distort and disﬁ gure them.10
He spoke also of the Idols of the Cave, the errors peculiar to the 
individual man. “For every one … has a cave or den of his own, which 
refracts and discolors the light of nature.”11
Every thinking being in the universe must have its peculiar biases, 
its “Idols of the Tribe,” also its “Idols of the Cave.” Even so, we would like to 
think that—distorted and disfi gured, refracted and distorted as it may be—
the universe we describe is not a mere personal—or even a collective—hal-
lucination. Th at our science is neither sophistry nor solipsism. Th at what 
we know is what other minds, say at Sirius or Aldebaran or M31 or the 
Coma Cluster, would know and—aft er suitable translation from their alien 
language to ours, and mostly looking like mathematics—describe much 
as we do. To the extent this is true, science becomes the study of the co-
variant truths, those that hold in all places and all times in our wonderfully 
homogeneous and isotropic universe, perhaps even in all the universes that 
can be that can support such beings as we. 
Th e basis of science is the admission of the power of the human 
mind to perceive and understand the world – and itself – but also the real-
ization that that power is limited, the instrument of knowing fl awed and 
imperfect. It is, as Jacob Bronowski put it in Th e Ascent of Man, refl ecting 
on what happened at Auschwitz:
This is where people were turned into numbers. Into this pond were 
ﬂ ushed the ashes of some four million people. And that was not done 
by gas. It was done by arrogance. It was done by dogma. It was done by 
ignorance. When people believe they have absolute knowledge, with 
no test in reality, this is how they behave. This is what men do when they 
aspire to the knowledge of gods.
Science is a very human form of knowledge. We are always at the 
brink of the known, we always feel forward for what is to be hoped. 
Every judgment in science stands on the edge of error, and is personal. 
Science is attributed to what we can know although we are fallible. In 
the end the words were said by Oliver Cromwell: “I beseech you, in the 
bowels of Christ, think it possible that you may be mistaken.”12
We don’t yet know how pervasive life is in the universe. We do know that 
there was liquid water once present on Mars, and the Saturnian moon 
Titan seems to contain hydrocarbon lakes on its surface. Th e building-
blocks of life pervade the Solar System; we can guess that the Galaxy, 

 376 
Galactic Encounters
indeed the universe, must be teeming with life, at least of the single-celled 
variety. How oft en do multicellular organisms occur? (On Earth, life 
remained single-celled for almost three billion years.) Th e universe may be 
colonized with microbes, but what we really want to know is: are we alone? 
We would take small comfort in looking up at the stars and imagining 
colonies of staphylococci or streptococci, worlds inhabited with smallpox 
or even sponges and jellyfi sh. How oft en, among the myriad planets which 
exist, are they barren wildernesses, abortive, waste? How oft en does life 
arise? Any kind of life? In the Galaxy, is intelligent life common? How do 
we defi ne intelligent life? Is it life capable of understanding the Pythago-
rean theorem? Life capable of sending and receiving radio messages? Life 
capable of grasping the equation we cited above?
Th e universe itself appears to be highly intelligent. A cosmos. It 
has mathematical structure –elegance –rationality—beauty. We see it in 
the logarithmic spirals which unfold in the spiral galaxies, in Pythagoras’s 
harmonics which strike the galactic tuning forks. We can almost imagine in 
it the workings of mind.
But is it a human mind? A mind with any affi  nity to ours? Or is it 
not only the illusion of a mind, governed through the same laws of com-
plexity, seeming intelligent only because our own intelligence has specifi -
cally evolved to understand that coherence – those laws – that gave rise to 
us?
Th e wish to believe in something greater than ourselves comes from 
within ourselves. We continue, almost instinctively, to desperately seek 
some echo of response in the universe at large to the chord struck within.
Desperately, because we are unlikely ever to receive it. 
  In the end, we remain the hopeful and terrifi ed creatures that long 
ago huddled around the hearth in the Cave of the Night. We remain for-
ever children, small, shivering, afraid of the dark. But also children who 
are curious and can’t resist the challenge of piecing together the parts of 
a puzzle, and when the pieces fi t, are fi lled with pleasure and a sense of 
achievement. And eager to tackle another.
Above, where the Beasts of the Ice Age, which we then and still hold 
in awe, stampede across the sky, the fi ery stars maintain their icy silences. 
We continue to seek wisdom in their mute counsel.
*   *   *
 1. On complexity, see: M. Mitchell Waldrop, Com-
plexity: the emerging science at the edge of order 
and chaos (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992) 
and Roger Lewin, Complexity: life at the edge of 
chaos (New York: Macmillan, 1992).
 2. Gerald M. Edelman, “Building a Picture of 
the Brain,” in Th e Brain, Daedalus (Journal of 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences), 
Spring 1998, 48.
 3. We have tried to discover the source of that 
remark, without success. It is not, at any rate, 
in Cajal’s autobiography, Recollections of my life, 

 
Chapter 16: Afterglows 377
E. Horne Craigie with Juan Cano, trans. (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Th e MIT Press, 1989).
 4. Semir Zeki, “Art and the Brain,” in Th e Brain, 
Daedalus, 73-74.
 5. Translated from the Greek by Michael S. Arm-
strong, of Hobart and William Smith Colleges; 
used with permission.
 6. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Power and Laws of 
Th ought.”
 7. Lafcadio Hearn, Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan 
(Rutland, Vermont, and Tokyo, Japan: Charles 
E. Tuttle, 1976 reprinting of 1894 edition), xxv.
 8. Hearn, Kokoro: hints and echoes of Japanese 
inner life (New York and Tokyo: ICG Muse, 2001 
reprinting of 1896 edition), 197-198.
 9. Matthew Arnold, “Dover Beach.”
 10. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, Aphorism 
XLI
 11. Bacon, Novum Organum, Aphorism XLII
 12. Jacob Bronowski, Th e Ascent of Man (Bos-
ton and Toronto: Little, Brown and Company, 
1973), 374.

 
378
Author Index
A 
Abetti, G., 215
Adams, W.S., 135, 213, 218, 220, 230, 271
Airy, G., 84, 105
Aitken, R.G., 183
Alexander, H., 31, 35, 44, 81
Alpher, R., 346, 347
Al-Sufi, A.-R., 16
Alvarez, L., 359, 360
Argelander, F., 152
B
Baade, W., 248, 250, 257, 296, 297, 328
Babcock, H.W., 215
Bailey, S.I., 222, 223, 226
Balmer, J., 161, 162, 270, 280
Banks, J., 36, 40, 56, 65
Barnard, E.E., xii, 6, 121, 123–125, 130–132, 142–144, 
151, 174, 184, 199, 214, 238, 239, 246, 269
Becquerel, H., 160
Belopolksy, A., 186
Bessel, F.W., 68, 146, 148
Bethe, H., 163, 331, 348, 356
Bigourdan, G., 243
Bohr, N., 161
Bok, B.J., 142, 270
Bond, G.P., 93–96, 119, 121, 150, 153
Bond, W.C., 91, 93, 110
Bradley, J., 47
Brashear, J., 176, 177, 182, 186–189, 196, 207
Bruce, C., 134
Bunsen, R., 102, 103, 105, 106
Burbidge, G., 347
Burbidge, M., 347
Burnham, D.H., 207
Burns, R., 300
C
Campbell, W.W., 176, 177, 189, 191, 192, 197, 203, 
204, 212, 213
Cannon, A.J., 156, 157, 271, 285
Carnegie, A., 134, 211, 216
Carr, E., 9, 13
Chamberlin, T.C., 192
Churchill, W., 10–11, 13, 78
Clark, A.G., 98, 106, 148, 152, 182–183
Clark, G.B., 152
Clerke, A.M., 112, 113
Cogshall, W.A., 185, 187, 203
Comstock, G.C., 200
Comte, A., 102–103, 113
Crossley, E., 175
Curtis, H.D., 229–230, 235, 238, 240, 242, 243, 245, 
246, 248, 265
Cysat, J.B., 16, 17
D
Daguerre, L.-J.-M., 76, 119
d’Arrest, H., 100
Darwin, C., 61, 65, 101, 112, 160, 211, 372
Davy, H., 60
de Laplace, P.S., 59, 84
De la Rue, W., 105, 131
Delisle, J.N., 19
de Peiresc, N., 16
de Sitter, W., 253–256, 354, 364
de Vaucouleurs, G., 72
De Vorkin, D., 283
Dicke, R., 347, 356
Donati, G.B., 107
Doppler, C., 104, 105, 162, 176, 177, 188, 197, 
229, 328
Douglass, A.E., 181–183, 185–187, 189
Draper, H., 4, 120, 121, 153, 154, 156, 213, 270, 271
Draper, J.W., 119, 120
Dreyer, J.L.E., 39, 77, 243
Duncan, J.C., 197, 245
E
Eggen, O., 261, 305, 309, 336
Einstein, A., 104, 163, 253–255, 260, 262, 327, 330, 
337, 338, 345, 354, 365
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

 
Galactic Encounters
Eliot, C., 151, 152, 154, 268, 288
Ellerman, F., 208, 213
Evans, R., 360
F
Farrar, N.A., 154
Fath, E., 177–179, 195, 196, 238, 341
Fizeau, A., 104
Flammarion, C., 112, 180
Fleming, W.P., 141, 155, 156, 165, 230
Ford, W.K. Jr., 332
Friedmann, A., 255, 345
Frost, E.B., 134, 139, 140, 191–193, 213, 238, 239, 269
G
Galilei, G., 2
Gamow, G., 331, 346
Geiger, H., 160
Geller, M., 335
George III, 43, 54, 58, 62, 63
Gilmore, G., 306
Goodricke, J., 222
Gould, B.A., 279
Greenstein, J.L., 282
Gribbin, J., 349
Guth, A., 349, 355, 356
H
Hale, G.E., 134, 179, 184, 205–221, 230, 238, 240, 
248, 331, 332
Hall, A., 94, 97, 111
Halley, E., 17, 18, 21, 49, 74, 146, 289
Hartwig, E., 111
Henderson, T., 67, 68, 146
Henyey, L.G., 282
Herman, G., 346, 347
Herschel, C., xii, 30–35, 44, 154
Herschel, J., 39, 61–65, 68, 71–74, 76–77, 83–85,
Herschel, M.B.S., 64
Herschel, W., xii, 3, 7, 27–30, 34, 36–45, 47–60, 79, 
81, 82, 84, 89, 100, 108, 111, 127, 129, 133, 
138, 145–147, 185, 221, 225, 233, 265, 266, 
277, 286, 291, 296, 303, 317, 335, 361
Hertzsprung, E., 157, 160, 225, 226, 338
Hind, J.R., 100
Hodierna, G., 16
Holden, E.S., 30, 95, 121, 132, 133, 174, 175, 183
Hoyle, F., 346–348, 362
Hubble, E., 193, 200, 226, 231, 265, 327
Huchra, J., 335
Huggins, M., 154
Huggins, W., 105–109, 120, 131, 149, 154, 175, 177, 
216, 235, 291, 340
Humason, M.L., 231, 256–258, 261, 319, 325, 330
Hunter, S., 91–93
Hutton, J., 47, 49, 59
Huygens, C., 16, 17, 20, 64, 91
J
Jansky, K., 266, 348
Jean, J., 207, 244
K
Kahn, R.N., 359, 360, 366
Kapteyn, J.C., 221, 228, 229, 253, 265, 266, 276, 277
Keeler, J.E., 132, 133, 174–177, 179, 196, 203, 210, 
217, 240
Kerr, R., 338
Kirchhoff, G., 101–106, 113, 159
Kohlschütter, A., 271
L
Lampland, C.O., 202
Lassell, W., 77, 97, 99, 100, 105, 131
Lemaître, G., 255, 331, 345, 348
Lick, J., 4, 131–133, 174, 175, 177, 179, 182, 183, 
189, 191, 197, 209, 213, 238, 248
Lin, C.-C., 165, 298
Lindblad, B., 298
Linder, E.V., 364, 366
Lord Kelvin (William Thomson), 159, 160, 276
Lowell, P., 53, 174, 178–180, 183, 190, 191, 193, 
202–204, 372
Lundmark, K., 230, 238, 247, 248, 255, 263, 328
Lynden-Bell, D., 261, 305, 309, 325, 336
M
Marsden, E., 160
Maskelyne, N., 40, 47, 49
Mather, J., 349
Maury, A., 156, 270
Mayer, J.R., 159
McEwen, H.I., 285–286
Messier, C., 18–28, 40, 45, 59, 65, 85, 89, 129, 130, 
139, 226, 228, 233, 289, 291, 301, 303, 308
Miller, W.A., 105–107
Millikan, R.A., 236, 327
Minkowski, H., 358
Mitchell, M., 154, 156
Mitchel, O.M., 90
Morgan, W.W., xii, 156, 199, 264–289
Moulton, F.R., 192, 238
Muller, R., 359
N
Nassau, J., 277, 279, 280
Newcomb, S., 103, 129, 151, 173
Newton, I., 17, 18, 61, 99, 100, 261, 361, 362
Nichol, J.P., 86–88, 94, 98
Niépce, N., 64–65, 119
O
O’Dell, R. (Bob), 8, 11, 14, 121, 170, 172
Oort, J., 264, 266 
Oppenheimer, J.R., 339
Osterbrock, D.E., 174, 252, 271, 282, 285, 289
243, 279
87,91, 92, 97, 117, 118, 141, 159, 236,
 379

Galactic Encounters
P
Palmer, H., 176–177
Parsons, W. (3rd Earl of Rosse), xii, 79, 81, 83, 98
Payne, C., 162–163, 246, 263
Peebles, P.J.E., 348
Pennypacker, C., 358–363, 366
Perlumutter, S., 363–364, 366
Philips, M., 361
Piazzi, G., 54
Pickering, E.C., 151–157, 173, 181, 182, 200, 208, 
213, 230, 268
Pickering, W.H., 181, 186, 203, 211–212
Pierce, C.S., 151
Purcell, E.M., 285
Putnam, R.L., 202
Putnam, W.L. II., 185
R
Ramón y Cajal, S., 369
Ray, J., 234
Reber, G., 267
Rees, M., 337, 351, 353, 366
Reynold, J., 242, 263
Rieke, G., 8, 13
Riess, A.G., 364, 366
Robinson, T.R., 82, 84, 85, 88, 89, 97
Roll, P., 347
Rubin, V.C., 331–334, 353
Russell, H.N., 157, 198, 222, 230, 246
Russell, J., 29, 38, 100
Rutherfurd, L.M., 107, 149
S
Sandage, A., 219, 237, 240, 248, 249, 257, 260, 261, 
272, 305, 313, 332
Schiaparelli, G., 149, 179, 180, 184, 190
Schlesinger, F., 200
Schmidt, B., 363
Schmidt, M., 342
Schwarzschild, K., 337–339, 345
Secchi, A., 107, 148–150, 154, 155
See, T.J.J., 183–185
Seyfert, C., 177, 340–342
Shapley, H., 220–223, 226, 228–231, 237, 240–242, 
245–246, 249, 257, 265, 271, 275, 276, 291, 
302, 307, 372
Sharpless, S., 279, 282
Shu, F., 298, 300
Singleton, E., 120, 132
Slipher, V.M., 179, 186–202, 229, 237, 238, 
242–245, 247, 248, 251–253, 255–257, 259, 
265, 303, 307, 341, 365
Smith, S., 330
Smith, W.H., 331
Snyder, H., 339
Stebbins, J., 177
Stromberg, G., 255
Struck, C., 303
Struve, O., 92, 94, 100, 162, 250, 269, 275
T
Talbot, W.F., 77
Thomson, J.J., 159–161
Thoreau, H.D., 9, 10
Tinsley, B., 310, 312, 325
Tombaugh, C., 202
Toomre, A., 305
Toomre, J., 305
Turner, M., 364
V
van Maanen, A., 201, 230, 245, 246, 248
Van Stavoren, J.H., 124, 125, 128
Vogel, H., 154
von Fraunhofer, J., 101
W
Waterston, J.J., 159
Watson, W. Jr., 36, 37, 42, 44, 62
Weinberg, S., 258, 347, 349, 350, 352, 371, 372
Wheeler, J.A., 338
White, S., 337
Wilkinson, D.T., 347
William IV (King), 66
Wirtz, C., 255
Wolf, M., 235, 236, 239, 241, 286
Wright, W.H., 243
Y
Yerkes, C.T., 133, 134, 136, 184, 191–193, 209–214, 
238, 239, 264, 269, 270, 272, 274, 277, 282,  
284, 287
Z
Zel’dovich, Y., 347
Zwicky, F., 327–331, 340, 357–358, 364
 380 

 
381
 
A
Accademia dei Lincei, 2
Active galactic nuclei (AGN), 340–342, 344
Air Force, 359
Albireo, 38
Alice in Wonderland, 366
Allegheny Observatory, 174
Alpha Centauri, 68, 116, 146, 166, 235
AM 0644-741, 314
American Astronomical Society (AAS), 199, 200, 
264, 277
Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT), 361
Aristotle, 234
Armagh Observatory, 54, 82
Arp 273, 312
Astronomer Royal, 47, 49, 84, 105, 129
Astrophysical Journal, 179, 248, 275
B
Baryon, 262, 309, 331, 333, 350, 365
Bath (town), 30
Berlin Academy of Sciences, 338
Beryllium, 347
Big
bang, 258, 262, 308, 318, 323–325, 331, 336, 
344, 346–350, 352, 355, 356, 362, 374
chill, 355, 364
crunch, 355, 356, 364
Dipper, 65, 119
Birr Castle, 83, 84, 86, 93
Black hole, 13, 75, 118, 145, 163, 169, 254, 294, 295, 
303, 309, 324, 326–352
Bohr model, 161
Bruce telescope, 6, 134, 135, 140
C
Caltech, 108, 216, 220, 237, 327
Cambridge (town), 17, 27, 53, 61, 62, 67, 78, 84, 86, 
98, 113, 144, 161, 173, 203, 223, 232, 244, 
262, 263, 290, 325, 337
Canis Major Dwarf, 302
Cape Town, 66–69
Carbon, 140, 143, 150, 164, 165, 168, 171, 309, 347, 358  
Carleton College, 177, 178
Cassiopeia, 7, 130, 142, 150, 283, 284, 289
Cassiopeia A, 266
Castor, 47
CCD. See Charge Coupled Device (CCD)
Center for astrophysics (CfA), 335
Cepheids, 167, 222–229, 231, 232, 245–247, 250, 
257, 258, 263, 265, 271, 275–276, 278, 283, 
284, 292, 303
CfA. See Center for astrophysics (CfA)
Chamberlin-Moulton hypothesis, 193–194
Chandraskehar’s limit, 171, 358
Charge Coupled Device (CCD), 4–5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 
86, 182, 322, 359, 361, 363, 372, 373
Chéseaux Comet, 19
Chile, 4, 15, 73, 170, 361, 363
Coalsack, 15, 70, 116, 118, 295
COBE (satellite), 349, 350
Cold Dark Matter, 335–337
Collingwood, 77, 81
Coma cluster, 258, 260, 327–330, 375
Copernicus, 221, 229, 231, 365, 372
Cosmic microwave background, 262, 333, 345–352, 
356, 364
Cosmological constant, 254, 255, 262, 364–366, 374
Critical density, 355–356, 364
Crossley reflector (telescope), 175, 176, 203, 265
61 Cygni, 68, 146, 148, 157
Cygnus, 15, 49, 116, 128, 138, 235, 262, 284, 286
Cygnus X-1, 266, 339
D
Dark
ages, 7, 350–352
energy, xiv, 262, 333, 354–366, 374
matter, 164, 262, 294, 302, 307–309, 313, 319, 
326–352, 357, 364–367, 372, 374
Datchet, 44, 47–49, 57
Subject Index
Comet Donati, 94
 
 
W. Sheehan and C.J. Conselice, Galactic Encounters: Our Majestic and Evolving
to Time s End
’
, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-85347-5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
 Star-System, From the Big Bang

Galactic Encounters
Dearborn Observatory, 148, 207
Disk galaxy (disks), 32, 170, 186, 254, 293, 294, 
302–303, 305, 310, 321, 339
Doppler effect, 104, 105
Draco Dwarf, 107, 109, 302, 340
Dust lanes, 143, 252, 308, 310, 317, 343, 368
E
Earth, 1, 2, 5, 7, 11, 12, 17, 21, 37, 47, 49, 59, 63, 67, 
68, 75, 94, 104, 107, 110, 112, 160, 170–172, 
180, 183, 184, 193, 198, 205, 210, 214, 222, 
225–227, 229, 252, 257, 258, 266, 273, 276, 
293, 295, 298, 303, 329, 341, 342, 349, 359, 
365, 370, 376
Electron, 12, 160–163, 167, 293, 303, 327, 331, 340, 
349, 350, 358
ESO 325-G004, 251
Eta Carina Nebula, 73, 166
Event horizon, 338, 339
Eye (human), 1–3, 14
F
Feedback, 343
Flagstaff, 179, 181, 182, 185, 186, 188, 192, 200, 
202, 212, 286
Flatness, 356
FLRW metric. See Friedmann-LeMaître-Robert-
son-Walker (FLRW) metric
Friedmann-LeMaître-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) 
metric, 354
G
Galactic plane, 140, 265, 267, 274, 279, 280
Galaxy evolution explorer (GALEX), 295
Galaxy mergers, 307, 309, 313, 321–325, 339, 342, 
344, 345, 354
GALEX. See Galaxy evolution explorer (GALEX)
General Catalogue of Nebulae, 77, 97, 234, 243
General theory of relativity, 104, 262
Globular clusters (globulars), 9, 22, 23, 25, 70, 72, 
89, 111, 116, 178, 222–224, 226–229, 231, 
244, 245, 251, 258, 265, 275, 276, 297, 302, 
306, 307, 316
Great Comet of 1881 (Tebbutt’s Comet), 130
Great debate, 100, 229, 230, 246
Great Rift, 49, 284, 295, 303
Greenstein-Henyey camera, 279
Greenwich Observatory, 17, 54, 111, 119, 131, 150
H
Halley’s comet, 22, 197, 267
H-alpha, 6, 102, 161, 214, 280, 340
Hanover, 28, 31, 54, 63, 65, 68
Hartley 2 (comet), 23
Harvard College Observatory, 91, 93, 95, 110, 151, 
153–155, 208, 211, 220, 223, 228, 230, 268
h-Chi Persei (chi), 289
Hertzsprung-Russell (HR) diagram, 157–160, 162, 
222, 280, 338
HII regions, 15, 25, 73, 75, 85, 132, 142, 166, 252, 
257, 275, 279, 280, 282, 284, 286, 287, 289, 
297, 304, 305, 308, 310, 311, 314, 331, 341, 
342, 371
Hind’s nebula, 105
Horsehead Nebula, 141
Hôtel de Clugny, 19
Hubble constant, 257, 258, 345
Hubble Deep Field (HDF), 293, 315, 318, 322, 336
Hubble diagram, 258, 261–263
Hubble sequence, 248, 250, 320
Hubble Space Telescope, 8, 11, 168–170, 172, 205, 
227, 251, 261, 292, 295, 303, 304, 313–316, 
318, 319, 322, 324, 325, 336, 342, 367
Hubble type, 314
Hubble Ultra Deep Field, 318, 320, 321, 352
Hydrogen, 102, 103, 107, 149, 161–166, 168, 171, 
172, 197, 206, 208, 213, 265, 267, 270, 275, 
276, 285, 286, 307, 308, 310, 332, 340, 342, 
346, 347, 351, 352
I
IAU. See International Astronomical Union (IAU)
IC 2163, 313
IC 2944, 144
24-Inch Clark, 182, 188, 191, 195, 196, 256
15-Inch Merz Harvard refractor (Merz), 88, 91, 93, 
95, 110, 222
60-Inch reflector, 179, 205, 211, 221, 227, 231, 271, 330 
100-Inch reflector, 240, 241, 250, 292, 296–297,  
319, 328
200-Inch reflector, 239, 240, 257, 259, 342
International Astronomical Union (IAU), 202, 243,  
290, 366
Isaac Newton telescope, 361, 362
J
James Webb Space Telescope, 325
Jupiter, 3, 32, 41, 66, 84, 85, 88, 106, 115, 123, 125, 
128, 129, 131, 188–191, 195, 207
Jupiter Camera, 41, 125
K
Keck telescope, 205
Kenwood Observatory, 184, 208, 209, 211, 213, 219
Kirkwood Observatory, 185
Kwajalein atoll, 359
L
La Palma, 361, 362
Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), 66, 71, 72, 172,  
223, 342
Large Underground Xenon (LUX) detector, 336
Lawrence Berkeley lab, 358, 359
Evanston, Illinois, 198, 200, 238, 251, 269
Henry Draper Catalogue, 154, 156, 270, 271
 382 

 
 
Galactic Encounters
Leviathan (telescope), 79, 82, 84, 85
Lick Observatory, 4, 95, 131–133, 174, 175, 177, 
178, 182, 183, 186, 189, 191, 197, 199, 203, 
208, 212, 213, 229, 235, 240, 243, 245, 248, 
265, 330, 331, 335
Light, polarized, 1, 152
LMC. See Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC)
Local Group, 75, 200, 246, 249, 299, 302, 303, 306, 
307, 324, 334
Local Spur, 289
Lowell Observatory, 143, 174, 178, 179, 181, 
183–191, 196, 197, 199, 200, 202–204, 245, 
249, 253, 263, 332
LUX. See Large Underground Xenon (LUX) detector
Lyman series, 161, 162
M
M1 (Crab Nebula), 9, 22, 23, 40, 89, 150, 172, 328
M2, 22, 178
M3, 22, 23, 25, 228
M4, 116
M8, 24
M12, 89
M13, 178, 228
M15, 178
M16 (Eagle Nebula), 144, 166
M17, 25
M27 (Dumbbell Nebula), 25, 57, 167
M30, 89
M31 (Andromeda Nebula), 9, 109–112, 177, 178,  
196–198, 200, 231, 241, 245, 246, 250, 258, 
265–267, 275–276, 278, 283, 285, 293, 307, 
330–331, 333, 375
M32, 198, 200, 275, 302, 307
M33, 8, 25, 85, 89, 200, 201, 241, 245, 246, 250, 293, 
302, 307
M36, 289
M37, 289
M38, 289
M42 (Orion Nebula), 8, 9, 11, 16, 24, 59, 75, 89, 93, 
94, 96, 97, 100, 110, 118, 121, 142, 143, 340, 
341, 373
M46, 25
M51 (Whirlpool Nebula), 25, 65, 85–87, 90, 294, 
296, 304–306
M57 (Ring Nebula), 57, 167, 172
M60, 240
M64, 310
M65, 26, 89, 310
M66, 26, 310
M77, 8, 89, 177, 198, 341
M80, 111, 112, 227
M81, 344
M83, 287
M95, 89
M97 (Owl Nebula), 89, 167
M99 (Coma Berencies), 48, 72, 89, 90, 142, 360
M101, 85, 201, 230, 252, 301, 308
M104 (Sombrero galaxy, NGC 4594), 142, 198, 199, 
251, 252, 303
M109, 253
Magellanic clouds, 66, 71, 72, 75, 166, 172, 
223–226, 228, 243, 245, 276, 293, 302, 342
Main sequence, 145, 157, 163–165, 167, 270–272, 
307
Mars, 39, 94–95, 106, 115, 179–184, 186–191, 
193–196, 201, 202, 215, 360, 375
Marseilles, 16, 129
Mars Hill, 181, 187
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 151, 
189, 190, 194, 207, 208, 216, 298, 305
Mauna Kea, 4, 205
Merope, 197, 199
Milky Way, 2, 14, 47, 57, 97, 112, 114, 145, 174, 
205, 235, 264, 293, 332, 357, 367
MK Atlas, 272
Molecular clouds, 140, 142, 143, 145, 164–166, 
171, 173, 274, 289, 296, 298, 304, 305, 308, 
344, 368
Monastery, 134, 220, 332
Monoceros, 116, 165, 280, 284, 289
Monolithic collapse, 306, 309
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
242, 288, 337
Moon, 2–5, 17, 19, 29, 33–38, 66, 82, 88, 90, 100, 
106, 111, 115, 119, 128, 129, 131, 137, 208, 
245, 246, 251–252, 268, 315, 318, 373, 375
M-stars, 142, 162
Mt. Hamilton, 131, 133, 174–177
Mt. Hopkins, 335
Mt. Wilson Observatory, 178, 179, 205, 218, 241,  
242, 248
N
Naval Research Laboratory, 347
Nebula, 4, 14, 28, 55, 79, 100, 114, 153, 174, 226, 
233, 265, 291, 328, 361, 373
Nebular hypothesis, 60, 84, 87, 90, 110, 111, 159, 
179, 192, 193, 200, 244
Neptune, 39, 91, 99, 191, 194–196
Neurons, 292, 367, 368
Neutral hydrogen (HI), 267, 276, 285, 286, 301, 350
Neutrino, 335, 336
New General Catalogue of Nebulae (NGC of 
Nebulae), 77, 97, 234, 243, 306
NGC 147, 302
NGC 185, 302
NGC 224, 241
NGC 253, 253, 344
NGC 281 (Pacman Nebula), 130, 142, 289
NGC 309, 297, 314, 325
NGC 584, 201–202, 251, 252
NGC 891, 8, 142, 143, 295
NGC 1275, 343
NGC 1300, 254
NGC 1499 (California Nebula), 130, 132, 280
383

Galactic Encounters
NGC 1514, 56–58
NGC 2070 (Tarantula Nebula), 72, 75, 141
NGC 2207, 313
NGC 2261 (Hubble’s Variable Nebula), 239–242, 263
NGC 2841, 311
NGC 3115, 198
NGC 3314, 317
NGC 3372 (Eta Carinae), 73, 74, 166
NGC 4308/4309, 316
NGC 4565, 142, 198
NGC 4755, 71
NGC 5128 (Centaurus A), 75, 307, 342
NGC 5194, 177
NGC 5195, 87, 296, 304, 306
NGC 6522, 297
NGC 6543 (Cat’s Eye Nebula), 107–109, 340
NGC 6822 (Barnard’s Galaxy), 130, 243, 245, 246, 
249, 250, 263, 293
NGC 6960 (Veil Nebula), 138, 235, 262
NGC 6992, 138
NGC 7000 (North American Nebula), 286
NGC 7293 (Helix Nebula), 167, 170
NGC of Nebulae. See New General Catalogue of 
Nebulae (NGC of Nebulae)
Nobel prize, 214, 327, 348, 349, 356, 359, 364
Nova Persei, 176–177, 186
Nuclei, 48, 75, 86, 94, 110, 111, 160–163, 177, 178, 
229, 233, 234, 244, 248–250, 254, 275, 294,  
303, 316, 327, 328, 331, 341–344, 346, 347,  
350, 358, 368
O
O and B stars (OB Stars), 70, 166, 279, 280, 284, 
285, 288, 289, 311
Observatory House, Slough, 54, 81, 91
Orion spur, 51
O-type stars, 141, 162
Outlines of Astronomy (book), 77, 87
Oxford, 38, 40, 80, 193, 230, 236, 237, 246
P
Palomar Observatory, 4, 219, 239, 240, 328, 332
Paris Observatory, 17, 20, 94, 131, 150
Period-luminosity relation, 224–226, 245, 257, 275, 
276
Perseus, 23, 130, 132, 135, 142, 172, 278, 279, 283, 
284, 288, 289, 301, 343, 353, 373
Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions of the 
Milky Way, 136–138, 144
Photographic plate, 12, 154, 181, 182, 204, 208, 
272, 332, 341, 342
Photon, 2, 12, 161, 328, 349, 350
Planck (satellite), 333
Planet X, 196, 202
Pleiades, 3, 24, 58, 147, 164, 197–199, 204, 226, 373
Pluto, 202, 204, 333
Polaris, 1, 37, 152
Popular astronomy, 77, 112, 113, 115, 177, 203,  
262, 346
Population I, 252, 275, 276, 293
Population II, 252, 275, 276, 293, 302
Potsdam Observatory, 154, 176 
Potato famine, 88, 90
Praesepe, 3, 24, 58
Prague, 104
Pythagoras of Samos, 299
Q
Quasar, 261, 262, 340–342, 344
R
Radio, 12, 75, 160, 163, 171, 203, 257, 261, 
265–267, 276, 285–288, 294, 295, 301, 342, 
343, 346–348, 376
Realm of the Nebulae, 258, 263, 334, 353, 361
Red giant, 165, 171, 222, 229, 306
Rho Ophiuchi, 133, 135, 136
Ritchey-Chrétien telescope, 4, 6, 9, 23, 25, 56, 211, 
215
Rome, 2, 19, 22, 107, 149, 150, 217, 243
Rotation curve, 331–333, 353
Royal Astronomical Society, 27, 53, 63, 65, 78, 203, 
204, 242, 246, 288, 337, 361, 366
Royal Observatory Greenwich, 17, 39, 42, 54, 84, 
111, 119, 131, 150, 361, 362
Royal Society of London, 16, 27, 36, 37, 78, 90, 98, 
106, 120, 159, 246
RR Lyrae star, 165, 228
S
Sagittarius Dwarf, 249, 302, 306
S Andromedae (nova), 76, 111–113, 152, 177, 230, 
231, 245, 247, 328, 360, 364
Seyfert galaxy, 177, 340–342
Sirius, 17, 73, 76, 85, 107, 116, 145, 147–150, 156, 
167, 183, 184, 375
Sirius-A, 148
Sky & Telescope, 2, 3, 18, 115, 187, 202, 283, 285, 360
Slough, 44, 54–56, 58, 60, 62, 63, 66, 76, 77, 79, 81, 
91, 167, 361
Small Magellanic cloud (SMC), 223–226, 228, 342
SMC. See Small Magellanic cloud (SMC)
Solar Union, 153, 179, 195, 216, 218, 238
Spiral arms, 87, 140, 142, 199, 201, 244, 250, 252, 
264–289, 294, 295, 297, 298, 300, 305, 307, 
309, 311, 312, 315, 330, 368, 369
Spitzer Space Telescope, 8, 75, 288, 296
Standard candle, 173, 225, 274, 312, 357, 361
Star-gage, 48, 49, 266, 335
Stars-giants, 14, 142, 165, 171, 245
Stars-supergiants, 71, 142, 157, 158, 167, 271, 272, 
274, 278, 280, 296, 319
Stellar classification, 148–150, 156, 270, 272
Stratum, 47–49, 52, 57, 72, 100, 110, 136, 278
Sun, 5, 15, 39, 60, 84, 101, 115, 147, 184, 208, 235, 
269, 295, 329, 372
Supernova Cosmology Project, 359, 361–363
Supernova-Type Ia, 171, 173, 328, 361–363, 365
 384 

 
 
Galactic Encounters
Supernova-Type Ib, 358
Supernova-Type II, 75, 87, 171, 172
T
Theory of evolution, 112
Tonantzintla Observatory, 277
Trapezium, 16, 64, 87, 88, 91, 143, 147, 168, 169, 340
Trecento, 287
Trifid Nebula (M20), 24, 141
Triton, 99
T Tauri, 164, 165
47 Tucanae, 224
Tulse Hill, 106, 120, 149
Tycho’s star, 171
U
United States (U.S.) Naval Observatory, 111–112, 
132, 151
University of Chicago, 133, 183, 192, 193, 208, 210, 
212–214, 236, 238, 264, 327, 364
Uranus, 41, 43, 57, 191, 195
Ursa Minor Dwarf, 302
V
Vega, 5, 68, 114, 116, 119–120, 124, 128, 145, 147, 
149, 152, 153, 156
Venus, 21, 68, 115, 128, 131, 183–191, 203
Venus, transit, 21
Virgo cluster, 25, 48, 258, 259, 303, 311, 335
W
Weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs), 
335–336
Wet-collodion plate, 119–120 WFC3. See Wide 
Field Camera 3 (WFC3)
White dwarf, 145, 148, 163, 167, 171, 172, 229, 358, 
361
Wide Field and Planetary Camera-2, 315
Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3), 141, 261, 311, 325, 
342
Willard Lens, 132–134
Wilson’s Peak, 211, 212, 256
WIMPs. See Weakly interacting massive particles 
(WIMPs)
Windsor, 43, 44, 53, 54, 58, 61, 63
Wolf-Rayet stars, 155, 177
X
X-ray, 12, 160, 266, 295, 339, 343
Y
Yerkes Observatory, 16, 125, 132–134, 136–139, 
153, 175, 192, 210–213, 216, 238, 239, 256, 
264, 266, 269, 273, 276
Z
Zone of avoidance, 52
385

