See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233528924
Galileo and the Mountains of the Moon: Analogical Reasoning, Models and
Metaphors in Scientiﬁc Discovery
Article  in  Journal of Cognition and Culture · October 2004
DOI: 10.1163/1568537042484904
CITATIONS
13
READS
1,256
1 author:
Marta Spranzi
Clinical ethics consultant, Cochin Hospital (AP-HP), Paris
33 PUBLICATIONS   106 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Marta Spranzi on 16 October 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Galileo and the Mountains of the
Moon: Analogical Reasoning,
Models and Metaphors in
Scientiﬁc Discovery
MARTA SPRANZI∗
ABSTRACT
This paper is about the use of analogical reasoning, models and metaphors in Galileo’s
discovery of the mountains of the moon, which he describes in the Starry Messenger, a
short but groundbreaking treatise published in 1610. On the basis of the observations of
the Moon he has made with the newly invented telescope, Galileo shows that the Moon
has mountains and that therefore it shares the same solid, opaque and rugged nature of
the Earth. I will ﬁrst reconstruct Galileo’s reasoning, and illustrate the counterintuitive
and quasi-circular way in which discovery depends on analogy: in order for analogical
reasoning to succeed in bridging ontological gaps and thus serve as a discovery tool,
a certain similarity between what are considered as radically different domains has to
be presupposed. More particularly, in order for analogical reasoning to lead to genuine
discoveries, salient features have to be selected in the source domain that will be mapped
onto the target domain. There is disagreement as to how this mapping is successfully
carried out: the syntactical (Dedre Gentner), pragmatic (Paul Thagard) and ontological-
categorical (Rom Harré) approaches, all illuminate some features of this selection in the
mapping process. On the basis of an analysis of Galileo’s discovery, I will argue that we
need a different “bootstrapping” approach which involves the construction of an imaginary
temporary model encompassing both the source and the target domains, and which is
occasionally strengthened by metaphors which serve as incomplete transitional models.
By dedicating the newly discovered satellites of Jupiter, the Medicean stars,
to Florence Grand Duke Cosimo II de’ Medici, Galileo became a well-paid
and prestigious court scientist. The Starry Messenger, the work published in
1610 in which he described the novelties he was able to see with the
∗University of Versailles.
c⃝Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2004
Journal of Cognition and Culture 4.3-4

452
MARTA SPRANZI
telescope has attracted almost as much attention in its time as it does to-
day. The discovery of the mountains of the Moon, announced, explained
and visually documented in the same work is one the most studied and
quoted examples in the history of science, still raising crucial historical
and philosophical questions: What is the scientiﬁc signiﬁcance of Galileo’s
Starry Messenger? To what extent do the observations of the mountains of the
Moon constitute evidence in favour of the Copernican system? Is it a case
of genuine discovery? And if so why? As we shall see, these questions have
been given a great variety of answers, but the most recent literature on the
subject has stressed the strategic signiﬁcance of the treatise.1 Historians, as
we shall see, have often reluctantly come to the conclusion that Galileo’s
discovery was more a consequence of his Copernican leanings rather than
independent evidence in favour of the Copernican system.
In this paper I would like to look more closely at the reasoning un-
derlying Galileo’s discovery of the mountains of the Moon and describe
its structure by appealing to the family of cognitive tools known alterna-
tively as analogy, metaphors and model-based reasoning. The analysis that
I provide could be read as a case study in what Nancy Nersessian has
called “model-based reasoning practices.”2 However, I would like to resist
this characterisation. The interaction of the historical and the theoretical
elements of the analysis is less straight-forward than the case-study ap-
proach suggests. History as a repository for new ideas and insights, and
philosophy as a tool for deconstructing what might seem self-evident, re-
tain a measure of independence from each other and only interact by way
of suggesting new questions, and hopefully new solutions, to each other.
Cognitive psychology, for its part, sets the limits of what can reasonably be
said philosophically about the historical case.
Although the variously deﬁned and interrelated cognitive tools of
analogy, models and metaphors have recently attracted much attention,
they have not dispelled the feeling of elusiveness which surrounds the
concept of analogy itself, and which is well expressed by J. Agassi in
1Biagioli (1993).
2Nancy Nersessian speaks of the “cognitive-historical analysis” and describes its workings
as follows: “the practices uncovered [by history] are examined through a cognitive ‘lens,’
i.e. in light of cognitive science investigations of similar practices in both ordinary and
scientiﬁc circumstances” (2002: 135).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
453
a recent paper: “(. . .) We meet again the fascination of analogy: it is
loose; its boundaries are vague. If analogy were clearly a generalization
legitimised by induction or if alternatively it were clearly wilful and ad
hoc, a mere working hypothesis, then there would be no fascination. The
looseness of the connection, the unwillingness or inability to say that it is
entirely wilful or that it is entirely legitimate – it involves some judgement
remember – this precisely is the secret charm of analogy” (Agassi 1988:
403). A measure of this elusiveness is the number of hypotheses and
theories concerning the inner workings of analogical reasoning, and the
controversies surrounding the nature and role of models in science. Taking
as a starting point Galileo’s account of the discovery of the Moon’s
mountains, I would like to suggest a fruitful approach to analogical
reasoning involving what might be called “a bootstrapping” procedure,
which supposes an immediate connection between the source and the
target domain through the construction of a ﬁctional model. After looking
more closely – and de-constructing so to speak – Galileo’s analogical
reasoning as he reports it in the Starry Messanger, I will illustrate the
bootstrapping approach by comparing it to three other existing hypotheses
on the structure of analogical reasoning: the syntactic, the semantic and
the ontological-categorical approaches respectively.
Among the three conclusions that Galileo reports in the treatise – the
Moon’s surface, the composition of the milky way and the satellites of
Jupiter – the observation of what he interpreted as being the “mountains”
of the Moon have the greatest signiﬁcance with respect to the wider cos-
mological question raised by the Copernican hypothesis, i.e. whether the
Earth moves or not. The issue is taken up again and developed at length
in the ﬁrst day of the Dialogue on the two Chief World Systems, published in
1632. Moreover, it is the question which has the highest symbolic import
and which justiﬁably invited and, what is more, cautioned the wildest spec-
ulations. Although the Starry Messenger does not directly vindicate Bruno’s
liberating picture of the universe, quite to the contrary, it legitimates his
heroic vision of a radically non-anthropocentric exceptionless universe. By
his own admission Bruno wants to reject the “vile fantasy of the shape of
the heavens, of their spheres and their diversity,” by giving each of the
innumerable Earths in the universe its own heavens, and freeing man from
the chains of their limited senses and the closed walls of their conﬁned

454
MARTA SPRANZI
imagination. It is not an accident that Kepler in his answer to Galileo’s
Starry Messenger, invested so much energy and space in the refutation of
Giordano Bruno’s ideas (Kepler 1965). Again, Kepler, among others, takes
so seriously the analogy between the Earth and the Moon that he entertains
in earnest the possibility of life on the Moon (1967).
Discussion about the mountains of the Moon has often focused on
the use of the telescope and on whether Galileo’s conclusions are justiﬁed
from an empirical point of view.3 Was his picture of the Moon trustworthy
given the limitations of the instrument and the state of his knowledge of
the laws of refraction? Whatever the answer to this question may be, the
main issue was not: “Could Galileo really see what he saw?” but rather:
“Could Galileo interpret what he saw as he did?” The novelty of Galileo’s
conclusions is also challenged. It has been rightly noticed that speculations
about similarity of nature between the Earth and the Moon are not new,
and go as far back as the ﬁrst century AD with Plutarch’s, whose work
Galileo had access to.4 What was new, however, were not speculations
about the similarity between the Earth and the Moon, but the view of
the moon’s spots as regularly changing shadows of mountains. Only once
they came to be viewed as shadows, did the Moon’s dark spots speak in
favour of the supposed “analogy,” in the sense of similarity and family
resemblance, between the Moon and the Earth. It is not the thesis in itself,
which was new, but rather the way Galileo argued for it, and above all the
theoretical consequences he drew from the existence of the mountains of
the Moon.
Here is a schematic representation of the relationship between Galileo’s
“observation” of the Moon’s mountains and Copernicanism.
(Step 1) Starry Messenger
The existence of mountains on the Moon
conﬁrms
the deep and basic categorical similarity between the Earth and the
Moon
(Step 2) Dialogue on the two Chief World Systems
The fundamental similarity between the Earth and the Moon
3See Machamer (1973).
4See Casini (1983).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
455
conﬁrms
the Copernican hypothesis
Step 2 is not as straightforward as it may appear. Galileo’s lunar obser-
vations certainly have a strong albeit indirect Copernican import insofar
as the analogy – in the generic sense of similarity – between the Earth
and the Moon makes it plausible that the Earth moves around the Sun
as the Moon moves around the Earth. By extending the analogy between
the two celestial bodies to include motion, the Earth comes to be viewed
as a planet, in the etymological sense of “moving star” like the Moon and
the other known planets. Galileo’s purpose is not so much to show that
the moon is similar to the Earth, but rather that the Earth is similar to
the Moon. To use Galileo’s words, “to place the Earth in the host of the
stars (EN VII, 122; Galileo 1967: 96). But there is a deeper reason that
makes the mountains of the Moon an essential piece in the attempted
demonstration of the Copernican hypothesis.
The Copernican signiﬁcance of the mountains of the Moon is very
high and does not lie in the direct conﬁrmation of the Copernican
arrangement and motions of the Earth, the Sun and the Planets, but in the
reconstruction of the coherent universe which Copernicus had hinted at. It
provides the ontological basis which explains the hypothetical astronomical
arrangement of the heavens provided by Copernicus and which renders
the new system acceptable in the sense of satisfying to a newly educated
imagination. What Galileo writes at the end of the letter to Ingoli shows
how his discovery of the mountains of the Moon helped to highlight the
coherence of the Copernican universe: “Copernicus attributes rest to all
the luminous parts of the world, which are the ﬁxed stars and the sun, and
he gives motion to all the opaque and dark ones, which are the planets
and the earth, the latter being like the former; this is what one should
expect from nature, which is very judicious in all her works.”5 Galileo’s
realism, which constituted the basis for Galileo’s condemnation of 1633
does not merely lie in an abstract epistemological stance to the effect that
the Earth really moves, but also and above all in the fact of rendering it
physically plausible and possible that it does move. In contributing to the
construction of a new coherent theoretical as well as visual model of the
5EN VI, 561, Finocchiaro’s translation, 1989: 197.

456
MARTA SPRANZI
universe, in which similar bodies behave similarly, the prior probability of
the truth of the Copernican universe has greatly increased.6
However, if we look more closely at the relationship between step
2 ad step 1, the reasoning that we have outlined can be turned into a
double vicious circle, if it is read from the bottom up. The Copernican
hypothesis would lend credibility to the deep similarity between the Earth
and the Moon, and in turn the supposed existence of mountains on the
Moon would allow Galileo to interpret what he saw on the Moon with the
telescope AS shadows projected by mountains, a vision which was rendered
more familiar to Galileo through his recently documented acquaintance
with the pictorial techniques of perspective and chiaroscuro (Edgerton
1991). And there are good reasons to suppose that Galileo was already
a convinced Copernican when he published the Starry Messenger, in 1610.7
Recent historical analyses of the treatise have often led to the con-
clusion that it was the awareness of a possible similarity between the two
celestial bodies, itself informed by Galileo’s Copernican leanings, which
allowed him to see the special conﬁgurations of dark and light spots AS
the shadows of mountains existing at the Moon’s surface. This reading,
if true, can undermine both the inventive part of the discussion – the
discovery of the mountains of the Moon – and the justiﬁcatory side of it –
the use of such discovery in order to support the Copernican hypothesis.
In a recent article, William Shea acknowledges that the invention of the
modern Moon “was rendered possible by the analogy between the progress
of sunrise on Earth and the play of light and shadow on the Moon,” but
argues that the general “old” view of the similarity between the Earth and
the Moon allowed Galileo to interpret what he saw as shadows: “Plutarch
and other ancients had speculated that the Moon might be a planet sim-
ilar to the Earth and, had Galileo not been aware of this hypothesis, he
would not have seen mountains and valleys when he focused his primitive
6This is why the discussion of the nature of the Moon in the ﬁrst day of the Dialogue on
the two Chief World Systems and the constitution of the new inertial physics in the second day
constitutes the true pillars of the new picture of the universe, and considerably strengthen
the argument from simplicity drawn from the Copernican explanation of planetary motions
(third day), and the inference to the best explanation of the movement of the tides (fourth
day).
7Galileo expressed his Copernican conviction in 1597 in two letters, one addressed to
Kepler (EN X, 67) and the other addressed to Mazzoni (EN II, 197-202).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
457
telescope on our satellite” (2000: 99). Roger Ariew who takes the issue
from an entirely different perspective, maintains that Galileo’s lunar ob-
servations could not by themselves be effective against scholastic science
and concludes by referring to Feyerabend’s verdict on Galileo: “Certainly
there are ample materials in such a study to please (. . .) a Feyerabend who
argues that allegiance to new ideas (such as Galileo’s attempts to generate
allegiance to Copernican ideas) has to be brought about by means other
than argument” (1984: 226). He refers to Paul Feyerabend’s famous (or
infamous) analyses of Galileo’s use of “irrational means such as propa-
ganda, emotion, ad hoc hypotheses, and appeals to prejudice of all kinds”
in Against method (1978: 154).
Analysing Galileo’s analogical reasoning in all its complexity will
hopefully free Galileo of the charge of circular and prejudiced reasoning.
If we consider it as a worthy task, albeit a rather old-fashioned one, to
do justice to Galileo’s Copernican achievement, we have to take a closer
look at step n.1, namely at the “justiﬁed discovery,” or re-discovery, of
the mountains of the Moon, and follow the stepwise journey which led
Galileo to transform a presupposed and vague similarity between the Earth
and Moon predicted on the basis of the Copernican hypothesis, into an
established and more detailed analogy between the two celestial bodies,
one that could itself be discussed, reframed, qualiﬁed and used as an
argument in favour of the Copernican system. This stepwise journey can
be reconstructed almost entirely from the text of the Starry Messenger, all the
more so that the instantaneous timing of the publication makes it midway
a note-book and a reworked treatise. As such it can almost be considered
as what Kevin Dunbar calls “in-vivo analysis” of scientiﬁc discovery (1998).
This historical/conceptual analysis will also shed some light on the
use of those cognitive tools – analogies, analogical reasoning, models
and metaphors – which are part of a single broad family which aims
at exploiting the notoriously obscure relationship of similarity in order
to extend, illustrate, explain, conﬁrm (rather than just suggest, enrich,
enlighten) a given piece of knowledge. More precisely, analogies, being
midway between the known and the unknown, are useful in breeching
established ontological categories and in constructing new ones. The
relationship between analogical reasoning and ontological categories is not
as self-evident as it might appear at ﬁrst sight. Quite to the contrary, it

458
MARTA SPRANZI
seems to be founded upon a paradox, which is the theoretical underpinning
of the circularity charge to which Galileo’s argument is often considered to
be liable. Analogical argument, especially in the scientiﬁc domain, can be
said to be genuinely useful for discovery if it succeeds in showing that two
ontological categories considered up to that moment to be distinct, overlap
considerably.8 The more the two domains are considered to be distant,
the more the discovery of their similarity amounts to a groundbreaking
discovery. However, in order for this to be possible – or, to use a
more technical language, in order for the analogical transfer of properties
from the source to the target domain to possibly occur –, one has to
presuppose, against all previously accepted theory, that it exists a certain
degree of similarity, albeit superﬁcial, between what are considered to be
two ontologically distinct domains. It is the intuition of this similarity which
allows a particular source domain to be chosen as relevant. This is precisely
what happens in the case of the Earth and the Moon. Galileo’s great
achievement consists precisely in showing that these two celestial bodies
belong to one and the same ontological category, namely to the category
“planet,” against the Aristotelian doctrine of their radical difference.9 And
yet in order to do so, he has to suppose that the pictures of the two
bodies seen from afar can be compared, and that therefore the spots
that we see through the telescope on the Moon’s surface might well be
shadows. How could Galileo justiﬁably base his analogical reasoning on
a supposed communality between the two bodies?10 Bridging ontological
gaps, which is what scientiﬁc discovery often amounts to, should be either
8Analogy is widely used in the process of categorization. See on this issue Sander (2000).
9Aristotle’s radical distinction between the “sublunary” and “supralunary” worlds
became a fundamental tenet of cosmology all through the scientiﬁc revolution. In his
immensely inﬂuential treatise On the heavens, he argues that the Earth, at rest at the centre of
the universe, is composed of four elements (earth, water, air and ﬁre) which are intrinsically
imperfect and constantly affected by generation and corruption. By contrast, all heavenly
bodies revolving around the earth are composed of a ﬁfth ethereal element, eternal and
unchanging and possessing all perfections.
10Sceptical arguments indirectly appealing to the distinction between the sublunary
and supralunary universe were used against Galileo’s observations at the time of their
publication: since we have no direct access to celestial matter it is difﬁcult for us to interpret
telescopic observations as we interpret terrestrial observations. On the early reception of
Galileo’s observations, se the introduction by Isabelle Pantin (in press) to Francesco Sizzi’s
Dianoia astronomica, optica, physica published in 1611.

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
459
utterly impossible, or the fruit of an unjustiﬁed gamble rewarded by sheer
luck.11 If, as it seems more plausible, it is a case of “bootstrapping,” how
does it exactly work?
The structure of Galileo’s analogical reasoning
Despite the sober documentary style in which he records his observations,
Galileo hints at the revolutionary import of what he is about to say: “Let us
now review the observations made by us during the past 2 months, inviting
the lovers of true philosophy to the start of truly great contemplation”
(Galileo 1989: 39). The contrast between the two parts of the same sentence
– so plane the ﬁrst, so heroic the second – could not be more striking, and
thus excite our curiosity. Galileo announces at the outset the conclusion
his observations of the Moon seen through the telescope will lead to:
Anyone will then understand with the certainty of the senses that the Moon
is by no means endowed with a smooth and polished surface, but is rough
and uneven and, just as the face of the Earth itself, crowded everywhere with
vast prominences, deeps chasms and convolutions (Galileo 1989: 36).
Taking this statement at face value, we might interpret Galileo’s discov-
ery by appealing to a “natural judgement of the senses” approach, accord-
ing to which Galileo just saw the mountains, and he did not infer their
presence from what he actually observed through the telescope, namely
different patterns of light and dark spots. Giving a historical underpin-
ning to this approach, Philippe Hamou argues that drawing on traditional
approaches to the science of optics and new developments in perspective
theory, Galileo appealed to a special “intelligence of vision” judgement em-
bedded in the process of vision itself (1999: 62). Such judgement includes
reasoned and attentive examination of visual appearances as they are ﬁrst
perceived and allows vision to rule out illusions. According to this reading,
the analogical reasoning developed in the Starry Messanger is not a discovery
11Curiously, one of the other celebrated analogies in the history of science seems to
raise the same difﬁculty. Darwin built his notion of natural selection on an analogy with
artiﬁcial selection. However, the variability of species under domestication was precisely
used, for example by Cuvier, to deny that species could evolve, since it was claimed that
only man’s intervention can cause a great number of variations.

460
MARTA SPRANZI
tool, but rather a teaching aid, helping those who did not recognize the
existence of mountains on the Moon to see them.
However, the “natural judgement of the senses” approach fails to
account for Galileo’s discovery of the mountains of the Moon as a genuine
discovery. If vision is so intelligent, why didn’t others see the mountains,
even after having been told the news? According to this reading, Galileo
would have discovered the mountains of the Moon by suddenly realizing
their existence through the telescope. Moreover, by making observations
impossible to justify, this approach makes Galileo liable of having seen the
mountains because, as a Copernican, he was already expecting to see them,
thus raising the methodological conundrum of the theory-laden character
of observation.
Galileo’s appeal to the “certainty of the senses” may thus be historically
pertinent, insofar as this common conception of vision could contribute to
render his claim more plausible to his interlocutors. It may also faithfully
express Galileo’s own phenomenological experience, insofar as it might well
be that by pointing his telescope to the Moon he actually saw, or thought
he had seen, the mountains of the Moon. However, it does not solve the
theoretical puzzle concerning that discovery. The perceptual experience
cannot, in and by itself, account for the identiﬁcation of those visual
patterns with the mountains of the Moon and neither can it constitute, by
itself, scientiﬁc discovery. In the ﬁrst place, recent theories of perception do
not support the “natural judgement” approach. Although these issues are
still controversial, it would seem that inferential processes residing “within”
the visual system can provide us with “surface recognition,” “whether
surfaces are seen as connected or disconnected; folded, straight, or curved;
whether they pass in front or behind; whether they are transparent or
opaque,” but are unable to go as far as “object recognition,” “which
requires knowledge of speciﬁc objects or object classes” (Kosslyn and
Osherson 1995: 10).
Secondly, and philosophically more interestingly, in order to be con-
sidered as a genuine scientiﬁc discovery, a fact must be justiﬁed in a way
that makes it understandable and acceptable if not actually accepted by
the scientiﬁc community. This is what we might call an “established fact.”
One ought to be able to give a public account of what might well have
been the result of a simple intuition or perceptual experience most often

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
461
informed by preconceived ideas.12 The role of the reasoning Galileo devel-
ops in the Starry Messenger is precisely that of allowing a “justiﬁed discovery”
of the mountains of the Moon, transforming an initial vague presupposed
similarity between the two bodies into a well-established fact underwriting
a new extension of the “planet” ontological category.
It would then seem that the discovery of the mountains of the Moon
depends, at least in part, on some inferential process. Analogical reasoning
emerges as a likely candidate, since Galileo explicitly evokes it in the text.13
Galileo’s main analogical reasoning can be reconstructed in the following
way:
Premise: distinction between the “old” spots and his newly observed
“new” spots invisible at the naked eye, on which the reasoning will be
based.
1. We see on the Earth, and can have direct experience of mountains
and plains illuminated by sun in different ways.
2. By thought experiment we can imagine to be very far from the
Earth (on the Moon for example) and to draw what we see by
applying the laws of perspective.
3. We can draw the different images of the spots we observe on the
Moon through the telescope at different times of the month. And
this is what Galileo himself does, by etchings and water painting.
4. We compare the two drawings (real and imaginary) and we realize
that they are substantially similar, if not identical.
5. By analogical reasoning we can conclude that the drawings we have
of the Moon indicate the presence of mountains and of valleys on
the Moon.
12Moreover, there is empirical evidence that descriptions of discovery in terms of
intuition may just be a retrospective and biased view of what is in fact a step-wise process
of discovery (Gruber 1998).
13Galileo’s reasoning could also be read as an “inference to the best explanation”:
interpreting the visual patters of the Moon seen through the telescope AS shades projected
by mountains, could be regarded as the best explanation for their particular shapes. I am
tempted to discard this hypothesis for two reasons. First, the initial plausibility of this
explanation is very weak, according to the common accepted theories. Secondly, Galileo
explicitly presents the mountains of the Moon as similar to the Earth’s mountains, and does
not take pains, at least in the Starry Messenger, to refute possible alternative explanations of
the visual appearances, a step which would be necessary in order to make a conclusive
inference to the best explanation.

462
MARTA SPRANZI
We can formalize the analogical reasoning as follows:
The drawings of the Earth mountains from afar (1) are to the
Earth mountains (2) as the drawings of the Moon (3) are to the
mountains of the Moon (4)
This is a classical example of analogical reasoning, called analogy by
proportion. We ﬁnd the 4th term of the proportion by using the identity of
the relationship existing between terms (1) and (2) and between terms (3)
and (4). The analogical reasoning is thus founded upon two different kinds
of relationships:
A causal relationship between (1) and (2) and between (3) and (4),
And a similarity relationship between (1) and (3).
Unfortunately, both of these relationships involve some basic difﬁculty.
I shall look at them in turn.
a) The causal relationships between (1) and (2) and between (3) and (4)
are presumably warranted by the laws of perspective. However, their use
in this case is problematic. In the ﬁrst case (the causal relationship between
(1) and (2)) the representation of the mountains of the Earth relies on a
thought experiment, since we imagine to draw the mountains of the Earth
seen from considerable distance. In the second case, we have to interpret
a two-dimensional representation as a three-dimensional object, and not,
as the laws of perspective teach us to do, to represent a three-dimensional
object in two dimensions. This is highly problematic, since illusions are part
of what perspective allows us to represent.14 This weakness is exploited by
Ludovico delle Colombe, one of Galileo’s Aristotelian opponents. In his
Against the Motion of the Earth he acknowledges that “seeing in the lunar
body all those differences in rarity which resemble to mountains, valleys
and hills, I have the impression of contemplating another Earth” (EN III,
286). He points out, however, that “as painted pictures show us, a squared
body may appear round, a spherical body plane, the plane body with
relief and background because of the variety of colours [used], shades and
lights” (ibid.). He feels rightly legitimated to use an old explanation of
the dark spots of the Moon, and contends that an alternative explanation
of those appearances can easily be given which saves the theory of a
perfect spherical body. He evokes differential rarity and density, not only
14See what Martin Kemp calls “illusionistic naturalism” (1990: 337).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
463
on the surface but also in the depth of the lunar body to account for the
vivid appearances he has acknowledged seeing (ibid.). In other words, the
drawings of the Moon could be faithful drawings without corresponding to
any tri-dimensional body, i.e. to any mountains at all, but to the smooth
surface of a sphere whose visual patterns resemble those of mountains
and planes because of its differential density.15 Galileo takes seriously this
objection and discusses it in the Dialogue, as we shall see.
b) It is the similarity relationship between (1) and (3) which allows the
analogical reasoning to be conclusive. It is this alleged superﬁcial similarity
between the two celestial bodies, which are very different according to the
accepted view, namely the similarity between the drawings of the Moon
and of the Earth seen from a distance, which allows the inference to a
deeper analogy, between the rugged nature of the Earth and that of the
Moon. We must notice that Galileo’s analogical reasoning is itself meant to
demonstrate not so much the Moon’s nature itself, but the Moon’s nature
as it is similar to the Earth, namely the deep analogy between the two
objects with respect to two of their main properties, namely their solid
and uneven surfaces. This would be in keeping with the common view
according to which superﬁcial similarities lead to the discovery of deeper
similarities.
The problem, however, is that there are no drawings of the mountains
of the Earth seen from astronomical distance. On the contrary, if there had
been any, they would be quite different from those of the Moon, because
of the presence of the atmosphere and of the large regions occupied by
water! The superﬁcial similarity is thus not there at all, even if Galileo
might have imagined, by thought experiment, that it existed.
Given that these two major ﬂaws could undermine Galileo’s genuine
demonstration of the existence of mountains on the Moon, and hence
justify the claim that Galileo’s approach is circular, we might legitimately
ask wherein lies the strength of his analogical reasoning.
15In the same text, Delle Colombe goes as far as maintaining that the impression of the
existence of the mountain is not the result of a combination of superﬁcial two-dimensional
patterns of different shades, but of the actual existence of three-dimensional mountainous
shapes inside the glassy ball-like body of the Moon.

464
MARTA SPRANZI
Strengthening Galileo’s analogical reasoning: models and
metaphors
In what follows, I would like to look more closely at the way in which
Galileo creatively reinforces his analogical reasoning in different ways,
bringing models and metaphors into play in order to allow what I have
called an “analogical bootstrapping” to occur.
Galileo gives a detailed and ordered description of the different appear-
ances offered by the Moon at different stages of the lunar month. These
descriptions are accompanied by a few engravings of the Moon, which
signiﬁcantly complement the description making it more immediately self-
evident and perspicuous. Also, in order to support an interpretation of
these appearances as resulting from a solid and rugged surface, Galileo
appeals directly to the vividness of a common visual experience, rather
than to the detailed analogical argument that we have outlined above: the
view offered by earthly mountains variously illuminated by the Sun is sup-
posed to allow the reader to immediately reach the conclusion, rather than
to inductively infer, that the Moon has mountains. Finally, Galileo ends
this part of the treatise with two striking metaphors for the Moon. I will
consider these three aspects in turn.
A verbal and visual portrait of the Moon
Availing himself of his engravings of the Moon, Galileo develops his
preliminary hypothesis of a profound analogy between the Moon’s and
the Earth’s surfaces, and explains in great details the “new appearances”
of the Moon revealed by the telescope. It has been noted that Galileo offers
the reader a “verbal portrait” (Winkler and Van Helden 1992: 207) of the
Moon, which is more detailed and exhaustive than the iconic pictures. The
analogical reasoning is broken up into many independent pieces. These
lengthy descriptions of the Moon’s “new” spots are carefully ordered from
the most to the least evident – from the border between the dark and the
illuminated part of the Moon to the barely visible appearances of the spots
in the thin horns of the crescent –, and regularly proceed from the static to
the dynamical viewpoint. The moving perspective, which is only partially
captured by the engravings, also contributes to help the reader endow the
different shapes he can observe with a sense of depth.

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
465
Figure 1.
(Source: Galileo 1890, vol. III, pp. 63.)
Figure 2.
(Source: Galileo 1890, vol. III, pp. 66.)

466
MARTA SPRANZI
I will look more carefully at the three main appearances of the Moon’s
new spots, as they are verbally described and visually represented in the
images reproduced in the text.
A. The Moon’s demarcation line between its dark and its bright parts
The ﬁrst and most salient feature of the Moon which lends itself to
the analogy between the Earth’s and the Moon’s rugged surface, is the
irregular proﬁle of the Moon between its dark and bright parts, which is
incompatible with the Moon being a “perfectly spherical solid” (Galileo
1989: 40; see Figure 1).
B. Dark spots in the bright area
Galileo notices that those “asperities” “extend” beyond the line of demar-
cation between the dark and bright portions of the Moon, to the point of
detaching themselves from that line and form bright spots in the dark part
and dark spots in the bright part. He examines these newly observed dark
spots in both static and dynamic terms:
Indeed a great number of small darkish spots, entirely separated from the
dark part, are distributed everywhere over almost the entire region already
bathed by the light of the Sun, except, at any rate, for that part affected by
the large and ancient spots. We noticed moreover, that all these small spots
just mentioned always agree in this, that they have a dark part on the side
toward the Sun while on the side opposite the Sun they are crowned with
brighter borders like shining ridges. (Galileo 1989: 41; see Figure 2).
These characteristics are explained by appealing to an analogy which
renders them more easily understandable to the reader to the point of
being predictable:
And we have an almost entirely similar sight on Earth, around sunrise, when
the valleys are not yet bathed in light but the surrounding mountains facing
the Sun are already seen shining with light. (ibid.)
The analogy is strengthened by introducing a dynamical component
in the description:
And just as the shadows of the earthly valleys are diminished as the Sun
climbs higher, so those lunar spots lose their darkness as the luminous part
grows. (Galileo 1989: 41)

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
467
C. Bright spots in the dark area
The opposite occurs for the bright spots in the dark area of the Moon.
The description in this case is entirely dynamical:
(. . .) what causes even greater wonder is that very many bright points appear
within the dark part of the Moon, entirely separated and removed from the
illuminated region and located no small distance from it. Gradually, after a
small period of time, these are increased in size and brightness. Indeed, after
2 or 3 hours they are joined with the rest of the bright part, which has now
become larger. (Galileo 1989: 42; see Figure 2)
The analogy with the Earth’s mountains is introduced again:
Now on Earth before sunrise, aren’t the peaks of the highest mountains
illuminated by the Sun’s rays while shadows still cover the plain? Doesn’t
light grow, after a little while, until the middle and larger parts of the same
mountains are illuminated, and ﬁnally, when the Sun has risen, aren’t the
illuminations of plains and hills joined together? (ibid.)
The analogy is further strengthened when Galileo turns the reader’s
attention to a peak of “triangular shape” appearing in a “dark gulf
projected into the bright part” of the Moon (ibid.). This detail concerning
the geometrical shape of the spot is strongly evocative of the shape of
mountain’s peaks seen from a great distance.
Models and visual vividness
At the end of these descriptions the analogical reasoning has been played
out in full. On the basis of an imaginary visual experience of the Earth
mountains, the Moon’s spots are interpreted as shadows of similar solid
mountains variously reﬂecting the Sun’s light. To support the analogy
we have the textual descriptions and the iconic representations of the
visual appearances of the Moon on the one hand, and the vividness of
the imaginary visual experience of the Earth’s mountains on the other
hand. The crucial question is how the two can be matched.
I would like to show that through the ordinary visual experience of the
mountains of the Earth as well as the telescopic view of the new “spots” of
the Moon observed through the telescope, Galileo manages to construct a
satisfactory though schematic and simpliﬁed model which applies to both

468
MARTA SPRANZI
the Earth and the Moon, and can make the transition from a preliminary
conjectural association between the Earth and the Moon as planets, to the
full-ﬂedged establishment of a new ontological category which underlies
and justiﬁes the Copernican theory.
This constructed model is then used in order to answer what Galileo
himself considers as “a grave difﬁculty” for his theory: the outer circum-
ference of the visible Moon is not seen “uneven, rough and sinuous”, as
it would be expected if it were an uneven body throughout16 “but exactly
round and circular” (ibid. 43). He also uses the model in order to account
for the previously known appearances of the Moon, namely what he calls
the “old spots,” the larger darker and irregular patches seen at the naked
eye. It is interesting that in dealing with these two issues Galileo overex-
tends the analogical transfer from the Earth to the Moon. One of his two
explanations for the smooth appearance of the Moon’s contour appeals to
the existence of an atmosphere around the Moon’s surface, which allows
its border to be perceived as smooth by interfering with the visual rays.
At the same time, the “older,” larger and irregular spots are interpreted
as being the Moon’s seas. It is a tribute to Galileo that in his later work,
the Dialogue on the two Chief World Systems, he could point to the disanalogies
between the two bodies, and explain that there is no water, and hence no
humidity, no seas and no life on the Moon (EN VII, 126; Galileo 1967:
100). Although these explanations are only partially correct, the apparent
fruitfulness of the model contributes to further reinforcing it.
The construction of a conceptual model17 thus emerges as the crucial
element of Galileo’s demonstration that the Moon has mountains. As we
shall try to show, it involves a visual component. Galileo’s drawings are
midway between iconic representations and didactic diagrams. As it turns
out, it is good that it is so. What mattered to Galileo was not to represent
the Moon as it really is, but to use these pictures to give what he calls a
16Harré, Aronson and Way (2000) rightly distinguish between “descriptive” and “ex-
planatory” models.
17For a useful overview to different approaches to the construction and use of models,
see the collection of essays by Morgan and Morrison (1999).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
469
“very cogent proof” (Galileo 1989: 47) of the rough and uneven nature of
the Moon’s surface.18
On the basis of Galileo’s literary description of the appearances of the
Moon we obtain a pseudo-picture, or didactic model.19 It is constructed
by abstracting from all the possible properties of the two bodies, two
common and salient ones: their solid and earthlike matter, and their rugged
surface. These two characteristics are directly and causally related to the
particular shape, aspect and conﬁguration of the newly observed spots.
Thus the pictures of the Moon seen through the telescope and the vivid
images of the Earth’s mountains which Galileo manages to evoke in the
reader’s mind, become both meaningful if they are related to an imaginary
constructed object which exhibits the common fundamental structural
characteristics of both the Moon and the Earth, and which are in turn
causally related to their more superﬁcial properties. By appealing to this
imaginary constructed model of both the Earth and the Moon Galileo has
been able to make up for the inexistent apparent similarity between the
drawings of the two bodies, and hence to justiﬁably infer the existence of
mountains on the Moon.
I would like to enter brieﬂy into a more theoretical and controversial
issue concerning the construction of analogue-models, namely the criteria
used for the selection of precisely those relevant properties of the source ob-
ject, among the inﬁnite possible ones, which can be transferred analogically
to the target object. In the case at hand, how did Galileo select the Earth
properties of having a solid and rugged surface to be mapped onto the
Moon? Several hypotheses have been advanced to solve this fundamental
puzzle of analogical reasoning. Among the most inﬂuential are Gentner’s
“syntactic” approach, Thagard’s “pragmatic” approach and Harré, Aron-
son and Way’s “ontological-categorical” approach. After brieﬂy sketching
what I consider to be the drawbacks of these approaches, I will outline my
own “bootstrapping” proposal for the selection of the salient features of the
source object to be mapped onto the target object.
18The exaggeration of the dimensions of the crater today called Albategnius which
clearly stands out at the center of the drawing (Figure 2) and which is compared to the
whole of Bohemia seen from a distance (Galileo 1989: 47) is but the most evident clue of
the didactic purpose underlying Galileo’s drawings.
19A “generic model” in Nancy Nersessian’s terminology (2002).

470
MARTA SPRANZI
According to Gentner’s syntactic approach relational properties, and
especially higher-order relational properties, are more likely to be selected
in the source for analogical transfer. By contrast, simple attributes (one-
place predicates) are not. More speciﬁcally, it is those higher order
relational properties which have the higher level of “systematicity,” namely
that are such as to constrain other lower order properties, which are more
likely to be selected (Gentner 1983). In the classical example of the solar
system considered as a source analogue for the atomic structure, it is such
higher-order relational properties as “attraction depends on distance” that
are mapped onto the target object, and not attributes like the absolute
weight, size, colours, etc. of the bodies involved. According to this syntactic
approach, it is in principle possible to select the salient properties of the
source object independently of the consideration of the target object: some
properties will always be good candidates for the analogical transfer while
others will be poor candidates. However, in a context-free situation, there
may be several sets of such properties, not all of which will be pertinent for
the analogical transfer. Moreover, in the case at hand, the most relevant
properties, that of being a solid body with rugged surface are not relational
properties. The relational property of reﬂecting the sun’s rays so as to
produce corresponding shadows, are derivative on those other absolute
properties.
Paul Thagard criticizes the syntactic approach and introduces a prag-
matic component as an inescapable element of the analogical transfer. In
his own words, “a purely syntactic approach is unable to predict accu-
rately the basis for the analogical transfer, because it fails to take account
of goals. Differing goals can lead to different mappings for what is puta-
tively the ‘same’ analogy. The perceived structure of an analogy is heavily
inﬂuenced by the pragmatic context of its use. The aspects of the source
analogue transferred to the target will be determined by a variety of factors,
including knowledge of what aspects of the source are conveniently taken
to be important or salient” (Holland et al., 1986: 303). Thagard makes
the choice of the relevant properties a function of an already available
hypothesis about the nature of the target object. In Galileo’s case, Tha-
gard’s approach would support the circular interpretation of his analogical
reasoning: it was Galileo’s reliance on his Copernican presupposition of an
essential identity between the Earth and the Moon which allowed him to

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
471
see those various spots as corresponding to mountains. More importantly,
the pragmatic approach renders the analogical transfer too ﬂexible, in
that many potentially different contexts can elicit the selection of as many
properties in the source object. In other words, this approach tends to li-
cence overextending analogical transfers, makes it difﬁcult to discriminate
between good and bad analogical transfers, and encourages overlooking
disanalogies. In our case, how could Galileo rule out that the Moon is in-
habited like the Earth, an inference which even Kepler ventured to make?
Harré, Aronson and Way’s ontological-categorical approach comes
closer to accounting for the revolutionary use of models in discovery.
They argue that “the underlying cognitive structure of model building (and
metaphor) is not comparison leading to a similarity/difference balance, but
‘vertical’ relations within the relevant type-hierarchy” (2000: 7). It is thus
not the inspection of either the source and/or the target objects that will
allow the selection of the relevant properties. Rather these will be made
salient by the common higher-order ontological category to which they
can both be considered to belong. Harré and his co-authors reinterpret the
atom/solar system analogy in the following way: “(. . .) the solar system is
a source for a planetary model for the atom because both are subtypes or
instances of the same general supertype. They both inherit their properties
from the central force ﬁeld law. It is the inheritance relation and the
structure of the hierarchy which generates the analogy, not the isolated
comparison of properties at the lowest level” (ibid.). However, the higher-
order ontological category which serves to select the salient features to be
mapped, can be considered to be the result rather than the presupposition
of the analogical transfer. This is particularly evident in the case of Galileo’s
reuniﬁcation of the Earth and the Moon under the same newly deﬁned20
category of planet.
After this brief overview of the available theories of analogical transfer,
we can more easily appreciate the advantages offered by the bootstrapping
approach. From the discussion of the Starry Messenger, it would seem that
the salient properties which lie at the basis of the analogical transfer are
20The category planet is an old category, but, after Galileo, the properties of its objects
are not the same. Most notably, planets are not made up of a perfect and unknowable
celestial 5th element of Aristotelian ascendancy. Rather, their internal constitution is
substantially similar, and knowable by the same methods, as that of the Earth.

472
MARTA SPRANZI
not selected by a direct inspection of the source object alone – the Earth –
as it is predicted by the syntactic approach; and neither are they selected
on the basis of a contextually determined hypothesis about the nature
the target object – the Moon, as the pragmatic approach would have
us believe. They are not selected either on the basis of a pre-existing
higher-order ontological category to which both objects would belong,
insofar as the redeﬁnition of this category is precisely the result of the
analogical transfer. Rather, these properties are indirectly selected via the
construction of an abstract imaginary model of both. The analogy of the
two bodies as far as their salient properties are concerned is itself suggested,
provoked, elicited,21 by two different sets of perceptual experiences, in
principle unconnected: the observation of the sun illuminating mountains
on the Earth, and the appearances of the Moon observed through the
telescope. As Douglas Hofstadter writes: “most analogies arise similarly –
as a result of unconscious ﬁlterings and arrangings of perceptions, rather
than as consciously sought solutions to cooked up puzzles” (1985: 548).
The imaginary model resulting from these different sets of perceptual
experiences helps to visualise and pick out the salient properties to be
used in the analogical transfer. It is in this sense that we could subscribe
to what Hofstadter adds a few lines later: “an analogy helps to bring
out the salient characteristics that would not be salient otherwise” (ibid.).
To be sure, a vague and generic similarity between the two bodies was
already suggested to Galileo by his Copernican convictions. However,
this theoretical and pragmatic context only provided the background with
respect to which certain properties could become salient properties of the
model; it did not determine which the relevant properties for the analogical
transfer actually are. The characterization of this model-based approach to
analogical reasoning as “bootstrapping” becomes more perspicuous: the
model not only sidesteps the potentially circular process of selecting salient
transferable properties in the source object, but also and above all allows
21It is worth asking what particular kind of mental representation this abstract model is
and how it is constructed in the mind. Insofar as it may be related to a stabilised “mental
image,” it would include both iconic and propositional representations. The processes by
which mental images are produced, maintained and transformed in the mind are still highly
controversial and their discussion lies outside the scope of this paper. For an overview of
the latest relevant psychological theories, see the chapter entitled “Mental imagery” in
Kosslyn and Osherson (1995).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
473
this selection to go through at the same time as the model is constructed.
Analogical reasoning thus “lifts itself up with its own straps.”
Galileo explicitly uses the imaginary constructed model underlying his
analogical reasoning, in the Dialogue here, he attempts to answer Delle
Colombe’s objection of the irreducible two-dimensional nature of the
spots, by challenging him to construct a physical small-scale model of the
Moon as a smooth body and to explain all the particular phenomena that
Galileo can explain with his own model: “Out of the countless different
appearances that are revealed night after night during one lunation, you
could not imitate a single one by arbitrarily fashioning a smooth ball
out of more or less opaque and transparent pieces. On the other hand,
balls may be made of any solid and opaque material which, merely by
having prominences and cavities and by receiving varied illumination, will
precisely demonstrate the very changes and scenes which are discovered
from one time to another in the Moon” (Galileo 1967: 86).
Although this constructed imaginary model cannot be perceived di-
rectly, it can be variously represented by different visual, iconic or me-
chanical models. These representations do not necessarily “resemble” their
conceptual counterpart, but rather are more or less “well-founded” in rela-
tion to it. This relationship between a conceptual model and its visual and
iconic representations allows for the existence of dissimilar but equally well-
founded visual representations of one and the same conceptual model. Not
all iconic representations are good representations of the model, insofar as
some do not capture what we consider to be their essential properties, but
several different iconic representations may be as good in capturing them.
It is not possible to order those equally good iconic representations on a
hierarchical scale going from better to worse according to whether more
or less essential properties are represented. Rather, once they reproduce
those necessary and sufﬁcient properties which are necessary for the ana-
logical transfer, they can only be discriminated on the basis of their use in
different pragmatic contexts.22
22On the other hand, the question of how the model represents or resembles a real
object does not arise, since the model is a constructed imaginary structure corresponding
to no object in particular and used only as a temporary tool. In this respect, my approach
relies on a conception of “models as ﬁctions” developed by Barberousse and Ludwig (2001).
For an analysis of the role of visual models in science, see Giere (1999).

474
MARTA SPRANZI
Figure 3.
Woodcut of the ﬁrst quarter Moon (Source: Winkler and Van Helden
1992).
By way of example, and quite independently of their historical signiﬁ-
cance, I will consider two different visual models used to depict the Moon
after Galileo’s discovery, and I will compare them relatively to the way in
which they relate to the imaginary constructed model which was crucial to
Galileo’s analogical reasoning.23
We can observe that Giuseppe Biancani’s very primitive etching of
the Moon (Figure 3) is closer to Galileo’s own than Johannes Hevelius’
much more accurate depiction (Figure 4) of it a few decades later.24 The
particular aspect of the spots, as we have seen, is the crucial element of
Galileo’s description, in that it is the only element which is directly related
to the two salient features of the imaginary model, its solid nature and its
23For the history of selenography and representations of the Moon in the 17th century,
see Whitaker (1989).
24Giuseppe Biancani’s Sphaera mundi, was published in 1620 and Hevelius’ Selenographia
sive lunae descriptio in 1647. See Whitaker (1989) and Winkler and Van Helden (1992).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
475
Figure 4.
Copper engraving of the last quarter Moon (Source: Winkler and Van
Helden 1992).
rugged surface. In this respect, we can say that Galileo’s and Biancani’s
visual representations are equally well-founded with respect to the model
they evoke, and they are thus equivalent representations even though they
are pictorially different. On the other hand, Hevelius’s representation is
not so well-founded, though it is clearly more visually accurate.
The model is related to the visual appearances of both the Moon
and the Earth because it points to the same causal changing relationship
between the sun’s rays and the projected shadows of the mountains lit by
the sun. One could argue, therefore that the construction of the model
depends on the presupposition that the material the Moon is made of is
such that it is able to reﬂect the Sun’s light rather than absorb it, and

476
MARTA SPRANZI
that reﬂection is the cause of the Moon’s brightness.25 This assumption is
part of the initial vague commonality between the Earth and the Moon
which can be presupposed on the basis of the Copernican theory. However,
Galileo reinforces this assumption by demonstrating that the Earth itself is
a bright body and that its reﬂected light is visible in the Moon, through
the phenomenon known as the “ashen light of the Moon,” that is the soft
and pale light which can variously be detected on the obscure side of the
lunar disc facing the Earth.26 If the Earth shines by reﬂected light, and we
can have evidence of this reﬂection in the Moon’s ashen light, so can the
Moon. The demonstration of the existence of mountains on the Moon will
strengthen this possibility. The explanation of the ashen light of the Moon
has the further advantage of reinforcing the family relationship between
the Earth and the Moon: “In an equal and grateful exchange, the Earth
pays back the Moon with light equal to that which she receives from the
Moon almost all the time in the deepest darkness of the night” (Galileo
1989: 55).
Models and metaphors
Concluding Galileo’s description of he Moon’s appearances is what appears
to be a literary interlude. Galileo introduces what we could refer to as two
metaphors, interestingly interconnected in the same passage: “This lunar
surface which is decorated with spots like the dark blue eyes in the tail of
a peacock, is rendered similar to those small glass vessels which, plunged
into cold water while still warm, crack and acquire a wavy surface, after
which they are commonly called ice-glasses” (Galileo 1989: 43)
I call the uses of these terms “metaphors” as opposed to analogies,
because whereas associating the Moon to the Earth on the basis of
25Roger Ariew (1984) has rightly observed that Galileo’s demonstration of the existence
of mountains of Moon could not go through and defeat the differential density explanation
unless he ﬁrst proved that the Moon shines by reﬂecting the sun’s light.
26Galileo based his demonstration on the refutation of all alternative theories and on the
explanation of the special appearances of the this secondary light of Moon: “In its various
aspects to the Sun and Earth, the Moon receives more or less light by reﬂection from the
Earth as she faces a larger or smaller part of the illuminated terrestrial hemisphere. For the
relative positions of those two globes are always such that at those times when the Earth is
most illuminated by the Moon the Moon is least illuminated by the Earth, and vice-versa”
(Galileo 1989: 57).

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
477
those common properties which were captured in a model has allowed
speciﬁc analogical inferences – most notably the presence of a particular
conﬁguration of mountains and planes –, the association of the Moon
to a peacock tail or to a cracked and wavy vase does not provide the
basis for a novel inference.27 Do these metaphors have a function in the
argumentative structure of the work, and if so, which role do they play
and how?
The two objects the Moon is compared to are apparently very
different, and refer to different categories of properties of the Moon, visual
and substantial. The ﬁrst indirectly refers to, or brings out, the spotted
appearance of the Moon, and the second to its real mountainous nature.
One is a natural object, the other an artiﬁcial object. Yet the two objects
which constitute the basis for the metaphoric redescription have something
in common, they are both beautiful, precious objects, one in virtue of its
appearance, the other in virtue of the material of which it is constituted.
Despite the fact that these two objects are striking and highly evocative
of traditional themes, they appear to the reader to be pertinent and instruc-
tive metaphors, although they require some stretching of the imagination.
This impression can be justiﬁed if we notice that these objects possess, each
in its own particular way, at least one of the main characteristic aspects
of the same constructed model. The vase reproduces the rugged surface of
the Moon, and the peacock’s tail eyes imaginatively reproduce the same
internal structure of the spots as they are observed on the Moon, which
is so crucial to Galileo’s demonstration of the existence of mountains. The
particular appearance of the spot, with their layered internal structure of
lights and dark concentric lines is also highlighted in a diagram Galileo
includes in a letter to Grienberger (September 1st, 1611; EN XI, 183; see
ﬁgures 5 and 6).
The two objects used in the metaphors do not capture the central
salient structural features of the model, i.e. the light-related conﬁgurations
of the spots, and the structured conﬁguration of mountains and planes of
both the Earth and the Moon. However, they capture some additional
aesthetic features: the regularity and beauty of the new Moon. These
two images together hint at two alternative “compromise models” of the
27Rather than analogies and metaphors we could also use Kevin Dunbar’s distinction
between “regional” and “long-distance” analogies (1998).

478
MARTA SPRANZI
Figure 5.
The Moon’s spots (Source: Galileo 1980, vol. XI, p. 183).
category planet which includes both the Earth and the Moon: both the
Moon and the vase are ball-like objects made of some precious material
and whereas one is cracked and uneven the other presents spots which are
regular and beautiful. These compromise models are not “productive,” or
serious models insofar as the shape of the spots and the conﬁguration of
the unevenness do not correspond to each other as they do in the working
model. However, this attempt at ennobling the new model, by associating
it with a compromise model, is in tune with Galileo’s frequent appeal to
the idea that the new Moon is no less “perfect” than the old. It is perfect
in the same way in which the Earth is itself a perfect body, in a new
relative deﬁnition of perfection.28 Insofar as they encompass the idea of
28“For my part I consider the Earth very noble and admirable precisely because of
the diverse alterations, changes, generations, etc. that occur in it incessantly. If, not being

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
479
Figure 6.
Male Peacock (Pavo Christatus) displaying tail feathers.
perfection, these two compromise models facilitate the transition between
the old dualistic theory of the universe and the new monistic theory.
One might be tempted to dismiss the models which can be constructed
on the basis of two metaphors as being superﬂuous and as having a
simple rhetorical function. However, we can consider Galileo’s scientiﬁc
discovery of the mountains of the Moon as a long process leading from
the ﬁrst intuition of the nature of celestial bodies, to the consolidation
of a new ontological category through a detailed analogical reasoning
itself supported by the construction of an imaginary model, and ﬁnally
leading to its acceptance by a wider public. In this perspective, metaphors
subject to any changes, it were a vast desert of sand or a mountain of jasper, or if at the
time of the ﬂood the waters which had covered it had frozen, and it had remained an
enormous globe of ice where nothing was ever born or ever altered or changed, I should
deem it a useless lump in the universe (. . .). What greater stupidity can be imagined than
that of calling jewels, silver and gold “precious,” and earth and soil “base”? People who do
this ought to remember that if there were as great a scarcity of soil as of jewels or precious
metals, there would not be a prince who would not spend a bushel of diamonds and rubies
and a cartload of gold just to have enough earth to plant a jasmine in a little pot” (EN
VII, 83-84; Galileo 1967: 58-59).

480
MARTA SPRANZI
and the compromise models which they underwrite have a legitimate
and fundamental place in scientiﬁc discovery insofar as their persuasive
power legitimately contributes to ﬁnalize the process of “establishing” a
new ontological category and ultimately a new image of the universe.
Concluding remarks
Having reconstructed in detail Galileo’s journey from the hypothesized
vague analogy between the Earth and the Moon to the establishment of
a basic structural analogy between the two bodies, setting the stage for a
radical overturning of basic ontological categories, we can say that Galileo
can effectively be freed from the charge of having discovered the mountains
of the Moon only on the basis of a presupposed similarity between the
Earth and the Moon. Galileo’s insight might well have been inspired by
the Copernican view of the Earth as a rotating planet, but his was a case
of genuine discovery, whose steps can be reconstructed from the text of
the Starry Messanger.
The analogy between the Earth and the Moon is a good analogy
despite the non literal resemblance between the pictures of the two
bodies seen from afar. The structural similarities between the two bodies
concerning the relationship between the shapes of the projected shadows
and their respective mountains illuminated by the Sun’s rays, do not show
visually and immediately, but have to be unearthed by reasoning, as Galileo
himself recognizes in his Letter to Christopher Grienberger (September
1, 1611; EN XI, p. 183): “How do we then know that the Moon has
mountains? We know it not by the simple senses, but by coupling and
joining argument (‘discorso’) to the observations and the appearances of
the senses (‘apparenze sensate’).” However, as we have seen, this is not
the whole story. Reasoning in turn – in this case analogical reasoning
– is based on the construction of an imaginary and temporary model
containing and exhibiting the salient characteristics of both bodies and
suggested by the hypothesized analogy and the visual experimentes. Such
a model makes the transition between mere visual appearances and the
deep similarity between the Earth and the Moon, relatively to two basic
characteristics, namely the solid “terrestrial” nature of the Moon’s matter
and the ruggedness of its surface. Once the content of the ontological
category “planet” has been redeﬁned, the model becomes superﬂuous.

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
481
It is in that sense that it is temporary. Much as “dead metaphors,”
terms which were once associated to another metaphorically but which
become synonymous, so analogue models become superﬂuous and fade
from existence, as they have exhausted their role.29
As a ﬁnal remark, we may notice that by facilitating the transition
from old to new ontological categories, a model can be a source of
intellectual satisfaction which is one important dimensions of insight and
understanding, two terms which are notoriously difﬁcult to deﬁne, but
which may well be related to the visual and spacial component implicit in
models.
REFERENCES
AGASSI, J.
1988 “Analogies hard and soft.” In: D.H. Helman (Ed.), pp. 403-420.
ARIEW, R.
1984 “Galileo’s Lunar observations in the context of medieval lunar theory.” Studies
in history and philosophy of science 15/3: 212-227.
BIAGIOLI, M.
1993 Galileo courtier: the practice of science in the culture of absolutism. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
BARBEROUSSE, A. & P. LUDWIG
2001 “Les modèles comme ﬁctions.” Philosophie 68: 16-43.
CASINI, P.
1983 “Il ‘Dialogo’ di Galileo e la luna di Plutarco.” In: P. Galluzzi (Ed.), Novita celesti
e crisi del sapere. Florence: Giunti Barbera, pp. 57-62.
CLEMENT, C.A. & D. GENTNER
1991 “Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping.” Cognitive science
15: 89-132.
DUNBAR, K.
1998 “How scientists really reason: scientiﬁc reasoning in real-world laboratories.” In:
R.J. Sternberg & J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight. Cambridge: MIT
Press, pp. 365-395.
29This distinguishes the sense of “model” as a cognitive aid to discovery I have used
in this paper, from the more usual sense according to which a “theoretical model” is the
ultimate purpose and result rather than the instrument of scientiﬁc research. It is both
what a scientiﬁc theory “means” (semantic view of theories) and what makes it a good
instrument of prediction (Hesse 1966: 19) and explanation (Giere 1999).

482
MARTA SPRANZI
EDGERTON, S.Y.
1991 “Geometrisation of geometrical space: Galileo, ﬂorentine disegno and the strange
spottedness of the Moon.” In: The heritage of Giotto’s geometry. Cornell University
Press.
FEYERABEND, PAUL
1978 Against method. Verso.
FINOCCHIARO, M.
1989 The Galileo affair: a documentary history. Berkeley: University of California Press.
GALILEO GALILEI
1890-1909 Le opere. Editione Nationale (edited by Antonio Favaro) 20 vols. Florence:
Giunti Barbera [indicated in the text as EN].
1967 Dialogue concerning the two Chief World Systems (translated by Stillman Drake).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
1989 Sidereus nuncius or Sidereal Messenger (translated by A. Van Helden). Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
GENTNER, D.
1983 “Structure-mapping: a theoretical framework for analogy.” Cognitive science 7/2:
155-170.
GENTNER, D., K. HOLOYAK & B. KOKINOV
2001 The Analogical mind: perspectives from cognitive science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
GIERE, R.
1999 Science without laws. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
GRUBER, H.E.
1998 “Insight and affect in the history of science.” In: R.J. Sternberg & J.E. Davidson
(Eds.), The nature of insight. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 397-431.
HALLYN, F. (ED.)
2000 Metaphors and analogy in the sciences. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher.
HAMOU, P.
1999 La mutation du visible. Essai sur la portée épistémologique des instruments d’optique au XVIIe
siècle. Lille: Presses universitaires du Septentrion.
HARRE, R., J.L. ARONSON & E.C. WAY
2000 “Apparatus as models of nature.” In: F. Hallyn, pp. 1-16.
HELMAN, D. (ED.)
1988 Analogical reasoning. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher.
HOLLAND, J.H., K.J. HOLYOAK, R.E. NISBETT & P.R. THAGARD
1986 Induction: process of inference, learning and discovering. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
KEMP, M.
1990 The science of art. New Haven: Yale University Press.
HOFSTADTER, D.
1985 “Analogies and roles in human and machine thinking.” In: Metamagical themes.
New York: Basic Books.

GALILEO AND THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON
483
KEPLER, Y.
1965 Conversations with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger (translated by E. Rosen). New York:
Johnson Reprint Corp.
1967 The Dream, or posthumous work on lunar astronomy (translated by E. Rosen). Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
KOSSLYN, S.M. & D.N. OSHERSON (EDS.)
1995 Visual cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
MACHAMER, P.
1973 “Feyerabend and Galileo.” Studies in history and philosophy of science 4: 1-46.
MORGAN, M.S. & M. MORRISON (EDS.)
1999 Models as mediators. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
NERSESSIAN, N.
2002 “The cognitive basis of model-based reasoning in science.” In: P. Carruthers,
S. Stich & M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive basis of science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 133-153.
SANDER, E.
2000 L’analogie, du naïf au creative: analogie et catégorisation. Paris: L’Harmattan.
SHEA, W.
2000 “Looking at the Moon as another Earth. Terrestrial analogies and seventeenth-
century telescopes.” In: F. Hallyn, pp. 83-104.
SIZZI, F.
(in press) Dianoia astronomica, optica, physica (introduction and translation by Isabelle
Pantin). Paris: Les belles lettres.
WHITAKER, E.A.
1989 “Selenography in the seventeenth century.” In: René Taton & Curtis Wilson
(Eds.), Planetary astronomy from the Renaissance to the rise of astrophysics (part A).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 119-143.
WINKLER, M. & A. VAN HELDEN
1992 “Representing the heavens: Galileo and visual astronomy.” Isis 83: 195-217.
View publication stats
View publication stats

