
Game On!

Tech​.­edu
A Hopkins Series on Education and Technology

Game On!
Gamification, Gameful Design, and the 
Rise of the Gamer Educator
Kevin Bell
J O H N S  H O P K I N S  U N I V E R S I T Y  P R E S S  
B A L T I M O R E

© 2018 Johns Hopkins University Press
All rights reserved. Published 2018
Printed in the United States of Amer­i­ca on acid-­free paper
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Johns Hopkins University Press
2715 North Charles Street
Baltimore, Mary­land 21218​-­4363
www​.­press​.­jhu​.­edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Bell, Kevin, 1968–­ author.
Title: Game on! : gamification, gameful design, and the rise of the 
gamer educator / Kevin Bell.
Description: Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017. | Series: 
Tech​.­edu : a Hopkins series on education and technology | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017009944 | ISBN 9781421423968 
(hardcover : alk. paper) | ISBN 1421423960 (hardcover : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781421423975 (electronic) | ISBN 1421423979 (electronic)
Subjects: LCSH: Education, Higher—­Effect of technological 
innovations on. | Education, Higher—­Computer-­assisted 
instruction. | Internet in higher education. | Gamification. | 
Computer games. | Educational games. | BISAC: EDUCATION / 
Higher. | GAMES / Video & Electronic. | EDUCATION / 
Computers & Technology.
Classification: LCC LB2395.7 .B45 20107 | DDC 378.1/7344678—­dc23
LC rec­ord available at https://­lccn​.­loc​.­gov​/­2017009944
A cata­log rec­ord for this book is available from the British Library.
Special discounts are available for bulk purchases of this book. For more 
information, please contact Special Sales at 410-­516-­6936 or 
specialsales@press​.­jhu​.­edu​.­
Johns Hopkins University Press uses environmentally friendly book 
materials, including recycled text paper that is composed of at least 
30 ­percent post-­consumer waste, whenever pos­si­ble.

Calling out one person in no way diminishes my appreciation of 
the large number of ­people who have supported and encouraged 
me through the production of this work. However, I dedicate it 
officially to my dad, Michael Bell, who taught in some pretty rough 
inner-­city schools in the UK, motivating students that ­others had 
given up on. Contextualizing through his loves of lit­er­a­ture, ­music, 
and (proper) football, he gamified spelling tests in the 1970s with 
leaderboards, promotions, and relegations, intrinsically motivating 
kids steeped in the highs and lows of supporting Newcastle 
United—­the greatest team in the history of all sports ever.
Dad claims to understand next to nothing of my writings yet 
embodies the spirit and princi­ple of the very best educators: ­those 
who inspire and change lives. Thanks fatha.

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowl­edgments  ​ix
	
	
Prologue. Ashton to Apple —­The Breakout Year  ​1
	
1	
A Societal Imperative: The Impetus for Online Education  ​5
	
2	
How Did We Get ­Here? The Maturation of Online Education  ​20
	
3	
The Fairy Tale MOOC  ​44
	
4	
The Hero’s Journey  ​71
	
5	
Ethical Decision Making  ​94
	
6	
Dungeons and Discourse  ​111
	
7	
Threat of Crime and Terrorism  ​131
	
8	
Assessing Gamification: Conclusions and Implications  ​150
	
9	
Catching Fire: The Model That Burned Brightest  ​168
	
	
Captain’s Epilogue  ​183
Bibliography  ​189
Index  ​197
Contents

This page intentionally left blank

As is traditional, way too many ­people to list ­here, but I’ll give it a go.
Two ­people went beyond the call of duty or friendship to help me with 
this work.
My dissertation chair, Dr. Laura Perna, provided unreasonably prompt and 
helpful feedback on the executive doctorate program at the University of Penn­
sylvania. A gamefully designed, intrinsically motivating goal of mine was to 
get my work to a level where I would get feedback on a draft with fewer than 
100 comments, tweaks, or suggestions from her. It never happened. Even 
from Kazakhstan when technically offline, she spent precious time bringing 
her ­laser focus to bear, sending me significant (as in p-­value less than 0.05, 
causing me to reject the null hypothesis) support. Thank you, Laura.
Robert Rosenbalm, ­because of geeky interest in the subject area and by be­
ing what I would simply call a ­great bloke, tirelessly and again, punctually, 
reviewed chapter drafts with an editor’s eye, a pedant’s accuracy, and a friend’s 
sensitivity. His mantra for this work and the changes that ­were happening in 
my life at the time—­“You got this”—­became my comfort blanket, my mulli­
gan, and/or my incentive to keep ­going. Thank you, Robert.
The book would be nothing without the input and reflections of the prac­
ti­tion­ers whose work and energy drove the cases. Massive thanks to some of 
the most inspiring and generous educators I have ever met—­Drs. Neil Niman, 
Kevin Yee, and Gerol Petruzella and Fred Aebli and Greg Andres; I hope your 
work, even to a small degree via this book, gets you the recognition and unlim­
ited quarters you all deserve.
I mention my dad, Michael Bell, in the dedication, and again ­here, for the 
balance and background he and my mum, Jean, provided: raising my ­brother 
and me with a blend of culture, academia, sport, ­music, love of reading, and 
a carefree, insulated start to our lives. Thank you both so much.
A shout-­out to Cohort 12 at Penn, a supremely talented and intelligent 
group. Swimming in that gene pool was exhilarating, made more so by the 
unequivocal support, humo(u)r, empathy, and friendship provided along the 
way—­many thanks and egészségére.
Acknowledgments

x    Acknowledgments
Professionally, Northeastern University was a solid base, and ­people ­there 
­were ­great supporters of the doctoral work that led to this book. Thank you to 
(former dean) John LaBrie, (SVP/CEO) Philomena Mantella, and, for cheerlead­
ing and the occasional “pint,” Peter Stokes, Bryan Lackaye, and Kat Hitchcock.
Fi­nally, most importantly, thanks to my wife and ­family for allowing 
me the time and space to work on this book. Sorry I missed the occasional 
recital, show, or hiking trip, but I hope this work makes you a ­little bit proud. 
Diane, Shay, Téah, and Rhianna—­thanks for making my life so full and apol­
ogies in advance for the Gorf refurbished video arcade cabinet unit that ­will 
arrive soon to celebrate book completion day.
Stay in touch, old friends and new:
Twitter: @kbell14; blog: kevinbell@wordpress​.­com; other social media chan­
nels. Or just come in person and see the kangas outside my office at Western 
Sydney University, where I serve at the DVC-­A’s discretion.

Game On!

This page intentionally left blank

Prologue
A S H T O N  T O  A P P L E — ­T H E  B R E A K O U T  Y E A R
The year 1978 was in­ter­est­ing for many reasons. Two popes, Paul VI and John 
Paul I, died within six weeks of each other, while, just before the pontifical 
passing, both Ashton Kutcher and James Franco ­were born. The Bee Gees, col­
lectively and solo (Andy Gibb), dominated the US charts with six number-­one 
songs, but without doubt the most significant pop-­culture event of the year was 
Taito Corporation’s launch of Tomohiro Nishikado’s arcade game Space Invaders.
By way of a tribute to a popu­lar Japa­nese song of the time, Nishikado titled 
it Space Monsters before his bosses at Taito made him change it to スペースイ
ンベーダー : Supēsu Inbēdā transcribed into the Katakana used for imported 
western words in Japa­nese; Space Invaders in full-on western En­glish. One, 
now somewhat debunked, part of the mystique around the game’s popularity 
in Japan was that it caused a national shortage of the 100-­yen coin, forcing 
the government to ­triple production. Note for readers born in the last 20 to 
25 years: every­one used to go to arcades and put coins in slots in the antedi­
luvian days before PlayStations and Xboxes ­were in­ven­ted. While the 100-­yen 
shortage story is exaggerated at best, and very possibly a downright myth, the 
hype made it over to the United States, where Bally’s Midway division li­
censed the game a year ­later. By 1982 it had grossed $2 billion, a figure that 
adjusted for inflation comes close to $7.26 billion in 2016 terms. As a culturally 
similar comparison point, the highest grossing movie of the late seventies 
was a ­little flick by the name of Star Wars. George Lucas’s first of three, six, 
seven, many Star Wars adventures banked a cool $486 million. Impressive—­but 
somewhat less so when compared to the success of Space Invaders. The movie 
made less than a quarter of the revenue of the arcade game. Bear in mind that 
each game interaction generated one single quarter—­around one-­tenth of 
the transaction charge ($2.53) of ­going to the movies in the late seventies. 
Maybe it ­didn’t quite cause a shortage at the US mint, but that’s almost surely 
enough quarters to take down the Death Star.

2    Game On!
Before 1978, worldwide arcade options had been limited to pinball, pool, 
or the occasional feisty game of bingo. Pong and Breakout ­were the height of 
late-­seventies technological sophistication. Atari’s Nolan Bushnell developed 
the two-­dimensional table-­tennis paddle game Pong in 1972, while two guys 
he hired developed Breakout on a $750 bud­get. One of them, Steve Jobs, alleg­
edly pocketed extra bonuses that ­were generated by his and the other Steve’s 
(that’d be Wozniak) speed and particularly ability to code efficiently using a 
minimal number of transistor–­transistor logic (TTL) chips. It’s in­ter­est­ing to 
surmise ­whether this duplicity ever came up as they combined to found a 
com­pany (Apple, Inc.) that would eventually be valued at over $700 billion 
(the first com­pany to break that mark) in early 2015. In a serendipitous clos­
ing of this initial narrative loop, Ashton Kutcher, born in Space Invaders’ year 
zero, portrayed Jobs in the 2013 movie featuring his name. It has to be said, 
the film, Jobs, generated a fraction of the revenue of ­either Star Wars or Space 
Invaders—­perhaps by missing a key opportunity in failing to feature James 
Franco as Wozniak.
As a side note: First reported back in 2008, but still rumored to be on the 
way, Leonardo DiCaprio was primed to star as Nolan Bushnell in the movie 
Atari. According to the 2008 press release: “­There’s a lot of ground to cover: 
Bushnell co-­founded Atari in 1972 on $500, hired Steve Jobs and Steve Woz­
niak as early employees, and sold the com­pany six years ­later for $28 million 
to Warner Communication ­after inventing the Atari 2600 and the addictive 
arcade game Pong” (Hart 2008). Art imitates life.
Getting back to gamification, gameful design, and related ephemera, fast 
forward to 2014-15-16, as Star Wars once again leaps back into pop culture, 
this time as TM property of The Mouse (Disney). Members of Generation X, ­those 
born between 1964 and 1981, are gaining responsibility and autonomy. Now 
midcareer, they provide an in­ter­est­ing anthropological study of the first video 
arcade generation to come of age. They have taken on roles in society with a 
degree of self-­determination and authority, and yet they seem to maintain a 
desire to play, to make a difference, and—­dammit—­maybe even to save the 
world from the Gorfian Empire.
Narrowing to the world of academe, many of ­these Gen Xers have tenure 
now, while ­others are associate deans or vice provosts. As a result of their 
growing se­niority they have job security and perhaps even a degree of au­
tonomy to set their own agenda. Despite academic (leading to fiscal and be­
yond, by extension, to societal) success, likely enough to sate the appetites of 

Ashton to Apple    3
non-­earth-­defending mortals, many of ­these Space Invader champions, Pac 
Man wizards, Galaxian gods, or Gorfian Space Avengers express disappoint­
ment with their lot. They are saddened to see students who seem listless or 
disengaged, do the minimum to get by, and lack basic intrinsic motivation 
for their studies. ­These defenders of the galaxy / guardians of the gradebook 
won­der if they might provide some sort of spark of motivation or illustration 
of how fun it can be to achieve. It is a challenge, as it has always been, for 
older educators, let’s say mid-40s and up (Gen X), to get through to or con­
nect with their much younger, culturally shifted students. In terms of trying 
to be down with the kids, or even relating to students in their late 20s / early 
30s—­what we could call “posttraditional” (older)—­most instructors ­don’t 
risk trying to relate through ­music or pop culture. One instructor’s comment, 
“I have sweaters older than ­these kids,” provides a succinct summary of the 
challenge of finding shared experience or even shared context for ­those from 
only narrowly dif­fer­ent generations.
So, this is where we start to jump into the crossover world of game princi­
ples being applied to education and pedagogy. Is this the opportunity to 
achieve empathy through shared experience or shared experience through 
decontextualized (or recontextualized) teaching and learning? When wit­
nessing the commitment that twenty-­ to thirty-­somethings have to their 
phone screens, ­whether interacting socially or playing games, the question 
arises ­whether that commitment (the intrinsic motivation to interact, en­
gage, and spend time on task) might be somehow transported to their educa­
tion and their own ­futures. It is worth noting that this age group actually 
plays mobile games less than Gen X. They “over-­index” (do more of it than 
other age groups) in sports, health and fitness, ­music, media and entertain­
ment, lifestyle, and shopping. To put it another way, they are intrinsically 
motivated to interact more with apps and media that almost certainly have 
gameful ele­ments built in beneath a nongame interface. They are engaging 
with apps and content in general, just not as much (compared to other 
groups) with mobile games. This is worth bearing in mind when we come 
back to the ­whole educational games / gamification / gameful design ques­
tions ­later in the text.
Nonetheless, the forty-­something educators, perhaps still engaging on the 
sly with Candy Crush, Hay Day, or Flappy Bird, recall the heady cocktail of ac­
tion and challenge that maximized their engagement when young. Gaming 
while hours flew by, for as long as the quarters (or 100-­yen coins) lasted, a 

4    Game On!
high score list securing their legacy in eternity or at least ­until someone reset 
the system. As touched on above, while their motivation to enhance educa­
tion could be 100% altruistic, perhaps they are also channeling their own 
careerist angst or even boredom. Their positions are safe. They have paid 
their dues. Their first 20  years of workplace genuflection and conformity 
have bought them re­spect and the trust of their higher-­ups, allowing them to 
experiment a bit. Their motivation may be to try stuff and kick the prover­
bial tires of their ­career vehicle. The chance of their getting “hauled to the 
dean’s office” or even monitored (at least ­until something ­great—or terrible—­
happens) is minimal. The sanctity of the closed classroom door or even the 
perceived sense of self-­direction in online/hybrid classes is encouraging 
them to reinvent and try ­things in a dif­fer­ent, not-­chalk-­and-­talk, manner. 
­These instructors could certainly be accused of being self-­indulgent or even 
narcissistic. Might they be ­doing ­these ­things to make their own lives and 
­careers less formulaic? Does this constitute taking risks with their students’ 
education? Surely it would be safer to stick to the tried and trusted. Then 
again, nihilistic texts like Arum and Roska’s Academically Adrift (2011) have 
claimed that almost half of students in their sample (more than 2,300 stu­
dents at 24 institutions ­were sampled) demonstrated no significant improve­
ment in a range of skills including critical thinking, complex reasoning, and 
writing during their first two years of college. This suggests that the bar is 
effectively very low. In true Pong fashion, the ball is back in the educators’ 
court. What damage can they ­really do? Why ­shouldn’t they experiment 
with emerging theories for teaching and learning? Why not have a degree of 
fun? Why not even add uncertainty and risk to their (and their students’) 
daily lives? Why ­shouldn’t the “kids” get a win­dow on the fact that we used to 
be cool way back when? Retro is in.
Given the ubiquity of social media and easily implementable technology, 
is it so wrong for ­these instructors to simply contemplate having fun in the 
remaining 20  years of their ­careers? If it ­doesn’t ­really change stuff—no 
harm, no foul. If they happen to reinvent, disrupt, or evolve American and 
global higher education, then so be it.
Who knows, the force might just be with them—­get some quarters, quick . . . ​

C H A P T E R   O N E
A Societal Imperative
T H E  I M P E T U S  F O R  O N L I N E  E D U C A T I O N
Before we dive headlong into how gamification (or one of its sub-­branches) 
might impact higher education, the questions Where? and Why? rear their 
heads. To answer ­these questions, it is worth spending a few moments assess­
ing how we arrived at this juncture where higher education is having to con­
sider new formats for the delivery of their “product” in light of developing 
technologies and changing requirements as we near the end of the twenty-­
first ­century’s second de­cade.
­There are ­factors that have driven us to a place where many existential 
questions have emerged. Firstly, the emergence of for-­profit schools between 
2000 and 2005 seemed to bring a new “student as consumer” focus to the 
other­wise sleepy hollow of the admissions function within academia. Fol­
lowing that, the economic downturn from 2007 to 2012 caused a rash of 
conversations that focused on “value proposition” and “key differentiators” in 
places where that kind of phraseology had previously been absent. Fi­nally, the 
2012–13 massive open online course (MOOC) phenomenon drove academic 
institutions that had been still in a state of denial to accept the fact that on­
line is not ­going away as a means of delivering education and, indeed, might 
have a key societal role to play. As the millennium turned (or soon ­after), 
universities—­from smaller, fiscally challenged institutions desperate to diver­
sify revenue streams all the way up to prestigious institutions—­started, for 
one or all of ­these reasons, to question their own attitude ­toward online edu­
cation. The MOOC experiments conducted by Stanford, MIT, Harvard, and 
­others compelled many who had been hesitating to embrace any form of 
online to quickly join the party. When Teresa ­Sullivan of the University of 
­Virginia was ousted by her board in June 2012 for her incrementalism, an ar­
guably sensible lack of haste in jumping on the MOOC bandwagon or devel­
oping an alternative substantive digital strategy for her institution, many 
boards and presidents ­really began to pay attention.

6    Game On!
Despite rising costs of attendance, governmental and societal pressure has 
grown in ­favor of a more inclusive intake from all demographics into some 
form of higher education. Multiple attempts to ramp up alternate credential­
ing, with the exception of coding boot camps, have so far failed to generate 
much interest beyond the focused attention of on-­campus administrators 
looking for the next big ­thing. Despite many suggestions that ­there may be 
better ways of assessing viability of a job candidate, employers still gravitate 
­toward the safe proxy of a college degree, particularly one from an institutional 
brand or name that they recognize. Isolated examples exist, Google being the 
most quoted, of companies that go beyond or even ignore traditional qualifi­
cations, using puzzles or intelligence tests to assess candidates. Despite that, 
the ticket to the ­middle classes and the lifetime earnings boost of a college 
degree (estimated at +$900,000 for a bachelor’s degree over a high school di­
ploma and close to an additional $400,000 for a master’s degree according to 
a 2012 US Census Bureau report) remains a defined period of time in a class, 
a course, or a program that results in a walk across a stage and a handshake 
from someone wearing a large robe and, in all likelihood, a floppy hat.
If we accept the premise that opportunity and access to the means of 
procuring a diploma is a requisite of a civilized country, it becomes glaringly 
apparent that traditional campuses with limited facilities and dorm space 
cannot scale to deal with rising student numbers. The drive to increase the 
percentage of citizens completing higher education brings into play tens of 
thousands of previously unreached applicants from low socioeconomic status 
(SES) backgrounds along with first-­generation and minority aspirants. As the 
makeup of the US melting pot evolves and, as some would say, the rich get 
richer, then the increasing proportions of the target demographic coming from 
­these groups (low SES is a ­family income less than $36,000 in 2015 dollars) 
has led to some commentators asking how higher education ­will accommo­
date this “New Majority” in the coming years. Adding minority, ethnically 
diverse, and first-­generation students to the low-­SES population gets us above 
the 50% mark. ­These changing demographics sit unsteadily against a back­
drop of rising tuition costs, a sense of over-­the-­top facilities (climbing walls 
or the campus lazy river), and ­either administrative bloat or rising faculty 
salaries, depending on which side of that divide one sits on.
Neil Niman, professor and chair of economics at the Peter T. Paul School 
of Business and Economics at the University of New Hampshire, refers to 
­these challenges as the “coming perfect storm in higher education” (2014, 7). 

A Societal Imperative    7
His words align with ­those of management theorist Peter Drucker who calls 
them, more positively, “sources of opportunity,” envisioning how they can 
spur and encourage innovation. According to Drucker in his 2006 book In­
novation and Entrepreneurship, among the most common ­drivers for change in 
any sector are “changes in demographics that drive consumer be­hav­ior and 
production and distribution incongruities which arise as a result” (Soares 
2013, 1).
The impending perfect storm of opportunity in higher education is clearly 
driving consideration of the following incongruities:
1.	
The rising cost of ­doing business in higher education is coming into 
obvious conflict with the need to tailor to increased numbers of 
poorer or less well subsidized students.
2.	
The admittedly disproportionately weighted, not so very common 
but perceived as significant, investment in luxurious peripheral 
facilities while learners want for effective academic/social support 
and mentoring. As Jane Wellman, an analyst at the College ­Futures 
Foundation, put it, “the symbolism of this is worse than the real­ity 
of it” (Wood­house 2015). Louisiana State University’s recent $85 
million upgrade to its recreational facilities, including a lazy river 
­shaped like the letters LSU, is emblematic of this trend. The proj­ect 
was funded from student recreational fees (the students are charged 
$200 per person at LSU, amounting to $1,080 over a four-­year 
academic stay).
3.	
An increasing lack of student engagement and growing disenchant­
ment, manifesting itself in lower rates of course completion and 
per­sis­tence to graduation.
Despite ­these warning signs, institutions persist with the same tools, tech­
nologies, and forms of instruction that many consider antithetical to student 
interests and preferences. The com­pany Blackboard was founded in 1997 and, 
­after two de­cades has not changed its basic functionality. While the platform’s 
capabilities and features have certainly been augmented, the fundamental 
read-­post-­respond instructor strategy and training (as conducted by a major­
ity of institutions) has, if anything, ossified. ­These ambiguities provide the 
opportunity, or the ominous warning, suggesting business as usual (tradi­
tional education) has to be reviewed against emerging technologies, develop­
ing innovations, and disruptive means of delivery. In his joint address to 

8    Game On!
Congress on February 24, 2009, President Barack Obama set a national goal 
for the United States to have the highest proportion of college gradu­ates in 
the world by the year 2020. He emphasized a need to broaden the enrollment 
funnel, to get around eight million more young adults on track to attaining 
associate’s and bachelor’s degrees by 2020. What quickly became clear in the 
postgame analy­sis of ­these pronouncements was that, without some form of 
sustained attention and some dif­fer­ent means of ­doing business, ­these targets 
had no chance of being met. The kind of growth and scalability President 
Obama was speaking of caused many to ponder the next round of challenges 
layered upon ­those listed above.
Firstly, despite facilities enhancement, most residential campuses have nei­
ther the finances nor the infrastructure to significantly expand the physical 
campus. Perfunctory dorm space development lacks the tour-­guide-­friendly 
charm of the revamped dining hall and the climbing wall, and so this new 
swell of student-­customers cannot easily be accommodated on traditional resi­
dential campuses.
Secondly, many of the targeted students, being older and having more work 
experience, have families and jobs that prevent them uprooting to spend 
weeks, months, or years on a campus even if they wanted to.
Thirdly, even optimistic college completion rates mean that many of ­these 
new students are absolutely and depressingly destined to fail. As the National 
Center for Education Statistics report of 2013 relayed, the six-­year graduation 
rate for first-­time students attending full time and beginning their pursuit of 
a bachelor’s degree in fall 2005 was only 59% (2013, 202). In the at-­risk de­
mographic groups described earlier, the rate plummets. It goes without saying 
that higher education only makes a difference when participants complete 
their studies. As completion rates fall, students who have dropped out with 
accrued debt but no degree are in far worse shape than ­those who never 
started at all.
Given the above, many observers have concluded that online courses sim­
ply have to play a major role in meeting ­these societal goals of producing a 
qualified workforce. Online circumvents the dorm space issue, is less disruptive 
for older working adults/parents, and, depending on the institution’s develop­
ment model, can be more affordable for participants. From the institution’s 
perspective, online course development seems, at least at first blush, to be a 
means of diversifying an academic portfolio (allowing them to grow sustain­
ably or at least not atrophy) without the need for extensions to physical 

A Societal Imperative    9
facilities. A slightly wet blanket on this other­wise optimistic outlook is the 
fact that online courses tend to retain even more poorly in comparison to 
traditional face-­to-­face classes, particularly with inexperienced or fragile 
learners. A five-­year study reviewing 51,000 students conducted by the Com­
munity College Research Center at Teachers College, Columbia University in 
2011 found that 8% fewer students persisted in online courses to the end of 
their studies compared to ­those who persisted in traditional (face-­to-­face) 
courses. Despite this obvious need for caution, the societal goal of equity and 
increased access still leads many to conclude that online is the only ­viable 
option for many non-­traditional students. Furthermore, it seems worthwhile 
to counteract the current two-­tiered system, where the wealthy benefit from 
a comprehensive learning experience on a traditional campus leaving the 
disenfranchised to suffer through dated pedagogy and poor use of technol­
ogy online. With social media becoming an omnipresent part of most stu­
dents’ lives, with the gameful design of apps like FourSquare and the rise of 
wearable technology like the Fitbit activity tracker (now mandated by Tulsa’s 
Oral Roberts University of all its students), questions are increasingly being 
asked as to the logic and efficacy of persevering with outdated tools and jaded 
pedagogy for this engagement-­hungry target audience. Backing up for a sec­
ond, Jane McGonigal, game designer and author, in her text Real­ity Is Broken: 
Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World described how 
gaming tends to make ­people more optimistic and helps them develop a 
mindset that results in their being less likely to give up when, initially, failing 
at a challenge. She uses examples of her own convalescence from a head in­
jury and how she defeated the challenges posed by her slow recuperation. 
Being more optimistic and less likely to give up sound like princi­ples that could 
be quite excellent in an academic environment.
James Paul Gee, one of the earliest advocates of the potential gaming-­
education nexus, writes in his seminal 2003 text, What Video Games Have To 
Teach Us about Learning and Literacy (in what sounds like a moment of ex­
treme irritation), that “better theories of learning are embedded in the video 
games ­children in elementary and particularly in high school play than in 
the schools they attend” (7).
He continues, “The theory of learning in good video games fits better with 
the modern, high-­tech, global world of ­today’s ­children and teen­agers live in 
than do the theories (and practices) of learning that they see in school.” Gee 
goes on to explain a further advantage of video games is that they provide 

10    Game On!
integrated learning through contextualized interaction in what is, in fact, a 
“material, social and cultural world.” This resonates for the contingency of tra­
ditional academics who are wedded to the internships or co-op experiences that 
are typically near impossible for the new-­majority student to experience. 
Through use of contexts and “material, social and cultural worlds,” can we cre­
ate gameful experiences that provide opportunity for learning in contexts 
that are applicable to the workplace and the next stages of life in society?
The New Majority and the (Nuanced) New Agenda
Just as societal demographic changes ­were beginning to manifest in the 
student body, a further change, driven by philanthropic foundations, has 
come into play—­that of asking new questions to institutions and their pen­
chant for business as usual. Funders like The Bill and Melinda Gates Foun­
dation and the Davis Educational Foundation have shifted their focus from 
an access agenda (2010–2013), which encouraged institutions to increase 
opportunity for all to get into further education, to the roughly 2014–16 
completion agenda of making sure that as many entering students as pos­si­
ble complete their studies. This has accentuated the need for institutions not 
only to reduce costs and encourage diversity but also to make education, for 
their enrolled students, as “sticky” or close-­to-­addictive as pos­si­ble. This 
institutionally acknowledges the sentiment that access for students of any 
stripe is futile, even counterproductive, if they merely start and then ­don’t 
complete their studies. It is a weak point of the current higher education 
system that, in most cases, an accumulation of 110 credit hours (10 shy of a 
bachelor’s degree at many institutions) results in precisely zero qualifica­
tions with marketable value. This alignment of the access/completion chal­
lenge wedded to the new majority students, who must be supported while 
lacking many of the intrinsic motivators that we typically take for granted 
(supportive families, a history of higher education, affordability in some 
shape or form), further supports the drive to disrupt and try something dif­
fer­ent. In the language of many funding opportunities, the evolving target 
demographic is underrepresented minorities (URM). This new designation 
in its entirety includes:
•	
minority students whose race/ethnicity is African American, American 
Indian / Alaska Native, Hispanic/Latino, or Native Hawaiian / Pacific 
Islander;

A Societal Imperative    11
•	
students from low income or low socioeconomic status whose 
combined parental income is less than or equal to $36,000;
•	
first-­generation college attendees whose highest parental education 
level is a high school diploma or less; and
•	
­women in science, technology, engineering, and mathe­matics 
(STEM) fields, given their underrepre­sen­ta­tion in ­those industries.
The STEM example actually provides one of the clearest illustrations of 
the challenges for ­these new students and the institutions belatedly trying to 
support them. A 2014 Condition of STEM report from the testing com­pany 
ACT showed that while 59% of mainstream majority students are deemed 
college-­ready in science, only 25% of the underserved are deemed similarly 
ready. In real­ity, the situation is actually much worse. The bulleted character­
istics listed above have been shown to have a cumulative negative effect when 
combined. In other words, students who check two of the risk boxes (for ex­
ample, low SES and first generation, or minority and low SES) score 20% lower 
on benchmark tests than ­those with only one risk ­factor. Students who meet 
all three of ­these risk criteria score 34% lower, producing the sobering statis­
tic that fewer than 16.5% of first-­generation, minority students from a low-­
SES background are deemed college-­ready for the study of science.
As the clock begins to run down on the second de­cade of the millennium, a 
majority of states are seeing rising numbers of students from backgrounds with 
significant risk ­factors. Even more challenging, their population comprises stu­
dents combining multiple risk ­factors. Loading the dice even further from a 
motivational perspective, ­these populations frequently have one reason to 
study: the resolute and genuine attempt to better themselves against multiple 
extremely stressful disincentives. ­These disincentives may include two or 
more jobs, a ­family to care for, the stress of challenging circumstances, or even 
the peer pressure from their own community not to persist. Even just taking 
the figure above indicating likely completion rates as a base, fewer than one in 
seven is likely to complete their studies. As higher education has started to 
ponder ­whether alternative means of credentialing or disruptive models might 
be feasible, co-­author of The Innovative University, Clayton Christensen, discuss­
ing emerging models that might facilitate URM access and perhaps success, 
clarifies that students from ­these backgrounds are not making se­lections that 
come down to preferences between Harvard, Yale, or Stanford. ­These students 
are ­going to be predominantly enrolled in online courses so that they can fit in 

12    Game On!
their studies between jobs or ­after their kids are down for the night. As Chris­
tensen puts it, “The next option is nothing.”
From an instructor’s perspective, this new student demographic shift 
pres­ents new and unique challenges and typically ones they have not been 
trained to cope with. In addressing ­these challenges with no (or minimal) 
extra resources and support, an instructor most likely has one shot to engage 
­these fragile learners and to get them through. Given the challenges students 
from URM backgrounds face, the costs they incur, and the logistical load 
they carry, if they fail, they typically do not (or cannot) come back. The vast 
majority of faculty, already with increasing demands on their time and skill-­
set, having added instructional design, technical troubleshooting, and the 
need to accommodate increased numbers of students with specific learning 
challenges, are now being asked to step up further to retain ­these at-­risk stu­
dents by any means necessary. The main, perhaps the only, consolation of this 
frankly depressing background is that in a seemingly hopeless situation ­every 
possibility is worth exploring. Perhaps this even includes trying to make games 
out of learning.
James Paul Gee, referenced earlier, was one of the pioneers in aligning 
specific aspects of teaching and learning with key features of successful video 
games. In addition, he recognized that ­these aspects or ele­ments might well 
be applied to help engage ­those who, at the time of his writing, ­were referred 
to as fragile learners (particularly first-­generation students). He references 
three ele­ments addressed by game designers from which he feels educators 
could learn. They seem somewhat obvious, but they provide a solid initial 
framework when contemplating next steps:
1.	
The learner must be enticed to try, even if he or she already has good 
grounds to be afraid to try.
2.	
The learner must be enticed to put in lots of effort even if he or she 
begins with ­little motivation to do so.
3.	
The learner must achieve some meaningful success when he or she has 
expended ­these efforts.
Gee’s working theory was that some barriers for learning might be sur­
mountable if students can reach a state of engagement, being somehow hooked 
and committed, at least ­until they reach a level of sophistication where the 
subject ­matter itself becomes motivating. Unlike many second-­, third-­ or even 
fourth-­generation students fortunate enough to access higher education from 

A Societal Imperative    13
middle-­class backgrounds (or in my case, ­because I grew up in the United 
Kingdom, where higher education in the mid-­to-­late 1980s was basically 
­free), emerging URM populations typically do not have the intrinsic motiva­
tors or the grit that comes of a statement like “I always knew I wanted to 
attend Stanford” or even “I come from a long line of ­lawyers” (substitute 
­doctors/engineers/accountants). Gee’s fragile (or URM, in the modern no­
menclature) students—­the first to venture on this high-­risk of failure path—­
will rarely, if ever, be overheard stating, “My mum was a Husky (or a Cardinal 
or Panther—­even a Terrier) so I’m ­going to be a (Husky/Cardinal/Panther/
Terrier). In the absence of ­these kinds of intrinsic motivators, the need to be 
encouraged and supported is accentuated. The possibility of meaningfully 
endorsing and strengthening, even by artificial constructs, their commit­
ment might just get them over the hump and to a place where they feel that 
they “belong,” from where they have a fair chance at per­sis­tence and ulti­
mately success.
Student ser­vices such as advising and financial aid are valuable and neces­
sary tools in support of all students. From the instructor’s perspective, getting 
back to the aging Space Avenger, the idea of trying to get students engaged by 
using game experiences is germinating. If Space Invaders could, in a galaxy 
and a time not that far, far away, get them out of bed and to the video arcade, 
then might it get and keep students in their classrooms, or online and engaged? 
Even the younger set of faculty, for whom the home-­console world facilitated 
a feet-up, stay-­at-­home philosophy, ­were still saving the world while caught 
up in the game’s narrative, rules, and challenges and still focused and seek­
ing higher levels. Do games or (I’m ­going to shift at this point to) gameful 
design perhaps provide a means of getting con­temporary students over the 
academic fear barrier, past the “I ­can’t do this” or “Why did I even try?” mind­
set to participating with reduced fear of failure (a gameful ele­ment), feeling a 
sense of progression or journey (another gameful ele­ment), and getting back 
to ­either playing or feeling playful in class? In the most ambitious scenario, 
activities are developed where students get close or closer to what is termed 
a flow state, the Holy Grail scenario where engagement and challenge inter­
sect. When experiencing flow, also known as being “in the zone,” the jour­
ney of intriguing, well-­structured involvement is so immersive and vital 
that it produces a sense of time flowing by. Imagine the phrase, “Wow! I 
spent X hours ­doing that.” Flow state is often idealized in stories of elite 
sportsmen and athletes but also can be experienced by more sedentary puz­

14    Game On!
zle solvers and even, ­here’s the hope, engaged students when activities are 
well structured and challenging. See also Invaders (Space), Sudoku, Warcraft 
(World of), marathon ­running (when fit) and, our goal, well-­designed learn­
ing challenges.
Most US instructors, as a subset of most educators on the planet, fall a 
­little short of the resources, particularly fiscal, needed to build flamboyant 
multimedia simulations or complex games. They have neither the bud­get nor 
the programming support or in-­kind technical team at their disposal. For 
most in the rewarding (just not financially so) world of academia, immersive 
simulations of highly programmed, highly sexy and/or violent shoot-­em-up 
games are not on the agenda. Having established that ­these obvious hooks of 
eye candy and gore are off the ­table, we, as educators, have to perhaps get 
more psychological and analytical to see if we can engender a picture of en­
gagement from quite a limited palette. In some ways, it may even be a bless­
ing to not have the million-­dollar multimedia bud­get. Where big bud­gets are 
blown on complex, interactive “educational games” the inevitable outcomes 
are: (a) the games are not very educational, (b) the education is not actually 
much fun, and (c) the inability to edit or “tweak” the simulations gives them 
a very limited shelf life.
Some faculty, typically but not exclusively ­those with some technical 
background, are aware of ­these concerns and are looking creatively at plug-­
and-­play social/low-­threshold technologies and asking themselves if ­there 
might be a way to bootstrap the development or piecing together of engaging 
learning resources. Cobbling together low-­tech, ­simple activities featuring 
quaintly ­simple hooks and motivators that make participation less of a chore, 
along with this goal of incrementally leveling the playing field for all stu­
dents, we get back to the question, soon to be ­really explored, as to ­whether 
­these mid-­forty-­somethings, the well-­ intentioned Space Invader geeks (nerds 
before the word existed) might be able to actually relate to and hence engage 
in this much more diverse, much more fragile, learner community.
Some of us clearly think it worth a try.
Engagement/Time on Task
The most ­viable means of improving student course outcomes, in turn cor­
relating with increased course completion, is to increase student engagement 
or time on task. George Kuh, one of the more prominent experts in the area 
of student retention, looked at how student engagement increases when stu­

A Societal Imperative    15
dents have a background in, or know more about, a subject. He references the 
value of practice, feedback, and collaborative prob­lem solving. Student mo­
mentum tends to build, he posits, as they come to understand a subject on a 
deeper level and become more motivated to continue to learn and further 
explore. The primary challenge, and biggest potential, it seems, for gameful 
design is in this minefield between the faltering, ner­vous baby steps of a new 
learner (especially a new URM learner) and a student’s more confident strides 
a class or two into a program, where she or he ­will likely show the more in­
formed engagement patterns of a burgeoning subject ­matter expert.
Play/Games
Given this alignment of impetuses and the logical notion to give it a go 
­because we have nothing to lose, play, in the most general sense of the word, is 
steadily entering our face-­to-­face and virtual classrooms. The arcade game 
instructors are playing with intrinsic motivators that they experienced as first 
generation gamers in the late seventies and early eighties. Some institutions, 
such as Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU) and Arizona State Uni­
versity (ASU) are exploring competency-­based models that can reduce costs in 
online courses through automation of feedback and support. ­These models 
employ technology to help unbundle the traditional faculty role and con­
sciously support student desire for immediate, informed feedback (as they 
would get from, say, a game). The economies of scale, as well as the automa­
tion and efficiency of ­these models, provide the potential for institutions to 
offer online courses at significantly lower tuition rates, thus extending access 
to still larger numbers of underserved and low-­SES populations. In a rare pos­
itive reinforcement loop, the large numbers of ­these students attracted by 
slick and professional marketing, no longer the exclusive purview of the for-­
profits, allows institutions at scale (like SNHU in the national market) to re­
duce incremental course delivery per student costs to close to zero. ­There is 
the concern that ­these kinds of semiautomated courses, termed competency-­
based education (CBE), with their heavier reliance on student self-­directed 
study and automated feedback, might exacerbate the low completion rate is­
sue. Given the likelihood that this type of low-­tuition disrupted model ­will 
attract fragile learners often lacking in confidence, and the stated aim to this 
effect of SNHU president Dr. Paul LeBlanc (a Clayton Christensen devotee), 
intrinsic motivators and experience and attrition could indeed be a big prob­
lem. LeBlanc and his team (disclaimer: I was a founding member of the 

16    Game On!
original SNHU Innovation Lab), refusing to shy from the market and genuinely 
aiming to support and enhance the lives and livelihoods of URM, low-­SES, 
and minority populations, have looked at any and all means of encouraging 
­these learners. As SNHU’s Executive Director for College for Amer­i­ca, Kris 
Clerkin, stated in a personal interview:
We’ve already incorporated ele­ments of this [gamification] into the new User Inter­
face (UI). We backed off a grant involving some quite complex games, but gamifica­
tion is definitely on the radar—we think ­there are lots of ­things we could do. ­There 
are ­simple ­things we are already incorporating—­the pro­gress meter, mea­sures of 
activity where we mea­sure every­thing students are ­doing in the environment that 
we reward them for. Basically, mea­sures of engagement we can reward them for, ­we’re 
moving ­towards mobile, part of that is just alerts when vari­ous ­things happen; if 
­they’re off track or need encouragement, when students get their first “not yet” for 
a competency. We feel that ­we’ve just started down this path—­we’re just starting 
and we feel that ­there’s a lot we can still do.
Technologies
In 2010, LeAnne H. Rutherford of the University of Minnesota described the 
potential of interactive technologies to encourage students to engage with 
course materials and take an active role in learning (Deneen 2010). This, she 
demonstrated, led to elevated retention of core course concepts and under­
standing. The 2010 US Department of Education report Evaluation of Evidence-­
Based Practices in Online Learning also marked time on task (or engagement 
with the materials) as the key determinant affecting student success. Success, 
in this case, was mea­sured as course completion in hybrid and online classes. 
It certainly seems a reasonable assertion that higher engagement should be 
pos­si­ble when we recall how stupidly engaging something as ­simple as Pong 
was. A perfunctory learning management system (LMS) in 2015 had the capac­
ity to store the data of 10,000 Space Invaders machines of the basic 1978 vari­
ety. “Spacies” (1978 UK slang) was fun despite pixelated graphics and limited 
interactivity. It was fun ­because it was a well-­thought-­out game. The premise 
was immediately graspable (more gameful design hints), and the controls 
­were usable ­after milliseconds of thought or observation of the greasy-­headed 
lad in the line before you. The feedback of “BOOM, ­you’re dead—­the Earth 
is invaded,” was instant and unambiguous, while the reward, “YOU SAVED 
THE EARTH” (at least ­until the next attack wave), was tangible. You had 

A Societal Imperative    17
collaboration (“Go on, Jimmy, shoot the bonus spaceship at the top”), you 
had competition (leaderboard top score: “KB-­rools,” 97,452 points), and you 
had the need for concentration. The Space Invaders game was, and this state­
ment is not as redundant as it sounds, gamefully designed. Basic tenets ­were 
in place, ele­ments that have been in place in good games, good sports, and 
good books since time immemorial. The application of ­these tenets to good 
education is, in many ways, long overdue.
If we accept the premise that online (to say nothing of traditional educa­
tion) is not ­going far enough to engage and support learners, particularly the 
new mix of fragile, ner­vous, inexperienced, and underprepared learners, 
then how should we proceed? We’ve confirmed that practically no one has 
World of Warcraft money or that kind of development time ($63 million and 
4.5 years, if ­you’re wondering). Throw in marketing bud­gets for major game 
developers or development proj­ects and you are well over a quarter of a bil­
lion (with a b) dollars. My sense is that as educators we are unlikely to win in 
a full-on simulation/interactive/full-­narrative/ first-­person real­ity game head 
to head with ­these competitors. Nor should we try.
So, what is an impoverished educator to do? As prac­ti­tion­ers, administra­
tors and faculty, despite the bud­get envy, surely we should be exploring all 
ave­nues that may lead to even incremental support of student engagement 
and academic success. Gameful design takes ele­ments of what makes games, 
or other forms of engagement, intriguing, boils them down to a fundamental 
level, and then applies them to educational experiences. Sensible prac­ti­tion­ers 
reflect and build on ­things that good instructors do as second nature. They 
challenge their students, they provide prompt and supportive feedback, they 
try to reduce students’ fear of failure, and they encourage cooperation or 
teamwork. ­These are all gameful design princi­ples.
While some instructors make the case for tangible, replicable game ele­ments 
(implementing leaderboards, rewards, badges, and levels in their courses), 
other more pedantic theorists consider ­these ele­ments to be extrinsic to the 
­actual game experience as they chase the goal of more consistently valuable 
and power­ful intrinsic motivators.
­There are no ­simple right answers, but the flip side of that is ­there are no 
­really wrong answers ­either. Millennial students tend to deeply appreciate 
and be supportive of any efforts to meet and engage them. While almost 
every­one from the Gen X population is sure that Millennials are playing games 
(usually on their phones) ALL the time, they ­aren’t. They are disproportionately 

18    Game On!
engaging with gamefully designed apps and actually play online games less 
than we do (that is, if ­you’re 30–45). If ­you’re not, then enjoy youth, as it 
fades quickly—­right around 39 and a half.
In online courses most students have experienced what ­we’ll call read-­
post-­respond (perfunctory) discussion boards fueled by horrible Power­Point 
slides and unreadable (on screen) PDFs. They are very ­eager, even borderline 
desperate, to try anything as an alternative. Remember that retro, basic-­is-­cool, 
and even drafty creative ideas can fly. Napkin sketches are what set Steve Jobs, 
Bill Gates, and (prob­ably) Mark Zuckerberg on their way. The song “Louie 
Louie” was written by Richard Berry on toilet paper in a club’s men’s room. 
Back as far as 1814 at Chesapeake Bay, Francis Scott Key wrote the lyr­ics to 
“The Star-­Spangled Banner” on the back of a letter, having seen the flag still 
­there “by the dawn’s early light.”
Unlike set texts and didactic lecturing, online courses provide a continuing 
illustration of what works and what ­doesn’t via the footprints that student 
participants make through the system. As analytics become more central to 
institutions’ strategic work, gameful redesign of coursework provides a won­
derful opportunity to meet students where they are at, especially supporting 
­those whose confidence and engagement are unfairly low. As one of my cases 
states, it can even provide a way to de­moc­ra­tize participation. In a good 
game, every­one participates, not just the smart, confident students. Gamifi­
cation or gameful design, when well done, has the effect of personalizing the 
student experience. It puts the student at the center of learning. I have heard 
this referred to as a “Copernican revolution”: the student who was formerly 
orbiting at a distance around a dazzling and worrying mass of materials is 
now at the center of the universe, with smaller sets of materials and options 
orbiting around them. This mirrors what has happened with traditional TV 
scheduling being supplanted by on-­demand. We are no longer beholden to 
receiving content or entertainment solely on the networks’ terms. Given the 
potential for commercial-­free binge watching (with personal preference rang­
ing from one episode a month to near-­OCD viewing patterns, watching three 
screens at once), the scheduling has become viewer-­centric. As C. Scott Rigby 
describes, this centrality, or this notion of “me being in control,” accentuates 
the ability to meet the core psychological needs of mastery, autonomy and 
relatedness. Mastery energizes and motivates (Ryan and Deci 2000), auton­
omy provides choice and freedom from control, and relatedness ensures that 
we feel that we ­matter to ourselves and to ­others (Rigby 2014). Let’s just ac­

A Societal Imperative    19
cept that education is suffering from a significant amount of deferred main­
tenance. While we should certainly be building on inherent strengths, we 
should also be exploring the Copernican revolution and what it means to our 
instruction. We should try putting the student at the center of their studies, 
encouraging their autonomy and choice, and facilitating their engagement 
through narrative, competition, cooperation, or challenge. As Niman, who 
you ­will meet again in his brilliant case study, stated, “We have not engaged 
students in a way that has made their educational experience a personal one 
with demonstrable benefits and a clear rationale for how it is ­going to make 
them more successful.”
So put on your game face, and ­we’ll see what we can do to fix that in the 
coming chapters.

C H A P T E R  T W O
How Did We Get ­Here?
T H E  M A T U R A T I O N  O F  O N L I N E  E D U C A T I O N
Before diving headlong into practitioner cases, it is worth spending some 
time understanding the state of online course development and deployment 
in higher education. As one of the few to have had a job title that actually 
included both ­those terms, I feel I have to somehow justify a position I held 
for almost exactly four years (2012–2016): executive director of curriculum 
development and deployment of Northeastern University’s College of Profes­
sional Studies.
The massive open online course (MOOC) explosion of 2012 brought a tsu­
nami of attention to online instruction of all va­ri­e­ties. Discussions about 
online education fi­nally and firmly landed in the worlds of the “Ivies” and 
highly ranked research universities. While initial massive interest was tem­
pered by findings that MOOC completion rates appeared to be extremely low 
(substantially lower than for other forms of online and traditional education) 
for many, MOOCs provided a kind of validity to online education that had, 
to that point, been lacking. Prior to that time, online environments had been 
(a) inaccessible without tuition (the unknown fueled suspicion) and (b) cham­
pioned almost exclusively by for-­profits, lower-­ranked institutions, and com­
munity colleges. Before 2010, most institutions dabbling in online had been 
compelled to diversify revenue streams ­because other aspects of their cam­
puses ­either ­were not working or could not scale. The assumed “lack of 
quality” argument so often proffered by the more elite institutions was 
thrown into doubt by the fact that Harvard, MIT, and Stanford ­were now get­
ting their feet wet with online offerings. The lure of the rock star experience 
(with tens of thousands of students) appealed to egos and consequently insti­
tutions, and faculty that had never previously considered delivering any­
thing online suddenly showed interest in mounting what appeared to be a 
momentum-­gathering bandwagon. My own experience was that faculty who 
previously had no interest now suddenly perked up. They wondered why my 

How Did We Get ­Here?    21
team, with our bud­get for course development right around 10% of that be­
ing spent on MOOCs, ­didn’t feature such polished multimedia, why we still 
had to launch from a learning management system where ­things like grades 
­were being kept FERPA-­proof (that is, adhering to the privacy requirements of 
the ­Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act), and why, ultimately, they 
­couldn’t engage and maintain a student audience with minimal (MOOC-­
like) faculty presence, feedback, and encouragement. MOOCs shifted quickly 
from a blessing to a curse and then, soon ­after, to an irrelevance as we con­
tinued trying to build 15-­week, participation-­focused, online experiential (I 
know, somewhat oxymoronic) courseware and content. My takeaway from 
where we are at with re­spect to the MOOC phenomenon:
•	
As ­we’ve been through the hype and the post-­hype letdown, now is 
the time to coldly evaluate what is/was ­great about the MOOC 
concept and what ­else is out ­there (technology-­ and pedagogy-­wise) 
that could be added to the mix to meet institutional goals.
•	
MOOCs, at least originally, ­were not tasked with effectively addressing 
community building, secure assessment, or per­sis­tence/completion.
•	
­There are means to meld ele­ments of MOOCs with work that has 
been done over the last 15–20 years by instructional designers and 
innovators in the field. It should not be an either-or situation.
•	
Administrators, developers, and faculty should pay attention to the 
target audience for their classes (demographic, prior exposure to 
higher education successes/failures, ­etc.) when we decide on institu­
tional ­strategy.
•	
Fragile/post-­traditional learners ­will not persist in a MOOC environ­
ment without comprehensive support and a boatload of intrinsic 
motivation addressed as part of the course build. “We can scale 
content; we ­can’t scale encouragement” (Siemens 2011a).
The primary takeaway lesson is that for the twenty-­first-­century student 
hooked on social media, where instant “likes” equate to instant gratification, 
their penchant for immediate feedback represents a growing challenge for 
purveyors of online education. The obvious solution to this, increasing faculty 
presence, is not ­viable at most institutions, while the near-­universal desire to 
scale and cater to larger populations exacerbates the challenge. Although 
MOOCs shone a light on this disconnect, the sense that demand for contact 
and engagement had long outstripped the faculty supply of the same was an 

22    Game On!
issue well known to students and administrators in “traditional” online edu­
cation for a number of years. From full-­time faculty members with multiple 
concurrent duties to adjuncts teaching multiple sections, most find it hard to 
maintain a ­viable and supportive presence through web-­based systems be­
tween classes. At institutions like Western Governors University and South­
ern New Hampshire University, ­either a more pliant governance system or, in 
the latter case, focused and resolute leadership has resulted in what has been 
called an unbundling of the faculty role, to allow a significant proportion of 
­these high-­touch students’ needs to be served by (candidly, more affordable) 
alternate mentors, advisors, or graders.
As differentiated models of online education have propagated, from MOOCs 
through adaptive to self-­directed courses and beyond, many campuses have 
supported the establishment of new positions. ­These new staff members typi­
cally have to find the ­middle ground between ambitious administrators and 
experienced, sometimes change-­resistant faculty.
Instructional Design
The concept of instructional design developed primarily from the World 
War II need to assess learners’ abilities to succeed in military training pro­
grams. Bloom’s Taxonomy (1956) articulated a basic set of terminology that 
evolved through the work of Skinner (1971) and ­others, developing into the 
lexicon and core concepts of the profession that persist to the pres­ent day. 
With the development of online training, courseware, and programs of 
study, the princi­ples transitioned and developed to the degree that the ma­
jority of current-­day instructional design prac­ti­tion­ers are involved in the 
development of online learning. In the 1980s and 1990s, personal comput­
ers, games, and simulations started to appear, and the web, with its use of 
hyperlinks and digital media, became recognized as having a role to play in 
the field of e-­learning. The ability to quickly locate and link to online re­
sources enhanced the value of educational tools and added to the complexi­
ties of the online product. As technologies evolved, the potential of online 
learning for corporate (and then academic) purposes became increasingly 
apparent. With resources and formats becoming more varied and nuanced, 
prac­ti­tion­ers started to collect and monitor metrics in attempts to deter­
mine which ­factors ­were integral to the design of engaging courses. Foci 
evolved from initial basic course usability and navigation, through target 
audience fluency in online terminologies, to considering level of challenge 

How Did We Get ­Here?    23
(difficulty) of learning content. This combining of emerging concepts like 
grit and self-­efficacy proved to be an impor­tant consideration for student 
success.
The developing complexity and recognition of a key skill set typically 
missing from campuses prior to the last de­cade or so has made the instructional 
design skill set quite sought ­after and marketable. In 2014, the website Recruiter​
.­com rated the job of instructional designer as “new and emerging,” project­
ing rapid growth with the 2010 employment of 128,780 expected to grow to 
165,000 in 2018 (a 3.5% annual rate of growth). Along with, and concurrent 
to, this hockey stick upturn as a general ­career choice, in larger institutions 
the role has diversified into more specialized subcategories. ­These include 
production specialists (with a focus on materials development), learning architects 
(honed on tenets of cognitive science and pedagogy), online curriculum/assess­
ment specialists (correlating promised outcomes and objectives with ­actual 
materials, activities, and summative assessments), graphic/multimedia support, 
and LMS specialists charged with making sure all the component parts speak 
to each other.
The increasing complexity of available technologies, such as discussion 
boards, audio threads, and multimedia ele­ments, to create personalized and 
adaptive systems has further emphasized the need for effective instructional 
design. Newer iterations of the LMS have made the basic posting and hosting 
of materials quite ­simple so that the majority of faculty can manage them­
selves ­after a brief training or orientation, thus freeing up the instructional 
designers for more complex and nuanced work.
The early instructional designer’s role, sometimes considered more of an 
educational technology support role, assisted the experienced classroom in­
structor in ­doing what­ever he or she felt might capture face-­to-­face presence 
best. The efforts clearly had limitations, for when instructors try faithfully 
to transfer their face-­to-­face instruction directly to an online format, often 
classroom capture via streaming video, they miss opportunities to make bet­
ter use of the online environment. In most progressive institutions, instruc­
tional designers have been able to move past perfunctory technical (help 
desk) support of academics to more appropriate discussions of online peda­
gogy, assessment, and best practices for online instruction. Illustrations of 
this shift from a focus on technical functionality (what can I do with the 
LMS?) to better pedagogy (how can I teach, as well or better, using the LMS 
and related tools?) are seen in the transitions from early attempts to simply 

24    Game On!
replicating live classroom experiences to using better practices for content 
formatting. Early efforts included capturing of hour(s)-­long lectures by video. 
Didactic lecturing is tough to stay with in person; online, as evidence now 
shows, it is pretty much unwatchable, with viewer attention long gone by the 
six-­ or seven-­minute mark, as figure 1 shows. Well-­structured content in con­
temporary online courses is referred to as “chunked”—­sized (based on ac­
crued evidence of what works) so that the consumer—­student—­can grasp a 
concept before he or she is asked to go and do something with the knowledge. 
The emphasis in ­later iterations also shifted to the challenges of building 
community online, increasing engagement, and constructing more easily re­
tained content.
Wallace “Wally” Boston, CEO of American Public Education, Inc., notes that 
his instructors and instructional designers ­don’t make video or audio files of 
more than four minutes (2014). As research and the trend-­monitor have come 
around to emphasis on what is variably called “student-­centered learning” 
(SCL), “active learning,” and “the learner at the center,” the shift away from the 
lecture, particularly in the online environment, has gathered steam.
7
Certiﬁcate-earning students
All other students
6
5
4
3
Median time spent watching video (minutes)
2
1
0
0–3 mins.
3–6 mins.
6–9 mins.
9–12 mins.
Videos grouped by length
12–15 mins.
15–40 mins.
Figure 1. edX video engagement findings, 2013. Analy­sis by Philip Guo, pg@cs​.­rochester​
.­edu​.­

How Did We Get ­Here?    25
The humility needed for some instructors to lean on expertise provided by 
(usually) younger and (predominantly) female staff has constituted a culture 
shift at many institutions. Several observers have reflected on the challenge 
for the traditional instructor, who assumes mastery of both teaching and 
instructional design despite having ­little to no training in ­either of ­these 
fields. Dr. Richard Clark of the University of Southern California refers to the 
“expert blind spot,” articulating the challenge for high-­level experts (faculty) 
to remember the small steps that all novices, including themselves, needed 
when they first approached concepts as beginning learners. The information 
that is transmitted to the student should be both suitably leveled (appropriate 
level of challenge) and suitably sized, or chunked, to allow steady, more in­
cremental pro­gress in learning. M. David Merrill’s work on component dis­
play theory and ­mental models in human-­computer interaction described 
the need to deconstruct established instruction habits and consciously de­
sign to leverage the potential of electronic communications media generally 
and online instruction specifically (Carroll & Olson 1988; Merrill 1983).
Development Models
As we crest the many challenges in delivering effective, pedagogically robust 
teaching and learning, both in a classroom and at a distance, further possi­
bilities and further challenges are opening up. At most institutions, along with 
online growth has come the realization that to develop and deliver effective 
online courses that encourage engagement, ­there must be further investment 
in design expertise. Some institutions have moved to external vendors that 
have taken on the cost of course development, marketing, and many other 
risks of launching courses. ­These vendors, Embanet and Everspring among 
them, look to negotiate multiyear revenue shares of up to 80% of tuition in­
come. Other institutions have insourced to leverage institutional focus by 
committing faculty to work alongside instructional designers, online pedagogy 
experts, and technologists. The advantage to an institution with in-­house 
development is that once materials and technology have been developed, 
online instruction becomes scalable with incremental costs per learner and 
potentially large profits.
For instructional designers and ­those in related fields, the search is on to 
implement princi­ples that ­will encourage fragile online populations to stay 
engaged. The societal impetus to engage larger numbers of learners with 
limited prior academic success is a real and substantial challenge for all in 

26    Game On!
academia. Having previously addressed the low-­hanging fruits of design con­
cepts that support users on the web (generally usability, content architecture, 
and accessibility), attention is shifting to ele­ments that they might weave 
into instructor-­provided content. This may draw on cognitive science, adaptive 
learning, learning analytics, and gamification, which I use ­here intentionally 
as the umbrella term ­under which a Monty Python–­esque range of subgenres 
exist (see “­People’s Front of Judea” / “Judean ­People’s Front”). An embrace of 
the term and the concept of gamification at least provides inspiration for de­
sign teams to move beyond basic course design and encourage creativity and 
experimentation with some of ­these newer concepts. As some prac­ti­tion­ers 
have described, it is time to move on to wherever we should be now. If early 
HTML was online 1.0 and the LMS with basic plugins was 2.0, then surely it’s 
time to see what constitutes 3.0. Research shows that courses centered on 
discussion boards that are structured to support requirements for students to 
simply read, post, and respond may, in fact, limit active learning (Moorhead, 
Colburn, Edwards, & Erwin 2013).
Gamification melds and unifies many of the best practices and potentials 
of other pedagogical approaches, as ­will become apparent in the forthcoming 
chapters. Karl Kapp simply defines gamification as “the use of game mechan­
ics to make learning and instruction more fun” and expounds on this defini­
tion to describe the concept more viscerally. “Think of the engaging ele­ments 
of why ­people play games—­for the sense of achievement, immediate feed­
back, feeling of accomplishment, and success of striving against a challenge 
and overcoming it” (Kapp 2012, xxi–­xxii). He further describes gamification 
as “motivation to succeed” with the “reduced sting of failure.”
When considering the potential of online classes to increase access for 
underserved communities, the “post-­traditional” learners that Louis Soares, 
vice president of the Center for Policy Research and Strategy at the American 
Council of Education, describes in Post-­Traditional Learners and the Transfor­
mation of Postsecondary Education (2013) must not be neglected. Soares pre­
dicts that ­these students ­will have disproportionate participation in online 
(a.k.a. affordable) courses. Kathryn Ecclestone, professor of postcompulsory 
education at the Westminster Institute of Education, worries that ­these frag­
ile learners need specialized, multifaceted care of their emotional well-­being 
and the kind of encouragement and support that are not feasible in large-­
scale online classes (2008). Into this conundrum, just perhaps, steps some of 
the work and findings of early gameful designers.

How Did We Get ­Here?    27
If a concept such as gamification has the potential to affect student en­
gagement positively through practitioner feedback, it could benefit the students 
who strug­gle most with learning and per­sis­tence in online education. It is 
certainly worth exploring gamification and its constituent parts to see ­whether 
­these early practitioner efforts merit further, more mea­sured, experimenta­
tion. Although ­there are many ways to approach gamified courses in terms of 
how they interface with the user (simulations, video games with educational 
settings, or even clickers in the face-­to-­face classroom), it is more beneficial to 
review the under­lying mechanics and how they can be applied to online 
courses. It is instructive to examine how a practitioner implements specific 
game ele­ments in courses with the aim of increasing student engagement. 
Jesse Schell of Car­ne­gie Mellon University has referred to this concept of 
increasing user stickiness or propensity to stay on page as the “psy­chol­ogy of 
engagement” (2010).
Why Now?
We are living in a time of flux and possibility in online education. The field 
has matured to the extent that ­there is a growing body of evidence mapping 
out criteria that positively impact student learning outcomes and a sense of 
entrepreneurial possibility is in the air. The US Department of Education’s 
2010 meta-­analysis of 99 studies comparing online and face-­to-­face classes 
concluded that “Students in online conditions performed modestly better, 
on average, than ­those learning the same material through traditional face-­
to-­face instruction” (xiv).
The report also identified a number of ele­ments typically implemented in 
the design phase of online course development as having an influence on 
learning outcomes. The ele­ments included use of multimedia, active learning 
(where the learner has to take actions such as clicking on items to reveal con­
tent), and student time-­on-­task.
The report’s most notable takeaway was that time-­on-­task is a critical ­factor 
with re­spect to learning outcomes irrespective of format. Online learning’s 
potential simply may be the fact that it is more conducive to the expansion of 
time-­on-­task than is face-­to-­face instruction. To expand time-­on-­task in face-­to-­
face classes, instructor time, classroom space, and students’ ability to physically 
attend at set times all have to be considered. In online classes, the uploading 
of late-­breaking news or current, in­ter­est­ing readings or activities by the click 
of a mouse can achieve the same result with far fewer ramifications.

28    Game On!
Despite ­these clear conclusions, a degree of inertia persists within academia 
with regard to implementing designed ele­ments—­even ­those shown by a pre­
ponderance of evidence to make an online course or program more likely to 
increase student engagement. At times, faculty members’ passion and confi­
dence in their own teaching experience make them unwilling to explore new 
concepts for teaching and learning. On the instructional design side of the 
equation, evidence supporting specific aspects of course design has started to 
align as research in the field develops.
Early instructional design centered on learning styles and multiple intel­
ligences (Gardner 1983) before developing via the field of cognitive science 
(Clark 2005; Mayer 2003), and then expanding to noncognitive student 
characteristics and more recent concepts such as intrinsic motivation, gam­
ification, and learning analytics. With the recent development of analytics 
software in online classes, it has become easier to track student be­hav­ior and 
quantify which course ele­ments produce more student engagement and, per 
the US Department of Education report, better learning outcomes. With data 
in hand, faculty and administrative design staff should be better able to de­
velop effective online lessons supported by direct research into what is ­really 
working. Before digging further into definitions of key ele­ments in the gami­
fication lit­er­a­ture, it is essential to understand some of the basic tenets of 
student engagement. The hope of prac­ti­tion­ers and theorists alike is that 
gamification may be a means to implement concepts and techniques broadly 
in online courses to lead to an uptick in student engagement.
Mea­sures of Engagement
Engagement long has been identified as an essential precursor of student suc­
cess in face-­to-­face and online classes. Chen, Gonyea, and Kuh say that en­
gagement is positively linked to a number of desired outcomes, including 
high grades, student satisfaction, and perseverance (2008). Despite that clar­
ity, and despite the opportunity provided by online courses where student 
access and behavioral data are readily available, ­there is no universally accepted 
definition of what constitutes engagement. One ser­viceable definition is that 
engagement is the “quality of effort students themselves devote to education­
ally purposeful activities that contribute directly to desired outcomes” (Krause 
& Coates 2008, 493). Other studies define engagement in terms of interest, 
effort, motivation, and time-­on-­task and suggest that ­there is a causal relation­

How Did We Get ­Here?    29
ship between engaged time (the period of time in which students are com­
pletely focused on and participating in the learning task) and academic 
achievement (Bulger et al. 2008).
In his report on the National Survey of Student Engagement, admittedly 
focused on traditional classroom study, George Kuh (2009) quotes the work of 
Chickering and Gamson (1987), who list princi­ples required to foster student 
engagement. Their work, Seven Princi­ples for Good Practice in Undergraduate 
Education, emphasizes student-­faculty contact, cooperation among students, 
active learning, prompt feedback, time-­on-­task, high expectations, and re­spect 
for diverse talents and ways of learning. The general conclusion from the lit­
er­a­ture is that engagement is a complicated blend of active and collaborative 
learning, participation in challenging academic activities, communication 
between teachers and students (and between students), and involvement in 
enriching educational experiences and communities (Chickering & Gamson 
1987; Clark 2005; DeTure 2004; Kuh 2009).
The ability to quantitatively mea­sure student engagement in online courses 
is dependent on the data-­capture capacities of technology in which the course 
is situated (Rankine, Stevenson, Malfroy, & Ashford-­Rowe 2009). Most of the 
companies still in the LMS market, such as Blackboard, Instructure, and Desire­
2Learn, offer metrics of some kind, but the available data, ­until very recently, 
­were rudimentary and time-­consuming to extract and interpret. Captured 
LMS data can and have been used to approximate student engagement and 
the evaluation of learning activities (Dawson & McWilliam 2008). Yet LMS 
data can only approximate ­actual student engagement. ­Simple metrics, such 
as frequency of student logins and grade point average (GPA), have been the 
most commonly observed mea­sures. MOOCs and some of the newer adaptive 
learning providers in par­tic­u­lar are promising much more granular and po­
tentially significant metrics.
­There is the danger that data might provoke inaccurate conclusions. Tech­
nologically savvy students might download documents and review them 
multiple times, while a less tech-­savvy student might repeatedly go back to the 
LMS without actually reading much. From the perspective of the captured 
data, the tech-­savvy student has visited the documents once during the term 
whereas ­others, choosing to click on the documents at ­every visit, errone­
ously appear more engaged. In reviews of student engagement, this kind of 
ambiguity ­will have to be borne in mind as metrics are considered. The 

30    Game On!
uncertainty of the data in this area is one of the reasons that early studies 
tended to focus on interviews and qualitative data when trying to assess the 
merits of a variety of treatments.
Building Engagement Into Online Courses
A number of theories inform our understanding of how aspects of instruc­
tional design can increase student engagement. The field itself is in a fairly 
constant state of flux given the rapid pace of technological change and the 
academic press’s fascination with the next big ­thing. Some concepts have 
become established in the field and are a common part of the lexicon (usabil­
ity, information architecture), some technologies that seemed to have ­great 
potential have faded from consideration (virtual 3D worlds like Second Life), 
while other aspects have had narrow yet per­sis­tent support among their fans 
(open education resources). A ­viable proposition is that adaptive learning al­
lied with leading work in cognitive science and learning analytics could be a 
game-­changer in the connected world of instructional design and higher ed­
ucation. With the basic tenets of ­those fields marked out, it could be instruc­
tive to assess the point at which they intersect to consider ­whether they 
might come together ­under a banner heading of gamification.
Cognitive Science
Self-­efficacy, a central ele­ment of cognitive science, describes the belief in 
one’s capabilities to or­ga­nize and execute the courses of action required to 
produce given attainments and has long been proposed as a determinant to 
learner success in online courses (Bandura 1997). Data from a number of 
studies show correlations between student low self-­efficacy and failure to per­
sist in online courses (DeTure 2004; Schrum & Benson 2001). ­There is a sense 
that the effect of low self-­efficacy, while impor­tant in traditional/face-­to-­face 
classes, is exacerbated in online classes, where it (self-­efficacy) is more diffi­
cult to recognize and harder to correct through support (DeTure 2004). The 
positive relationship between computer familiarity and computer self-­efficacy 
was empirically verified by the work of Compeau and Higgins (1995), while 
Staples, Hulland, and Higgins (1999) found that ­those with high levels of self-­
efficacy in remote computing situations ­were more productive, satisfied, and 
able to cope when working remotely.
Cognitive science theory extends beyond self-­efficacy to look at how much 
and in what way students can assimilate and retain materials most efficiently 

How Did We Get ­Here?    31
and effectively. The prime challenge is determining how cognitive skills and 
strategies make it pos­si­ble for certain ­people to act effectively and complete 
tasks that ­others strug­gle with and fail. Studies suggest that students are more 
likely to gain deeper and lasting conceptual understanding from materials or 
content designed with cognitive science princi­ples (such as how information 
is represented, pro­cessed, and transformed) in mind (Baggett 1984; Mayer 
2003; Mayer & Moreno 2002). Online courses that are designed based on 
cognitive science princi­ples assist students in managing their cognitive load, 
or focusing their cognitive resources during learning and prob­lem solving, thus 
leading to better learning outcomes (Chandler & Sweller 1991). Sweller, Van 
Merriënboer, and Paas’s ­later work on cognitive load theory in par­tic­u­lar dis­
cusses how learning is limited by the capacity of working memory (1998).
Both Sweller and Clark outline a number of strategies instructional design­
ers can use to help students manage cognitive load so that learning is made 
more effective, more efficient or both (Clark 2005; Sweller, Van Merriënboer, 
& Paas 1998). Cognitive task analy­sis connects most clearly with the world of 
instructional design when prac­ti­tion­ers carefully format materials with spe­
cific attention to what is called “chunk” size, defined as the amount of content 
that is or­ga­nized into one part. The size of chunks, neither too large nor too 
small, is positively related to a student’s ability to assimilate knowledge. The 
importance of appropriate chunking was demonstrated in Moreno’s work, 
which showed that participants who studied a carefully segmented, or chun­
ked, version of a classroom video reported lower ­mental effort and perceived 
the learning materials as less difficult than participants using nonsegmented 
versions of the same material (2007). The benefit of effective chunking was 
most pronounced in the case of novice learners, who ­were less capable of ad­
equately pro­cessing information ­unless it was packaged thoughtfully. Long 
and short-­term memories differ in fundamental ways, with only short-­term 
memory demonstrating temporal decay and chunk capacity limits (Cowan 
2009). When working memory is overloaded or “extraneous content provided,” 
a barrier comes down and prevents anything passing over to long-­term 
memory (Sweller, Van Merriënboer, & Paas 1998). If the content is effectively 
chunked, the learner can better pro­cess conceptually distinct clusters of in­
formation and better retain them (Mautone & Mayer 2001; Mayer & Moreno 
2002; Pollock, Chandler, & Sweller 2002).
Part of the attraction of games and gamification may be that they effectively 
chunk learning (of game features) so as to steadily reveal new features, skills, 

32    Game On!
and techniques to the user who practices and assimilates them. Another de­
veloping phenomenon that is worth framing before digging into the detail 
and nuance of gamification is adaptive learning. Adaptive learning extends 
the princi­ple of chunked knowledge, directing dif­fer­ent students to dif­fer­ent 
chunks based on their aptitude or study preferences with the goal of encour­
aging engagement through appropriate challenge and personalized paths.
Adaptive Learning
Adaptive learning describes the provision of multiple paths through materi­
als and supplemental materials that are personalized and tailored to individ­
ual users based on choice and prior per­for­mance. For-­profit companies such 
as Knewton, Cerego, and CogBooks are leading a charge to implement sys­
tems that resonate with gamers in that user choice leads to system conse­
quence. Macroadaptivity is based on prior be­hav­ior of large numbers of users 
and is best illustrated in the corporate world with Amazon’s “­People who 
bought book x, also liked book y.” Microadaptivity is tailored to an individ­
ual user’s prior personal se­lections and successes. If a user performed better 
on self-­check tests and quizzes ­after accessing video content, a microadaptive 
system would rec­ord this and, wherever pos­si­ble, serve up video as opposed 
to text-­based content. Advocates see the potential to make coursework more 
attractive or “sticky” to students, keeping ­people motivated to persist. This 
approach aligns with online course development priorities seeking to increase 
engagement, time-­on-­task, and, consequently, learning outcomes.
A frequent criticism of traditional classroom instruction, and at times of 
the instructors themselves, is that instructors teach to their own learning 
style (Stewart, Jones, & Pope 1999), defined as “a set of ­factors, be­hav­iors, and 
attitudes that facilitate learning for an individual in a given situation” (Reiff 
1992). The singular style of most classroom instructors, transferred directly 
to static-­design web-­based instruction, frequently has produced monotonous 
courses, some sal­vaged with per­sis­tent instructor presence, ­others not. The 
pace of improvement in online learning has been slowed by inexperienced 
instructional designers and instructors failing to apply appropriate instruc­
tional strategies or to monitor student pro­gress when developing online classes 
(Inan & Lowther 2007; Palmer & Holt 2009; Schrum & Benson 2001; Song 
et al. 2004).
Adaptive learning has the potential to track what is and ­isn’t working, 
producing evidence to promote student learning outcomes. Song and Keller 

How Did We Get ­Here?    33
suggest that enriched learning experiences occur when the design of instruc­
tion considers student motivation and preferences (2001). Growing interest 
in the concept is demonstrated by foundational and corporate funding op­
portunities such as the Adaptive Learning Market Acceleration Program grant 
opportunity commissioned by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and 
the Adaptive Learning Research Grant Program offered by Adapt Courseware. 
The hope of ­these funders is that, when implemented correctly, adaptive learn­
ing systems ­will increase student per­for­mance, motivation, and attitudes while 
concurrently decreasing learning time and usability prob­lems (Brusilovsky, 
Sosnovsky, & Yudelson 2009; Dogan 2008; Papanikolaou et al. 2003; Tsandi­
las & Schraefel 2004; Tsianos et al. 2009).
Learning Analytics
A final perspective that might inform the understanding of gamification of 
online courses is learning analytics, defined by Siemens as “the mea­sure­ment, 
collection, analy­sis, and reporting of data about learners and their contexts 
for purposes of understanding and optimizing learning and the environments 
in which it occurs” (2011b). The term has been increasingly applied to the 
field of education as prac­ti­tion­ers start to understand the information that 
can be gathered from an LMS. As numbers of students taking online classes 
have grown, with a recent bump through the massive enrollments associated 
with MOOCs, the opportunity to analyze data about student be­hav­ior is of 
­great value. Proprietary LMS companies are promoting new analytics suites, 
with access to on-­demand information aimed at improving academic success 
and student retention. Learning analysts use this quantitative output to 
assess student be­hav­iors and learning trends.
The Blackboard LMS, in par­tic­u­lar, has been very vocal in touting the new 
dawn that this ability to collect and analyze data heralds. On their website, 
they state that clients participating in a field trial of their new analytics suite 
in 2013 reported “­great success in gaining insight into student activity, iden­
tifying outstanding course designs that promoted active student engagement, 
[and] fostering a culture of discovery and investigation about the ­future of 
online and blended learning” (Blackboard 2013). While ­these proclamations 
come across more as a sales pitch than solid quantitative research, the claim 
that their tool is able to directly mea­sure the impact of online course design 
and online teaching techniques on student engagement and learning outcomes 
merits attention. Learning analytics can potentially mea­sure even incremental 

34    Game On!
gains wrought by the application of cognitive science and adaptive learning 
systems. If gamification is a banner cause able to unite ­these areas, driving 
adoption and focused analy­sis, then we might be seeing (no pun intended) a 
real game-­changer.
Gamification
Educational gamification, accentuating and embracing the visceral ele­ments 
of gaming and drawing from social cognitive and adaptive learning perspec­
tives, has the potential to move the dial on student engagement, time-­on-­task, 
and student outcomes (US Department of Education 2010). Prensky (2001) 
and Asgari (2005) believe that gamification is a broad, comprehensive, acces­
sible, and even visceral term with the potential to align previously distinct 
schools of thought within the instructional design community. Gamification 
encompasses insights gained from the work of cognitive scientists, adaptive 
learning, and learning analytics, and it seems to have promise to improve 
student engagement in online courses radically. As Jesse Schell reflected 
during his keynote at the Design Innovate Communicate Entertain (DICE) 
Summit in 2010, design is moving from the perfunctory to a new focus on 
immersion in aspects that approximate fun rather than merely functionality. 
“­There is something that’s happening in culture right now—­a shift just as 
sure as the Industrial Revolution was a shift. ­We’re moving from a time when 
life was all about survival to a time when it was about efficiency into a new 
era where design is largely about what’s pleas­ur­able” (Schell 2010).
The value of this shift was claimed at the For the Win Conference held at 
the Wharton School in Philadelphia back in August 2011. Gabe Zichermann, 
gamification author, entrepreneur, and blogger, stated then, “It’s the mean­
ing we ­will enrich, educations we ­will improve, health we ­will foster and lives 
we ­will lengthen through the application of gamification design that ­will be 
among our most impor­tant legacies” (2011). Gamification likely would have 
not made an impact at all had the progenitors of cognitive science, learning 
analytics, and early online learning analysts not led the way by suggesting 
that ­there was work to be done in enhancing online education.
Educational games, gaming theory, game mechanics, and gamification 
have all had numerous evolutions and a few false dawns during the last 
­couple of de­cades. The field developed as gaming extended its reach beyond 
the console, initially to corporate training, then to health care, then fi­nally 
on to education. Heralding a shift in focus away from clickers and avatars, 

How Did We Get ­Here?    35
Kapp defined gamification as “a careful and considered application of game 
thinking to solving prob­lems and encouraging learning using all the ele­
ments of games that are appropriate” (2012, 15–16). Gee, who provides a lot 
of the energy in the area of gaming implemented in the educational milieu, 
explains why learning should be more like gaming. “Learning is, or should 
be, both frustrating and life enhancing. The key is finding ways to make hard 
­things life enhancing so that ­people keep ­going and ­don’t fall back on learn­
ing and only work with what is ­simple and easy” (Gee 2003, 6).
The first manifestation of gamification in the “serious” world (as was true 
of the field of instructional design itself) was military, where war games have 
been used for centuries to train personnel without loss of life. Many consider 
Chaturanga, played in India in the seventh ­century, to be the first war game, 
with pieces representing foot soldiers, elephants, and chariots moved on a 
playing board much like the modern chessboard. Fast-­forward to the pres­ent 
day, with the average American child between the ages of 8 and 18 playing 
seven hours of video games each week, and it is clear that video games do 
capture students’ attention and interest (Gentile & Walsh 2002; National In­
stitute on the Media and the ­Family 2002).
A reasonable working hypothesis is that ele­ments intrinsic to games can be 
factored into materials development to improve student learning outcomes 
(more recently and now, more typically, referred to as gameful design). Mate­
rials structured with game princi­ples in mind could enable students to work 
with big ideas contextually, as well as symbolically, so they learn how to apply 
abstract ideas in qualitative and meaningful ways (diSessa 1982). Safe, “it’s 
only a game . . .” experimentation with big ideas and symbols may help stu­
dents develop domain-­specific schema (ways of thinking) that they can start 
to use to develop and demonstrate the par­tic­u­lar nuance and mindset more 
typical of domain experts than of novice learners (Ambrose 2010). Evidence 
presented by Greeno, Collins, and Res­nick (1996) and ­others suggests the po­
tential for users to become active rather than passive participants in shaping 
their role and actions to promote engagement and time-­on-­task. When stu­
dents become active participants in the knowledge-­ assimilation pro­cess 
(Greeno, Collins, & Res­nick 1996), the “focus of learning shifts from covering 
the curriculum to working with ideas” (Scardamalia 2000). This form of sys­
tem response is analogous to that of adaptive learning (addressed earlier) where 
student action produces a system reaction tailored to reinforce, support, or re­
direct be­hav­ior.

36    Game On!
­There are still distinct factions ­under the gamification banner. One side is 
enthused by the simulation or game design side of the research, whereas the 
other focuses on the psychological under­pinnings of gaming. Fully-­fledged, 
immersive game development is far beyond the scope of many design teams. 
While exact figures are hard to locate, World of Warcraft has been quoted at 
around $63 million to develop (digitalbattle​.­com) with perhaps three times 
that amount for marketing and upkeep in its first four years of existence (ko­
taku​.­com). With World of Warcraft as the competition, most efforts to pro­
duce action versions of education have fallen flat and are generally received 
by students as watered-­down games and by academics as watered-­down 
education. Irrespective of the visuals and technical sophistication, low-­tech 
activities can provide intrinsic motivation by incorporating game ele­ments 
such as optimal level of challenge; appropriate goals; uncertain outcomes; 
clear, constructive, immediate feedback; and ele­ments of curiosity and cre­
ativity (Brophy 2004; Cordova & Lepper 1996; Malone 1981).
One example that could be explored in a low-­tech context would be the way 
that game designers encourage a player’s ac­cep­tance of failing as a step ­toward 
learning. Education stigmatizes failure, and ­whether it does so consciously or 
not is a moot point. A former president of a midsized college in the north­
eastern United States captures the costs of failure, stating in a personal con­
versation that, at her institution, only 10–15% of students who needed one 
remediation course completed associate’s degrees. Students who failed again 
and needed a second remediation course, in her experience, never graduated 
despite repeated attempts in class sizes with a high-­touch average of just nine 
students per instructor. Compare that to the motivation that game failure 
provokes. Again, quoting Gee, “When the character you are playing dies in a 
video game, you can get sad and upset, but you also usually get pissed that 
you have failed. And then you start again, usually from a saved game, moti­
vated to do better” (2003, 82).
Which response should we be cultivating: abject failure and misery or 
­annoyed, pissed even, resolution to beat this damn ­thing?
Prior Studies
Studies since the early 1990s, when the phenomenon first started to gain at­
tention, suggest the promise of gamification and provide guidance for present-­
day focus. Though the systematic application of gamification to conventional 
online learning is a relatively new concept, since the 1990s a number of 

How Did We Get ­Here?    37
studies have analyzed the effects of games used as instructional tools. A 1992 
meta-­analysis reviewed 67 studies conducted over 28 years comparing game-­
oriented learning against the same content delivered by conventional in­
struction (Randel et  al. 1992). They found that 56% of individuals in the 
game-­oriented groups showed no difference in learning outcomes between 
games and conventional instruction, while 32% had higher learning outcomes 
(demonstrated via mea­sur­able tests) from the game format. The authors con­
cluded that subjects where content is very prescriptive and not particularly 
open to interpretation (e.g., math) are more likely to show beneficial effects 
for gaming (Randel et al. 1992). Wolfe’s 1997 analy­sis concluded that game-­
based approaches produced greater knowledge-­level increases over conven­
tional case-­based teaching methods. A more recent meta-­analysis concluded 
that subjects’ confidence in their grasp of core course concepts was on average 
20% higher in courses with game ele­ments, declarative knowledge (defined 
as “knowing what”) was 11% higher, procedural knowledge (“knowing how”) 
was 14% higher, and overall student retention was 9% higher when simula­
tions ­were used (Sitzmann 2011). Ke (2009) reviewed 89 research articles that 
provided empirical data on the application of computer-­based instructional 
games. She found that, of the 65 studies specifically examining the effective­
ness of computer-­based games on learning, 52% returned a positive impact and 
25% had “mixed results,” where an instructional game supported some learn­
ing outcomes but not ­others. In only one study of 89 did she find that conven­
tional instruction was more effective than computer games.
Gamification is an inexact term used for successful implementation of 
many game-­related ele­ments. As such, developers (and other interested par­
ties) who are interested in digging further into the concept need to under­
stand constituent ele­ments. How are courses gamified? By what definition 
and composition?
­We’ll look into ­these questions throughout the cases and analy­sis that fol­
lows. Bear in mind as you proceed, a degree of deconstruction is necessary 
before course development can begin. When building a gamified or a game­
fully designed course, implementing ele­ments that bring together thinking 
from cognitive science, psychometrics, and adaptive learning, the developer/
instructor (­whether one and the same person or two individuals) must not 
neglect the need to build in a way to stimulate user enjoyment. If learning is 
always a task to be endured, then many ­will not persist. The final ele­ment to 
consider, the lubricant to make the pro­gress smooth, is flow. In the lit­er­a­ture 

38    Game On!
of games and gamification, flow is frequently referenced (see, e.g., Kapp 2012; 
Schell 2008; Zicherman 2011). Flow provides foundation and context as well 
as an ultimate goal for the construction of effective engagement in gamified 
courses.
Flow
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1990) builds on the concept of extreme engage­
ment, referring to “flow” as the point at which engagement makes effort feel 
compelling and achievement feasible. The “game-­psychology” faction led by 
Prensky (2001) and academics such as Asgari (2005) argue that, while the vi­
sually striking ele­ments of simulations—or “novelty effects”—­initially may 
provide competitive enjoyment or stimulation, the best types of engagement 
come from learners’ enjoyment of “more effective learning experiences, ones 
that put them in control and encourage active participation, exploration, re­
flection, and the individual construction of meaning” (Galarneau 2005). Pa­
pert (1997) refers to the princi­ple of “hard fun” as the enjoyment derived 
from a challenging but meaningful learning experience, an experience that 
James Paul Gee (2003) described as “both frustrating and life enhancing.” As 
Csikszentmihalyi describes it, flow represents “times when, instead of being 
buffeted by anonymous forces, we feel in control of our actions, masters of 
our own fate,” with a “sense of exhilaration, a deep sense of enjoyment that 
is long cherished and that becomes a landmark in memory for what life 
should be like” (1990). ­These moments, contrary to many assumptions, are 
not relaxed, idle periods; they are challenging and require focus. “The best 
moments usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to its 
limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile.” 
Csikszentmihalyi describes eight components as critical in engendering flow. 
The task at hand must be achievable—­the person involved must believe that 
she or he can achieve it with some degree of effort. In addition, the person 
must concentrate. The task must have clear goals, and ­there must be feedback, 
both immediate and continual. The participant should feel a sense of effort­
less involvement with control over actions having immediate and purposeful 
results. Fi­nally, when experiencing flow (a.k.a. being “in the zone”), concern 
for self dis­appears. The only ­thing the participant is thinking about is the ac­
tivity, and she or he experiences a notable loss of sense of time such that hours 
feel like minutes (Csikszentmihalyi 1975). In recent revisions Csikszentmih­
alyi adds one final ele­ment: “the experience is an end in itself” (1990, 71). As 

How Did We Get ­Here?    39
­people seek enjoyment, what they ­really seek is to be in a state of flow. This 
goal of optimum engagement is even more valuable than a prize at the end 
(Reeves & Read 2009).
Other theories inform understanding of flow but are less widely cited than 
Csikszentmihalyi’s. Malone’s (1987) theory of intrinsically motivating instruc­
tion describes three key ele­ments that make a game motivational: challenge—­
goals with uncertain outcomes, fantasy—an environment that evokes ­mental 
images of ­things not pres­ent to the senses, and curiosity—an optimal level 
of informational complexity. Lepper, a con­temporary of Malone, contributes 
Instructional Design Princi­ples for Intrinsic Motivation. His four princi­ples 
are control—­providing learners with a sense of agency over the learning activ­
ity, challenge—­setting goals of uncertain attainment and an intermediate level 
of difficulty, curiosity—­highlighting areas of inconsistency, incompleteness 
(or even inelegance) in the learner’s knowledge base, and contextualization—­
highlighting the functionality of the activity (Lepper 1988).
­Little is known from available research about how ­these states of flow or 
intrinsic motivation can be effectively and intentionally built into an online 
course or the impact of ­these ele­ments on the engagement and time-­on-­task 
of online students. Further research is also required to understand the effects 
on outcomes for underserved or developmental subgroups that typically have 
found sustained institutional study (traditional, face to face, and online) 
challenging.
Defining Game Ele­ments or Getting to Gameful Design
Constructing (or reconstructing) an academic course with embedded or in­
trinsic game ele­ments first requires specifically defining what ­those ele­ments 
are. In the lit­er­a­ture, ­there are many attempts to categorize and separate ele­
ments that make up a successful game. One of the more accessible lists is 
based on what has been called the “elemental tetrad” (Schell 2008). Schell 
came from a video gaming background and identifies how key aspects of suc­
cessful, recreational games could be applied to online courses. He describes 
the importance of the following ele­ments:
•	
Mechanics—­the procedures and rules of the game. The goal of the 
game and how players can and cannot try to achieve it.
•	
Story—­the sequence of events that unfolds as players play the game. 
It can be linear and pre-­scripted or emergent and branching.

40    Game On!
•	
Aesthetics—­how the game looks, sounds, smells, tastes, and feels. The 
aesthetics should reinforce the other ele­ments of the game to create a 
truly memorable experience.
•	
Technology—­from paper and pencil to ­lasers and rockets. The 
technology chosen for a game allows it to do certain ­things and not 
do ­others. The technology is the medium in which the aesthetics 
take place, in which the mechanics ­will occur, and through which 
the story ­will be told.
All of ­these ele­ments are of equal importance and must, according to Schell, 
interact seamlessly (2008).
Other authors break game components into more specific categories. Kapp 
references 12 distinct ele­ments, with some overlap to the list above.
Aligning his definitions with ­those of Schell, Kapp says, “Gamification is 
using game-­based mechanics, aesthetics and game thinking to engage ­people, 
motivate action, promote learning and solve prob­lems” (2012). Kapp, among 
­others, recommends that essential components of a well-­designed game in­
clude abstractions of concepts in which the game environment provides an 
alternate rendering or approximation of real­ity, ­whether it be hy­po­thet­i­cal, 
­imagined, or fictional. Pretty much all of the lit­er­a­ture focused on this field 
stresses that games must have goals to add purpose, focus, and mea­sur­able out­
comes and rules (defined as operational or how the game is played), founda­
tional (under­lying formal structures), implicit/behavioral (defining the social 
contact between players), and instructional (what you want the learner to know 
and internalize ­after playing the game). Added to ­these fundamental aspects, 
Kapp also encourages building conflict, competition, and cooperation into a 
game, asserting that good game design includes ele­ments of all three, inter­
twined to provide an engaging environment. Time or time constraints also can 
be included by creating conditions where time is a key ­factor, increasing tension 
and demanding focus as it expires, or where time is compressed to show out­
comes more quickly (typical in games where civilizations are built up or crops 
farmed). The most often trivialized and perhaps misunderstood ele­ment of 
gamification is what Kapp calls reward structures, which include badges, points, 
or a leaderboard. Kapp argues that all need to be thoughtfully implemented as 
integral parts of the game rather than treating gamification as an add-­on.
Feedback in video games is almost constant—­designed to evoke the cor­
rect be­hav­ior, thoughts, or actions—­and Kapp includes feedback in his cate­

How Did We Get ­Here?    41
gories. Feedback is the place where gamification most closely aligns with cog­
nitive science, behavioral training, encouragement, and direction. Hunicke, 
in a speech at UX Week in 2009, described what gamers call “juicy feedback” 
as tactile, inviting, repeatable, coherent, continuous, emergent, balanced, and 
fresh (2009). Schell (2010) describes “juicy” more meta­phor­ically as a ripe 
peach—­just a ­little nibble of which gives you a good flow of delicious reward.
Kapp also stresses the need for defined levels in an effective game. Levels 
keep a game manageable and allow for building and reinforcement of skills 
while serving as motivation. Storytelling adds meaning, provides context, 
and guides action. One of the more common stories is that of the “hero’s 
journey,” first described by Joseph Campbell in 1949 and developed by Chris­
topher Vogler in 1992. The hero’s journey represents a quest with challenges 
and hardships on the way before a final, im­mensely rewarding conclusion. 
Ele­ments of the structure of the hero’s journey might well be applicable to an 
online class even if the epic, evil-­conquering aspect is not. Kapp’s final three 
ele­ments indicate that developers need to think about the game / gamified 
course’s curve of interest, defined as how a game can hold a learner’s atten­
tion by plotting the level of interest through time. Aesthetics (appropriate 
and aligned visuals, showing the designer’s attention to detail) help create an 
immersive environment that contributes to the overall game experience. The 
elemental replay or do-­over gives participants the permission to fail with 
minimal consequences. Failure in an effective game equates to an additional 
level of content, as it makes the player reconsider his or her approach to a 
game. The act of failing multiple times makes the act of winning more 
pleas­ur­able.
The potential of ­these ele­ments for increasing student engagement with 
courses is apparent. Good teachers may feel that they incorporate some of 
­these ele­ments to varying degrees in their traditional classes. One would cer­
tainly hope to see overlap between tenets of effective teaching no ­matter the 
format. The search for ele­ments of instruction leading to enhanced student 
engagement suggests that gamified instruction and good, effective instruc­
tion do not have to be distant relatives.
Potential Application to Online Courses
Having analyzed the lit­er­a­ture and broken down the concept and constituent 
parts of games and gamification, a question that arises is ­whether ­these ele­
ments are feasible inside a restrictive LMS and governance-­bound academic 

42    Game On!
courses. As suggested above, a number of ele­ments already may be built in—­
either consciously or unconsciously—to what evidence suggests are “good” 
online courses (“good” in that they engage students and produce effective 
learning outcomes). The MOOC phenomenon has shined a spotlight on the 
capacity of instructional design to develop student engagement at a higher 
level in lieu of an unscalable instructor presence. In traditional online courses, 
adjunct faculty are increasingly pressured by well-­intentioned administrators 
to maintain close to 24/7 connectivity to provide what amounts to almost 
“immediate corrective feedback.” MOOCs, typically featuring full-­time fac­
ulty and massive enrollments, cannot rely on faculty connectivity and effort 
to be the sole means of maintaining student engagement.
The industry is almost at the stage where it can assert that princi­ples of 
cognitive science and adaptive learning can contribute to developing student 
engagement. A more intriguing question is ­whether gamification might pro­
vide a more comprehensive, generalizable, and applicable overview of the 
possibilities for engagement.
The following chapters pres­ent practitioner experiments in this emerging 
realm of gamification or, more specifically, gameful design. In review of ­these 
examples we can ask questions about the incorporation of gamification in 
courses, including
1.	
How are princi­ples of gamification / gameful design incorporated into 
selected courses?
2.	
What forces contribute to and limit the implementation of 
gamification into the selected courses?
3.	
What are the potential effects on student engagement of gamified 
online courses?
For each of the five reviewed courses, I interviewed the proj­ect lead (defined 
as the main person in each case conceiving of the idea and driving its im­
plementation). Where pos­si­ble, I also interviewed instructional designers 
or developers involved in the build of the course and then faculty or the 
instructor, who typically also played one of the other roles already men­
tioned. I interviewed students when they ­were available and, if time and ac­
cess permitted, interviewed administrators at the institutions. Participants 
­were selected based on their availability and centrality to the proj­ect.
Given my initial thinking that gamification / gameful design might lead to 
increased student engagement, I conducted the analyses as a form of expla­

How Did We Get ­Here?    43
nation building—an iterative pro­cess beginning with a theoretical statement, 
refining it, revising the proposition, and repeating this pro­cess. In analyzing 
my interview data, I used coding schemes to explore consistencies and incon­
sistencies within the interview narratives. My review included eyeballing—­
the ocular scan method—­proofing for words that stand out as unusual or 
commonly occurring. This extended to what Bogdan and Biklen call the in­
traocular percussion test, “where you wait for patterns to hit you between the 
eyes” (1982, 153).
I found that the chosen examples are all practitioner-­driven, faculty-­led 
proj­ects that ­were at first ­either off-­radar or only loosely supported by their 
host institutions. They show the value of “giving it a go” and demonstrate 
that students appreciate any worthwhile effort. While not constituting un­
equivocal successes, they justify supporting ­future initiatives and provide 
ideas for development.

C H A P T E R   T H R E E
The Fairy Tale MOOC
The University of South Florida (USF), motto Truth and Wisdom, is an American 
metropolitan public research university located in Tampa, Florida. Established 
in 1956, it was the first in­de­pen­dent state university conceived, planned, and 
built during the twentieth ­century. It employs 6,133 academic staff (over 
1,700 instructional faculty) and enrolls close to 50,000 students, with ap­
proximately 36,000 of ­those at the undergraduate level. A member institute 
of the State University System of Florida (the fourth-­largest in the state), it is 
made up of 14 colleges and offers more than 80 undergraduate majors and 
more than 130 gradu­ate, specialist, and doctoral degree programs. Classified by 
the Car­ne­gie Foundation as a top-­tier research university, it has a proud his­
tory and placed 10th overall among all universities worldwide in 2011 in the 
number of US patents granted, according to the Intellectual Property Owners 
Association. Alumni include Pam Iorio (mayor of Tampa), Tony LaRussa, 
Lauren Hutton, and Hulk Hogan.
USF’s 2014–15 undergraduate tuition costs ­were $211.19 per credit hour for 
in-­state students and $575.01 per credit hour for out-­of-­state students, trans­
lating to total annual tuition of $6,410 for in-­state and $17,324 for out-­of-­
state students. As of fall 2014, the student diversity profile of the university 
consisted of 55% White, 12% African American, 21% Hispanic, 7% Asian/
Pacific Islander, and 0.16% American Indian. Four ­percent of students re­
ported two or more races, and 1 ­percent did not report.
Kevin Yee is Director for Teaching and Learning Excellence at USF, hav­
ing moved over from the University of Central Florida in 2012, switching 
between his discipline, German (he holds a PhD in German Language and 
Lit­er­a­ture from the University of California, Irvine) and his vocation sup­
porting and leading technology-­facilitated instruction. At USF, he offers fac­
ulty workshops and consultations, performs classroom observations, serves 
as events coordinator for university-­wide conferences, and coordinates out­

The Fairy Tale MOOC    45
reach and training for adjunct faculty and gradu­ate teaching assistants, among 
many other duties. He continues to teach in the world languages program 
and the honors college, and he has delivered graduate-­level courses on 
course design and learning management system (LMS) pedagogy in online 
and hybrid formats.
Prior to launching his fairy tales course, Yee pulled together a list of princi­
ples of video games that he felt ­were relevant to gamification in an educa­
tional environment:
Display Pro­gress
•	
Reward effort, not just success;
•	
Reward ­after fixed intervals (e.g., ­every five tokens) but also 
randomly;
•	
Offer momentary rewards (“­great job” flashes on screen) or per­sis­tent 
rewards;
•	
Provide rewards in the form of badges—­people are natu­ral collectors;
•	
Use pro­gress bar if not using a badge list; and
•	
Show pro­gress summary not only when initially accomplished, but 
in a global spot that is easy to access ­later (and vis­i­ble publicly to 
other participants).
Maximize Competition
•	
Motivation through innate competitiveness;
•	
Leaderboard; and
•	
Beware FERPA issues.
Calibrate Difficulty Carefully
•	
“Balance” issues—­neither boring nor anxiety-­inducing;
•	
Early, easy wins, then ratchet up difficulty;
•	
Add skills incrementally;
•	
Return to early skills with spaced repetition; and
•	
Boss levels.
Provide Diversions
•	
Mini-­games reset the attention clock;
•	
Reward exploration via Easter eggs (example: humorous alt text on 
images);
•	
Your word choices: “quests” rather than “objectives”;
•	
Allow for nonlinear (or branching) pro­gress ­toward the goal; and

46    Game On!
•	
Where practical, embed games and other content rather than link 
away.
Employ Narrative Ele­ments
•	
Start with a hook (high concept, “elevator pitch”);
•	
Determine a central conflict that drives the storyline;
•	
Think in terms of setup, buildup, and payoff;
•	
Do not tell a story so much as construct a mystery; and
•	
Imagine characters, backstories, and use as many details as pos­si­ble.
Yee took his theory into practice via USF’s first massive open online course, 
or MOOC. Fairy Tales: Origins and Evolution of Princess Stories (figure 2) was 
developed by Yee and offered over four weeks between July and August 2013. 
With an initial enrollment of 1,200 students (and about another 200 who 
joined midstream), a cohort of 107 (8%) completed the course, with comple­
tion defined as submitting all assessments. Students ­were permitted to join 
the course at any time during the offering.
Figure 2​.­ Screenshot from the Canvas-­based Fairy Tales: Origins and Evolution of Princess 
Stories MOOC. © Kevin Yee, University of South Florida; reproduced with permission.

The Fairy Tale MOOC    47
Fairy Tales was a MOOC developed by the instructor himself on the Can­
vas platform with no major support or promotion from any of the recognized 
MOOC providers like EdX or Coursera. The USF communications department 
issued the following press release to support the launch:
TAMPA, Fla. (July 19, 2013)—­A ­free online course offered by the University of 
South Florida, “Fairy Tales: Origins and Evolution of Princess Stories,” affords 
anyone in the world the opportunity to explore online learning. As the universi­
ty’s first MOOC (Massive Open Online Course), the four-­week class starts Aug. 5 
and explores the meaning of fairy tales and their relationship to modern society.
And tweeted about the new offering (figure 3).
Yee leveraged his personal networks and used word of mouth to promote the 
proj­ect with a target of enrolling manageably large, rather than massive, num­
bers. Part of the reason that he wanted to develop and deliver the course was 
that, given his need to be knowledgeable about teaching and learning in any 
and all formats, he considered the proj­ect overall as job training. To an ex­
tent, his work was intended, as he put it, to “kick the tires” of both the Canvas 
platform and the ­whole pro­cess of managing an open-­enrollment MOOC 
with larger numbers than would be typical for USF faculty. With the massive 
surge of interest and (academic) press hype over MOOCs, he anticipated re­
quests in the near ­future for support from his faculty peers. For his pi­lot ver­
sion he had no specific target enrollment but built the course to be scalable 
for anywhere between 50 and 50,000 participants. His initial hope was to 
reach five figures, but he fell short of that with the overall registration of 1,400.
Figure 3. Tweet from University of South Florida ­Human Resources promoting the Fairy 
Tales MOOC. © Kevin Yee, University of South Florida; reproduced with permission.

48    Game On!
Yee’s perfunctory experimentation with the technology and scale of a ge­
neric MOOC might have had some in­ter­est­ing results of itself, but his interest 
in the concept of gamification compelled him to meld ­those two aspects, 
which, in turn, more than doubled his own learning outcomes. His long-­
standing interest in gamification as a mnemonic tool stemmed from his college 
days in the late eighties when he realized that he was retaining more details 
of the role-­playing games of the day, such as Zelda, than of his studies. One 
strong reminiscence about a game that he was playing in the late 1980s brought 
back sharp memories of the game, “the story line, the in­ven­ted histories and 
all that stuff,” compared to subjects that he formally studied, about which he 
could remember very ­little. This experience made him suspect that games 
had potential for use in education. He came to realize, as he puts it, “not an 
overly academic assertion . . . ​that ­because games are fun you care about them, 
and when you care about them you are more likely to remember the ­things 
you hear, the ­things you go through.”
­After gaining his doctoral degree in German in 1997 and working for a 
number of years as an adjunct professor, Yee shifted to work for a com­pany 
headquartered in Southern California named Interplay, a developer, pub­
lisher, and licensor of video game software. While at Interplay, he worked on 
interpretation and cultural flavoring of American-­produced video games for 
release in foreign countries. Then in 2001 he returned to the world of aca­
demia, first as an adjunct teaching German and humanities and then, start­
ing in 2007, in faculty development. Over all that time he maintained his 
interest in games and gamification but put the interest on hold against his 
more immediate life duties, staying employed being primary, and the feel­
ing that the technology was not yet evolved enough to help him achieve his 
goals. His interest in gamification as a pos­si­ble enhancement to traditional 
forms of education was rekindled prior to his work on this MOOC, particu­
larly through his observations of the development of smartphone technology 
and the ubiquity of games in retail and social media generally. One key trig­
ger event was him observing his wife’s interest in the location-­sharing iPhone 
application FourSquare. Yee described how ­these observations helped him 
realize that gamification princi­ples had firmly made the leap to the corporate 
world. In thinking about smartphone usage of gamification princi­ples he re­
alized that ­there was nothing particularly new about gamification, but the 
way that it was penetrating a wider swathe of society was significant. Describ­
ing his wife’s use of FourSquare he opined:

The Fairy Tale MOOC    49
This is that technology where you check in and you tell your friends and the system 
where you are located . . . ​you get some rewards, you get discounts in places where 
you go a lot and eventually you get bragging rights in the form of mayorship when 
­you’re the one that checks in ­there the most. So, that recognition that ­there’s some­
thing in it for you to keep ­doing what are rote tasks, that is what I think has attracted 
business’s attention and now more and more ­people are talking about what is gami­
fication and how we can use it.
Progressing from reflections on married harmony through to a similar line 
of thinking with regard to parenthood, Yee saw ­these princi­ples again in kin­
dergarten instructors’ distribution of gold stars and “most helpful student” 
awards aimed to maintain order and attention among their charges. His final 
day-­job reflection, when the planets ­really aligned for him, was when he saw 
instructors in traditional (face-­to-­face) higher education situations dividing their 
classes, holding competitions, and keeping track of scores for the day. In ­these 
cases, the activities ­were rigidly finite; in his opinion, the instructors missed an 
opportunity to provide longer-­term, sustained motivation for the students. The 
cumulative effect of seeing his wife, his ­children, and students at his workplace 
all dabbling in the world of gamification was stimulus enough for him to be­
gin planning his course. Given the concurrent rise in popularity of MOOCs 
and Yee’s academic technology role, he designed a course so he could, in an in­
formed manner, advise other USF faculty members on what works and what 
­doesn’t in MOOCs generally. He saw an opportunity to experiment with engage­
ment normally not seen in online classes, explaining, “What I was trying to get 
­here was identified best practices; this was not an attempt to be scientific about 
my approach. It was an exploratory attempt to see what does and ­doesn’t work 
from a practice point of view of gamification, not so much from the metrics.”
He did find himself having to reassure some faculty regarding the fear that 
they might be automated out of their ­careers. As Yee puts it, “I think ­there’s 
always a role for your subject-­matter experts to stay plugged in.” Continuing, 
“most faculty have not been replaced, the LMS has become another tool to 
use when thinking about the constant pedagogical issues of classroom man­
agement . . . ​of scaffolding material correctly and carefully for this audience—­
the LMS just helps with that and gamification can do some of the same ­things.” 
In ­doing so, his core questions became solid:
How do we get students motivated?
How do we get students caring?

50    Game On!
How do we get students reading and properly pro­cessing, putting all the 
­things in place they need to succeed?
He felt that gamification addressed all of the above without needing to 
replace the faculty member.
Why Gamification?
Yee described seeing gamification becoming prevalent in many aspects of 
society and, as he termed it, “penetrating ­today’s life.” When pushed further, 
he reiterated his wife’s use of FourSquare and other gamified apps on her 
smartphone but admitted that many of his reflections came retroactively as 
he was in the pro­cess of developing the MOOC. His more succinct version, 
with observations relegated to the subliminal, was that he simply deci­ded 
that the time was right to blend his passion and his ­career. As he embarked 
on the proj­ect he acknowledged that the complexities and ambiguities of aca­
demia presented challenges in higher education that ­were perhaps not as ob­
vious, or missing entirely, in corporate FourSquare or training gamification 
proj­ects. He was very sensitive to potential Federal Education Rights and Pri­
vacy Act (FERPA) issues, and given that the entire course build-­out and im­
plementation was on his shoulders alone, he knew that he needed to develop 
safeguarded and ­simple means of ensuring compliance.
Yee reflected that, in early gamified courses such as his own, many willing 
experimenters had to play multiple roles, particularly at less-­resourced institu­
tions. The need to play multiple roles is partly due to the paucity of available 
resources but also ­because ­these experimenters are creating and implementing 
courses and course ele­ments beyond the current support framework at their 
institutions. This mapped to his own experience as the proj­ect lead, concomi­
tant with the responsibilities and skills he needed to develop, build, and 
maintain the course while also updating it and acting as the class instructor. 
Even as ­there was no evidence of Yee being anything less than transparent 
and communicative at his institution, he also represents the edgy “hacker-­
instructor” who seems to revel in being a ­little ­under the radar.
The meta-­questions that initially motivated Yee and that he developed as 
ongoing ­drivers for his work ­were:
How do we get students motivated to stay engaged with courses and 
course materials?
How do we get students to care about their studies?

The Fairy Tale MOOC    51
How do we get students to read and properly pro­cess academic courses?
How do we put all the ­things in place that ­will help them succeed?
In considering how he might increase student motivation, he posited that 
a pop culture phenomenon called the Easter egg had potential to increase 
student engagement with materials. Easter eggs, in the geeky gamer sense, are 
typically intentional jokes, hidden messages, or features in a computer pro­
gram, movie, book, crossword, or other work that only dedicated participants 
are ever likely to find. The earliest frequently referenced example of a hidden 
in-­joke buried away in an obscure section of the code (in other words, an Easter 
egg) was in the 1979 Atari 2600 game Adventure. The game’s main programmer, 
allegedly annoyed at the lack of official recognition for his development role 
in the game, secreted the message “Created by Warren Robinett.” Players could 
find this message if they directed a gray dot into a hidden room in the game. 
Even further back, the Fairfield Channel F console, launched in 1976, fea­
tured a number of hidden messages. 1978’s Video Whizball (a version of Pong) 
displayed the coder’s name (Bradley Reid-­Selth) on screen if the player car­
ried out a series of complex moves at the end of the game.
Yee’s sense of the potential for Easter eggs came three or four months before 
taking this task on, when he had just finished reading the novel Ready Player 
One by Ernest Cline. As the book blurb relays, “In the year 2044, real­ity is an 
ugly place. The only time teenage Wade Watts ­really feels alive is when he’s 
jacked into the virtual utopia known as the OASIS. Wade’s devoted his life to 
studying the puzzles hidden within this world’s digital confines—­puzzles 
that are based on their creator’s obsession with the pop culture of de­cades 
past and that promise massive power and fortune to whoever can unlock 
them.” Throughout the novel, the players solve puzzles and reveal Easter eggs 
by virtue of an understanding of 1980’s cultural references. As a child of the 
’80s, Yee was obviously hooked on the narrative, but what it ­really under­
lined for him was that ­people lived the material in ser­vice of unearthing the 
Easter eggs. This suggested potential for the world of academia, where much 
of an instructor’s challenge is in getting students to ­really engage with the 
materials. Yee was also fascinated at the level of challenge that the text pro­
vided. He determined to make the Easter egg challenges harder and less obvi­
ous than just lying on the surface.
The emerging question of what actually constituted gamification encour­
aged Yee to experiment with a range of ele­ments while feeling safe in the 

52    Game On!
knowledge that the concept generally was yet to solidify into a definitive 
model or set of rules. He reflected that he allowed his own personal whims and 
interests to guide him in coalescing the princi­ples of what made games and 
activities in­ter­est­ing. He effectively shoehorned ­these ele­ments and princi­ples 
into his own compendium-­teaching model. This flexibility and laissez-­faire 
attitude encouraged him to explore a variety of ele­ments, with the idea of 
experimenting to see what worked. His desire to experiment with the format 
was, in part, his reaction to the media frenzy about MOOCs (described by 
John Hennessey, then president of Stanford, as the coming “MOOC tsunami” 
[Auletta 2012]). Yee’s dual role at USF, encompassing not only his own teach­
ing but also the training and support of other instructors university-­wide in 
pedagogy and technology, fueled his suspicion that USF faculty would soon 
beat a path to his door seeking guidance as to how to implement a successful 
MOOC. He was motivated to have a range of experiences and some quasi-­
research-­based findings to share with them. His hope was that the experience 
and his learning would be useful for him to support faculty who might sub­
sequently be interested in delivering a MOOC.
Yee deci­ded to build out his course on the Canvas LMS that USF had moved 
to a year or so earlier so that he would learn through his own trial and error 
what worked and what did not. He built the course with the idea that with 
minimal adjustment and only basic technical expertise it could be repurposed 
to run again with alternate subject ­matter. This notion of reusability or re­
purposing was part of Yee’s philosophy as a developer and supporter of faculty 
activities. He felt that a more open platform, rather than overdesigned simu­
lations or more game-­y games, would be of more or wider use to the institution. 
As he put it, “It’s one ­thing to get a million-­dollar grant to build a custom 
video game environment that teaches accounting, but that’s not ­going to 
help your chemistry teacher.”
If it had not been for this secondary goal, Yee claims that he would have 
tried to publish his MOOC on the more vis­i­ble and richer Coursera platform, 
which would have given him exposure to a much wider audience and likely 
have resulted in more course registrants. It is worth reiterating that this was 
not simply a MOOC for his own edification but rather a learning experience 
for him, as a faculty developer and also as a pioneer paving the way for ­future 
USF MOOCs. His prescience in sensing other USF instructors’ interest seems 
to be validated by the USF press release announcing Yee’s MOOC, which con­

The Fairy Tale MOOC    53
cluded, “A second ­free MOOC ­will begin Sept. 9, 2013 entitled, ‘Forums for a 
­Future,’ which discusses current societal issues that ­will impact the ­future of 
the world. Anyone at USF interested in offering a MOOC should contact . . .” 
The par­ameters framing Yee’s work ­were that, while he was ­eager to experi­
ment with his personal interest in gamification, a lot of the course build had 
to be simplistic and replicable by an instructor with limited technical skills. 
Yee, with no formal gamification training, used ­simple HTML coding and a 
good degree of creativity to build basic game ele­ments into the Canvas-­based 
MOOC, allowing him to test theories and game princi­ples that he had seen 
in his nonacademic ­career. His thought pro­cess boiled down to ­whether the 
gamified ele­ments could promote engagement and student motivation.
His desire to keep to a low-­tech implementation actually short-­circuited 
some of the tracking capabilities of Canvas and reduced his ability to rec­ord 
student data on individual pages or learning objects. He built HTML pages in 
Adobe Dreamweaver and uploaded them to Canvas, which rendered them 
only as files without the regular tracking capabilities of the Canvas system. 
He did this to maintain the aesthetic ele­ments that he created using cascad­
ing style sheets. He described balancing pro­cess as an ongoing “war between 
design and functionality,” including it in his personal debrief for the gamifi­
cation ele­ments. Given his interest in gleaning better information from his 
student data, Yee noted this inability to granularly track student pro­gress in 
the course as a critical lesson learned and a pos­si­ble amendment for his sec­
ond run of the course.
Ele­ments of Gamification
In identifying the key gamification ele­ments of his MOOC experiment, Yee 
focused first on the concept of competition. In explaining his perspective on 
the value of competition, he connected it to the notion of reward as a means 
of motivation, “­People are more invested when ­there is competition, and I 
think it’s impor­tant to show pro­gress somehow. You ­can’t just have competi­
tion that goes nowhere—­then ­you’re just on a treadmill.”
Yee’s emphasis on competition and challenge formed the critical under­
pinning of his fairy tale MOOC. Competition and challenge provided a large 
part of the impetus for students to engage with the academic, mostly text-­
based materials. His plan was to document and display the fruits of this com­
petition on a fairly rudimentary student leaderboard built using HTML with 

54    Game On!
JPEG images that he would paste in manually whenever he wanted to assign 
a badge. The leaderboard for Yee was emblematic of academic-­specific chal­
lenges not apparent in other participatory environments.
When you are an educator, you are thinking about other ele­ments to this that are 
not necessarily in ­every gamification model for businesses out ­there; FERPA, for in­
stance. I ­can’t just put ­people’s scores out on a leaderboard, so you have to end up 
gamifying or badge-­ifying ­things that are not worth points in the class so the list of 
­things that I am gamifying include stuff that’s not weekly grades. It’s more likely to 
be ­things like “the first discussion post of the week” or the “best challenge tech of 
the week.” I’ve challenged them [with that one] and they put up products basically. 
“The best question or best answer on the discussion board,” “The most amount of 
perfect scores on Easter egg quizzes for their team,” ­etc.
The MOOC design concept meant that courses and course ele­ments had 
to potentially accommodate tens of thousands of ­people. Yee’s fairy tale 
MOOC ultimately enrolled around 1,400 users, of which only a few more 
than 100 persisted through to completion of the final exam. He was firm in 
saying that he intended the design to be able to support up to 50,000 users. 
Wanting to build in engagement and scalability, Yee implemented what he 
called the “Harry Potter proxy protocol,” whereby individual effort yields 
rewards for the ­whole ­house, as in the book/movie of the same name. Stu­
dents ­were grouped alphabetically with the hope of producing the dual benefit 
of developing team spirit among the participants while reducing an instruc­
tor’s need to assess and reward on an individual basis. This Harry Potter proxy 
protocol was based on the princi­ple known as the “dependent hero contin­
gency,” where consequences are delivered to a group based on the per­for­
mance of one member or a subset of members, as researched in the work of 
Litow and Pumroy in 1975. The approach was intended to provide subtle peer 
pressure without the demotivation (for some) of full-on competition by re­
placing it with a gentler co-­desire not only to not let down, but also to im­
press, teammates.
This bunching of feedback and reward to teams rather than individuals 
also had the course management effect of diminishing the impact of the 
large numbers in the MOOC platform, thus reducing instructor load. Even 
with that reduced load, however, Yee reported that he was unable to keep up 
with the awards or even the initial design work of the numerous badges he 
had intended to award (see examples in figure 4 below). As one student con­
structively commented in the student survey responses, “The badge system 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    55
would have been ­great, and maybe it would help the professor to have an 
assistant assigned just to do that job.”
Easter Eggs
The rationale for Easter eggs is that ­people have to engage with and go 
through the content numerous times to locate more difficult eggs. This strat­
egy is basically employing a trick. The Easter egg hunt is a fun activity but 
could produce academic results by promoting increased immersion in the 
content. Many ­people do question ­whether hunting for Easter eggs actually 
entails engaging with the content or merely looking between, over, or above 
the content when searching for clues. The content in Yee’s course tended to 
be ­simple text but could also encompass other formats that students had to 
access repetitively, such as watching videos multiple times or listening to au­
dio files over and over. Yee intentionally built in Easter eggs using an array of 
­simple coding techniques, including subliminal messages that flashed ­every 
few seconds in a webcam lecture, the gradual revelation of a hidden URL, the 
title tag of a picture providing a secret URL to visit, and URLs hidden in back­
ground images (deliberately faded) set on repeat. Yee felt it vital that the sec­
tions of the course featuring the Easter eggs ­were carefully embedded in the 
course content rather than hyperlinked out. As he states, “­People are more 
likely to click on ­these diversions when ­they’re right ­there in front of them.” 
He also noted that “­People reacted in dif­fer­ent ways—­one user clicked back 
37 times to one document—­a three-­page story. She was looking for Easter 
eggs, but ­there ­were none in that document.” Yee even had an awesome Fight 
Club rule for Easter eggs on the discussion boards. It read “First rule for Easter 
egg hunts—­no-­one discusses Easter eggs on the discussion boards.”
Of the 16 students submitting comments to the USF survey (as mentioned 
earlier, 36 students completed the ratings) on all aspects of the course, 10 
Figure 4. Sample badges, developed but not implemented, in the USF MOOC. © Kevin 
Yee, University of South Florida; reproduced with permission.

56    Game On!
(62.5%) commented on the Easter eggs. Eight of ­these 10 comments ­were 
positive. Representative comments include:
The course was made more fun by the fact that we had virtual Easter egg 
hunts.
I was quite surprised of the effect on the Easter eggs by myself (and 
­others); it ­really worked.
The Easter eggs ­were awesome as a gamer I LOVE Easter eggs in games.
The game aspect was definitely in­ter­est­ing. The Easter egg hunt was 
wonderful!
As the “37 times” quote from Yee above illustrates, the course data cap­
tured the be­hav­ior of some students who revisited course content multiple 
times in pursuit of Easter eggs. The Easter eggs irritated a few students (2 of 16 
completing surveys), and ­there was no way of knowing ­whether any students 
who dropped the course before submitting surveys ­were also turned off by 
the activity or its degree of difficulty. Yee felt, from his rudimentary tracking 
of course statistics, that students might have dropped off at certain places in 
the course specifically ­because of frustration at their inability to find a cer­
tain Easter egg.
The data is not specific enough to say exactly where they fell off—to one specific 
item or one specific Easter egg. I ­will say that one specific Easter egg generated a 
ton of email from students who ­couldn’t find it. It was obscure enough that a ton of 
­people sent me emails. ­There is a possibility that ­people dropped off as that was too 
hard. I went into this thinking Easter eggs are bonus content—­who cares if you ­can’t 
find it, but it could be that ­people cared enough about the Easter eggs that it made 
them stop coming to the class in general.
Narrative Ele­ments
Yee intended to include a narrative ele­ment in the course whereby the par­
ticipants would receive motivating thematic text, in addition to badging 
awards, describing their pro­gress in the world of the fairy tale MOOC. His 
operating meta­phor was the carnival game where you throw a ball and it 
lands in a scoring hole giving you three points, four points, five points, or 
zero points, and your ­horse moves along the back wall of the carnival booth 
the requisite number of spaces. What Yee intended was that the group earn­
ing the most badges would have “awesome ­things happen to their team in 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    57
the storyline that week” (akin to their ­horse moving many spaces), whereas the 
group earning the medium amount of badges would have “a medium ­thing 
happen to them that week in the storyline.” As he put it, “the story would 
lurch ­towards some conclusion that I would not prearrange.”
The narrative ele­ment was another part of Yee’s original plan that he was 
not able to implement fully. Part of the challenge that he saw in developing the 
narrative was the complexity of a branching storyline accounting for ­every 
contingency. Even with only four weeks of branching, a system with four or 
five pos­si­ble outcomes for each team each week could amount to more than 200 
in­de­pen­dent outcomes, with each pos­si­ble path involving creative, instructor-­
developed narrative twists pending each group’s per­for­mance. Despite attempted 
simplifications, Yee realized that, given his other work/life obligations, he 
would be unable to commit the needed time to generate worthwhile narra­
tive and cancelled it as a course ele­ment prior to the start date. Taking a posi­
tive from this shortcoming, the narrative-­free course provided a more focused 
environment for him to test out the ele­ments he did implement (Easter eggs 
and team competition). Nonetheless, eliminating the narrative ele­ments re­
duced the breadth of his experimentation. One student who had discussed the 
narrative aspect with Yee concluded, “I do wish the competition aspect had 
worked out, but if I had to choose between the individual challenge of the eggs 
and the team competition, I would go for the individual challenge each time.”
Challenge
When generalizing on what makes a game bad or good irrespective of delivery 
format, the instructor returned to the idea that presenting the appropriate 
level of challenge is essential. “What makes a game bad is if it’s got balance 
issues—if it’s unbalanced. If it’s too hard, it’s anxiety inducing, if it’s too easy, 
it’s boring. You need exactly the right difficulty, early easy wins and then you 
ratchet up the difficulty and you use the skills one at a time. It’s very much 
like education, you learn something, you master it and then you go onto the 
next ­thing.” His student survey comments seemed to accentuate the critical 
aspect of what Yee called the “Goldilocks” effect of making challenges “not 
too easy, not too difficult, but just right.” One student indicated in her re­
sponses to the USF survey that the activities ­were, at times, too challenging, 
“Finding all of the game ele­ments was a ­little frustrating. I was unable to 
locate one [Easter egg], but I believe that it is more due to my way of thinking 
than the difficulty of the task.” Another student remarked, “I had a lot of 

58    Game On!
prob­lems with the Easter eggs. Still ­can’t find them. ­Will have to look at the 
cheat sheet!”
In addition to the above, Yee included technical challenges to entice stu­
dents to try new ­things. In the first week, for instance, he encouraged students 
to develop a short video explaining why they ­were interested in taking the 
course. Many students shared that this was their first experience developing 
multimedia and that it had been a challenge for them. One student’s survey 
response reflected positively on the role of the technological challenges, “[I] 
loved that Dr. Yee incorporated new technology into the course. With each of 
the technology challenges I learned something new and hopefully I can ap­
ply my new knowledge to my current or ­future job.”
When reviewing the issue of challenge in the MOOC, Yee concluded that 
all instructors—­but particularly ­those working on gamified courses—­must con­
sider balance issues and make activities neither boring nor anxiety-­inducing. 
Instructors and course developers should offer early, easy wins and then ratchet 
up the difficulty. In terms of using challenge to increase student information 
retention, he suggests adding skills incrementally, returning to early skills 
with spaced repetition, and implementing “boss levels” (a gaming term that 
describes a challenge analogous to that of traditional final exams). Boss levels 
are summative ultimate challenges introduced once students have bought in, 
are committed, and (the developer is confident) ­will spend substantial amounts 
of time trying to “defeat an ­enemy” utilizing all skills and experiences to that 
point learned in the game/course.
Outcomes
Of 1,400 course starters, 400 persisted beyond the first week of the course 
(defined as attempting the second assessment), and 107 completed the final 
exam. Of the group of completers, 36 completed surveys that ­were distrib­
uted in the final week of the course through the Canvas platform. Yee’s sur­
vey featured 10 fixed-­response questions asking students to indicate their 
agreement on a rating scale of 1to 5. ­There was also one section for additional 
commentary introduced thus, “This course is being studied for its application 
of game princi­ples to education. Please provide any additional comments about 
the course you feel are relevant to this study.” The survey also included six op­
tional demographic questions.
The 36 respondents ­were predominately female (82%), the age spread 
was wide (figure 5), and the majority of participants ­were college educated 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    59
(figure 6). Two-­thirds (68%) of the respondents ­were participating from North 
Amer­i­ca and 24% from Eu­rope. ­There was a wide range of declared incomes 
(figure 7) in the smaller subset (n = 22) disclosing that information.
The course, as a ­whole, was rated as very enjoyable (4.44 out of 5), and the 
inventiveness of the instruction methods was appreciated (4.15 out of 5). 
­Those students completing the survey claimed to have learned a lot (4.26). 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
50 or
older 
40–49 
30–39 
23–29 
18–22 
17 or
under 
Figure 5. Age of participants in the USF Fairy Tales MOOC (n = 36). Note: Data gleaned 
from student surveys conducted by Kevin Yee of USF; used with permission.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Some college
High school
or
equivalent
Bachelor's
degree
Master's
degree
Doctoral
degree
Figure 6. Academic background of participants in the USF Fairy Tales MOOC (n = 36). 
Note: Data gleaned from student surveys conducted by Kevin Yee of USF; used with 
permission.

60    Game On!
The response to the question of ­whether they learned more in this course 
than in “most other online courses” was rated lower, although still ­toward the 
positive (3.26).
Faculty Role
Yee acknowledged that the time it takes a faculty member to plan out a gami­
fied course is likely to be more substantial than for a typical online course. 
Bearing in mind that Yee is an experienced designer and deliverer of online 
courses, his comments are instructive. “Development was a minimum of 40 
hours—­prob­ably more like 80 hours of effort. Keep in mind that I’m fluent in 
HTML and a power user of the LMS so a regular faculty member would spend 
prob­ably twice as much time. Implementation was honestly only 2–5 hours 
per week. Next time I do this that ­will be higher.”
His main regret from the experience was his inability to fully support and 
implement his gamification ele­ments. He emphasized the need for faculty 
and developers in gamified/online courses, but in MOOCs particularly, to 
think carefully about manual pro­cesses in courses that need consistent atten­
tion on the instructor’s behalf. Yee’s hope is that early pioneers ­will work 
with their successors in mind to build and develop scalable, replicable mod­
els so that not every­one is starting with a blank slate. As Yee notes, “Scalabil­
ity is very much part of my daily vocabulary as a faculty developer, and I 
built what I did with the MOOC with this in mind.”
0
Under $10,000
$10,000–$29,999
$30,000–$49,999
$50,000–$69,999
$70,000–$89,999
Above $90,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 7. ­Family income of participants in the USF Fairy Tales MOOC (n = 36). Note: Data 
gleaned from student surveys conducted by Kevin Yee of USF; used with permission.

The Fairy Tale MOOC    61
Yee also commented on the need for sustained faculty visibility to users in 
the course as something that is essential irrespective of format (traditional 
online vs. MOOC) and its degree of gamification (from none to extensive). 
The amount of faculty presence is a common concern in traditional online 
courses. Gamification may, Yee feels, exacerbate this prob­lem by adding other 
ele­ments to update besides the common challenges of responding to discus­
sion board posts, grading assignments and hosting synchronous sessions. Yee 
candidly reflected on his own inability to maintain a consistent presence in 
the class and how this ultimately hurt the class dynamic and, more likely 
than not, student completion. “Normally speaking, what I would have done 
was have way more interactive videos ­every week talking about what their 
discussion board posts had been and giving very customized individual feed­
back. I think that it, as much as anything was why they stopped checking in 
­after week one. We had had a full third of ­people ­there week one and then 
they ­didn’t finish week two and I think that’s ­because I ­didn’t give them a lot 
of sense that I was pres­ent in the class between weeks one and two.”
Although Yee cannot directly prove, based on the system data he could 
get from his Canvas build, that his gamification/gameful design efforts in­
creased student engagement, the student enjoyment and repeated reading of 
content suggests that conclusion. Student survey responses show that many 
of ­those students who stuck around to the end loved the Easter egg compo­
nent of it. As Yee concludes, “For the ­people it [the gamified course/game ele­
ments] worked on, it worked very well. What we ­can’t say is that it worked on 
every­body.” He recognized that a logical next step would be to move to a 1x2 
research design, splitting the class and offering the same content to both but 
with one group receiving gamified ele­ments. As described earlier, the nature 
of his first attempted build (including the way he built out his content in the 
Canvas system) hampered data collection. “What’s not captured in the data 
is how many ­people kept reading week by week but stopped filling in the 
quizzes. And you could maybe guess at it with class-­wide statistics data look­
ing at how many ­people saw the pages.”
It seems likely that a revised version of Yee’s course with more instructor 
time to connect and update the game ele­ments as well as enhanced tracking 
ability would be a valuable exercise given what look like promising initial 
ideas. Yee’s fairy tale MOOC illustrated the potential for a creative instructor 
who is willing to take a few risks to implement technically ­simple game ele­
ments into a course. Participants’ survey comments described the course as 

62    Game On!
engaging and reported that the course encouraged interaction with what 
could other­wise be quite standard text-­based content. In Yee’s opinion, for 
­those for whom the course worked, it worked very well. He suggested that gami­
fication might especially benefit academically lower-­level students. Yee expands 
on this in his review of the MOOC, “I ­didn’t come to gamification with a target 
population in mind, yet . . . ​it may be that fragile learners might be induced to 
find and file away education differently . . . ​have a dif­fer­ent approach and atti­
tude to education if it ­were to grab their attention in a dif­fer­ent manner.”
Yee extended his thinking to a more philosophical level when contem­
plating how gamification might be used to modify traditional academia and 
­whether this is actually a good ­thing to do. He speculated that gamification 
might pander to the superficiality of some of ­today’s students rather than 
calling them on it by bringing them up to our concept of education. Philo­
sophically he continued, “It’s an open question as to ­whether I’m ­doing more 
harm than good by meeting that student halfway, or more than halfway, in 
our vari­ous definitions of what education means.” While addressing the 
question of gamification’s potential to support students who have tradition­
ally strug­gled to engage with higher education he commented, “It could be 
that a fragile learner could be more easily met by this—­it’s a dif­fer­ent po­liti­
cal question ­whether you want a fragile learner to be met by this—­perhaps a 
special education teacher or something could be done with certain intents 
very well. It prob­ably does lend itself particularly well to certain contexts bet­
ter than ­others.”
Student Comments
I learned a lot about the fairy tales, which I never think a lot before. And 
at the same time, I know a lot of history about ­those stories and 
authors. It is ­great!
I was quite surprised of the effect on the Easter eggs by myself (and 
­others); it ­really worked. Too bad the badges ­didn’t work, but I guess 
this group of students was more interested in the search than in 
status. Always good to check!
The Easter eggs ­were awesome as a gamer I LOVE Easter eggs in games.
I ­really enjoyed being able to jump in to a course like this with using the 
topic of fairy tales. The only ­thing I had trou­ble was with finding all 
the hidden Easter eggs. I enjoyed being able to learn and use other 
websites to do proj­ects.

The Fairy Tale MOOC    63
Finding all of the game ele­ments was a ­little frustrating. I was unable to 
locate one, but I believe that it is more due to my way of thinking 
than the difficulty of the task.
I did not find any Easter eggs. I had no idea where to start or what to look 
for.
The game aspect was definitely in­ter­est­ing. The Easter egg hunt was 
wonderful! I do wish the competition aspect had worked out but if I 
had to choose between the individual challenge of the eggs and the 
team competition I would go for the individual challenge each 
time.
I liked it I learned a lot about the other fairy tales besides the Disney 
ones.
Had a lot of prob­lems with the Easter eggs. Still ­can’t find them. ­Will 
have to look at the cheat sheet! Loved that Dr. Yee incorporated new 
technology into the course. With each of the technology challenges 
I learned something new and hopefully I can apply my new knowl­
edge to my current or ­future job.
The course aided in the exercise of critical thinking and application of 
multiple paradigms to a single question.
It was made more fun by the fact that we had virtual Easter egg hunts. 
The badge system would have been ­great and maybe it would help 
the professor to have an assistant assigned just to do that job.
The badges could have been fun, but ­there should have been announce­
ments when badges ­were posted and more explanation about them 
(i.e. if ­there is a best comment give a link to the comment). The 
Easter egg hunt was fun ­until I got to the last module. I cannot make 
the one (I suspect two) work with the hidden text no ­matter how 
many permutations I try, and I ­don’t own a smartphone or anything 
that would read a QR code. Plus, the file with Easter egg spoilers 
­won’t load ­either, and now it is no longer fun.
I enjoyed being able to use a lot of new web sites that I ­didn’t know about 
to do proj­ects.
It should be nice if we got [all] ­those game ele­ments we ­were promised.
I love it, it has been wonderful.
For non-­native En­glish is difficult following videos without subtitles and 
most activities are dedicated to ­people who control speaking in this 
language.

64    Game On!
Yee’s candid experimentation, his can-do attitude, and his infectious en­
thusiasm ­were certainly huge assets. As ­we’ll see with other experiments in 
subsequent chapters, the students who provided feedback ­were extremely 
supportive of his efforts. His MOOC retained around twice as many students 
as was typical at the time, and I, personally, learned a lot about fairy tales—­
some of it quite nasty (one ­sister in Cinderella actually cuts off her big toe 
and part of her heel to try and fit into the glass slipper in the ­Brothers Grimm 
version).
Where Are They Now?
In mid-­May 2016, I spoke with Dr. Yee to see where he had got to with the fairy tales proj­
ect. My questions ­were: How has the proj­ect evolved? Has it grown or atrophied at the 
institution?
BELL—­So as time has passed, what happened with your proj­ect, the Fairy Tale MOOC? 
Did it run again? Did you tweak it? What happened with the interest, both yours 
and institutionally? Where you are at with gameful design, gamification?
YEE—­So as you know, mine was a ­little higher than normal completion rates for a 
MOOC, and that was useful. First, some backup for why I had offered that par­tic­u­lar 
MOOC. The topic ­wasn’t new to me, nor was gamification as an idea. Our university 
had not done any MOOCs at the time (around 2014), and ­people ­were worried that 
MOOCs ­were about to sweep or take over. I wanted to be in a stronger position to 
protect the university, and I feel that ­there is no substitute for ­doing something 
yourself and seeing what happens. So that was sort of the major motivation for me 
rather than the research specifically into the gamification side. Also, I had done a 
MAGNA seminar on gamification at one point [MAGNA is a for-­profit player in fac­
ulty professional development]. So I had a fairly established faculty-­facing, hour-­
long pre­sen­ta­tion as to what gamification means for me and the princi­ples that I 
prescribe to it. I have my own six princi­ples for the ­things we want to steal from 
games.
That is a long way of explaining that I ­didn’t pick up the MOOC beyond that 
second run ­because it’s not a priority for what we do. Now I’m a faculty member I’m 
[on call twelve months a year] . . . ​my main job is to know ­things and do ­things so 
that we can help faculty become more effective, it’s not to teach MOOCs. So I 
­haven’t returned to it for that. Now, in terms of gamification, I do teach about once 
a year, but lately what I’ve been teaching is an honors class with only about 20 stu­
dents. Honors students are already motivated. This last year I was teaching the topic 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    65
[not fairy tales but] Disney World. The title of the class was Deconstructing Disney 
World. With a topic like that they ­really ­don’t need the external motivation that 
gamification provides ­because ­there’s enough inherent motivation in it, so it ­wasn’t 
my first thought to do it.
Now ­there is, however, an answer for how it has transmogrified in my brain or 
how I have started to do ­things differently with gamification. I have started to use 
some of ­those princi­ples in what we do in faculty development; the ways in which 
we not only engage faculty but keep them interested in our longer events. We have 
a two-­day event called Summer Teaching Symposium (STS). We ­don’t offer a sti­
pend, a cash stipend, for ­people to come to this, so it has to be useful or they ­won’t 
come back, and, to some extent, it has to have some fun ele­ments to it. So we have 
kind of evolved into a position where we make the event not just a staid instructor-­
level very formal sort of “Go to workshops [and] learn from this and that.” It has 
much more of a fun vibe, so your nametag when you get it comes with games built 
into it. ­There’s a picture of a par­tic­u­lar kind of choco­late in the corner. Then ­there’s 
code in the corner down ­here that says A and then 17-2 or something like that, and 
then over in the other corner ­there’s a word written, like frost. And they all represent 
dif­fer­ent games that are to be used to interact with each other during the course of 
the two days. So the person with frost has to find someone ­else’s nametag (­they’re 
all custom) with a word that can go with frost to form a combination word. Frost and 
house ­wouldn’t go together, but someone with frost could go with someone with 
the word bite to make frostbite. When they meet a person where the names are com­
patible, then they interview each other about their best teaching trick—­that sort 
of ­thing.
I ­don’t know that it follows necessarily my princi­ples of gamification to force 
students to do work that is other­wise boring to them, but what it does do is it gen­
erates interest in the event and keeps ­things fresh. Again, it being a faculty event, I 
­wouldn’t do it that way with students, I ­don’t think. So ­there’s a fair amount of that, 
and it turns out the very next year’s STS topic is ­going to be gamification. This year 
was the flipped classroom—­how you flip classrooms, why you do it, what are the 
prob­lems you have, and how you surmount ­those—­all of that stuff.
BELL—­Are you taking a lead in that—­the gamification? Or is that something that has 
come up organically at the institution?
YEE—­No, the event is ours. I’m the director of the office, so I think you can prob­ably 
safely say it’s just an executive decision by me that this last year was ­going to be the 
flipped class and that next year ­will be gamification. So the reason why? I ­don’t 
know, I guess ­there are a ­couple of reasons why. First, it’s something that we, or at 

66    Game On!
least I, have a lot of experience in ­doing, and most faculty ­don’t know what it is or 
how to do it. So it becomes a topic that is kind of ripe for a two-­day intensive look 
at it with lots of breakouts. And, of course, the event itself ­will be gamified . . . ​just 
as the flipped classroom event was flipped . . . ​We have a fairly well produced trailer 
for what STS 4 ­will look like. ­There’s a Harry Potter ele­ment to it, so that we ended 
up using ­music from one of the Harry Potter trailers and overlaid images of students 
basically not being plugged in and text­ing and all ­those other ­things. ­We’re sug­
gesting that ­there are princi­ples of games that we could steal that would make ­things 
more in­ter­est­ing in the classroom. The Harry Potter connection is how we ­will gam­
ify the event. We are ­going to sort our faculty into four Harry Potter ­houses and 
provide “five points for Gryffindor,” ­etc., when they do something good in one of 
­these breakouts.
BELL—­That was one of your key princi­ples, ­wasn’t it? The dependent hero contingency—­
the Harry Potter princi­ple of engendering, ­whether it’s peer pressure or team spirit 
or whatever?
YEE—­Yes, I think for me the Harry Potter idea (and you might as well just use the ­actual 
Harry Potter—­right?) came about more from a logistical point of view ­because ­there 
is not automation in the LMS. Actually, Blackboard may have it now. We’ve been on 
Canvas for a while, and Blackboard does have badges of some sort built in. But 
­because of the lack of automation in the LMS level, the generic princi­ple is one of 
proxy. You do something good your ­whole team benefits, ­because I’m not keeping 
a gigantic ­table with 300 ­people’s scores.
BELL—­That makes sense. So back to the MOOC experiment—­you said you ran it twice 
in quick succession. Did you tweak anything between runs? Did you ramp anything 
up or scale it down?
YEE—­I actually have to report that term, and this is why ­there was no third MOOC. I 
ended up getting even busier with the day job than I was even first time around. The 
first time around, what happened was it was only a four-­week MOOC, and about 
three weeks into it I started ­running into logistical challenges. I ­didn’t have enough 
hours in the day to do the gamified parts of it, and so a ­couple of the badges ­were 
just not awarded . . . ​or I guess they ­were, but they ­were done very late in the cycle 
each time. And so I felt like I ­wasn’t ­really making as much of a presence in the dis­
cussion boards as I had wanted to, and it ended up becoming a stealth experiment 
into how much you could automate a MOOC. By the second time around I did it I 
had even less presence week to week, and still ­things ran. The Easter egg hunts still 
continued. ­People still reported like they did with the first one that they ­were in­
tensely interested in finding all the Easter eggs, and that ­really drove them to read 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    67
­things multiple times. So all of that continued, but sort of the ­house challenge—­
where the first person who posts a question this week gets a badge or what­ever, 
that kind of ­thing—­the second time around some of ­those ­things just did not get 
awarded ­because I just was not finding the time within the workweek to do it. So 
out of that guilt I did not try to run it again.
BELL—­So your MOOC stalled a ­little. You do have the faculty development piece. The 
class you are teaching you say you ­don’t see the need to implement. Do you have 
any other plans to implement anything gamified on your campus?
YEE—­No. You know, if this ­were a phone call in two years’ time—­that would be a year 
­after we do our STS event on gamification—­I would be willing to bet ­there ­will be 
some faculty on campus who are trying to develop some version of this. Unfortu­
nately, I ­don’t have much I can share with you now just ­because . . . ​we have a mil­
lion ­things we try to push, and ­there a million ­things I try to make myself an expert 
on, and gamification is only one of them. If I was a nine-­month faculty member I 
prob­ably would have taken that topic or a similar one and said, “this is my niche,” 
and kept publishing on it, but that’s not my situation.
BELL—­So obviously with your work you are generating a good degree of interest on 
your campus. Have you been seeing or hearing concerns over trivializing or from 
faculty that when you gamify your course it makes my (traditional) course seem 
even more boring by contrast. Have you had any of that kind of pushback?
YEE—­Yes. When I give my regular one-­hour workshops on gamification—­which I have 
done over the years—­there are three main concerns that I hear most frequently. 
One is about trivialization, one is about lack of universality—­what you just said—­
like “if my colleague ­doesn’t do this,” and the third, which is the deadliest of them, 
is that we are not actually addressing core motivation. What ­we’re ­doing is actu­
ally tricking the students into ­doing something. If you ­were to look into industry 
definitions of gamification it would be something along the lines of (take Four­
Square) where if you get ­people to check in to ­here they become mayor, so ­there’s 
something in it for them. In the meantime, Starbucks can now offer you a coupon 
for being nearby, that sort of ­thing. So the industry definition of gamification is 
often about taking a boring or routine pro­cess and making it fun. But that implies 
that what ­we’re teaching them in the classrooms is boring or routine, and gamifi­
cation ­doesn’t ­really fix that. To some extent it’s a critical flaw to what we do as 
gamification.
So what does it mean? Well I ­don’t purport to have all of ­those answers, but what 
it might mean is that gamification serves to create some initial interest ­after which, 
theoretically, they have bought in to the ­actual inherent content itself. Now they 

68    Game On!
might sense a reason for memorizing something like all the bones in the body in 
biology ­because it’s become in­ter­est­ing in and of itself; the game was a means to an 
end. My background is actually in languages—­I have a PhD in German—so when I 
teach German classes we have always, since the beginning of time, done some ver­
sion of games within classes to make ­things more in­ter­est­ing. So the way you mem­
orize certain prepositions can be done to the tune of, say, “Twinkle, Twinkle ­Little 
Star.” So that conversion of a game gets you somewhere ­towards them knowing it 
and remembering it, and now they care about ­these other, bigger ­things within the 
discipline. That’s a ­little bit dif­fer­ent from ­doing a semester-­long Harry Potter type 
­thing.
You know, I meet some faculty who are willing to give that ground where they 
say, “So what if it’s purely extrinsic?” Let’s say it is. ­There’s nothing intrinsic about it, 
but they come to class and they end up learning something as a result of it . . . ​even 
though I ­haven’t turned them on to the world of calculus, but they got through it 
and they enjoyed the class and [it received] good evaluations and they actually 
learned something. And maybe they ­don’t like it, or maybe they like it for the wrong 
reasons, but at least they got through my class.
BELL—­And you ­don’t hold to the trivialization argument ­either then, for similar reasons, 
I guess? It ­doesn’t ­matter why they are engaged so long as they are?
YEE—­No, that’s a ­really good question, and I think that cuts to the heart of a style ques­
tion. I ­don’t see that as trivialization—as kindergartenization—­that it seems beneath us 
as faculty members at a college level, that we would resort to ­doing this through a 
game lens. Why ­don’t we just approach this as adults? The bigger prob­lem is not so 
much the faculty pushback on that as it is faculty recognizing that ­there ­will be a 
subset of students who ­will push back on that. Gamification actually speaks to the 
lowest common denominator of students, the ones who ­will be the least likely to 
be engaged. To some extent it ­really is an imposition to the ­people who are already 
engaged for intrinsic reasons. You know, “Now you have to go through this game 
ele­ment.” “Well, what game ele­ment? Can we please talk about the bones in the 
body and how they interact with each other?”
BELL—­At least one of my other prac­ti­tion­ers said almost the same ­thing, that it’s a hook 
to get students to the level of engagement to where they are hooked by the subject 
area.
YEE—­Well, to use the flipping analogy as well, ­there are degrees of implementation 
­here. So with the flipped classroom you can flip five minutes and then create five 
minutes’ time during the lecture to do something dif­fer­ent—­you ­didn’t do very 
much. So the game version of that is stealing . . . ​one of my princi­ples is to leverage 

The Fairy Tale MOOC    69
competition. Students are, generally speaking, looking for a chance to be competi­
tive with each other, literally just for the hell of it. You ­don’t have to give them prizes 
or anything, just, like, “This half of the class won ­today,” they eat that up. So can 
you turn . . . ​that moment when you are getting a review into a game where they 
have to call out the right their answers based on what side of the room they are on. 
That’s stealing some of the princi­ples of gamification without making it a semester-­
long ­thing. You know, it makes ­today a ­little raucous, makes ­today maybe a ­little bit 
less staid and boring, but it’s not a big jump from what ­people already do now. Sort 
of microimplementations of gaming.
BELL—­So clearly your interest is still ­there. What would it take to make this ­really catch 
fire at USF?
YEE—­You never ­really know in faculty development what it ­will take. So what you hope 
is that the message itself ­will resonate enough that ­people ­will start ­doing it. That’s 
why we have it [in the STS], is that we hope faculty ­will just say, “We’ve heard of this 
flipping ­thing and at the STS I find out that it’s not too hard and ­there are ways to 
get it wrong but it’s generally quite safe to try,” so they nibble at the edges. So what 
­you’re talking about is culture change, and ­there’s a body of lit­er­a­ture around cul­
ture change, and much of it suggests it’s hard, it takes a long time, it happens via 
individual champions, and sometimes it’s po­liti­cal, yes. So, po­liti­cally, to do it at the 
first-­year experience class would mean that the person in charge [of] the first-­year 
experience class would have to be convinced that it’s a good ­thing. That would be a 
single attempt to convince someone. I think in our case, ­we’re ­going to start at the 
STS ­because that’s where the faculty themselves are. ­We’re actually restructuring 
­these days . . . ​the units like student affairs and undergraduate studies ­will be com­
bining to some extent, so the first-­year experience class may be being looked at 
again. That might be an opportunity ­there to raise my hand and to say, “Let’s look 
at this gamification ­thing again,” so you just never ­really know what’s ­going to catch 
on—or which of the vari­ous methods.
You mentioned money—­does course redesign pay? Sometimes, but ­we’ve tended 
not to incentivize around money out of my office for a ­couple of reasons. It creates 
expectation, and it’s also, to some extent, the wrong meta­phor. I think faculty 
should be revisiting their classes all the time, and they ­shouldn’t need to be paid to 
do that. It’s a ­little bit like giving faculty members five dollars ­every time they brush 
their teeth—­they ­shouldn’t be paid for ­doing that.
BELL—­Any other reflections? Anything ­else you are seeing that you think exciting?
YEE—­I’ve been reading Karl Kapp and Michelle Dickey, so whenever brochures come 
out with books I do tend to review and try to stay aware of them. ­We’re ­going to 

70    Game On!
start planning now based on the lit­er­a­ture and revised research—we have 11 months 
to plan and prepare for the next STS.
BELL—­Do you still play games? What are you playing at the moment?
YEE—­I’m playing a Steam game right now called Dungeon Defender II, and I’ve been 
playing Battlefield 4 on the Xbox when the kids are not awake (­because it’s not a 
kid-­appropriate title). Dungeon Defender II is, like many STEAM games, ­free to play. 
It’s multiplayer and it’s kind of a tower defense meets platform game. So you have 
­things you have to shoot—­your enemies—­because your towers are not strong 
enough to do it by themselves, and so it’s multiplayer, multipath tower defense with 
shooting. And you switch character roles so ­you’re dif­fer­ent classes (and you can 
switch in the ­middle of a level)—­might be good for ­these kinds of flying ­things, or 
­these towers are strong but this has the best ranged attack, what­ever this stuff is. It’s 
actually—my 13-­year-­old started playing it, and now I play it with him—­it’s a ­family 
­thing that we do.
BELL—­That’s ­great, so ­you’re keeping your sense of fun and youth . . . ​
YEE—­Yeah. One of the ­things I did recently, actually, was to bring into my office my 
games . . . ​the ones I rocked out on back in the day. It’s become part of the position­
ing or the branding of the office is that, you know, I’ve got experience in the gam­
ing industry, so I’m ­going to leverage that.
BELL—­Well, thanks so much. It’s ­great to catch up and ­great that ­you’re still working on 
this and thinking about this.
YEE—­Yes, it’s lower-­level and more on the faculty development side of ­things, but that 
is the main job, so that’s where I have to keep it for now.
BELL—­I had a ­great experience working with you, and I can report that it worked on 
me. I can report that my retention of fairy tale history and genesis is still strong. My 
­daughters thank you. Keep in touch.

C H A P T E R   F O U R
The Hero’s Journey
In bucolic Durham, New Hampshire, the picturesque campus of the Univer­
sity of New Hampshire (UNH) provides a scenic backdrop to some innovative 
programming and instruction. The UNH cata­log describes economics as
the study of how socie­ties or­ga­nize themselves to produce goods and ser­vices 
and to distribute ­those products among the members of society. In the modern 
world, a combination of market forces, public policies and social customs per­
form ­these basic economic tasks. Economists use concepts, models and data to 
analyze efficiency of resource use, fairness of economic outcomes and develop­
ment of global and national economies.
The department chair and instructor, Neil Niman, has gone beyond the 
typical bounds of a standard economics class (figure 8). He provides a snapshot 
illustrating under­pinnings to his philosophy of narrative gamification, quot­
ing Lydia Plowman’s paper “Narrative, Linearity and Interactivity: Making 
Sense of Interactive Multimedia,” “Narrative ­isn’t just a shaping device: it helps 
us think, remember, communicate and make sense of ourselves and the world. 
The role of narrative is not therefore simply aesthetic; it is central to our cog­
nition from earliest childhood” (1996, 96). For a variety of reasons, and to a 
variety of ends, as presented in this chapter, Niman runs with this concept to 
address the challenge of helping (self-­declared) nontechnical/math-­phobic 
students succeed in his class.
Background
UNH was founded and incorporated in 1866 as the New Hampshire College 
of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts, a land grant subsidiary of Dartmouth 
College in Hanover, New Hampshire (officially associated with Dartmouth 
and overseen by their president). Dartmouth is the smallest of the Ivy League 
schools and is famous for its selectivity, for its nearly 250-­year history, and for 

72    Game On!
serving as part of the inspiration (the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity) for National 
Lampoon’s Animal House. The co-­writer of the, “To-­ga-­To-­ga” / “Fat, drunk and 
stupid is no way to go through life, son,” comedy, Chris Miller, is a Dartmouth 
gradu­ate, class of 1963.
In 1891, following the bequeathal of farm and land assets by Durham resi­
dent Benjamin Thompson, the college’s move to Durham was approved. In 
1923 the college’s name was changed to the University of New Hampshire. 
UNH is home for over 15,000 students and runs the oldest endowed sustain­
ability program in higher education in the nation. In 2012, UNH was named 
the sixth “coolest school” in the country by Sierra magazine for its efforts in 
sustainability. Tuition and fees for in-­state students ­were $17,624 in 2016, 
$31,424 for out-­of-­state students, and room and board ­were around $10,000 
for undergraduates. Famous alums include John Irving, Acad­emy Award–­
winning screenwriter and novelist; Carlton Fisk, professional baseball player 
and inductee into the Baseball Hall of Fame; three former governors of New 
Figure 8. Screenshot: Support website interface for the University of New Hampshire 
EconJourney course. Reproduced with permission of Neil Niman, University of New 
Hampshire.

The Hero’s Journey    73
Hampshire; and over 20 professional hockey players graduating from UNH’s 
famous Wildcats team.
Niman studied economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz, and 
The University of Texas at Austin. He now serves as the associate dean of aca­
demic programs at UNH. At the time of the initial course development in 
2012 he served as the chair of the Department of Economics at UNH and 
was preparing for the inaugural launch of a revamped Microeconomics 101 
course. His class was typically made up of undergraduate students from a va­
riety of disciplines, many with a built-in affinity and ability with regard to the 
discipline, but ­others with no natu­ral disposition ­toward logic, rules, math, 
and related concepts. He employed a number of gradu­ate assistants (GAs), 
one of whom, “StoryCoach” Jennifer Trudeau, a fifth-­year PhD student in the 
same department, described the makeup of the class. She notes that ­there are 
a large proportion of students in the class:
Who ­aren’t necessarily the traditional economics students, a lot of economics stu­
dents are logic based, number-­kind of, applied math ­people . . . ​for ­those students 
who come in . . . ​maybe ­they’re in marketing or advertising and they have a more 
creative brain and they like to exercise ­those skills, and you ­wouldn’t typically get 
that in an economics class necessarily ­because it’s logic, rules, math and concepts.
Trudeau’s explanation introduces the concept of melding creative individuals 
and personal flavor to a microeconomics class environment focused on con­
crete facts, logic, and rules. For students to succeed, ­these facts and rules 
must be memorized and reapplied when analyzing and implementing princi­
ples of microeconomics beyond the classroom. Niman picked up on this and 
explained why the “story” has become central to his thinking about creating 
an engaging and motivating educational experience:
Stories are the way we communicate; stories are the way that we raise our ­children; 
stories are something that we do ­every moment of our life, especially now with this 
­whole social media revolution. And so, if ­we’ve trained ­people to become storytell­
ers, or storytelling emerges as part of our normal way of life, ­doesn’t it make sense 
that learning should incorporate ­those skills?
He sees the role of narrative as a multifaceted communication that develops, 
as he puts it, “organically,” blossoming into “the student’s imagination” on a 
framework that ­we’ve constructed. His hope is that in this model the student, 
with guidance, becomes vested, which makes this a more meaningful learning 

74    Game On!
experience. The idea of co-­creation of narrative to illustrate and frame con­
cepts and key course ele­ments became the signature feature of his course.
Niman and Trudeau implemented a form of gamification with ele­ments 
that are common to other models—­competition, collaboration, and rewards—­
along with another layer that they feel can provide mnemonic traction for 
learning to persist. ­These devices, they hope, ­will not only promote student 
engagement but also motivate students from a variety of backgrounds to con­
nect with the course material. Trudeau feels that their format provides stu­
dents “a dif­fer­ent way to proj­ect their voice” and hopes that they can make 
what is, for many, a difficult subject more accessible. Niman’s personal web­
site, where he has recorded much of his thinking in the genesis of this class, 
captures the rationale: “We believe that learning best takes place when it is 
part a co-­created pro­cess. Students are no dif­fer­ent from anyone ­else; they do 
not like to be told what to do. Rather, they are looking for assistance in reach­
ing goals that they establish along a journey that takes them where they would 
like to go. They need the freedom to explore, a variety of pathways to choose 
from and the tools needed to help them succeed.”
Niman’s team developed the course during fall 2013 with user testing 
scheduled for November of that year. Unfortunately, staff turnover and Ni­
man’s competing responsibilities meant that user testing was delayed ­until 
2014. The planned launch date for the class as a credit-­bearing undergraduate 
first-­year course was shifted to summer 2014. Student comments (integrated 
into the sections that follow) came from individuals on the development 
team who had taken the economics course in its ungamified versions rather 
than from students currently enrolled for credit.
The Rationale: Why Gamification?
Niman’s elevator pitch on the course was that the learning experience is fueled 
by “the student’s imagination on the framework we have created.” Co-­creation, 
the idea of story and story ele­ments as used in many games, is the fundamen­
tal philosophical pillar to the model. He sees his role as the instructor of 
the modified course to be helping students develop their stories rather than 
“spoon-­feeding” them fixed narratives or case studies that may not resonate. 
The idea of mnemonics and even whimsical memory prompts came to them 
in earlier work on helping students retain critical information. Trudeau re­
counted how she and Niman recorded a brief illustration of a key economics 
concept, “We went out and played tennis to explain the law of diminishing 

The Hero’s Journey    75
marginal returns. So it was very obvious, in that case, that the students’ re­
tention of that concept was helped by Jen looking like an idiot while playing 
tennis out on the tennis courts.” Niman and Trudeau began to reflect that it 
would be more meaningful when the examples ­were self-­generated by the 
students and then compared within the class. Emerging research into tools 
students are familiar with, like Facebook and other social media platforms, 
indicates that perceived value emerges from a co-­created pro­cess that has the 
user learning more about themselves and their friends while enhancing feel­
ings of belonging within a community of peers (Marandi, ­Little, & Hughes 
2010). Niman’s personal epiphany came when grading final papers for an 
executive MBA class, which he used as an opportunity to show a prospective 
MBA student that she was capable of participating in an academically rigor­
ous com­pany environment:
I said to [student name], “You want to go check ­these [MBA papers] out.” And it was 
a real learning experience for her, you know, ­because ­here are ­these executives’ 
writing and what’s the quality and how dif­fer­ent are they? Are they ­really good? Or 
are they ­really bad? And it’s by seeing what other ­people are ­doing that you say 
­either, “Wow, I thought ­they’d be awesome and I would be so much further ­behind,” 
or “I’m right at their level,” or even, “I can do better than them.” So it’s all about 
relative comparisons, right? And seeing what other ­people are ­doing.
Niman framed the course around the notion of relative position, positing 
that ­people gain motivation, build self-­esteem, and learn through their rela­
tionships with each other. He speculated that more effective motivators than 
points or badge systems, which he ­doesn’t particularly see to be of value, 
would be students posting their thoughts and reflections of a more personal 
nature, knowing their fellow students would rate or “like” it in a manner that 
they are very familiar and comfortable with through their social media use.
Perhaps the most transformative ele­ment of their model was the idea that 
students with dif­fer­ent skill sets may be able not only to coexist but also to 
support each other and encourage mutual discovery and learning. Encourag­
ing fuller class participation through the provision of comfort or safe zones 
may be a key benefit of gamification, what­ever the specific means and format 
that facilitate that end. Theorists such as Schell (2008) and Kapp (2012) per­
ceive failing in games not to be stigmatizing (as is often the case in academia) 
but instructive. This removal or reduction of “fear of failure,” at least hypo­
thetically, encourages student participation and can make competition a more 

76    Game On!
­viable ele­ment. In the UNH model, Elizabeth Assaf, a sophomore studying 
business administration with a concentration in information systems man­
agement and marketing, illustrated the enthusiasm typical of members of 
Generation Y when sharing their personal narratives. “If the kid sitting next 
to you has an awesome story and ­really gets the concepts ­because he’s made 
connections in ways that he can understand them and you have not and you 
know you have to pres­ent next week, that itself is competitive and game-­
like.” Again, from the recent student perspective, Abigail Hahr, a sophomore 
majoring in economics and minoring in po­liti­cal science and justice studies 
(she is also involved in the development of the course), described her prior 
experience taking the traditional course in her first year:
I was a freshman last year . . . ​it’s a ­really daunting prospect walking into an econom­
ics course, but the thought of it being more game-­like would make it less daunting. 
I can think, “OK I can do this, all I have to do is work through this game and I’m 
creating this and what I decide for my character to do ­will decide ­whether they 
succeed or not.” I think it’s less daunting—­rather than seeing all of the scary con­
cepts come at you all at once in a textbook this is more like working through them 
and giving you a better chance at grabbing them.
Ele­ments of Gamification
­Here is the description of the course as outlined for student participants:
Learn economics as you write a story.
Learning economics can be a challenge. Too many concepts are often applied in 
unrelatable contexts that have ­little meaning. EconJourney is designed to use 
the power of story to help students learn how to take complex ideas and apply 
them in ways that ­will make them understandable and memorable.
The course is broken down into 12 stages. Each stage introduces the student to 
three impor­tant concepts. They encounter a challenge that must be overcome 
and writing prompts designed to help them think about how to use economics 
to gain insight into key events in their own life. ­Every four stages create a chap­
ter and their final story ­will combine all three chapters into one coherent ­whole 
where they become the hero of their own story.
By walking students through a logical thought pro­cess, it assists them in build­
ing associations between what appear to be a series of disconnected ideas. By 

The Hero’s Journey    77
having them apply ­these concepts within the context of a story line that they 
develop, they begin to see their applicability ­toward solving a prob­lem that is 
meaningful to them. In turn, it empowers them to think about change and the 
power of narrative as both a thought pro­cess and a means of communicating 
ideas in an understandable and engaging way.
A story-­based approach to learning economic princi­ples creates an educational 
pro­cess connected with a student’s life and therefore is just one more extension 
of ­those daily activities that leads them to consider who they are and how they 
fit within the broader social fabric. The stories we tell about ourselves help us to 
establish a sense of self that can serve as the foundation for acquiring the knowl­
edge and skills that lead to personal success both in the ­here and now as well as 
into the ­future.
As Niman reflected in conversation, games and literary narratives have been 
used to illustrate economic princi­ples for a long, long time. He quotes William 
Breit and Kenneth Elzinga, who stated, “All good economic analy­sis is struc­
tured like classical detective fiction” (Breit and Elzinga 2002). Niman’s twist 
is allowing the students to personalize the narrative. He refers to his students 
as “multi-­modal consumers of information” and “storytellers who share their 
lives on a daily or even moment by moment basis.” He is convinced that sto­
rytelling for Millennials (his current audience for the most part) is more 
impor­tant than for any prior generations, with perhaps the exception of 
Arthurian troubadours with their oral histories, as means of maintaining and 
perpetuating legend. Their stories, he postulates, are not merely entertain­
ment or knowledge dissemination; they are actively being used to create a 
sense of identity and “place within a social fabric consisting of friends, rela­
tives and peers.” He feels that co-­creation, as built on the work of Prahalad and 
Ramasawamy (2004), provides a means of encouraging mastery as a means to 
a more significant (for the participants) end. He encourages the students to 
take on the role of the hero in their own story. As he explains, “By adopting 
the role of the hero in the story, the student can establish an identity within 
the context of a story that can take on epic proportions, thereby contribut­
ing to a sense of self-­esteem.” He continues, “This explains, at least in part, 
why games are so attractive, relative to other activities, and can form the 
foundation for self-­reinforcing activities.” He feels that a more interdisciplin­
ary focus in the class ­will empower students to achieve more than simply 
memorizing facts or terminology. If he can get his students to actually write 

78    Game On!
well, utilizing key concepts and terminology, he feels that they ­will be better 
motivated to engage and better equipped to retain ­these concepts further 
down the line in their education and work life. As he states:
The EconJourney pro­cess is about more than just a new way of learning economics. 
It is also about teaching students how to write, solve ­simple math prob­lems and 
become analytical thinkers. It is about promoting creativity and (hopefully) that 
learning can be fun. It is also designed to place individual action within a social con­
text; thereby helping students understand that a single individual can truly make a 
difference.
As a final justification, not that he felt he needed one, Niman touches on 
lecturing as a poor means of instruction. A 2010 survey indicated that close 
to 83% of class time is still spent lecturing despite the fact that many studies, 
including one by Walstad and Allgood, demonstrated that ­there was only a 
marginal difference in subsequent recollection of key information between a 
student that had taken an economics course and one that had not (1999). Col­
lege se­niors who had taken a class in economics scored 62% on a 15-­question 
test, only 14% higher than students scoring 48% who had never taken an eco­
nomics class in their life. The bar is disappointingly low.
Turning Students into Stakeholders
The development pro­cess for Niman’s team was initially theoretical and 
therefore, by definition, platform-­agnostic. Their early focus was on the ele­
ments and rationale rather than the precise mechanics of delivery. Develop­
ing with no fixed platform in mind was a contrast with the other cases in this 
study, where the realities and restrictions of available tools and platforms ­were 
uppermost in most teams’ minds. Not being tied to a specific learning manage­
ment system provided the team with the freedom to think more creatively. 
Niman fueled the development team with his assimilation of, and enthusiasm 
about, prior work connecting economics with mnemonic narrative. The dis­
tinguishing feature of the UNH proj­ect is that the model encourages student 
participants to develop their own narratives to better personalize the key ele­
ments that they need to remember. In his paper “The Hero’s Journey: Using 
Story to Teach Economic Princi­ples,” Niman quoted Savitz and Tedford to pro­
vide more context on this perspective, “If you read between the lines, you’ll 
discover that the entire Facebook platform is or­ga­nized around the generation 

The Hero’s Journey    79
and amplification of stories” (Savitz and Tedford 2012, 21). This concept of 
­going beyond the instructor-­provided, culturally dated narrative is clearly 
captured in the succinct statement by Trudeau, Niman’s (by most standards, 
young and connected) GA: “I’m 26 and my references are dated.” Niman elabo­
rates upon the need for personally resonant narrative, referencing Hawtrey: “It 
is about empowering students to identify pertinent content in order to create 
their own stories that are both relevant and meaningful for them” (2007, 143).
The Journey/Narrative
The UNH microeconomics journey, or EconJourney, involves a 12-­step pro­cess 
with a challenge in each step (see figure 9). To overcome the challenges, the 
students need to use economic concepts explicated by “helping applications,” 
“helping utilities,” or other cues that help them learn to understand and 
apply the concepts. The pro­cess proceeds in two parallel lines, with one de­
veloping the story and the other the concepts. The gaming incorporates both 
the journey and sharing within the group through discussion forums. In 
­these forums, students can compare stories and characters, voting for best, 
most creative, and the like.
Structurally, the story develops through a series of challenges. Meeting 
­these challenges requires the students to develop an understanding of critical 
economics concepts. The system is or­ga­nized in two synergistic tracks. In 
one the students are supported in developing a story or a narrative while, in 
the other, they are presented with explanation and illustration of key eco­
nomics concepts. Niman, like many before him including George Lucas (Star 
Wars director), was influenced by the work of Joseph Campbell, the American 
mythologist, writer, and lecturer (1904–1987). In his most influential and 
most widely cited work, The Hero with a Thousand ­Faces, Campbell identifies 
the common features and plot similarities that are evident in hero narratives 
across the millennia, from ancient times to the pres­ent day. While ­there are 
many versions of the template for the “hero’s journey” (with stages or steps 
ranging from just over half a dozen to three times that), Niman employed a 
format proposed by Christopher Vogler, author of a famous guide for screen­
writers (The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers) that lists twelve dis­
tinct stages. As figure 9 shows, the challenges are subdivided into specific, 
thematic categories bundled into three broad bands. ­After each band, stories 
are shared, and encouraging feedback is given.

80    Game On!
Band one is bracketed ­under the heading “Setting the Stage.” The four 
categories within this band are:
1.	
The Ordinary World—­the hero is described in a familiar environ­
ment where they have been living, to a degree, in a state of ignorant 
bliss. Think Luke Skywalker on Tatooine in Star Wars, Simba as a 
baby lion in The Lion King, or Woody as a child’s favorite toy in Toy 
Story.
2.	
The Call to Adventure—­some shift occurs. Some catastrophic, or 
potentially catastrophic, event happens that ­really shakes up the 
blissful content of their (now former) life. The hero realizes that 
sitting back, ­doing nothing, is not ­really the right ­thing and starts to 
“overcome their ignorance,” as Niman puts it, becoming a positive 
force for change. Think of Skywalker (Star Wars, again the obvious 
analogy) or Po the Panda in Kung Fu Panda (for the younger readers).
3.	
Avoiding (or Refusing) the Call—­cold feet. In starting to understand 
the magnitude of what needs to be done, the hero develops dread 
and actually starts to step back from the challenge. She or he at­
tempts to hold on to the past and wishes it had all never happened. 
Figure 9. Screenshot: Initial draft interface for the UNH EconJourney course. Reproduced 
with permission of Neil Niman, University of New Hampshire.

The Hero’s Journey    81
Think of any sports hero movie where the training is tough, the 
opponent is scary, or the odds against are high.
4.	
Acquiring Skills, Tools, and Knowledge, Meeting with the Mentor—­
the desire in the previous step to walk away is overcome by further 
recognition that if nothing is done, every­thing ­will be lost, and the 
­future ­will be untenable. The scale of the prob­lem and the under­
standing that ­there is no other option allows the hero to overcome 
his or her fear and persevere, through training and hardship, to 
acquire the skills to ultimately succeed. Traditionally an older, wiser 
mentor figure appears, sometimes by magic, and commits to training 
and educating the younger, naive hero. Think Rocky, Bruce Lee, The 
Karate Kid, or Winter the dolphin in A Dolphin’s Tale.
The second band within the journey is titled “The Journey Begins.”
5.	
Crossing the First Threshold—­having got around all the prevarication 
and committed to saving (or finding or killing) something, the hero 
typically travels to a new environment to train and study the chal­
lenge while starting to hone potential solutions. The location 
provides a fresh perspective but reinforces the sense that if he or she 
­doesn’t act, every­thing, including this new place (not just the hero’s 
own home base), ­will be destroyed. Thor coming to earth in the movie 
of the same name comes to mind without much specificity as to what 
he does or why.
6.	
Friends, Enemies, and Challenges—­Captain Amer­i­ca: Civil War has 
now defined this category for a new generation of cinemagoers. In this 
stage, as the hero continues preparation, friends become rivals or 
threats to his or her mission to save/find/kill someone or something. 
The hero has to persevere and keep learning, training, and developing 
ideas to eventually meet the ultimate challenge (often referred to in 
gaming parlance as the boss ­battle—­more on this ­later).
7.	
Uncovering New Knowledge (or Approach to the Innermost Cave)—­
having made it through the preceding stages with much existential 
angst alongside tangible challenge, the hero develops a sense that the 
answer was somehow ­there all along. The veil of ignorance begins to 
fall away, and the hero begins to see that a solution and ultimate 
victory is pos­si­ble ­after all. George Lucas cultivated his Star Wars 
characters so that they came to see the power of The Force and 
realized that all was not despair and doom.

82    Game On!
8.	
Facing the Ultimate Challenge—­typically something ­will come up 
that ­will threaten the ­whole episode—­a late twist, a re-­emergent 
threat or challenge that was considered already vanquished. The 
hero has to overcome this, hopefully, final challenge.
The third and final band is titled “The Road to Victory.”
9.	
Formulating a Solution—­having faced and conquered that ultimate 
challenge, the hero is now fully empowered and ready to return 
home and address the key threat.
10.	 Encountering One Last Challenge—as the hero nears home, one final 
challenge arises that produces one final seed of doubt as to ­whether 
the solution/training package is actually pointing at the truth and/
or ­whether her or his solution ­really solves the prob­lem. This 
confirmation check is often thought of as the final piece of the 
puzzle—­the last lingering qualm assuaged, the certainty of a hero set 
in noble bronze.
11.	 Mysteries Revealed—an opportunity for reflection on how far the 
hero has come, how his or her doubts and insecurities have been 
peeled away, leaving a sense of certainty and a resolution to complete 
the task. Frequently a sense of “this is why I was chosen.” A final 
girding of the loins before ­going into ­battle.
12.	 Celebrating Victory—in a magnanimous, calm sort of way, demon­
strating humility and a suggestion of reluctant hero-­hood, the hero 
returns home, slays the monster, and changes the world for the better.
Niman gives examples (beyond the pop culture Star Wars / Kung Fu Panda / Toy 
Story examples given) where au­then­tic, real-­world challenges could frame a 
hero’s journey, including
•	
Climate change suddenly getting very serious, making the Earth 
basically uninhabitable;
•	
The exhaustion of all fossil fuels and conventional energy sources.
•	
Population explosion to an extent that the Earth cannot feed its 
inhabitants;
•	
A sudden dictatorship or emergence of megacorporations that enrich 
themselves at the expense of every­one ­else on the planet; and
•	
Some form of cyber-­attack rendering all electronic devices inoperable 
(imagine the panic for the 19–22-­year-­old with this disaster).

The Hero’s Journey    83
Despite ­these examples, Niman still hopes that students ­will use the guid­
ing framework to support the development of their own personal narrative 
stating, “We always intended to create some sort of forum where students 
­will be able to share their writing initially within a smaller team then more 
widely with other students in the class.” Despite this very student-­centered 
nature of the activity, he obviously also wants students to be afforded the op­
portunity to share their narratives with their professor. Alongside the in­
structor’s more considered, or academic, feedback, he hopes to generate more 
peer interaction asking questions along the lines of, “OK, so who had the best 
character?” Since the journey is broken into thirds, at the conclusion of each 
band ­there is an immediate opportunity for the students to pause on the core 
memorization of economics and instead, using the concepts and terminol­
ogy they have reviewed, construct a story in three main sections (or twelve 
steps). ­These stories ­will get them feedback on both their grasp of the key 
terms but also on the excitement and vividness of their writing, their creativ­
ity, and their imagination. ­After each band, each student ­will award gold, sil­
ver, and bronze rankings to the three stories they thought ­were the best. The 
instructor, or his GAs, ­will convert the awards to points and post the leaders 
to a leaderboard ­under the hero’s (rather than the student’s) name. Through 
this format both social interaction and a degree of competitiveness ­will be 
built into the model.
At the end of the course the students ­will be directed to put the ­whole 
story together and ­will receive comprehensive feedback again on both as­
pects. Niman hopes that this social ele­ment, blended with supportive and 
constructive instructor feedback, ­will provide a richer source of encourage­
ment that translates to increased student engagement and time-­on-­task. As 
an extra support, Niman employs “Storytellers” in the build. ­These recent 
gradu­ates of the class provide culturally relevant, age-­appropriate sample 
narratives so that, encouraged by their examples, the enrolled students ­will 
overwrite the provided examples with their own fully personalized narra­
tive. The final, hyper-­personalized context ultimately ­will serve as a mne­
monic tool to help students weave economic concepts into a framework 
that they can recall when needed. ­After all the students complete their 
journey and share their full story with their “Journey Team,” the top hero/
story from each subgroup ­will be labeled “Superheroes,” and their stories 
­will be shared via a blog that the entire class ­will review before voting to 
determine the class “Ultimate Hero.” The professor ­will retain the authority 

84    Game On!
to elevate stories that he considers of special merit to contend for the final 
recognition.
Trudeau connected their model to a direct gaming format, contextualiz­
ing the Millennial student’s comfort with the evolving story format: “­There 
are many dif­fer­ent types of games. ­There are the massive multiplayer role-­
playing games (MMORPGs) that are story-­based. The story is evolving and 
you have to do ­these tasks within the story and eventually ­there’s some out­
come that you get to at the end, which is, I think, very much what ­we’re try­
ing to do except that ­we’re having them create the story that is evolving.”
Her own illustrative example comes from current pop culture, “The Hunger 
Games trilogy has a lot of economic under­pinnings in it so when I read it I 
sunk my teeth into it . . . ​it’s politics and economics and ­we’re dealing with 
scarcity and how ­people are fighting with it. If you sit down and read it, you 
can make the connection.”
Niman is comfortable with this construct, when many other instructors 
perhaps are not. Certainly, students in this kind of environment have a greater 
degree of autonomy than would be seen in a didactic lecture environment. 
As focus in academia has sharpened on student-­centered learning (SCL), his 
work seems well aligned with the core princi­ples of this approach:
•	
Students solve prob­lems, answer questions, formulate questions of 
their own, discuss, explain, debate, or brainstorm throughout the 
learning experience.
•	
Students are presented with or collaboratively formulate big-­picture 
challenges for themselves that frame and motivate their learning. 
­These are real-­world-­applied, significant challenges that require a 
multifaceted approach to resolve.
•	
Active involvement and participation are necessary for learning.
Niman again quotes Prahalad and Ramaswamy, “Co-­creation as a part of 
learning is not about ceding control of the educational pro­cess to the stu­
dent, nor is it about joint knowledge creation, rather it is about creating an 
experience environment in which students can have an active dialogue and 
co-­construct personalized experiences that ­will facilitate the learning pro­cess” 
(2004, 9). Summarizing, Niman adds, “It is about creating an environment 
where a student can take abstract constructs and turn them into relatable 
concepts that have meaning for them.”

The Hero’s Journey    85
Cooperation
In the EconJourney class, each student is randomly assigned to a team termed 
the Journey Team. Each team ­will consist of at least six students, with each 
working in­de­pen­dently on their story, completing initial ele­ments including 
their hero character and their own unique context. Following ­every fourth 
step of the journey (see figure 9), students ­will upload their work to a Journey 
Team blog and ­will be required to review the pro­gress of their teammates. In 
this collaborative phase, each team member ­will be asked to award gold, sil­
ver, and bronze rankings to the top three in their team. Niman conveyed the 
pos­si­ble value of class participation by noting, “What might be the most ef­
fective piece of the learning experience is not necessarily creating your own 
story but seeing the other stories that students in the class have created.”
Competition
Niman’s personal philosophy on the value of competition is captured in this 
quote, “­Whether it is against other players, some per­for­mance standard or an 
imaginary opponent, competition often brings out the best in each of us.” The 
narratives in the class are posted to the class leaderboard ­under the individual 
hero’s name. Positions on the board are not directly grade-­related and so run 
no risk of violating federal privacy guidelines. When all heroes have completed 
the journey and shared their stories with their team, the highest-­ranking indi­
vidual narratives ­will be labeled “Superheroes” and ­will be posted to the main 
collaborative area where the entire class ­will review and vote for their “Ulti­
mate Hero.” Individuals whose heroes did not make it to the final competition 
can submit their completed narrative to the professor, who may choose addi­
tional contenders, thus ensuring that ­those who thoughtfully connect narra­
tive and key economic concepts can get recognized. This kind of in-­class peer 
competition is not intended to produce grade pressure (or a pressure to suc­
ceed) but rather to lead to the development of self-­esteem when stories are 
shared in a safe environment and other students like or recognize each other’s 
work. Although ­there may be students whose work is neither graded well nor 
upvoted in the narrative/journey side of the equation, the extra means of rec­
ognition suggest that all students have a greater range of possibilities for gain­
ing esteem through ­either their economics understanding, their creativity, or 
other ele­ments that the instructor chooses to recognize.

86    Game On!
Technical Build
In fall 2013, Niman’s team was empowered (but also arguably limited) by 
the lack of platform and technological specifications that they had in place. 
UNH, as part of the state system, runs the Blackboard learning management 
system. Even as the course was always likely to be connected to the larger 
institutional system, Niman was comfortable linking out to other develop­
ment platforms they might end up using. He consciously encouraged think­
ing outside the box, and so his team’s language was creative yet lacking detail 
in terms of concrete implementation:
­We’ll have some sort of notes section where they can type notes to themselves and 
dump that into a database, and then they can pull that up at any time so they ­don’t 
have to remember ­these ­things. So at the end of this sort of brainstorming stage 
­we’re talking about, ­they’ll have a button that ­will call up the choices ­they’ve made. 
We had started with Wordpress, the blog developing software, but for the ideas we 
had [as a team] we felt that it ­wouldn’t support our needs—we wanted to have a 
database ­behind a dynamic site.
Student Reaction
Samantha-­Jo Virga, a ju­nior economics major at UNH, commented on the 
importance of personalized content in the hero’s journey model and the po­
tential that it may have for retention of information. Her comments ­were 
based on her own academic experience and the development team’s discus­
sions, “That article that your teacher says, ‘Read this’—am I ­going to retain it 
a year ­later? I doubt it. But if ­you’re making your own story that’s kind of cool 
so ­you’re ­going to . . . ​I would assume, remember it—­bits and pieces at least.” 
She wondered ­whether the instructor role would change in this less instructor-­
didactic, more student-­centric environment:
That’s hard to say—it could change a lot of ­things. As it stands, I feel like ­unless you 
get to know your instructor well the roles are ­really separate. ­They’re the faculty, 
­you’re the student. In this model I would hope that the student gets more passion­
ate about the materials and maybe . . . ​you would get more discussion and debate 
about the stories. So perhaps the instructor does become more of a coach—­more of 
a guide—­rather than throwing information at you and then just seeing if you do 
well on the exams.

The Hero’s Journey    87
Elizabeth Assaf, a sophomore who acted as pi­lot tester and “Storybuilder” on 
Niman’s team, reflected on the potential for the model to allow participants 
to go beyond their usual classroom persona—­something that is particularly 
useful if they are labeled, ­either by themselves or institutionally, as an under­
achiever. “It’s the concepts of gaming, creating that experience where ­you’re 
playing that character that might not essentially be who you are, but it might 
be who you want to be. So if ­you’re striving academically to be the person you 
want to be, academic standards-­wise, and ­you’re creating that experience to 
get ­there then it could be completely dif­fer­ent from the usual pass or fail in 
this classroom.” As a self-­declared high achiever, Assaf is self-­aware enough 
to know that she does not necessarily represent all students who ­will be tak­
ing this entry-­level economics class. This was a theme shared by almost all of 
the student-­developers: that ­there ­will be students in the EconJourney class 
who are ­there ­because they have to be rather than ­because they want to be. 
Although aware of differing student types, the team did not manipulate the 
design for par­tic­u­lar subgroups, feeling that all students would benefit from 
the gamification. According to Assaf, “Some students are ­there ­because they 
have to be ­there. We want to take that and make it so ­every kind of student 
finds some type of interest in this program and is willing to put in even a 
tiny bit of knowledge and work. Even among the high achievers ­there are a 
lot of students who think, ‘I’ll memorize this and then forget about it.’ ”
Outcomes
Niman is comfortable speaking of the EconJourney model as a gamified 
course while distancing himself from what he perceives as the norm for 
gamified courses. He distinguished between courses that have some added 
game ele­ments versus ­those that have been fully gamified, stating, “The 
­whole approach is sort of a gamified approach where, just as in a game, I cre­
ate an avatar, I develop a character, the character builds skills, the character 
has experiences, they overcome challenges, they see how they are growing 
and progressing, and they feel good about themselves. I mean, that’s gamifi­
cation more than just giving someone a badge or something like that.”
When discussing ele­ments such as cooperation, competition, and recogni­
tion, the UNH team conceives of ­these coming as embedded ele­ments in the 
course rather than as the instructor granting awards or badges. This approach 
fits with the open nature of their narrative (student-­led) and their idea of 

88    Game On!
co-­creation to engender buy-in and mnemonic retention of information. Rec­
ognition by virtue of social/peer approval also reflects mechanisms such as 
“liking” in Facebook, accruing approval from peers on platforms and imple­
menting tools used by the target demographic for this course. Millennial stu­
dents tend to be, in Niman’s experience, more comfortable sharing informal 
feedback in a social media–­like environment than they are formally assessing 
their peers academically.
A third part of the model that Niman feels could have ­great value is the 
potential for social support to reduce failure anxiety. He feels that reducing 
fear of anxiety could be of par­tic­u­lar value for less-­confident learners, such as 
first-­generation college attendees or fragile learners: “Many students seem to 
be more interested in managing risk than achieving success. ­Whether they 
are trying to prevent losing points on an exam, looking foolish answering a 
question in class or selecting easy rather than difficult courses to take, it is 
more about averting losses than gaining success. The EconJourney pro­cess is 
designed to build students up so that that they are more willing to take a risk 
and try to learn something new. It is about replacing fear with achievement.”
The development team hopes that the blend of mnemonic aid and addi­
tional student-­generated context ­will stimulate dialogue, encourage sharing, and 
allow the fun context of the activities to counteract the more typically daunting 
atmosphere of the economics environment for non-­economics/math majors.
Although the team emphasizes encouraging creative, non-­logic/non-­math-­
minded students in the milieu of economics, an associated benefit is that their 
model is likely to encourage logic/math-­minded economics majors to think 
and write creatively. This serendipitous bonus is something that may help sci­
ence majors whose only writing training typically comes in general education 
En­glish and social studies classes that are often forgotten when students get 
back to their science or math-­based coursework.
Niman summarizes the potential for his gamified format to develop com­
petencies beyond ­those usually emphasized in an economics or STEM course, 
“­We’re trying to do more than just teach economics. So ­there ­will be a lot of 
critical reasoning to overcome ­these challenges and certainly to develop the 
students’ stories. ­There’s also a big focus on writing and communication 
skills so ­we’re trying to sort of cover all of that. Writing ­isn’t an add-on in the 
class, writing is an integral part of the class.”
As institutions face increasing pressure to confirm teaching effectiveness 
and tangible student output competencies, the cross-­disciplinary, interwoven 

The Hero’s Journey    89
nature of Niman’s format merits encouragement. If he is able to increase the 
pre­sen­ta­tion skills of economics majors, develop the capacity of non–­math ma­
jors to grasp central concepts of microeconomics, or even just generally im­
prove student engagement, then his model ­will be validated. This potential is 
certainly uppermost in Niman’s mind, as illustrated in his paper, “The Gamifi­
cation of Higher Education: Designing a Game-­Based Business Strategy in a 
Disrupted Marketplace,” in which he comments, “We are failing our students. 
Some think it is ­because the material we teach is not very relevant for ­today’s 
economy. ­Others think it is ­because something fundamental has shifted and, 
as a result, learning styles are no longer in step with the way higher education 
is delivered. I think it is ­because we have not engaged students in a way that 
has made their educational experience a personal one with demonstrable ben­
efits and a clear rationale for how it is ­going to make them more successful.”
When asked about the motivation and need for a new model such as this, 
Trudeau stresses the potential long-­term value, “­There are not many jobs now 
where you go and sit in a room by yourself—­it’s very much collaborative and 
working with ­others—so if you need to get your point across, this may be 
another way to articulate the numbers story in a dif­fer­ent way.” In a final re­
flection, Niman alludes to the potential for extension of his concepts to wider 
audiences:
I could see this format as an add-on to a traditional class or it might be a substitute 
for a traditional class . . . ​might be something that somebody just wants to do. Our 
thought is just to build the site and make it available to anybody and every­body. In 
­future iterations, we may target someone who is sitting in their living room who is 
not part of a degree program at all. They may be attracted to one, any or all aspects 
of the proj­ect, “I’m creative, I’d like to write a story and I’d like to learn a ­little eco­
nomics in the pro­cess.”
Given the low completion rates of online courses—­particularly MOOCs—
a hero’s journey model such as the one being developed by the UNH team 
would have to fulfill only a small portion of its potential to merit further 
study. Trudeau’s summary is appropriate in its scope and encouraging in its 
conviction, “I think if you can get students more interested [in academic con­
tent], be it through competition, self-­discovery, better examples or what­ever, 
you can only make the learning experience a better one. I’ve stood in front of 
the class and seen the ­people who are enjoying it and getting it and compar­
ing that to ­those who just ­don’t care. Finding a new strategy to get ­those 

90    Game On!
students to care is . . . ​attractive. I’m hopeful that it ­will kind of make the 
subject ­matter more accessible to a broader population.”
Where Are They Now?
On May 17, 2016, I spoke with Niman to see where he had got to with the EconJourney 
proj­ect. My questions ­were, How has the proj­ect evolved? Has it grown or atrophied at the 
institution?
BELL—­So Neil, thanks for taking my call. I’m wondering if you could fill me in on the 
two years since we reviewed the EconJourney proj­ect together back in 2013–14.
NIMAN—­This past year we ­were ­doing EconJourney 2.0 and ­we’ve got some ­really in­ter­
est­ing ideas ­we’re ­going to implement over the summer to create version 3.0. With 
EconJourney we did it in a single class. We focused more on sort of telling a story 
rather than learning economics, we ­didn’t ­really implement any of the games stuff 
well, and we ­didn’t ­really know what we ­were ­doing, so it was sort of a disaster.
Then we sort of cleaned it up a ­little bit and ran it again and had a lot more suc­
cess. Part of it was we knew what we ­were ­doing, and we’d made some pretty fun­
damental changes and restructured the content. The students ­were ­really receptive 
to it, and that sort of spurred us to come up with version 2.0. We did a total site re­
design, so the look and feel was entirely dif­fer­ent, and a lot of the content was dif­
fer­ent. You know, we had gone into the proj­ect design with ­great enthusiasm but 
­didn’t ­really think of it from the student perspective. They ­didn’t want to read any­
thing, and they ­don’t want to click on anything. They just want to do as ­little as 
pos­si­ble and the key question became, “How can we better engage them?” Version 
2.0 is focusing on changing the way we presented the material, by creating a more 
linear design in the site and better specifying what our expectations are and what 
they [the students] need to do.
And so now ­we’re ­doing version 3.0. We’ve been focused on getting the content 
down, and now we have a better idea of what content we need. ­We’re ­going to 
continue to refine the content and add game ele­ments that ­don’t exist. We redid 
the challenges so now they tell a story and serve as an example of what it is we ex­
pect the students to write. ­We’re creating a more engaging story, but now ­we’re 
­going to add some agency where the students can pick dif­fer­ent forks in the story 
so that they feel more part of ­things. Then at the end of the story, ­they’re ­going to 
be able to pick what happens and choose (we ­haven’t figured out what ­we’re calling 
it yet) a talent or a skill that the character in the story develops. This ­will earn the 
equivalent of a badge, and ­they’ll be asked to use that in their stage writing. Then at 

The Hero’s Journey    91
the end it’s sort of like a personality test, where ­we’ll tell them the twelve character­
istics, traits or talents that they identified and what it means. So that it’s sort of 
this New Age, self-­help kind of ­thing, while at the same stage [they] sort of learn 
economics . . . ​and we continue to hope that they draw a better connection be­
tween the character that ­they’re writing about and their own perceptions of them­
selves. This is getting back to that “changing mindset” stuff that we ­were working 
on a ­couple of years ago. We are embracing that and looking at the semester (and 
at each stage) as a series of interventions that hopefully at the end empowers them 
to think that this validated their character make a difference so that they can make a 
difference too.
BELL—­What ­you’re saying is that the original (1.0 version) was too loosely structured? 
Allowed the students too much freedom of choice and movement?
NIMAN—­The first version we took kind of a sandbox approach, “­Here’s a sandbox and a 
bucket and you go build a sandcastle.” The students ­were like, “Well I’ve never seen 
a sandcastle and ­don’t know how to do a sandcastle,” or “I ­can’t decide.” We dis­
covered that they need more guidance than that, so we put more structure into the 
site, but ­we’re still trying to slip ­things in without them realizing it. And the content 
we redeveloped and rewrote to try to make it more engaging, snappier, and briefer. 
­We’re trying to give them a ­little more structure, so now we give them writing 
prompts. In fact, we went [in 2.0] too far the other direction. We gave them very 
specific writing prompts, and all they did was take them and essentially turn them 
into a series of essay questions. The students shifted to, “well I’ll just answer the 
writing prompt,” rather than thinking about how the writing prompt was intended 
to nudge them and to get them to think what to write. So in version 3.0 ­we’re 
throwing away all the existing writing prompts, and ­we’ve come up with a new way 
of envisioning how ­we’re ­going to get them to pull out concepts and use the con­
cepts in their writing.
The part I forgot to mention is this past year ­we’ve used version 2.0, and we have 
had a tremendous amount of success. In the fall we used it in a class of two hundred, 
and I had an instructor teach two sections of a hundred students in each. One sec­
tion used a formal publisher’s e-­text and support materials, and in the other section 
he used EconJourney. The lectures ­were exactly the same, the exams ­were exactly 
the same, every­thing was the same except a difference in the electronic learning 
platforms. What we discovered was that students ­didn’t perform any worse on the 
exams using EconJourney than they did using the formal publisher’s e-­text and sup­
port materials. In terms of preference, students ­didn’t strongly prefer one over the 
other, and so we ­were feeling ­really good about that, as I ­don’t know how many 

92    Game On!
millions of dollars ­were spent developing [the formal publisher’s e-­text and support 
materials], but we spent, I ­don’t know, a few hundred bucks, three weeks of my wife’s 
time, and what­ever time I put in developing the content. So it goes to show, we ­didn’t 
see any difference in learning outcomes whatsoever, and the students ­were equally 
satisfied without having to spend tens of millions of dollars. Then we used it again 
last semester and ran the same experiment, but the professor used a dif­fer­ent 
­[formal publisher’s] e-­text and support materials instead of the previous publisher’s 
e-­text and support materials. As far as she can tell (the students just took their final 
exams on Friday), throughout the semester EconJourney students did equally as well 
on the standard exams.
So we did this semester to see if hopefully EconJourney is yielding better results 
on what we ­really care about ­because the questions ­were sort of standard multiple-­
choice questions, the kind you would see in a mindless economics class—­nothing 
special. It occurred to me that in EconJourney, ­we’re hoping to improve their writing 
ability, and ­we’re hoping to get them to think critically and to get them to use the 
concepts in a meaningful and relevant way. So what we did this semester (and ­we’re 
grading them as we speak) is, in addition to the multiple-­choice exam we wrote a 
special EconJourney question. We gave them a ­couple of paragraphs of text and 
asked them to pull out econ concepts and use them in a meaningful way. So ­we’re 
about to evaluate how the students did in ­those terms, and what ­we’re hoping is 
that in the “plain Jane vanilla” economics exams EconJourney students ­don’t do any 
worse. But [we hope] in terms of something that asks them to use the concepts in a 
meaningful way, that they do a lot better, and ­we’ll have ­those results in a week 
or two.
Something ­else that ­we’re ­going to do is ­we’re ­going to reach back to ­those stu­
dents who took the class in the fall semester and ask them to take an exam and to 
see if the EconJourney kids retain their knowledge of economics any better than 
they do with the formal publisher’s e-­text and support materials kids—­that’s some­
thing that we want to test.
And then what’s ­really exciting, or nerve-­wracking, is when we roll out version 
3.0 next fall ­we’ll have 650 students, using EconJourney 3.0.
BELL—­Can you tell me where you went with the tech platform? It was very basic in the 
pi­lot, and it was something you had said you wanted to work on.
NIMAN—­We’re still using WordPress. We’ve found ways to make the platform more 
power­ful so the students move through levels. They can follow a pro­gress bar, and 
­we’ve set it up so they can get immediate feedback, so ­we’ve been able to do a lot 
more with the WordPress environment. So ­we’re still staying in the WordPress 

The Hero’s Journey    93
environment, and, in fact, one of the papers that I’d ­really like to write if I ever get 
­free time is how WordPress can be used in this way with this ­whole movement for 
open educational resources. The one big impediment in the way is, well, if you want 
some sort of electronic learning platform to support some open resource, you’ll 
find the major publishers have a stranglehold on that. Basically, you move[d] away 
from the environment where they charge for the textbook and threw the software 
in for ­free, and now ­they’re charging for the software and throw the textbook in for 
­free. So what ­we’re trying to do is ­we’re trying to say, “Hey—­we’ll give you a tem­
plate, ­we’ll show you how to build your own Journey platform and you can do this 
for relatively few dollars,” and ­really eliminate the last barrier to entry that the text­
book companies have to maintain their stranglehold on the market.
So this summer I’ve hired a gradu­ate student to develop an Eco-­Journey (as in 
ecol­ogy, not economics), and I’ve hired an undergrad to help him build that and 
document every­thing that’s done so that at the end of the summer we could basi­
cally distribute a guide that says to other faculty and even other institutions, “Hey, if 
you want to develop your own journey approach, ­here’s how to do it.”
BELL—­That’s ­great. Before we wrap, I’d like to talk to you about a second proj­ect that 
has sparked off at UNH, something that you described to me back in 2013 as your 
ultimate goal, and what you saw as an expression of gamification’s massive poten­
tial on a campus-­wide implementation. Can we talk about that?
NIMAN—­Well, I think that that might merit a separate chapter all to itself. Do you want 
to come back to that ­later—­say, chapter 9?
BELL—­Sounds ­great. See you ­there.

C H A P T E R   F I V E
Ethical Decision Making
The University of Waterloo (UW), established in 1957, is a public research, 
co-ed university with its main campus in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. It has a 
reputation as one of the leading proponents of cooperative education, placing 
over 19,000 of its 27,000 undergraduate students with over 5,200 employers 
annually. It was founded with the goal of educating the engineers and tech­
nicians Canada needed for its postwar development. UW’s second chancellor 
cultivated the system, blending classroom, academic study with industry train­
ing, forming the basis of the co-op program. Its location in a key region, in 
what is referred to as Canada’s Technology Triangle, has provided both oppor­
tunity and impetus to support and populate fledgling startups and growing 
businesses, all in a synergistic relationship with what has been called one of 
the top economic development organ­izations in Canada. Through its Research 
and Technology Park on its North Campus, businesses are granted access to 
the university’s faculty, co-op students, and alumni as well as use of the uni­
versity’s facilities and resources. Among over 160,000 gradu­ates are John Baker, 
founder of Desire2Learn, and Mike Lazaridis, cofounder of the com­pany that 
became BlackBerry Ltd. The school is proud of its reputation that its faculty, 
students, and alumni have formed more companies than any other Canadian 
university, a reputation that has seen the university labeled “the Silicon Val­
ley of the North.” Canadian citizens and permanent residents pay between 
C$9,000 and C$15,000 for tuition and books, with international students and 
nonpermanent residents paying more than double that. ­There is a C$658 
co-op fee, and housing and meals have to be added to the above fees.
UW’s institutional openness to the possibilities of gamification was publi­
cally demonstrated when it hosted the 2013 Gamification conference. This 
was the second time that the university had hosted this event, a conference 
that brings together academic researchers and industry leaders to engage in 
discussions and demonstrations of gamification in health care, marketing, 

Ethical Decision Making    95
education, and entertainment. All told, around three hundred attendees from 
all sectors of business and academia participated, including a broad range of 
nationalities from beyond the United States and Canada.
The Rationale: Why Gamification?
The Waterloo Professional Development (WatPD) core at UW was developed 
by the faculty to support the experiential learning of the university’s co-op 
students. The format of WatPD, online courses in topics related to their real-­
world experience, allows students to continue to engage with the institution 
while they are “out” immersed in their co-op. The central idea is that ­these 
fully online, credit-­bearing courses ­will allow students to arm themselves 
against, or react to, real-­world challenges. They provide students with the op­
portunity to develop skills that UW faculty and administrators feel ­will im­
prove their subsequent employability and workplace productivity. The courses 
have always included an ele­ment of constructivism—­asynchronous discussion 
areas created to encourage students to reflect on connections between the 
workplace, their academic courses, and their ­career path. UW’s own lit­er­a­ture 
describes the program as emblematic of “Waterloo’s commitment to innova­
tion in teaching, technology, and co-­operative education.” The overall objec­
tives of the WatPD program are listed as:
•	
To enhance the overall work-­integrated learning experience of co-op 
students by providing engaging and relevant online courses to 
improve students’ employability and workplace productivity.
•	
To promote the integration of what is learned at work with what is 
learned during academic terms through critical reflection.
•	
To enable peer learning and foster a sense of community among 
co-op students.
The WatPD program has four required courses and eight electives. Ethical 
Decision Making PD9 (figure 10) is one of the electives. ­These courses are 
designed to be concrete and succinct, intended to take students between 20 
and 25 hours to complete including time spent reading, watching, and listen­
ing to course content and completing course assessments. Students who self-­
reported through surveys (with an impressive 75% completion rate averaged 
across courses) confirmed 20 to 25 hours of work during the 10 weeks that 
the course runs. The fact that the WatPD courses are available for students to 
take while they are actually placed at their co-op during a “work-­term,” as 

96    Game On!
UW calls it, allows them immediately to apply the knowledge they are gaining 
to the work environment. The courses include assessments and formative (in­
structor) feedback on individual assignments, quizzes, tests, and exercises. The 
final grade in the course is binary, submitted to the registrar’s office as ­either 
a CR (credit) or NCR (no credit) and appearing on students’ transcripts in that 
format. UW administrators feel that ­these courses do not require a proctored 
final exam, as plagiarism is not felt to be a major risk given the clear partici­
pation benefits and fairly low academic requirements for the students. The 
official course description for Ethical Decision Making reads,
Borrowing from philosophy, game theory and economics, this course equips co-
op students with both theoretical and practical knowledge needed to make ethi­
cal decisions in an ever-­changing and increasingly competitive workplace. How 
we act ­will affect ­others.  And insofar as our actions affect the well-­being of 
­others, ethics has something to say about how we conduct ourselves. A basic as­
sumption of the course is that interests and incentives drive ­human be­hav­ior. 
With a clear understanding of how interests and incentives affect the decisions 
­people make, students ­will be better prepared to navigate the complexities of 
ethical decision making in the workplace.
Greg Andres is an assistant professor in philosophy and instructional sup­
port coordinator at UW. He develops courses for the WatPD program taken 
by approximately 16,000 students each year. Andres discussed how his inter­
est in gamification developed from experiences in his face-­to-­face classes and 
transitioned to his online class Ethical Decision Making:
In lectures, on campus, I started using i-­clickers just to encourage attendance and 
participation—­and it’s incentivized so they get—­well, this term it’s 15% [of their fi­
nal grade]. If they come to class and answer 75% of the questions they get 15% just 
for sitting in the seat. I teach a lot of the concepts by just having games, and I have 
them play against me. ­They’re usually just game theory games, so ­there are two 
decisions to be made, two players: ­here are the outcomes, use your i-­clicker, how 
would you play it? It works beautifully. In the lecture, I ask a question, “How many 
of you are familiar and understand the prisoner’s dilemma?” And they are all very 
confident (80%), “Yeah, we know how to play.” “Alright, let’s play a game.” And the 
majority of students play irrationally, so it’s like—in what sense? You highlight that 
disconnect—­you think you know how to play, let’s talk about it. Then I thought, 
“That’s got to work online,” and it was just a hunch, in an online context, this has . . . ​

Ethical Decision Making    97
something similar has to work. We can take the course concepts and not just have 
them passively, you know, listen to it or read it, but, “­Here’s a game, let’s play it.”
Andres explained that the flexibility of games allows him to provide new 
situations where students can apply course concepts. UW is known for the em­
phasis it places on co-op programs. On the UW website, a statement on “The 
Mission of Co-­operative Education” emphasizes that the program is designed to 
“inspire uWaterloo students to connect to the possibilities in a continuously 
changing world of work; enable them to bridge their academic and workplace 
knowledge; challenge them to learn, grow, and contribute wherever they go.”
Andres believes ­there are aspects of gaming that clearly motivate and en­
gage gamers and resonate with the goals and aspirations of co-­operative edu­
cation. As students take his course while active on co-op, he is hopeful that 
the embedded games and game ele­ments ameliorate the jarring contrast be­
tween the lived experience of the real workplace and that of school. ­There are 
Figure 10. Screenshot: University of Waterloo Ethical Decision Making course. 
Reproduced with permission of Greg Andres, University of Waterloo.

98    Game On!
certainly ele­ments emphasized in the lit­er­a­ture on experiential education 
(Kolb 1984) that would seem to overlap with skills needed to perform well in 
a gaming environment. The need to think quickly in rapidly changing situa­
tions, the ability to make informed decisions, and the opportunity to receive 
immediate, corrective feedback are all key ele­ments of experiential learning 
that gaming advocates would find familiar. Other ele­ments of experiential 
environments, including competition for rewards and penalties or stigma for 
failure, are also not uncommon in both real-­world and virtual games.
Ethical Decision Making: The Gamified WatPD Course
The objectives of the Ethical Decision Making course specifically (as opposed 
to the general WatPD program aims mentioned earlier) include building an 
understanding of ethical issues in the workplace and fostering students’ abil­
ity to take personal responsibility in group contexts.
The course has three types of assessments. Nine units with short-­answer 
questions are worth 27% of the final grade. Three long-­answer assessments 
are worth 55% of the final grade. This leaves 18% of the final grade that is 
carried by the gamification ele­ments contained in the nine units, for a total 
of 45 games at five games per unit. The gamified ele­ments are designed to be 
nonpunitive, rewarding participation rather than success (e.g., “the right an­
swer”). To pass the course, a student must receive an overall grade of at least 
50%, meaning that any student could hypothetically skip the gamified ele­
ments and still receive a CR grade. Notably, none of the students does.
Ele­ments of Gamification
Andres’s course applies the term “to gamify” quite esoterically, based primar­
ily on the instructor’s personal interests rather than through any sustained 
analy­sis of game ele­ments. Andres uses subject-­related quiz games and gami­
fication ele­ments, including a leaderboard, and is considering other ele­ments 
to increase student engagement. The games are actually scenarios based on 
quite traditional course content, with no heroes or narratives layered on top. 
The instructor discusses the games that are embedded in the course content:
The games are the type of games that you would find in any game theory text. Each 
game consists of a brief setup (a scenario or some type of story), a description of 
who they are playing against, two choices and the outcomes of their choices. They 
are then asked to make a choice based on their ethical values (worldview, or what­

Ethical Decision Making    99
ever you want to call it). They play against me in most of the games (well, against a 
programmed version of me). ­There is also a leaderboard. Each student sees their 
individual ranking, but only the top 10 are displayed for every­one to see.
The Centre for Extended Learning (CEL) team at UW supported the build 
of the platform as envisioned by Andres. As Mark Stewart, the CEL instruc­
tional digital media developer, described it,
Greg worked with an online learning con­sul­tant and a course developer ­here at CEL 
to flesh out his request. Once the concept was nailed down, the development team 
was brought in to work out the technical details and start the build pro­cess. This 
pro­cess took a long time as both teams had to educate each other on what was 
needed and what was pos­si­ble, especially in the time frame. This was a custom build 
that would have to be done from the ground up. We used MySQL, PHP, Javascript, 
json, and HTML to bring ­these games to life.
The Leaderboard
Andres built the leaderboard so that all participants retained the option to 
remain anonymous or have their name displayed based on personal prefer­
ence. The nature of the course, the way the game ele­ments are graded (that is, 
students receive points for any sort of serious attempt), and the ability for 
students to remain anonymous, Andres felt, would protect the UW team 
from privacy concerns. Figure 11 shows the leaderboard distinguishing stu­
dents who chose to remain anonymous and ­those who elected to be vis­i­ble in 
the course (their names are blocked out ­here to protect the innocent).
Game Scenarios
The games are related to course content, but they can be taken in­de­pen­dently 
and do not need team or cohort synchronicity (i.e., every­one ­doing the same 
­thing at the same time) to complete. The students are presented with a sce­
nario directly embedded in the Canvas LMS (figure  12), and are asked to 
make an ethically informed judgment call based on their understanding of 
readings and materials provided by the instructor.
As an example, the dilemma presented in figure 12 raises a question of 
­whether the student in a job-­hiring situation would allow a potential em­
ployer access to his or her Facebook profile. The student in this scenario has a 
fairly clean profile, with few embarrassing posts or pictures. Another job can­
didate, known personally to the student, has a Facebook profile with evidence 

100    Game On!
of a more hedonistic lifestyle. The question is ­whether the student would make 
the ethical decision to grant the employer access to his Facebook page. She 
knows that in ­doing so, she would be making it difficult for the other candi­
date to say no, hence exposing his personal foibles. Having made their choice 
in the scenario (figure 13), students receive immediate feedback that is in­
tended to provoke further thought and discussion rather than simply stating 
that a choice was right or wrong.
Instructor Feedback
As suggested in figure 14, Andres rarely provides an absolute response, prefer­
ring to encourage discussion with the aim of getting the students to continue 
reflecting on the issues ­after the coursework is complete.
Figure 11. Screenshot: Leaderboard for the UW Ethical Decision Making course. 
Reproduced with permission of Greg Andres, University of Waterloo.

Ethical Decision Making    101
Given the way the course content is built out, individuals can overzeal­
ously race ahead and complete all game ele­ments. ­Doing so provides the 
short-­term boost of topping the leaderboard—­the “look at me!” ­factor, as An­
dres terms it. Yet this phenomenon of racing ahead also limits the opportu­
nity to build peer interaction in the games and game ele­ments. Conversation 
on discussion boards in online education tends to flag if students are not 
moving lock-­step through the materials. Andres recalls the lack of high-­
quality discussion about the scenarios as a disappointment. “So they play the 
game and ­there’s a moral in the story (usually conveyed in his feedback) and 
I was hoping that this would translate into discussion board discussions, but 
not so much.”
One exception to the general lack of discussion-­board activity was in con­
nection to one game scenario where, ironically, a lack of clarity (arguably, 
poor instructional design) provoked interactivity. Andres explains, “­There 
was some discussion on the discussion boards—­not as much as I’d wanted. 
­There was one par­tic­u­lar game that they ­were annoyed with. They ­were like, 
Figure 12. Screenshot: Game 7.2 setup in the UW Ethical Decision Making course. 
Reproduced with permission of Greg Andres, University of Waterloo.

102    Game On!
‘What’s the point of it?’ So I was like, ‘­Here’s the point,’ and they ­were like, 
‘Oh, OK.’ But of course I made the games so that they are kind of vexing, so 
it frustrates some, and it’s like, ‘Now ­you’re irritated and frustrated, now 
­you’re ready to listen.’ ”
Andres felt that the leaderboard could be a solid motivator for some stu­
dents but would have worked better if the activities and events that generate 
points had been sequenced to prevent “reading ahead.” Andres dug into this 
issue when he asked the students for feedback ­after the course had been com­
pleted. “Within two weeks of the course, four ­people had played all of the 
games, and I asked them, ‘Why? Why is this?’ And they said, ‘So we’d be top 
of the leaderboard.’ ”
Figure 13. Screenshot: Student choices in Game 7.2 in the UW Ethical Decision Making 
course. Reproduced with permission of Greg Andres, University of Waterloo.

Ethical Decision Making    103
Outcomes
The students playing the games are briefly engaged (for 5 to 10 minutes) by 
each game scenario with no real sense of progression or suggestion of increas­
ing degrees of difficulty. Even though student engagement on discussion 
boards was spotty at best, Patrick Laytnera (a former student in the class) 
referenced the leaderboard as a motivator to monitor pro­gress among peers 
in the class. “For the most part it’s you against the system, the system being 
Greg (the instructor). Usually it’s just . . . ​you pick your answer and it has its 
answer tucked away and based on your answer you get points or not. The 
games add a competitive ele­ment so you get more involved in the course. 
Since it’s an online course, you ­don’t have any interaction other than com­
puters, so this pulled you into the course.”
When asked ­whether this kind of course might work better for certain 
types of students, Laytner replied, “I think especially (for) students who 
Figure 14. Screenshot: Instructor feedback in the UW Ethical Decision Making course. 
Reproduced with permission of Greg Andres, University of Waterloo.

104    Game On!
­aren’t engaged in the content. Professional development courses tend to have 
a fair number of students who just want to do the bare minimum, get the 
credit, and then drop it (or not drop it but stop working on it). I think that 
the games could encourage them to stay engaged.”
It is worth bearing in mind the specific nature of Andres’s class popula­
tion: working students looking for resources and hoping (or having) to stay 
engaged with the university while distanced from the campus in real-­world 
co-­ops. Laytner suggests that ­there is a real temptation for students to do the 
bare minimum to get the CR (credit received) box checked without a ­great 
deal of effort or learning. Yet none of the course participants skipped the 
gamified ele­ments. Andres believes that the game ele­ments—­combined with, 
I would say, his experimentation and enthusiasm—­increased engagement 
with the course. Also noteworthy is the fact that Andres won the Waterloo 
Arts Teaching Award for 2013, thus earning institutional recognition for his 
energy and creativity.
Andres reports that, from the course that ran in September 2013, the major­
ity of the 38 students responding to the survey (out of 221, an admittedly low 
survey-­completion rate) stated “We find ­these games engaging and fun” (62%) 
and “­These games are helping us understand the course core concepts” (71%).
Andres realizes that the experiment is in its early stages. He is confident 
that “with over 200 students per term, ­there ­will be a lot of data for me to 
mine. My ultimate goal is to analyze the data to see if the games actually suc­
ceed as a teaching tool.”
The games and the leaderboard provide a rudimentary gamification 
theme to the course, although Andres’ interest in the field means that he is 
always primed to add features that he reads about in the work of prac­ti­tion­ers. 
At the 2013 UW gamification conference, he informally shared his interest in 
implementing a spotlight feature in the course as a contrast to the exclusively 
meritocratic leaderboard so as to highlight a qualitative achievement of the in­
structor’s choosing. Examples of spotlight awards could be the student who 
improved the most during the past week or someone who suddenly has achieved 
something particularly challenging. This approach, he hopes, ­will help build 
community and encourage the class as a ­whole to work ­toward a common goal.
Institutional Embrace of the Gamified Course
Having deci­ded to gamify his course, Andres pitched the concept to both his 
academic supervisor, the vice provost of academic affairs, and the UW tech 

Ethical Decision Making    105
team. The concept was received enthusiastically on the technical side in the 
form of ­eager agreement to help him build his game ele­ments. As he de­
scribes it, when he discussed his ideas with the man­ag­er of the CEL, his en­
thusiasm was palpable, “He sat back in his chair and he said, ‘If we can pull 
this off, it’ll be brilliant.’ They had never done anything ­else like this before, 
so they took it on as a challenge too.”
In terms of the academic, rather than the technical, permission to develop 
the course, Andres reflects, “I asked my boss, Anne Fallon (the vice provost of 
academic affairs)—­I pitched it to her and she loved it, and she said, ‘Just run 
with it.’ So I ran with it, and ­later she did come back and said to me, ‘Um—­
can you just explain for me the rationale—­just so that if the associate provost 
does come back to me then I can say, yes, this is the motivation.’ But no one 
at co-op, no one in the provost’s office has come back to us . . . ​So now it’s 
just pure academic freedom!”
Fallon describes some initial trepidation but indicates general institutional 
encouragement of Andres’s initiative in the form of technical support and 
public endorsement:
I ­wouldn’t say that I had concerns with including gamified ele­ments in the course, 
but I did have concerns about how they ­were implemented. It was impor­tant to me 
that the games included some sort of reflective piece and that students ­were clear 
why the games existed and how they ­were augmenting their learning. I also had 
concerns with the leaderboard. I ­didn’t want students to feel the need to compete 
with each other. The compromise for the leaderboard was to implement a feature 
that allowed students to earn points while playing anonymously.
As with many gamification proj­ects, the ele­ments have been infused into 
what is, to all intents and purposes, a “regular” cata­logued course. Andres’s 
course seems to have been protected by the blanket coverage of academic 
freedom to teach a course as the faculty member sees fit. Fallon further 
comments, “The course was not vetted at the se­nior academic level. The 
cata­log description does not include reference to games. The games evolved 
as the course was being developed.” Clearly, Fallon and UW’s interest in 
gamification as a concept and their desire to demonstrate UW as an indus­
try leader supported Andres’s desire to experiment with the format. UW is 
unique in this study, as it is the only example among the four cases that 
supplied any level of institutional academic endorsement for the instruc­
tor’s proj­ect.

106    Game On!
Next Steps
In terms of extending the experiment to other courses, Fallon comments, 
“The gamified ele­ments would need to be ­adopted on a course-­by-­course ba­
sis by instructors who are interested [in] or passionate about the potential for 
games. It would only work as an organic pro­cess and if a body of lit­er­a­ture 
existed to support the benefits of gamification.” She also thoughtfully pre­
sented her concerns that this initiative might be misperceived as frivolous. “I 
think ­there is a reputation issue, too, and I believe it extends to students and 
faculty. I’m not sure if ­there is research that has been done on this, but in my 
experience many students—at our school, at least—­react negatively to learning 
situations/assessments that fall outside the par­ameters of ste­reo­typical academic 
exercises like essays, exams, ­etc.” Fallon’s comments illustrate sentiments I 
heard at the conference, including support of faculty experimentation:
Games fall neatly into the category of unexpected assessment, and I think students 
tend to dismiss the learning experience ­because it ­isn’t deemed academically rigor­
ous. I believe that students can be persuaded of the benefits of ­these less traditional 
assessments, but that the challenge of ­doing so is exacerbated in an online environ­
ment. I think some faculty members share similar perceptions to their students. 
Academia falls into the box of lectures, labs/tutorials, midterms, and finals. In their 
mind, games are for fun, not for academic credit.
She does, despite her caution, conclude with a degree of positivity and opti­
mism, “I think ­there is ­great potential in gamification but that ­there is much 
work to be done. We need research to provide a strong pedagogical underpin­
ning. We need significant resources to build games that are engaging and that 
have enough finesse to actually meet the intended aims. Last but not least, we 
need to address preconceived notions about learning and academia.”
­These conclusions, in combination with Andres’s statements and enthusi­
asm, provide a healthy tension between the desire to experiment and the 
desire to prove the efficacy of his gamification efforts. UW seemed, in 2013, 
to be in an excellent position to continue as a leader in both experiential edu­
cation and gamification.
Where Are They Now?
On May 20, 2016, to discuss the progression of his work and to generally catch up, I spoke 
with Greg.

Ethical Decision Making    107
BELL—­Tell me how it’s all ­going. WatPD9, Ethical Decision Making, is it still ­running?
ANDRES—­Yes, it is still ­running. It went live fall of 2013 and has run ­every semester. They 
have gone to a dif­fer­ent model. It ­will run two semesters, then be off one semester, 
and then run for two and be off for one. This semester it is not ­running, so we are 
­doing a program review of it. I hope to address the games, as initially I had envi­
sioned the games to be one way, but the tech ­people [the web developers] said, 
“No we ­can’t do that, so ­here’s the compromise.” I want to see if I can get it closer 
to what I had originally conceived the games to be.
BELL—­Can you talk a ­little more to that?
ANDRES—­So what I wanted was more akin to a “choose your own ending [adventure].” 
Have the ­thing structured so if they played one way in a scenario it would take them 
to [a certain new] scenario. If they played another way it would take them to a dif­
fer­ent scenario. The tech ­people cashed it out as, “we ­can’t do it technically.” Right 
now it’s built in Desire2Learn (D2L), and it just uses the [native] quiz function—­
which is very limiting. I think it was the ease of using that convinced the developers 
it ­wasn’t worth ­doing the other way. You’d have to build a much more elaborate 
engine in the background to actually do what I conceived of ­doing. I want to push 
to see if ­things have changed, to see if they can actually catch my vision this time. 
I’d be willing to do the back work to make this fly. One of the ­things we’d need to 
do is the game would have to be able to track the student’s progression through it 
so we could provide feedback. “How are you playing relative to how ­others are play­
ing?” More importantly, it’s so we could track their pro­gress and assign participa­
tion marks for it. So that’s why they [developers] used the quiz feature in the first 
place—so it was obvious if the students had done it or not. So we’d have to build 
some sort of machine mechanism, some engine, to track their pro­gress to assign 
participation marks.
BELL—­How have you enhanced the game in subsequent runs? You ­were a ­little disap­
pointed not to provoke more discussion between the games—­has that improved at all?
ANDRES—­So one of the ­things ­we’ve done is ­every week we post an ­actual news story 
that motivated and inspired this par­tic­u­lar game so the students ­don’t just see this 
as an abstract activity. You know, “­Here’s how the game actually played itself out in 
real life, ­here’s the ­actual story.” It still ­doesn’t generate discussion.
BELL—­What ­else have you learned in the time between launch and now?
ANDRES—­That it’s ­really hard, that student engagement in an online context is incredi­
bly hard. It’s so much easier to run ­these games. I do a lot of ­these games in my 
game theory course that I teach on campus, and the student participation and en­
gagement ­there is of a very dif­fer­ent nature. It might be just if ­you’re online in a 

108    Game On!
context like this, maybe the students are more inclined just to take the mindset of 
being a passive observer. ­These games are intended to make each of them an active 
learner. But, I mean, that’s true of lectures on campus in general also, that it’s always 
a constant strug­gle to convince the students that if I’m talking ­you’re not learning . . . ​
that they have to actively engage in order to learn. It’s pos­si­ble in a class to do that, 
but I ­don’t know how to do that in an online context.
BELL—­Did your efforts affect the institution in any way? Did anyone pick up on this? 
What progression did you see? How did your efforts affect ­things?
ANDRES—­I have no idea how to gauge that. The program loves the concepts and has 
committed itself to making it better. I’m on the radar within the institution itself. We 
have a Center for Teaching Excellence, and we have teaching fellows throughout the 
university, and two teaching fellows have put me sort of in the public awareness. 
One just recently said in a letter to the other teaching fellows, “If ­you’re ever looking 
for ways to engage students, check out Greg Andres as every­thing he does is amaz­
ing.” I was also interviewed by US News & World Report and was featured in an arti­
cle on student engagement and gamification—­WatPD loved it.
The Director of WatPD is tasked with bringing the courses [that WatPD provides] 
to the broader student body. Right now, it’s just for co-op students, but they want to 
make it like a diploma or like a stand-­alone certificate. You would do your degree, 
and then you would take ­these extra courses, and it would be on your transcript 
that ­you’ve done this extra professional development aspect to your education.
BELL—­If you could ­really enhance and promote gamification at Waterloo, what would 
need to be done?
ANDRES—­I suspect we would need money to do a study in the course. We have a lot 
of data from thousands of students, but we ­haven’t yet ­really correlated how stu­
dent per­for­mance [in the course] is affected by how they did in the games. ­Here’s 
the ideal world: we would do a study and put some numbers ­behind it, then we 
would use that, and I would work with the Center for Teaching Excellence at UW to 
promote this kind of ­thing within a course. I ­don’t think most professors at UW 
might be convinced by just the anecdotes I pres­ent. Most would prob­ably say, 
“let’s see some real numbers. Can you definitively demonstrate, or at least show, 
that active learning in this way contributes to student success?” And that’s a huge 
proj­ect.
BELL—­Have you taken this out yourself? Maybe presented at any other conferences or 
taken it on the road to other institutions?
ANDRES—­No, I ­haven’t. I’ve been sidetracked by other proj­ects and other ideas.

Ethical Decision Making    109
BELL—­Have you seen or heard of anyone ­doing good work?
ANDRES—­Actually, other WatPD courses in development now have taken the interactive 
“choose your own ending” type ele­ments into the course itself. I hope that the Cen­
ter for Extended Learning has been able to construct this, and my hope is that it’s 
just a jump now so that this can now be applied to my games. I think they have al­
ready built a partial engine to do what I want. Seems like other courses are taking 
that aspect of student interaction and engagement much more seriously.
BELL—­Does this differentiate per student type?
ANDRES—­I noticed that some of the science-­y students are much more uneasy with the 
moral gray areas of the games and subjects that are foisted on us. They want the 
answers to be clear yes or no (or black and white) where ­these games are forcing 
them to go, “­you’re dammed if you do, damned if you ­don’t.”
BELL—­Do the kids that come up and say, “This is ­great” or “This is cool”—­are they a 
par­tic­u­lar demographic?
ANDRES—­I have no idea. Thinking of how it plays out in class, I think that the older 
students definitely grasp the point of the games quicker than first-­year students. 
You know, in class, sometimes the point of the game is just completely lost [on 
younger students]. We have to go back and ­either play the game again or go step by 
step and just explain [what was] the point of the game.
BELL—­Any employer feedback from the perspective of the co-op providers, perhaps?
ANDRES—­There was a study as to the effectiveness of ­these courses on employers’ atti­
tudes ­towards students who had done it. ­There was a sense that ­there is value to the 
courses that was the conclusion of the study.
BELL—­Any other reflections now that ­you’re older and wiser?
ANDRES—­I would totally do it again, and I’m looking forward to putting down version 
2.0. I think it’s totally worth it.
BELL—­What was it like from your perspective as a faculty member? Did implementing it 
enhance or undermine your position?
ANDRES—­It was a ­labor of love, a lot of work. But like in class, it pays off in spades. The 
kids seeing the connection between the theoretical concepts and how they actually 
play off in real life.
I’ve done two PD courses, one for engineers and one for the general population 
of students, and I’ll get ­every semester two or three students who have taken my PD 
courses online and have sought me out to take my on-­campus course—­specifically 
my game theory course. This is a self-­selecting group so not representative of the 
campus, but they report they loved the games or they felt bad about how they have 

110    Game On!
played the games. One ­woman this past fall told me, “I ­didn’t think that Ethical 
Decision Making would make me feel that bad.” So the students that have cared to 
comment have quite enjoyed the games.
BELL—­Are you still a gamer? Do you play games? I seem to remember that you ­were 
more of a fitness fanatic—­biking, ­running?
ANDRES—­Ironman in 2014.
BELL—[Worst follow-up interview question ever] You saw Iron Man?
ANDRES—­No, I did one [the triathalon] in Quebec. That’s where I injured myself—on a 
bit of a break right now.
BELL—­That’s ­great. Thanks so much for your time.

C H A P T E R   S I X
Dungeons and Discourse
Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts (MCLA) is located in North Adams, Mas­
sa­chu­setts. With around 1,500 students and a student-­faculty ratio of 1:13, 
76% of students agree that professors put a lot of effort into teaching their 
classes (25 respondents), while its party scene gets a sanguine B−­ (Niche​.­com). 
Founded in 1894 for teacher training as North Adams Normal School, by 2014 
MCLA had expanded to 19 majors and 35 minors with a focus on critical 
thinking and communication skills. It is known for its quality, affordability, 
and Berkshire Hills Internship Program—­coolest acronym in this book award 
goes to “B-­HIP”—­through which students gain hands-on experience with 
cultural venues in the area. Notable gradu­ates include urban fantasy author 
Anton Strout, writer of Dead to Me, Deader Still, Dead ­Matter, and Dead ­Waters 
(influenced by the party scene at the college?); Cleveland Indians World Se­
ries pitcher Ken Hill; and “Barstool Sports” blogger Brian McGonagle, a.k.a. 
Rear Admiral. In 2015 its in-­state tuition and fees ­were $9,475 and out-­of-­state 
$18,420. Room and board ­were assessed at a smidgeon ­under $10,000.
Gerol Petruzella is a humanities instructor who also teaches ancient lan­
guages, philosophy, and ethics. He has taught philosophy at the Mas­sa­chu­
setts College of Liberal Arts (MCLA) since 2007 and served as the coordinator 
of academic technology since 2011. His areas of specialization include an­
cient Greek philosophy, ethics, and Greek and Roman language and lit­er­a­
ture. Further areas of interest include the ethics and social implications of 
open-­source culture. When the coordinator of academic technology at MCLA 
left her position, Petruzella was asked to cover the position in an interim ca­
pacity. As a faculty member, he was committed to learning the newly imple­
mented Canvas LMS and thought that, in taking the new role, he would be 
able to learn the new tool and support other faculty in ­doing so. Although 
not from a formally trained technical background, he was comfortable with 
computing, and he since has grown into the role.

112    Game On!
Having taught his regular philosophy class (PHIL 100) between 2007 and 
2010 in a standard format, he wondered if his new technical skills would al­
low him to develop a gamified course inspired by his own gaming interests. 
The specific idea came from a web comic titled Dungeons and Discourse, which 
grounded discussions on philosophy in scenarios based on the role-­playing 
game Dungeons & Dragons. Dungeons & Dragons was developed in 1974 by 
Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson and is explained to neophytes on the official 
homepage: “The core of Dungeons & Dragons is storytelling. You and your friends 
may tell a story together, guiding your heroes through quests for trea­sure, 
­battles with deadly foes, daring rescues, courtly intrigue and much more. You 
can also explore the many worlds of Dungeons & Dragons through any of the 
hundreds of novels written by ­today’s hottest fantasy authors, as well as en­
gaging board games and immersive video games. All of ­these stories are part of 
Dungeons & Dragons.”
The Dungeons and Discourse comic produced by Aaron Diaz, an Oregon-­
based Internet cartoonist also known as Dresden Codak, fueled Petruzella’s 
interest in experimenting and attempting to tie his academic and social/
gaming worlds together. His gamified three-­credit course PHIL 100: A First 
Course in Philosophy (Dungeons and Discourse) ran in MCLA’s spring terms 
2012 and 2013. The first time the course ran (with 15 students) no one was 
informed that it was to be gamified prior to the class. By the time the course 
started its second run, the campus was aware that the instructor was experi­
menting with gamification, and 20 students enrolled.
The Rationale: Why Gamification?
In 2012, having spent a year familiarizing himself with basic responsibilities 
in his new role as coordinator of academic technology, Petruzella deci­ded to 
explore his own creative ideas to enhance student engagement. His empathy 
for students who have traditionally strug­gled to engage with higher educa­
tion was apparent when we spoke. “Our campus has a reasonably high popu­
lation of students who are first-­generation students coming out of personal 
backgrounds . . . ​­there are not necessarily a lot of folks in their backgrounds 
who have done college, so this is a potentially strange and new and intimi­
dating, kind of environment.” Close to half (45%) of the students at MCLA 
qualify as low income and are eligible for federal Pell grants. As became clear in 
our conversations, the motivation ­behind Petruzella’s gamification work is di­

Dungeons and Discourse    113
rectly tied to his efforts to engage and encourage students from disadvantaged 
backgrounds. MCLA, according to its own lit­er­a­ture, strives to promote excel­
lence in learning and teaching, innovative scholarship, intellectual creativity, 
public ser­vice, applied knowledge, and active and responsible citizenship. The 
school, in its own words, “prepares gradu­ates to be practical problem-­solvers 
and engaged, resilient global citizens” (MCLA 2013). The environment at 
MCLA seemed comfortable with creative instruction and supportive of in­
structors such as Petruzella.
Petruzella revealed his interest in the realm of student engagement and his 
notion of gaming’s potential to reduce the separation between study and play. 
“I think, across the board . . . ​it’s unfortunate but true, that ­there are a lot of 
students, what­ever their backgrounds, coming out of high schools where 
­there is not a lot of playfulness associated with education.” His focus on the 
introductory-­level course captures his interest in pulling students from what 
he sees as K-12 thinking to practical problem-­solving, producing the engaged, 
resilient global citizens that are referenced in the MCLA values. “I see a gami­
fied intro course as the opportunity for a freshman to break some of ­those 
habits or expectations that students may be coming in with, that might nega­
tively influence their attitudes ­towards education—­their own perception of 
how to go about being in class, being a learner.”
Ele­ments of Gamification
­Under the banner of gamification, Petruzella implemented ele­ments to de­
liver his take on a Dungeons & Dragons course re­imagined to capture and con­
vey key concepts of entry-­level philosophy.
Personalization
Recognizing the role of personalization in role-­playing games such as Dun­
geons & Dragons, Petruzella built out a personal page for each student. He did 
this by embedding a spreadsheet produced through Google Docs into the 
Canvas LMS. On a basic level, this approach allows the students to create their 
own biography, adding a photo and a personal quote or mantra. Figure 15 
illustrates Petruzella’s own personalized page. The interface also keeps track 
of students’ gold (awarded for participation in class discussions), quests com­
pleted, skills accumulated, and any bonus objects found. The personalization 
ele­ment had the secondary effect of introducing competition for at least 

114    Game On!
some of the students. As Ross Betti, a student from Petruzella’s first gamified 
class, describes it: “The competition for me was pretty impor­tant. If we had 
the opportunity to have competition—­I like a good, healthy competition—it 
helps me excel in courses. If someone next to me has a better character than 
me, I’m ­going to redo that assignment. I wanted my character to be the best—­I 
was like, ‘I’m ­going to have the coolest tricked-­out wizard in Log­os.’ ”
The Quest
The meta­phor for learning in the Dungeons and Discourse class is a journey, 
or quest, through realms where philosophical concepts are presented and ex­
plored. Five realms in total represent six theories of thought. Students spend 
approximately three weeks in each realm discovering scrolls left by former 
Figure 15. Screenshot: Instructor’s personalized page in the Mas­sa­chu­setts College 
of Liberal Arts Dungeons and Discourse class. Reproduced with permission of Gerol 
Petruzella, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts.

Dungeons and Discourse    115
travelers that they have to analyze and be ready to discuss in the face-­to-­
face class meetings. Petruzella developed the scrolls using open educational 
resources, some from the Creative Commons (a peer-­reviewed repository of 
resources) and ­others from the University of Adelaide collection of classic 
texts. ­These scrolls replace a textbook, a change that has the benefits of reduc­
ing costs for the typical MCLA student and allowing Petruzella to add supple­
mental content when he discovers it through his ongoing research. Nate 
Stanley, another student from Petruzella’s class, reflected on the decision to 
move away from textbooks:
If ­there’s no book you actually have to listen, you have to pay attention. I’m one of 
­those students where the day before an exam I can write all the notes from the text 
and I can ace the exam, but does that mean you learn anything? It means that you 
have the ability to remember a few words and regurgitate them. I think that by tak­
ing textbooks out of the equation and putting ­people into unfamiliar situations; I 
think that is ­going to make them succeed much more than they would just in a 
normal classroom environment.
The scrolls and information lead to quizzes with short answers, correlat­
ing to concrete skills and outcomes that ultimately map to learning outcomes 
in the traditional versions of the class. Given that Petruzella has had no formal 
technical training and lacks technical support from MCLA beyond his own 
capabilities, a map simplistically illustrates the realms without any technical or 
tangible ability for the participants to track pro­gress through the land.
Participation Rewards and Incentives
Although the class was designed to be potentially run fully online, in early 
iterations Petruzella has hosted face-­to-­face sessions to discuss pro­gress and 
offer what he calls the “marketplace.” On each student’s personal page in 
Canvas, three gold coins are subtracted ­every day during the term, account­
ing for living costs and equipment maintenance. Through evidence of learn­
ing and thoughtful discussion in the marketplace sessions, students are 
awarded additional gold coins to augment their supply. Petruzella developed 
the participation-­incentive system in a gamified format. The merchant (Pe­
truzella) purchases good questions, and students have to barter to replenish 
gold that “expires” as the class proceeds. Petruzella ­adopted this approach 
with the goal of encouraging class-­wide inclusion. One of his students, Nate 
Stanley, describes the format: “­Every week, we met two to three times. We 

116    Game On!
called each class the marketplace, and we’d have readings called scrolls that 
­were by Socrates and the other phi­los­o­phers and we had to decipher what 
they ­were trying to say and put it into our own words. When we’d go to the 
marketplace, the teacher would bring up ­these questions and when we an­
swered them correctly, he’d say, ‘I would buy that.’ Which means ­you’re get­
ting through participation, ­you’re earning gold.”
A second student, Ross Betti, compared the experience to participation in 
other classes, noting that all individuals felt compelled to participate to con­
tinue in the game. “The key was to keep participating in class, which kept 
every­body involved, which is more than a lot of classes do where ­there are 
three or four ­people who talk all the time and ­there are a lot of students who 
­don’t.” He elaborates: “If the (student) question was the right question and it 
was something that would strike up a discussion not only between you and 
the teacher but also among the students . . . ​you would earn gold that way, 
not only by giving the answers but also answering to other students, and it 
just makes the ­whole ­thing essentially a bazaar. You get every­body trading 
ideas, trading theories, and it made it a very productive environment.”
When reflecting on the experience of delivering his gamified course, Pe­
truzella describes a recent conversation at the faculty center where class 
­participation of all students was discussed as a concern in traditional (non­
gamified) courses. The conversation made him reflect further on ­whether his 
gamified approach might promote greater engagement than a traditional 
course.
He explains:
Faculty are concerned about making participation the sort of ­thing that’s available 
to all students on a fair basis. The topic was implicit around recognized bias in how 
you interact with students and ­whether that’s in terms of gender—­privilege male 
students in certain ways—or students of color or what­ever . . . ​“How do I carry on a 
classroom discussion in ways that are fair ­towards all participants?” when students 
are not coming with the default, “Yes, I’m ­going to speak up and I have something 
to say very confidently.” So what are the ways, the techniques for pulling ­those folk 
in and giving them a space and an opportunity and mechanism for participation?
Although not a key driver of Petruzella’s work, the possibility that gamify­
ing a course might de­moc­ra­tize participation, thus compelling all students to 
participate irrespective of an instructor’s conscious or subliminal prejudices, 
could be a valuable outcome of his approach.

Dungeons and Discourse    117
Collaboration
Many successful role-­player games incorporate teamwork, and many games 
that are played online are now team-­based. One of Petruzella’s students de­
scribes his online gaming experiences, emphasizing the social nature of what 
is sometimes considered a solitary pursuit. “I play games where you can ­really 
get to know the ­people that you are playing with; ­you’re not just interacting 
through a microphone. I mean, ­these ­people I play games with on the com­
puter I have been playing with for six or seven years, and I’ve been playing a 
sequence of games with them that are made by the same com­pany, so I know 
how they play, and they know what I am capable of.”
Cognizant of the importance of teams, Petruzella has built numerous op­
portunities throughout the course to collaborate and promote the benefits of 
group work in the Dungeons and Discourse model. Although the initial ex­
ploration of the realms is individual, for the activities and assessments stu­
dents are or­ga­nized into groups of four or five and encouraged to collaborate 
to look for details and come to understandings that individually they may 
have missed. Students who ­were interviewed reflected positively on the im­
plementation of the team ele­ments. Betti comments:
As a class we rated higher than average for participation . . . ​I think it (the teamwork) 
forced ­people to get together more—my team got together to discuss ­things as we 
needed to. As far as ­people being apprehensive about asking questions, I think it 
became much easier as the semester went on and you had to work more and more 
with each other. When other ­people ­weren’t sure what the answer was, that forces 
more ­people to talk about it. Being a game, it feels like it’s not a classroom so you 
­don’t feel boxed in pressure thinking. It builds critical thinking; it builds creative skills.
Reflecting on the noncurricular effect of embedded teamwork, he whimsi­
cally remarked that, just as during high school, teamwork leading to social 
skill development is a valid exercise. As he put it, “Let’s face it, college is just 
an expensive version of high school.”
The student also elaborated on the effectiveness of teamwork despite his 
own personal reticence to interact freely in a more typical classroom envi­
ronment: “I mean, I’m ­going to make a point to say hello to the person next 
to me and across from me and maybe move seats once during the term. But 
the group proj­ects—­I had to do two of them. I ­don’t enjoy ­doing group work, 
so I’m in an uncomfortable environment where I have to overcome my ­little 

118    Game On!
fears. It helped a lot—we learned a lot ­because every­one ­really wanted to 
learn.”
Boss ­Battles
The Urban Dictionary describes a “boss ­battle” as any encounter or situation 
that is particularly difficult or challenging (video game example in figure 16). 
A fight with a boss character is commonly referred to as a boss ­battle or boss 
fight. Boss ­battles are generally seen at the climax of a par­tic­u­lar section of a 
video game, usually at the end of a stage or level, or guarding a specific objec­
tive. The boss character is generally far stronger than the opponents the player 
has faced up to that point (Urban Dictionary 2013). Translated to an academic 
environment, the meta­phor lends itself to a final assessment or challenge that 
tests learning and knowledge accrued to that point.
Petruzella used the Canvas Assignment feature to develop boss fights at the 
end of a section or realm. He created ­these ele­ments with a narrative setup 
where the ­enemy character in the story pres­ents a speech featuring informal 
fallacies to which the students have to prepare rebuttals. When he ran the 
Figure 16. The ­mother ship from Phoenix, an early video game boss.

Dungeons and Discourse    119
class the second time in 2013, Petruzella ran in-­person extensions to the boss 
fights with former students returning to argue philosophy in character as 
the “wise, old, hoary boss.” As he affectionately reminisced, costumes ­were 
worn, and, even more encouragingly, the former students demonstrated re­
tention of knowledge and philosophical arguments they had studied the year 
before.
Boss ­battles ­were referenced by developers and interested faculty at insti­
tutions in prior chapters, but at most institutions, no one had found a means 
of developing anything to approximate the princi­ple. In this re­spect, despite 
the lack of any funding and minimal technical support, Petruzella is ad­
vanced in his implementation of this ele­ment at MCLA. In the ­battles with 
the boss figure, students ­were or­ga­nized in teams with assigned roles given 
by the instructor to each team member. Each group was given a specific task. 
One group analyzed the writing, identifying fallacies (factual and philosoph­
ical inaccuracies), while the other group worked on pre­sen­ta­tion (a rebuttal 
to be presented to the ­whole class). The groups shared their work using the 
collaborate tool in Canvas. A student describes his experience of the boss 
­battle, his enthusiasm apparent:
For the exams, each realm had a boss—­he’s the king, he’s the mayor, what­ever you 
want to call it. And with the first one, the first city which was Log­os, he had argu­
ments about using logic and using research and ­things like that—­you had to debunk 
his arguments ­because they saw us as threats, essentially trying to overthrow the nice 
­little cozy pad that he had established for himself. So he’s trying to say all ­these lies 
from history and every­thing ­else and we had to go back in time essentially through 
research, and say, no this ­isn’t what caused this, this caused this. So we ended up lib­
erating the ­people of Log­os and they ­were able to go about their lives.
Outcomes
In a class with 15 to 20 students, Petruzella admitted to struggling to keep up 
with class updates. He was unable to automate a satisfactory feedback pro­cess 
and failed, according to the students and him, to keep up with manual pro­
cesses such as awarding and tracking gold awards based on marketplace par­
ticipation. Petruzella’s reflections focused less on the incremental gold and 
more on the assessment ele­ments in the course. He describes his concern 
about scaling as a limiting ­factor, stating: “I would say that most of the scaling 
concern would come dealing with assessment. I guess that’s not surprising. 

120    Game On!
Given the par­tic­u­lar subject area that I’m ­doing, philosophy, ­there’s only so 
far you can go with auto-­graded sort of assessments. ­You’re talking about 
philosophical discussion and dialog, so the 800-lb. gorilla in the room is scal­
ing assessment.”
He had considered peer grading, stopping short of what he calls the “xMOOC 
idea,” where “I create this packaged ­thing and then just put it out ­there and let 
every­one just run through it.” He continued, “You know, when I look at ­these 
MOOCs and I see, ‘Hey let’s all 3,000 of us go to this Google Plus hangout on 
Thursday night and . . .’ Yeah, right.” He ­favors more efficient or sophisticated 
models that could make use of social features in a similar way that Reddit—­
the self-­declared “Front Page of the Internet”—­does. Reddit incorporates peer 
voting and a complex algorithm to encourage participant engagement, weight­
ing new and in­ter­est­ing posts or articles more heavi­ly while letting older 
posts wane or fade. In a similar manner, Petruzella envisioned students’ gold 
piles fading without their engagement. As he explains: “I’m thinking ­people 
surely have gotten further along [than ­simple peer assessment]—­thinking of 
­things like Reddit where ­there’s this ­really robust—­you know, vote up, vote 
down, and it’s not totally random, not just the Wisdom of the Crowds—­the 
notion of, somehow, a privileged user or privileged commenter who has 
some sort of credentialing with extra weighting.”
Students’ candid, quite critical but supportive, commentary identified two 
key areas for improvement. The first emphasized the need for the instructor 
in a totally manual course to keep up with basic features such as the gold 
awards. Students described the instructor’s failure to keep us as demoralizing, 
in part ­because at course launch the system had seemed to hold such promise. 
Betti again comments: “At the end of the course, if you looked at my gold, I was 
negative 50-­something gold, and it ­wasn’t ­because I ­wasn’t asking questions. 
I’m an active participant in class. But it’s ­because questions ­weren’t being re­
corded or the value of our questions ­wasn’t being recorded or not put in the 
program. I think it demanded a lot of Petruzella as a professor to keep up 
with the game.”
He reiterated this minimum requirement as the first target for the instruc­
tor to improve in subsequent class launches. “The gold has to be better—he 
­doesn’t have to do the character profile pages, but the gold, he has to rec­ord 
that and get that in the system. You ­can’t do your assignments if you ­don’t 
have your gold and if ­you’re trying ­really hard next class to ask questions and 
that ­doesn’t get recognized.”

Dungeons and Discourse    121
The lack of technical sophistication in Petruzella’s course build was con­
sidered a disappointment for participants, although again they couched this 
criticism in encouraging and supportive language. ­After the gold-­maintenance 
issue, the next recommended area for improvement was to provide a means, 
even a perfunctory one, of visually illustrating and tracking pro­gress through 
realms.
Stanley commented, “My impression when I first saw the realm graphic was 
that I would have a character that I would literally move through a ­little land 
on a computer . . . ​but ­there ­wasn’t any of that. It was like, ‘Alright, class, now 
­we’re in this land.’ So ­there ­wasn’t actually any gaming ­going on.” He specu­
lates about how greater use of technology could improve the course. “If you 
could write a program where you could actually take your character and go 
through this preset ­little land and you are forced to go in this direction like an 
RPG [Role Playing Game] kind of ­thing—­then I think it’s a ­great idea. I think 
it’s a fabulous idea, and it could be entirely online.”
As a self-­declared gamer, Stanley had strong recommendations for an im­
proved second version. He outlined the kind of development that he would 
encourage:
The biggest ­thing would be the visual, the cinematics. If I ­were to boil down any 
core—­there’d need to be a log-in basis and you’d have to spend some time 
logged in or you’d lose points or something. ­There’d need to be some structured 
communication—­you could even use Skype. For gaming online, I use TeamSpeak 
where you can have 80 ­people on a server talking. Just for now, I ­don’t see visuals 
being used effectively. You can use other game-­ development tools like the SDK 
gaming program at home . . . ​I’ve seen a lot of ­great games come out of develop­
ment kits like that. It’s literally just walking down a corridor, and you can take [a] 
left, turn right.”
In terms of core academic ele­ments, Petruzella adhered to the content of 
the traditional PHL 100 course and developed course outcomes to be consis­
tent with ­those of traditional sections. In a direct comparison with his own 
former iterations of the PHL 100 class, Petruzella’s average grade for the two 
gamified courses was 78.86 compared to an average of 70.82 for the two prior 
terms the course ran as a traditional, nongamified course. He certainly leans 
­toward the conclusion that the gamified ele­ments are making a real differ­
ence while acknowledging that his small sample sizes make any conclusions 
about course efficacy, student engagement, and grades tenuous at best. He 

122    Game On!
does not let that uncertainty dissuade him from reflecting on another out­
come (or pos­si­ble anomaly) that he intends to continue to observe in ­future 
iterations:
Looking at some of the numbers, it looks like ­there is a slightly higher percentage of 
students who ended up declaring philosophy majors, who took the (gamified) Dun­
geons and Discourse version when compared with a ­couple of years ago when I 
taught it as a standard. ­Because it’s a PHL 100 course we get a wide range of majors 
taking it, and, ­because it’s a freshman-­level course, we also get a fair number of first-­
semester freshmen and, in this case, second-­semester freshmen who may or may 
not have declared a major at this stage.
Petruzella feels that the gamified format is best suited to introductory 
courses, where students lack what he calls the intrinsic motivation of prior 
success. His working hypothesis is that MCLA students, who include large 
numbers of first-­generation college attendees and students from low-­income 
families, need a boost to get on board with the concept and practice of higher 
education. Petruzella asserts that if ­these students can get through entry-­
level classes and start to dig into a subject area, the content of the course it­
self intrinsically may motivate them to persist. Prior to that state, he feels 
that any means of encouragement—­including gamification—­must be worth 
exploring.
My suspicion is that gamifying might have a disproportionate effect with re­spect to 
100 and 200 level “Intro to” sort of survey courses and maybe less so as you start to 
get into the upper-­classman seminars, at which point you are dealing primarily with 
majors who are committed to a field of interest and have, sort of, developed a 
mature interest [in] a discipline and are ready to ­really engage deeply in a way that 
freshmen are not necessarily. So I sense that a lot of the value certainly does come 
from the engagement—­grabbing a student’s sense of curiosity and playfulness and 
­doing a bit of a transition.
As noted in the case study of the gamified course at UW, while competi­
tion and meritocratic reward may be a valuable tool, gamification seems to 
have the potential to encourage students who are not near the top of the class 
in terms of traditional achievement. Betti suggests this benefit, stating:
I think every­body learns differently. ­Because of the fact that ­there are the visual cues, 
it levels the playing field—­there’s no smart or stupid person in the game. I think it 

Dungeons and Discourse    123
helps all students. I’m a straight A student anyway, but I know a ­couple of guys in the 
class . . . ​I mean—­every­body’s smarter at something than someone . . . ​And it allows 
­people to relate to each other ­because, you know—­this guy’s ­really smart, but if he’s 
stuck on this, maybe we can figure it out. So, ­there’s involuntary teamwork ­there . . . ​
­there is ­going to be some part of it that’s ­going to advance somebody.
Petruzella wants to add further means of encouragement and affirmation 
in ­future versions of his gamified course:
I’m thinking I would like to add badges. I would have some that are sort of seren­
dipitous, you know, the idea of someone happens across a hidden component or 
someone follows a path further than expected or further than required and discov­
ers some sort of bonus. So I’d have the badge for the going-­above-­and-­beyond kind 
of phenomenon, but I’d also want some sort of core badges available just for most 
students who just got through and accomplish the quests as explained, as pre­
sented, rather than necessarily ­going off on their own.
Fi­nally, although at times critical, students’ conclusions ­were constructive 
and gave the sense that they ­really want to see this kind of model succeed. 
Stanley describes this potential: “Class was less like class; it was more like 
playing a game, and it made it very easy to fall into it . . . ​at least [for] me. I 
looked forward to ­every time I had philosophy.” Attempting to compare like 
for like in terms of his own experience in Petruzella’s course, Betti concludes, 
“I wish I had something to compare this against, I ­really do, but this is my 
first philosophy course. I wish I could say, ‘In my first philosophy course, 
where it was all books . . .’ I know I learned a lot and I retained a lot—­I can 
answer . . . ​a lot of questions about Socrates and about Plato. I’m all about it. 
I was just so interested in the topic.”
He describes how the class was motivated in a way that was novel to him 
compared to what he had experienced in other, nongamified courses: “­There 
was very rarely a day when we went in tired in the morning and ­were like, 
‘Oh, we ­don’t want to do anything.’ I ­don’t know if the incentive came from 
the game or our participation. We’d go in, we’d say our next challenge is the 
dread relativist and ­were talking about ­whether this applies or that. Ask our 
questions—­‘How can we arm ourselves better against him?’—­that kind of 
­thing.”
His takeaway from the gamified class was that his learning would per­
sist longer than in his other classes. “­People on the outside may say, ‘Oh 

124    Game On!
­they’re just playing games,’ but ­they’re ­going to be learning something 
from it, which is more than I can say for many normal classes where you have 
that normal class [routine of] cram for the exam, pass the exam, and then 
forget.”
Despite quite candid feedback on the shortcomings of the Dungeons and 
Discourse course format, the student interviewees ­were encouraging and in­
terested enough to summarize the potential of gamification in a format such 
as Petruzella developed. The student excitement at the potential for gamifica­
tion and gamified courses raises the question of ­whether Petruzella’s work 
might be extended or better supported at his institution. Petruzella noted 
that one challenge is the relative isolation in which faculty tend to construct 
their courses: “It seems to me that ­there is a growing number of ­people [at 
multiple institutions] ­doing ­really good ­things with gamification. I think 
generally a barrier is that every­one is working in his or her course. I’m work­
ing in my Philosophy 100 course, and it’s all well and good and I have the 
freedom to do what­ever I want in that context, but my students next semes­
ter are ­going to go and take Philosophy 200 or 240 or ­they’re ­going to take 
History 100.”
He speculates that ­these experiments may remain isolated for some time 
to come, in part, ­because the institution has not formally embraced this model 
while at the same time, faculty tend to operate in isolation with few opportu­
nities to collaborate effectively: “We ­don’t have an infrastructure as a college 
within which a gamified course has any significance beyond itself. From the 
point of view of MCLA, Dungeons and Discourse is still just PHIL 100, which 
amounts to three credits, and students get an A, B, C, D, or F in it, and that 
meets certain graduation requirements and major requirements as PHIL 
100—­that’s what the college sees, no ­matter what crazy ­things I’m ­doing 
within the guts.”
Petruzella believes that gamification has a potential role within higher 
education at large but describes a middle-­ground scenario where gamifica­
tion is established but not widespread. He feels that the best-­case scenario 
would be if gamification could carve itself out a place as a ­viable path in 
higher education. He clarifies that he ­doesn’t think gamification needs to be 
the standard or needs to replace credit-­based higher ed. “I would be happy to 
live in a world where ­there are colleges that do a game-­based bachelor’s [de­
gree] or even a game-­based major. I would be happy to see ­those exist side by 
side with ­these more traditional models.”

Dungeons and Discourse    125
Where Are They Now?
In a follow-up conversation I discussed how far Petruzella had got with his gamification 
interests in the two years since we last compared notes.
BELL—­Since we talked around 2013–2014, where are you at? Where did you get to?
PETRUZELLA—­Since that point, I’m in the situation where I’m full-­time ­doing this aca­
demic tech ­thing and teaching one course over that in a rotation. I’ve taught the 
Dungeons and Discourse course one time since then. In spring 2015 I ran it again, 
and I [am] on the books to teach it again in fall [2016]. So it’s quite firmly established 
in the college cata­log now. The course this coming term is part of our college’s first-­
year college experience.
BELL—­Did you modify it at all?
PETRUZELLA—­Yes, but I ­didn’t mix modifications. Some ­were merely structural, respond­
ing to the platform [Canvas] developments as they introduced new features over 
time. I also made a conscientious decision to develop the character of Del the Oracle. 
I had a placeholder when we last talked—­another persona representing another per­
son, another voice beyond my own for students to interact with. So I actually gave 
that role to my TA, to represent Del the Oracle as another point of access into the 
game world. I remember that I did that this last time I taught, so that was an addi­
tion—an expansion of the game world, another non-­player character, as it ­were.
Another piece that I added in was when Canvas rolled out a plug-in for easy 
badges, so I started to assimilate some. It ­wasn’t systematically, just the occasional ‘you 
get a badge for discovering an Easter egg’ or something like that. I ­didn’t roll out 
badges as a systematic part of core piece of the game—­just as an additional experi­
ence in the game play.
The third ­thing I remember I developed was basically kind of a store. I had devel­
oped a method for students to acquire gold pieces through class discussions by com­
ing into the marketplace and earning gold pieces. And at that point, the first ­couple 
of times around, ­there ­wasn’t any structure around use of the gold pieces. It was sort 
of a bare placeholder, and you ­couldn’t do much with them. So what I ended up 
­doing was pretty straightforward. I threw up a Google form representing the store 
with several options associated with certain numbers of gold pieces that students 
could choose to cash in by submitting a request through the form. So that was some­
thing I wanted to try out . . . ​low-­level, if you had five gold pieces you could cash 
them in for a twelve-­hour extension on a par­tic­u­lar deliverable—­things like that.
BELL—­So more academic constructs rather than game ele­ments?

126    Game On!
PETRUZELLA—­It was a mixture. Some ­were explicit to the course environment, some 
­were more fun, like a ­free download of a song in the course. ­There ­were prob­ably 
about 10 dif­fer­ent options representing difficulty and levels of challenge. The fourth 
change that I made was again not ­really within the game play but more the struc­
ture of the course itself, and I did contract grading with students that semester. At 
the beginning of the term I offered them three dif­fer­ent paths, essentially, and they 
selected what kind of effort, what kinds of ­things they wanted to do, and what sort 
of final academic grade that would get you for the successful completion of this 
path versus [another path]. So they chose one at the beginning, and just about a 
third to half of the way through the class, around midterms, we revisited it, and I 
said, “OK, think back as to what you selected at the beginning. We are about half­
way through what we need to do, half our time together. Does that still feel accu­
rate to you? Is this still the path you want to choose? Do you want to change it?” So 
I gave them a midpoint opportunity to renegotiate the path they had created. 
­Those are the four ­things I remember ­doing differently this past time round.
BELL—­Back to Del the Oracle—­was that a typical GA/TA mentor sort of role? ­Were they 
guiding or ­were they cheerleading?
PETRUZELLA—­A ­little of this and a ­little bit of that. Certainly, the core responsibility of 
the TA was student support. In the character of Del, the access point was in a course 
discussion. It was a dedicated discussion area where students could ask for help on 
anything over the course of the semester that they ­were encountering, ­whether it 
was a difficult scroll or a challenging quest or what­ever it was, and the TA (as the 
character of Del), would respond in this typical cryptic oracle/oracular kind of way. 
So their persona in this response was intentionally mysterious and was intentionally 
not in the business of giving a direct answer. It was my intention, in explaining the 
role, the TA was to be helpful but not to give direct answers, but to hint, to direct, 
to nudge in a direction, to encourage the student to reach out to another resource 
that would be helpful in finding the answer. So that was the model of the oracle, 
and it helped that the TA for that par­tic­u­lar semester was very familiar [with] classi­
cal models of oracles so almost immediately got what I was ­after with that.
BELL—­These sound like ­great enhancements. So what did you learn? What worked? 
What changed with ­these enhancements?
PETRUZELLA—­I would say one ­thing I immediately learned, one strong lesson I took 
away, is that building [the game] in itself does not make them come. Mentioning 
Del the Oracle as an example, I had to mention Del the Oracle almost on a weekly 
basis to remind students that Del was available and a good resource. And this is just 
a par­tic­u­lar example of a more general observation, I suppose—­you can mention to 

Dungeons and Discourse    127
students as many resources as you like, but mentioning them is rarely enough. You 
need to, I needed to, prioritize them myself through constant reference to encour­
age the students to internalize that importance. So that was sort of a pro­cess lesson 
for me. I’m not sure, but I think the contract grading was useful to students, but 
that’s just based on my own observation. Looking back, I know that relatively few 
students, a small handful of students, chose the midterm semester opportunity to 
change or to revise their contract.
In most of ­those cases students chose to revise upward. Some students who had 
chosen the C [grade] path chose to upgrade and said, ‘I’m ready to tackle the more 
challenging path and go for the B.’ So that was encouraging—­but the majority of 
the students stayed with what they initially chose. I’m not sure how to interpret that 
or what that means.
BELL—­When we first spoke you had sensed, rather than quantified, a slight upwards 
movement in student grading and engagement, and you had reflected that a greater 
proportion of students had declared philosophy as a major. Did ­those patterns per­
sist, and did you see a net effect of your efforts?
PETRUZELLA—­I did get a ­little bit more insight into more quantifiable ele­ments of the 
proj­ect. One of the improvements in the platform was the development of an ana­
lytics dashboard at the course level for the faculty. Through that I could see engage­
ment over time, aggregated over the course, and generally I saw strong patterns of 
engagement. I’m ­doing a side-­by-­side analy­sis of the gamified course versus the 
traditional. I would say that ­those initial observations did persist, and now I’m getting 
more numbers to back that up. But ­we’re still talking ­really small sample sizes. This 
past term we had around 20 students, so again small numbers but clearly more 
engagement.
BELL—­One other ­thing that stood out was your extension of your work to a more gen­
eral discussion around unconscious bias. I recall you had fostered discussions at fac­
ulty senate or curriculum committee around equity and removal of bias and that this 
had resonated with faculty. Did your work in this area gain any further traction?
PETRUZELLA—­Directly, not so much. I ­haven’t, for example, convinced the philosophy 
department to convert a bunch of their courses to incorporate gamified ele­ments or 
anything like that. That would be pretty spiffy if that happened—­but it ­didn’t. What 
has happened is that I have incorporated a lot of the lessons I have learned, the in­
sights I have gained, into my work in academic technology. Just in general I work 
with faculty a lot one-­on-­one in terms of course development and design, and I 
make sure as part of ­those conversations I bring up and suggest some of ­these con­
siderations that have been meaningful in my experience. When faculty are working 

128    Game On!
with me to develop a course, ­whether it’s hybrid, online, or face-­to-­face, I may out­
line and say, “Well, this is a very in­ter­est­ing discussion topic.” I try to appeal to fac­
ulty’s own experience with this ­because ­there are a ­whole lot of access points, “So 
you know ­there is always this risk of discussions being dominated by some very 
strong voices, so ­here we are developing this discussion in a new medium for you so 
let’s think about it. Are ­there tools available to us that could offset some of that risk? 
Have you thought about defining specific discussion roles?” By way of example, a 
lot of ­people ­will create a discussion and expect every­one to give the same type of 
response, be it analy­sis or reaction. So instead of that, what if you tap certain types 
of ­people and say, “Your role in this discussion is to play a dev­il’s advocate so your 
responses should be geared that way.” Then you create other subsets whereas your 
role in this discussion is, say, a researcher, so your only role is finding further links to 
support the reactions that ­people give. So something like differentiating roles in a 
discussion. This is not directly coming out of the Dungeons and Discourse experi­
ence, but it is very much resting on the same princi­ples and the observations that 
have been formed to what I do. So that’s connected to my part of work ­doing the 
instructional design stuff.
I prob­ably mentioned when last we spoke that ­there was another faculty member 
in the philosophy department who was interested in including some gamified ele­
ments in his course. He teaches a logic and critical thinking course pretty regularly. 
He ­wasn’t interested in ­doing a top-­to-­bottom restructuring as I did, but he wanted 
to include what he called ‘Gladiator Logic’ games as a unit (at least within the broader 
context of his traditional course structure). He’s not necessarily thinking about gamifi­
cation as pedagogy. He’s using this as a general engagement type of choice, but it is 
something that has latched on a certain bit. His practice has at least been encouraged 
by what I’ve been ­doing. It’s a sort of a team completion sort of model. He teaches 
this face-­to-­face in a kind of Jeopardy-­style, time-­restricted sort of competition.
In terms of other paths of influence, my course has been designated a first-­year 
experience course. Mine ­will be the gamified one, so students ­will be exposed to 
this early in their experience ­here. Our digital librarian is interested in developing 
virtual campus tours, ­etc., so she tends to be quite involved in the first-­year experi­
ence also. She’s another promising person on campus that is interested in a sort of 
augmented real­ity tour with QR codes around campus—­that kind of ­thing.
BELL—­What would take it to the next level at your campus? What’s needed in your 
opinion?
PETRUZELLA—­I ­don’t think politics is one of our bigger issues. I would say our culture 
­here is pretty receptive in terms of trying ­things like this out. The biggest issue that 

Dungeons and Discourse    129
I could identify right now is lack of support resources (insofar as gamification is not 
tied necessarily to technology), as a lot of the most evident and accessible points of 
access do tend to be related to technology, and right now our Center for Academic 
Technology is me—­I’m it. I had a half-­time colleague who retired this past semester, 
so right now any and all faculty who have any sort interest in learning something 
new (be it developing a proj­ect, ­doing instructional design, ­doing course redesign, 
learning how to teach online, troubleshooting issues with LMS or e-­portfolios) that’s 
all on one person at the institution at the moment. So it’s a bottleneck, is ­really what 
it is. I ­will be out connecting with other ­people in academic now at conferences and 
places and I always think, “Ahh, you have six ­people in your office—­how nice that 
must be.”
BELL—­What about the changing demographics, ­etc.? Other higher ed challenges? Do 
you have any other reflections? Is it worth the effort?
PETRUZELLA—­I still think that it’s valuable, and I think it’s a good pedagogical path. I do 
still think that. I think that in the intervening time I have noticed some more of ­these 
issues getting a bit more mainstream in the educational conversations. So that’s in­
ter­est­ing ­because some of the ideas that may have been new-­seeming several cycles 
ago have been a bit more taken for granted, a bit more taken as common wisdom in 
certain circles, and I think that recognizing the value of play and the value of allow­
ing students the space to fail without penalty—­those are a ­couple of the par­tic­u­lar, 
general ideas that have gained more traction over the intervening time. And since 
­those are core to a lot of what I was thinking and have been trying to do with this—­
that’s encouraging to me. That makes me think, “Alright, so ­these ­things are start­
ing to be recognized as useful and valuable. They are starting to have proven their 
merit a bit more in practice.” So maybe initially it was an exciting idea that seemed 
like it would work, but now it seems like ­people have been trying it for a while now, 
and it seems to have worked. So ­there’s that reinforcement cycle, I think, ­going on 
broadly. I do think that institutions, including my own, are starting to get a bit more 
serious about strategizing to reach out to expand the population we are trying to 
reach. We have seen some of the hype cycles reach their conclusion around ­things 
like MOOCs and whatnot, but coming out of the other side of that we still do have 
a core of ­things that we want to commit to.
We definitely want to commit with outreach to disadvantaged students—­that’s 
always been a part of the mission of certainly what my institution is ­doing. ­We’re 
starting to get a lot more technically literate staff and faculty as we start to hire new 
­people. ­We’re seeing that shift happen, where I’m finding I need to make the case 
less. Newer faculty coming in are like “Yeah, of course” rather than “Oh, what is 

130    Game On!
this?” So to cycle back to your question—­yes, I’m still committed to pursuing gami­
fication as a method that does, I think, at least two ­really impor­tant ­things.
One is to provide new and/or disadvantaged students an opportunity to learn 
from ­mistakes or failures or not quite coming in with all the tools. Gamification does 
that, and that’s been shown to be ­really a critical piece of what ­we’re ­after. I think 
also ­there’s that ele­ment of games as presenting the experience of higher ed as an 
experience that students come to want for its own sake. And that’s always a con­
stant worry in conversations that I have and that I hear. The worry, the commodifi­
cation of higher ed—­that students look at it as an experience that’s just as a means 
to an end, whereas having a gameful kind of experience challenges that. You ­don’t 
play a game just for the sake of having a high-­paying job at the other side of it. The 
game experience is its own reward in that way, so insofar as we can pres­ent learning 
to students in a way that is intrinsically enjoyable, I think that’s a second ­really impor­
tant advantage to pursuing gamification.
BELL—­Do you still play games?
PETRUZELLA—­I do, yes indeed. Certainly less than I would like given pesky ­things like 
work get in the way. I still play board games and online. I have to say it’s been a bit 
since I’ve logged into Steam. ­There’s a ­really cool tabletop game that I just backed 
on Kickstarter based on a book that I ­really loved. So I’m still in it a ­little bit. I still try 
to practice what I preach.

C H A P T E R   S E V E N
Threat of Crime and Terrorism
Founded as the Farmer’s High School of Pennsylvania in 1855, via a spell as 
the Agricultural College of Pennsylvania, Penn State College became The 
Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) in 1953. By 2003 it had grown to 
the extent that it had the second-­largest impact on the state economy of any 
organ­ization in Pennsylvania, generating an economic effect of over $17 bil­
lion. The mission statement of this research-­intensive university emphasizes 
teaching, research, and public ser­vice. With an annual enrollment of close to 
100,000 across its 24 campuses and online, it is one of the biggest universities 
in the United States. Famous alumni include Kelly Ayotte (former US senator), 
William Perry (former United States secretary of defense), John Aniston (actor 
on Days of Our Lives; Jennifer’s dad), Immortal Technique (po­liti­cal activist, 
rapper), Hugh Edwin Rodham (Hilary’s ­brother), and a multitude of football 
and baseball players. On the fictional side, Dr.  Abby Lockhart (of the TV 
show ER) and, in a nice piece of symmetry with the University of South Flor­
ida’s Hulk Hogan (who is real and mentioned in chapter 3), Dr. Bruce Banner, 
whose alter ego was The (Incredible) Hulk, are Penn State alumni. It is not 
documented ­whether The Hulk played football for the Nittany Lions—he 
would have been a heck of a nose guard. Penn State’s student body is 75.4% 
White, 5.5% Black, 4.3% Asian, 4.4% Hispanic, 0.2% Native American, 0.1% 
Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander, 1.7% two or more races, 5.8% international, 
and 3.1% unreported. Undergraduate annual tuition and fees in 2016 ­were 
$17,514 for in-­state students and $31,346 for out-­of-­state students, with 
$12,000 to $14,926 estimated for additional costs (room, meals, books, and 
supplies) for all students. Gradu­ate costs vary by program; the MBA goes for 
$23,708 annually for in-­state and $38,068 for out-­of-­state students.
Fred Aebli is a former major in the United States Marine Corps, where he 
worked aviation logistics. He joined Penn State in 1999 and worked on both the 
two-­year and four-­year curriculum in the information sciences and technology 

132    Game On!
(IST) degree. Based at Penn’s Worthington Scranton campus, he teaches online 
courses for their World Campus, is the IST program coordinator, and manages 
IST internship and community outreach programs. His recent non-­teaching 
work has included an analy­sis of distant synchronous information systems 
courses and, at the annual Online Learning Consortium International Con­
ference, a pre­sen­ta­tion on gamification techniques parenthetically titled “Turn­
ing an International Terror Plot into a Classroom Game.”
Aebli grew up as an only child in Scranton, Pennsylvania. His ­father passed 
away in the summer of 1977 when he was nine years old, and, as is so often the 
case, the loss cemented many events around that time in his mind for perpe­
tuity. He was supported through the love of 12 aunts, ­uncles, and cousins 
and clearly managed to glean a happy childhood despite his ­father’s death. 
One member of this ­family support team, an ­uncle in Arizona, informed him 
of the upcoming release of a movie that seemed to be worth seeing based on 
rave reviews in the media. It was called Star Wars, and, as Aebli recalls to this 
day, it was like nothing he had ever seen. When young Aebli fi­nally got to see 
the movie, he was blown away. The adventure and his imagination allowed 
him to mentally leave ­behind his own challenges, replacing them with a 
journey to the stars and beyond, roleplaying dif­fer­ent characters and creat­
ing new storylines in which he was central. The technology under­lying the 
Star Wars movie fascinated him, and he latched on to all ­things related to 
space travel and science fiction. He lived and breathed all ­things Star Wars for 
many of his formative years and re­created that world through toys, models, 
and, as he grew older, through the fledgling world of computers. Play had al­
ways been a means of escape for Aebli, and, prior to his Star Wars exposure, his 
mom had fed and encouraged his imagination buying him action figures and 
construction kits. It was, however, his discovery of the Atari 2600 in the early 
1980s that put him on the path of true creativity and creativity with an end 
product; he began to learn how to make (or code) “his own stuff.”
When playing with ­these early home video games, Aebli became intrigued 
and challenged himself to learn how to get ­under the hood hacking and writ­
ing new code, putting him on the path to software development and pro­
gramming. As this interest grew, his relatives realized that this was a hobby 
to be encouraged. He was given first a Timex Sinclair 1000 and ­later a Com­
modore 64 on which he taught himself BASIC programming. Moving on to 
high school he found like-­minded friends within the Dungeons & Dragons 
crowd, and he, perhaps to impress ­these new friends, started to challenge 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    133
himself to develop Dungeons & Dragons–­like role-­playing games. With 8-­bit 
graphics and his newly acquired skills he managed to create ­simple path-­
based games developing the twin sides of his interests in real technology and 
creative fantasy. Progressing through high school, still walking this ­middle 
ground between real­ity and the stars, Aebli deci­ded that he wanted to be­
come an astronaut. As a first step on that path and to help secure his own 
education, he deci­ded to serve his country in the military. A long-­time ­family 
friend of his ­mother suggested he shoot for a pi­lot ­career in the marine corps 
(again, one step closer to the stars). Aebli attended marine corps Officer Can­
didate School, graduated from Penn State with a computer science/math de­
gree, and received his commission as a second lieutenant in the United States 
Marine Corps. However, the ­giant leap to becoming an astronaut proved be­
yond him ­because of his lack of a terminal science degree. Not allowing that 
disappointment to blunt his energy, ­after a rewarding ­career in the marine 
corps, he entered ser­vice in the US Army and went back to school as an 
active-­duty soldier to receive his Master’s of Informational Systems Resource 
Management degree. In a clear summary of Aebli’s humor and never-­say-­die 
attitude, he has a news clipping on his home refrigerator reading “Astronaut 
Applications Being Accepted.” Nothing gets this man down.
On discharge from the US Army, Aebli was determined to further his tech­
nology experiences that he had begun when on active duty. The Internet was 
now a ­thing, and he realized that his experience to that point meant that he 
could build new ­things for this new environment. Proficient in HTML, Flash, 
graphics, and coding, he was hired by Bell Atlantic to lead a software proj­ect 
before leaving to work for an Oracle consulting group at a nuclear plant in 
Berwick, Pennsylvania. While ­there he started to teach night classes, and, 
­after a round of corporate downsizing, he explored the possibility of teaching 
back at his alma mater. His former computer science professor told him of a new 
degree that the university was starting called information sciences and tech­
nology and encouraged him to apply. He has now been teaching ­there for over 
16 years. Over that period, he has created many courses from scratch, coordi­
nated the IST internship program, and engaged the campus in what he calls a 
“pre-­incubator business startup hub” to foster new ideas and innovations. Up­
permost in his teaching philosophy has been the sentiment that got him 
through and beyond his own personal challenges: “Learning should be fun.”
When the university developed a security and risk analy­sis (SRA) curricu­
lum as a minor for the IST majors in 2012, Aebli was assigned SRA 211: Threat 

134    Game On!
of Crime and Terrorism (figure  17). The university website describes this 
­minor as “intended to familiarize students with the general framework and 
multidisciplinary theories that define security and related risk analy­sis . . . ​
providing a grounding in analy­sis and modeling used in information search, 
visualization and creative prob­lem solving.”
Students typically take SRA 211, Aebli’s course, as rising sophomores, and 
it is offered once a year in the spring as a resident course. It was initially de­
veloped and delivered in Penn State’s Angel learning management system 
(LMS) but was ported, as ­were all institutional courses, to Instructure’s Can­
vas platform when the university transitioned in 2015. The program target 
demographic, and indeed the student body generally at Penn State, consists 
of technology-­comfortable students of traditional college age with some 
nontraditional and active-­duty US military personnel and veterans alongside 
them. Most of the students are familiar with video game play, but ­there has 
also been a developing vibe around more traditional board games. Aebli 
himself recognizes this and serves as an advisor to both the IST Club and to 
the League of Extraordinary Gamers Club (LEG). This latter LEG group has 
had recent near-­exponential growth. Aebli oversees rooms filled with young 
Figure 17. Screenshot from the Penn State Threat of Terrorism and Crime SRA 211 course. 
© Fred Aebli, Penn State University; used with permission.

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    135
­people engaging directly with many dif­fer­ent types of board games, eschew­
ing, at least for a short period, cell phones and related technologies.
Aebli’s first attempt to gamify SRA 211 was driven by his desire to create a 
more engaging experience in and out of the classroom. Thinking back to his 
time in the marines, he reflected, “Turning anything into a game automati­
cally makes it more engaging . . . ​You definitely see it in the military. You see 
engagement go up when you train Marines in realistic scenarios, so I thought, 
why ­wouldn’t it work for my students? Why should they have to learn solely 
from listening to lectures and reading textbooks?”
Aebli’s version 1.0 of this proj­ect was developed as a role-­play game that 
represented the structure and format of the G8’s counterterrorism working 
group. The G8 (at time of the course actually the G7) is a governmental po­
liti­cal forum that has evolved from an initial group of six member states 
(France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States) 
in 1975 who got together to debate and formulate mutually beneficial local 
and international policies. The G6 became the G7 in 1976, when Canada 
joined; Rus­sia also signed up in 1997, making it the G8. When Rus­sia was sus­
pended in 2014 on the basis of their annexation of Crimea and intimidating 
be­hav­ior ­toward Ukraine, every­one arrived back at G7. Doubtless that ­will 
change again soon, but let’s leave it at that for now.
Within the G8 ­there are many subgroups, and one of them, the Roma-­
Lyons group, established in 2001 ­under Italian presidency (countries rotate 
and switch the leadership role), looks at strategies around terrorism and trans­
national crime. Roma-­Lyons meets three times a year when members debate 
and develop prevention and mitigation strategies. Roma-­Lyons members are 
drawn from the member countries and are typically foreign or interior minis­
try representatives of their respective nations. The group, in simplistic terms, 
develops a shared approach, recommendations, and best practices for the 
safeguarding of public security. The results of this subgroup’s work are passed 
on to the G8 group’s interior and justice ministers at their annual meeting, 
where they are reviewed and, in many cases, ­adopted as national policy for 
the constituent member countries.
Aebli’s idea for the central proj­ect for his fledgling SRA 211 course was to 
base the class format on the workings of the G8 Roma-­Lyons Group. He as­
signed groups of students to specific countries whose national security agen­
cies ­were to be analyzed and reported on to the class. The team assigned to 
­Great Britain had to analyze and review MI5’s organ­ization, policies, and 

136    Game On!
practices, while the team given Canada had to do likewise with the Canadian 
Royal Mounted Police (the Mounties). With class sizes between 15 and 24 
students, the average team size was small—­only three to four students. At 
the start of the proj­ect the Roma-­Lyons players had to elect a country to chair 
the group (or to serve as president) per standard G8 protocol. The members 
of the chair country ­were tasked with ­running the classroom meeting as an 
assembly, organ­izing the other members, and overseeing the production of 
critiques of their countries’ security agencies. ­These reports, titled Bottom 
Line Up Fronts (BLUFs), are a format common in US military writing, follow­
ing a protocol where conclusions and recommendations are laid out at the 
beginning of the text, with the goal being to expedite decision making. One 
member of each team, rising from desks with their country name displayed, 
reported on their team’s BLUF to the ­whole class. The BLUF content was made 
more au­then­tic and vital through intelligence reports, provided by Aebli via 
a password-­protected folder in the Angel LMS. The students ­were given one 
week to collaborate in their teams and prepare their analyses.
During larger group meetings, students ­were encouraged to ask questions 
of one another while the instructor, representing the United States, would 
“inject thoughts or questions in the event [he] ­didn’t see them making the 
pro­gress that [he] expected at that point in time.” The proj­ect culminated in 
a final proj­ect pre­sen­ta­tion developed collectively as a full 24-­member report 
with each country assigned dif­fer­ent aspects of national security and/or po­
liti­cal nuance to report out on. One group led the discussion on financing of 
terrorism, another on weapons procurement, and a further team on logistics 
and risks. Final pre­sen­ta­tions ­were public, and Aebli typically invited guests. He 
encouraged the students to dress in professional, business attire, and so, with 
an extra sense of gravitas and one final dose of authenticity, they presented 
in a large auditorium on campus.
Aebli felt that this version (1.0) of his immersive SRA 211 class, the Roma-­
Lyons G8 format, was effective. But he was concerned that too many students 
­were disengaged; as he put it, “­there was a lot of coat-­tailing ­going on.” He 
realized that the small team sizes did not generate much in the way of team 
competition or group dynamic. He also had a hankering to go beyond au­
then­tic role-­playing to more recognizable gamification, leveraging his imagi­
nation and perhaps recalling his engagement with adventure narrative and 
the value of creativity as a motivator. Besides, the original format was not 
producing significant results in terms of student grades. He hypothesized 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    137
that he needed to develop more tension and a more competitive environ­
ment via team challenges and narrative. He started to formulate ideas around 
fewer teams competing with more challenging materials, a more pronounced 
narrative, and a clearer sense of a tangible achievement or reward. Version 
2.0 began to take shape.
The Game
For version 2.0, working with limited support staff at the terrorism center, 
Aebli revised his central proj­ect for the SRA 211 course. In the new version, 
students are assigned to proj­ect teams, known as “FBI Fly Teams,” tasked with 
responding as counterterrorism units to intelligence about attack threats. Fly 
Teams ­really are “a ­thing, defined on the FBI website as: small, highly trained 
cadres of counterterrorism investigators—­including special agents and intel­
ligence analysts—­based at FBI Headquarters who stand ready to deploy any­
where in the world on a moment’s notice.”
A Fly Team’s mission (also from the FBI site) is ”To bring the FBI’s strategic 
and tactical counterterrorism capabilities to bear in partnership with other 
U.S. government agencies and foreign partner-­nation entities in critical over­
seas locations to detect, penetrate and disrupt terrorist networks.” To be enlisted 
onto a Fly Team, along with multilingualism, advanced medical training, and 
weapons training members must have the following skills:
•	
Digital media exploitation and forensics expertise;
•	
Explosive post blast investigations;
•	
Advanced tactical and force protection skills;
•	
Tactical evasive driving;
•	
Hostage survival and re­sis­tance training and
•	
Advanced surveillance techniques.
In recent years, FBI Fly Teams have been deployed to the Boston Marathon 
bombing; the US consulate attack in Benghazi, Libya; the Westgate Mall attack 
in Nairobi, ­Kenya; the World Cup bombing in Kampala, Uganda; and the Boko 
Haram kidnapping of schoolgirls in Abuja, Nigeria.
Aebli described the SRA 211 Fly Team core competency as being able to 
“analyze and critically assess a large volume of threat intelligence indicating 
the formation of a pos­si­ble terror plot at some location around the world.” The 
ultimate goal is to fully “unearth the plot and make recommendations as to 
how to neutralize the risk.” With this overview articulated, he set the stage 

138    Game On!
for teams within the class to compete with one another to determine the ter­
ror plot and acquire points to improve their grades. In a manner similar to 
that of the board game Clue, teams ­were told that it was their goal to learn 
all the terror plot details and then report out to the FBI director (Aebli) their 
team’s analy­sis. The target for the students preparing the analy­sis was to in­
clude the terror event location, an estimate of when it would happen, and 
the nature of the attack (what kind of kinds of weapon ­were to be used and the 
scale, including number of potential casualties, ­etc.). The course/game was 
structured over a 12-­week period. At the beginning of the proj­ect, Aebli took 
the solution, including all pertinent details, and, in front of the class, placed 
it in a large manila envelope. This was sealed and secured in his office ­until 
the last week of the proj­ect, to be opened ­after all the student teams had 
given their solutions.
Each week the students ­were assigned (a lot of) readings before they took a 
weekly online quiz assessing their comprehension of key details and princi­
ples of the investigation. The instructor recorded their individual scores and 
then calculated an average team score. On completion of the quiz reviews, 
the instructor published an “intelligence batch” made up of fictitious police 
reports, e-­mails, satellite images, and other intelligence artifacts (figure 18). 
However, only the teams that scored higher than a predetermined average 
quiz grade (or, as Aebli put it, cleared that level) got access to the intelligence 
batch.
Teams that scored, on average, below the required level ­were allowed to 
keep taking the quiz ­until they got their scores up and could move on. 
Clearly, though, prompt access to the intelligence reports allowed a group to 
get ahead and get closer to the solution faster. The students reacted well to 
this form of motivation. One commented, “Having the intel batches released 
­after the completion and average score of quizzes was an in­ter­est­ing way of 
bringing the group together for another purpose rather than just chatting 
about the proj­ect. It helped us all realize that relying on ­others to complete 
their work was essential for the group to advance further in the proj­ect.”
Aebli experimented with other means of providing information by plac­
ing intelligence in a variety of campus locations—an aspect he would like to 
develop in ­future iterations. Some of his course or proj­ect enhancement ideas 
center on devising puzzles to unlock ­those locations. “I’ve also been trying to 
do some geocaching. I want to actually plant items on the campus and have 
[the students] find them. So what I want to do is create a video that would 
contain a puzzle, and from the video it’ll generate a URL that ­will take them 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    139
to a webpage, and ­they’ll be able to find a map. It’s basically just that next 
level of engagement, outside of the classroom, and they seem ­really receptive 
to that.”
Students who completed the course in prior sessions ­were encouraged to 
come back and act as Special Agents, often peppering the active Fly Team 
members with misinformation, false leads, and information intended to de­
tract from their ability to focus on the ­actual solution. Aebli would actively 
reach out to the most engaged students from prior course iterations and ask 
them to act as his moles. Aebli comments: “We have a very small campus set­
ting, and within the degree program the students all kind of see each other, 
and they are aware—­these are all upperclassmen, and ­they’ll play this up. 
­They’ll literally walk up to a student and ­they’ll say, ‘Are you ­doing Aebli’s ter­
ror plot now? I’ll tell you the answer,’ and ­they’ll say the wrong ­thing, inten­
tionally giving misinformation, and they take it all very seriously. ­They’re 
­great guys and girls.”
Another Penn State student who was originally a business major, hearing 
of the class and learning that it was available as a minor in security, enrolled 
and served as another “plant,” as Aebli calls him. One of the pieces of intel in 
Figure 18. Sample intelligence batch from SRA 211. © Fred Aebli, 2015; used with 
permission.

140    Game On!
the course is a map with some Arabic writing on it. Penn State ­doesn’t offer 
Arabic, so while many try to use Google, it is of ­great value for them to work 
with a genuine Farsi speaker. Aebli’s plant, Johnny, is ­Middle Eastern and 
works part-­time in the Penn State cafeteria. When current students need to 
have the map deciphered, they have to figure out who Johnny is in the cafe­
teria and approach him to request his help. Johnny gives Aebli feedback on 
how the students are ­doing, providing a live ele­ment to the experience and 
thus allowing Aebli to tailor the flow of information. On occasion when Aebli 
was traveling off campus, he would require students to provide a “proof of 
life” by taking a team selfie holding up the current day’s newspaper. In another 
au­then­tic twist, active student Fly Teams ­were penalized when “agents” or the 
instructor discovered intelligence artifacts left ­behind in public spaces. ­These 
“security breaches” ­were treated as grading penalties ­toward batch releases, 
slowing team access to subsequent information. Reflecting on the class and 
the intelligence batches, one student commented, “When the proj­ect started, 
it took a while to start making sense of the intelligence batches. It ­wasn’t 
­until the fourth batch of intel when our team started putting the pieces to­
gether. It made me like ­doing the readings, and I felt addicted at some points 
reading the intel batches ­because it was so in­ter­est­ing. I ­really felt like we 
­were solving a major terror plot.”
Reflecting the importance of data visualization in modern crime and ter­
rorism study, designated groups of students as a subproject ­were tasked with 
building a social network map to represent and then review data, looking for 
threatening trends. The data repre­sen­ta­tion/visualization team was tasked to 
report out at the team meetings and would often lead work sessions, plugging 
in other countries’ data and helping analyze the results. Of their own voli­
tion, students with a more technical background developed or found tools to 
aggregate and collect data. Some used Google spreadsheets integrating a macro 
that allowed them to color-­code cells and then tracked color frequency, analyz­
ing trends in the data to help uncover the plot.
At the conclusion of the proj­ect period, each active team had to pres­ent 
their plot analy­sis. If a team demonstrated that they had correctly uncovered 
one or two ele­ments of the plot, they ­were rewarded with points to be applied 
elsewhere in the course, such as to a previously scored test or assignment. Teams 
deciphering all components of the plot ­were given points that could be applied 
to their final individual course grade. For the class session when the students 
presented their plot analyses, pulling on his connections and his former 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    141
­career, Aebli welcomed FBI agents, National Guard intelligence officers, local 
law enforcement, and campus security officers to the class pre­sen­ta­tions. 
Many came in uniform, adding an extra sense of authenticity to the proceed­
ings. Aebli’s military background combined with his access to the terrorism 
center at Penn State presented him with access to real-­world prac­ti­tion­ers who 
gave concrete and motivating feedback to the students. ­These professionals 
provided, according to Aebli, “very supportive and constructive feedback on 
how to pres­ent the information in a concise and meaningful way.”
Outcomes
The instructor reported success with this approach in terms of accentuated 
student engagement and retained knowledge at the end of the course. While 
class participation numbers remained low, rendering quantitative compari­
sons moot, his qualitative take was quite clear and confident. He and the as­
sembled experts felt that the students ­were better able to apply princi­ples and 
techniques (or competencies) typical of counter-­terrorist experts in au­then­tic 
activities and particularly the “plot” proj­ect. Aebli reflected, “At the end of 
the semester we had a feedback session where we just talked, and they said 
some ­things that ­really meant a lot to me ­because I do strive hard to get this 
proj­ect together. They ­were saying, ‘We’ve never had a proj­ect’—­especially 
the se­niors—­‘never had a proj­ect like this ever,’ and I think this is how they 
should all be run.”
One student elaborated, “The proj­ect was unlike any other I have ever done. 
The way Aebli designed it made it feel like you ­were ­really trying to solve a ter­
rorist plot. Piecing together the evidence over the semester was challenging 
and fun, and he did a ­great job at getting us motivated to solve a prob­lem that 
counter-­terrorism teams work on in the real world.” Aebli’s long-­term ambi­
tion is to extend the model to related courses and then even to courses in 
other disciplines.
The Canvas LMS, according to Aebli, worked well at a fundamental or 
“pi­lot” level of complexity. Aebli said, “Canvas has a ­really in­ter­est­ing feature 
that lets you create modules. Picture a series of boxes where when ­you’re 
done with the one box and ­you’ve achieved all the predefined ele­ments, 
you can then have access to the next box or module.” He used Canvas to 
facilitate his management of the proj­ect, particularly the announcement 
and communication tools, while also developing individual Fly Team work 
spaces. As the students leveled up and ­were cleared to access the next batch of 

142    Game On!
course intelligence, based on their average quiz score, Aebli dropped documents 
into ­these individual team spaces. His ­actual technical build was minor, as he 
set up all of the LMS work himself with minimal instructional design team 
support. The only more complex aspect, more of an enhancement than an 
essential, was the development of a database that allowed him to amend 
dates and time stamps throughout the course documentation. His original 
documents featured static dates that required updating, without which they 
would lose context and authenticity. He noted that he still needed to manu­
ally amend names of key figures, and related information, illustrating an 
awkward aspect of the authenticity of the courses: a lot of ­those named in the 
documents ­were living ­people whose roles changed over time or who, in some 
cases, ceased being living ­people. Aebli commented with a degree of sangfroid, 
“I guess that’s something that somebody’s proud of somewhere. It means 
­we’re marching forward on this, but I now have to think about who are ­these 
actors ­going to be now and, subsequently, changing the names or finding 
new names.” The increased automation of updates along with, he explained, 
finding better ways of automating the leveling up, quiz averaging, and intel­
ligence batch releases in ­future versions are Aebli’s priorities for platform 
development.
In terms of more ambitious enhancements, he remains interested in devel­
oping a new digital dimension and has been considering the Analyst’s Note­
book software (the class currently uses MS Visio) to assist in the tracking and 
analy­sis of social networks. This critical aspect of terrorist plot discovery, 
tracking what is often called “chatter,” can provide intimations of impending 
action. On an even longer and more ambitious timeline he can see the proj­
ect’s potential as a multiplayer video game and has discussed this possibility 
with the student-­led gaming commons group at Penn State.
Reflections
Aebli felt that in his most recent run of the class he “gave away too much” in 
terms of points and their impact on grades. At Penn State, in a recent session 
with the chief academic officer, the topic of grade inflation was discussed. The 
discussion was wide-­ranging, general, and generic (not targeted at Aebli or his 
class), yet he felt that “[he] had contributed to that trend.” Aebli elaborated:
I think it’s where I placed the points. So what ended up happening—­there was a 
team this last time—­they ­were the first team ever who got all three—­the who, the 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    143
what and the where. It was funny. The week was during what we call “Threat Week,” 
and at 5 a.m. on Monday of Threat Week you ­were allowed to submit your assessment. 
They got up at 5:00 a.m. and submitted it with the timestamp at 5:01 a.m. They 
­were clearly overachievers, and a ­mistake I made with this—­I’ve been ­doing team­
work a lot, but I assigned the teams, and, specifically with this par­tic­u­lar team, I 
­didn’t evenly distribute my se­niors (and they ­were ­great students). I just got an e-­
mail from one of the team who interviewed with Booz Allen, and at interview they 
discussed the terror proj­ect, and I was like, “Wow, that’s cool.” So this team was 
­really good at analyzing, reading, and assessing, and they ­were ­really competitive. 
­These ­were the se­niors; this is the team that just got it. The sophomores ­were still 
like “Hey, ­we’re in college?” Then ­there ­were two other teams where one team got 
two out of the three correct, so they got extra points on an exam, and the other 
team just got one right, so they just got extra points on a lab grade average. But the 
winning team, that correctly assessed the threat, they got extra points added on to 
their final grade. I think it was five points, which is a lot. That was the winning team. 
The other teams ­didn’t get so much of a boost. So I think if I ­were to do it differently, 
I would back off the total points I was awarding and redistribute it a ­little bit differently 
over the exams and the quiz.
Aebli frames his work in a bigger and more significant meta­phor. He likes 
to explain to the students and their parents that college life and education 
generally are not only about memorizing and regurgitating facts. He tells 
the students that the biggest advantage of their college life is the opportu­
nity they are given to make better versions of themselves: more articulate, 
informed, effective, and discerning critical thinkers who question and 
­really ponder the world around them and their place in it. He tells them 
that they can only do this if they ­really engage with their classes, their in­
structors, their classmates, and the materials they are given to review. When 
he speaks to parents at new student orientation he shares with them this 
observation, further illustrating his point by indulging his Disney fandom. 
As he puts it:
When you go to Walt Disney World, you get engaged with an experience. If you 
­were to go to another amusement park that has a roller coaster (well, Disney World 
has a roller coaster)—­but when you go to another park, it’s just a ­ride. At Disney it is 
an experience. I think when you go and you get engaged in an experience, it starts 
to elevate and it takes on another layer or level of significance. It starts to be the 
experience that ­will stay with you, not the ­ride that lasts a minute or two.

144    Game On!
This is what he hopes for not only with his class but also with the ­whole 
student experience at Penn State: making it an experience and motivating 
the students intrinsically so that they research and learn beyond the mini­
mal class requirements. His goal is to produce students who, ­after the class 
is done, ­will keep reading and listening to the news with a critical ear, 
students who ­will keep discussing the issues with friends, colleagues, and 
­family members, getting beyond infotainment and into the substance. His 
biggest reward in delivering the class is seeing students focused in the class­
room, especially certain students who have ­really engaged with the materi­
als, who go on to widen their world, listening to podcasts and paying more 
attention to the news. He values the heightening of intrinsic motivation, 
where they are not studying to pass a test anymore but ­because “it’s cool to 
know about stuff.” He reflects further, “Maybe it’s a sense of awakening—­
they start to realize what they are passionate about, and then they go that 
route.”
Aebli’s own personal motivators clearly go beyond the target of simply get­
ting students to earn a decent grade and complete his course with an above-­
average GPA. His personal incentive is grounded in a belief that while his 
subject ­matter is of ­great value, the life skills that students take away may be 
even more impor­tant. His students may not become international terrorism 
experts in the same way that he did not (yet) become an astronaut. He wants 
his students to do well in the class to help them to become better citizens. He 
stresses in the class that that terrorism ­doesn’t belong to one country or reli­
gion and pushes them to question all the intelligence, including his own. As 
he puts it, “I want the students to come out of the course more engaged in 
current events and with a better idea of analyzing what’s ­going on in the 
world. Sometimes students come in with assumptions and ste­reo­types about 
what terrorism is, and I want them to be more informed and able to think 
critically about ­things.”
His use of gamification techniques certainly appears to have motivated 
and encouraged students to go well beyond cramming for the test and then 
immediately forgetting their learning. One of his recent students commented, 
“Overall the proj­ect was fun. It helped me advance my analy­sis and critical 
thinking skills, and I wish ­there ­were more experiences like this on campus.” 
With Aebli’s enthusiasm and energy and the attention he is getting at Penn, 
­there doubtless soon ­will be.

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    145
Where Are They Now?
Aebli’s course was run more recently than the other cases, but I did ask him to reflect on 
the evolution of the course and the feedback he had acted on regarding gamification 
generally.
BELL—­I know that you have not had a ­great deal of time between class sessions, but 
what did you learn, or what have you perhaps tweaked about your gamification 
princi­ples?
AEBLI—­On the administrative side, I felt that I needed to review where we ­were at ­regarding 
pos­si­ble FERPA [­Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act] issues. I was concerned 
­because even though I was not sharing grades in any way through the platform, the 
students ­were discussing their per­for­mance on the quizzes and their grades with 
each other. When they take the online quiz, which becomes available for a 48-­ or 
72-­hour period, they are shown their individual grade, which I then collate and re­
port out to the team as a ­whole. Then when they receive their team grade, particu­
larly if they ­haven’t made the level needed to pro­gress and requiring them to take 
the test again, they immediately start saying out loud, “Well I got 100 on that quiz, 
what did you get?” I talked to my academic officer about that, and he said if they 
are freely giving that information then it was not a concern from a FERPA perspec­
tive. With that resolution, I reflected on how in­ter­est­ing it actually was that when 
they ­were ­doing the comparisons and asking how individual team members had 
done it ­wasn’t in a badgering sort of way. It was quite the opposite—in a fun, posi­
tive, peer-­pressure but encouraging kind of way. The ­whole student group was like, 
“Yeah, let’s get out ­there—­let’s go.” They would hit it immediately, ­really encourag­
ing and supporting each other. They ­wouldn’t put it off or say, “I have to get to next 
class.” They would say, “Hey, give me fifteen minutes, and I’ll go back and take the 
quiz again.” As the quiz was designed to pull from a question pool, it ­wasn’t the 
same quiz over and over.
The other ­thing that I have also noticed was the pace. Technically ­there are four 
batches of intelligence information that get released, but the vast majority of the 
students ­don’t get a sense of urgency and engagement ­until right around batch 
two. At that point the mountain of intel went from this big to THIS big, and most of 
them get it then, that, “uh-oh, the third batch is ­going to be massive—­let’s move—­
let’s go.” And the team that correctly assessed it this year (just [based on] observing 
them and hearing their conversations and seeing them work together), they got it 

146    Game On!
very early on and ­were hugely motivated. The team that ­didn’t get it ­didn’t do ­those 
­things. They hesitated more and seemed unsure of how to proceed. When all is said 
and done, I think the one ­thing to my advantage, though, is the material. It’s con­
temporary and au­then­tic. My only real disappointment about this class, a bit of a 
sad commentary, was that it still is disproportionately homogenous, having had 22 
students in it with 21 men and only one ­woman. The [lack of] diversity is definitely 
problematic for us as a discipline (not only or specifically in this class). Right now, 
that’s what we see in tech—­not enough females. The one ­woman that was in the 
class was actually from Rus­sia, and she thought it was very intriguing and told 
me that she got a lot out of the class. For the most part, though, when you see 
the participants in this format, ­those who ­really grab this material, they do tend to 
be first-­person-­shooter kind of gaming guys. It’s certainly ­great that they immedi­
ately related it to that and they love that. I ­don’t want to lose that, but I am hoping 
to engage and interest a wider pool of participants if at all pos­si­ble. What inspires 
and motivates me the most about this class is when I start off the first class session 
by saying, “If you make it through this class, I guarantee ­you’re ­going to be a dif­fer­
ent person by the time ­you’re done.” I’m confident in saying this, as what we do in 
this class is we look at this ­whole issue of radicalization from a much dif­fer­ent ­angle, 
and we look at it critically. What we end up with is not the typical knee-­jerk reac­
tions of, “Oh, you know . . .” the ste­reo­typical conclusions that they ­will even see in 
the mainstream press and in mass media around them at times. The students start 
to realize that ­there is more to this issue than what is often portrayed in the media. 
All the analy­sis and, I believe, the authenticity of ­those ­factors act as kind of a ste­roid 
input to this proj­ect. The students ­really get into it, and I think they ­really like the 
competitive piece—so it’s ­really something that I am proud of and that I know has 
­great potential for this and other classes.
BELL—­What would take this proj­ect or the concept of gamification at Penn State to the 
next level?
AEBLI—­I was invited up to The University at Buffalo where they ­were hosting a Mean­
ingful Gaming conference, a ­really ­simple, early-­stage conference. At that event 
­there was another professor who came off as very combative and provocative. The 
first presenter who spoke was very open-­minded, wanting to try new ­things, and he 
made some ­great comments. Then I got up, and I was sort of the applied guy, and I 
made my comments about what I had attempted, my preliminary successes and so 
on. Then the third guy got up, and he was very hard-­edged, and he ­didn’t like a lot 
of what we said. To be fair, he warned us ahead of schedule, saying, “You know, 
when I do this kind of ­thing I ­don’t get paid a lot of money, and what I like to do is 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    147
to pick fights.” I thought it was a strange ­thing to say, and I’ve spent a lot of time 
around guys like that in the marine corps. I started to pick up on the fact from this 
guy that he was dismissing this and viewed gamifying a course as being just this 
month’s new ­thing or a fad like the hula-­hoop. I started to even question myself if 
this is just a fad—­this year’s MOOC? I think what­ever we do, we have to make sure 
that we document and demonstrate it has good results and show that the barrier to 
entry is surmountable. I have shown a number of faculty that it is easy to set up and 
­doesn’t require a ­great deal of technical support. So that’s the ­thing I’m finding that 
every­one comes up to me to ask me: “Well, how did you actually do it?” and “What 
did you ­really do?” When I show them that it’s, you know, taking quiz scores and 
averaging them to show a team average, then often my colleagues ­will say, “What, 
that’s it?” I’ve concluded that ­there’s sort of a mystique to it, whereas in real­ity, it’s 
about implementing some creative ideas, not necessarily with expensive or high-­
cost build-­outs. With ­those ele­ments conveyed and illustrated I think it is pos­si­ble to 
get buy-in from the university. At my institution, one of the ­things I know they are 
hoping to do is create some easy-­to-­follow steps that show other faculty members 
how they might take their first few steps to give it a try, to usher it in.
One of the ­things ­people ­don’t realize is that gamification is already around 
them in many formats and that it is part of our lives even in relatively mundane 
ways. ­Those ­little key-­fob ­things from the gas station or cards from the coffee shops 
(the tags that you hang on your key that you swipe and get points), well, that’s 
gamification, and ­people ­don’t make that connection. I think that so many ­people 
are locked into thinking that it’s got to be a Warcraft strategy, virtual or board 
game, with serious meta­phors and high build costs. Thoughtful, creative teachers 
have been trying this kind of work for years and years. The gamification is an added 
flavor to spice up [already] good, or even ­great, instruction. It ­doesn’t have to be 
this ­whole, massive, scary production.
BELL—­So ­you’re moving ­towards a platform of changing student be­hav­ior, getting 
­people more engaged in current affairs and informed in how to find resources, ­etc., 
and not just academic per­for­mance for a test or a quiz?
AEBLI—­Right. So I was thinking about this. Should I try to capture some survey data 
from the students who have taken the course and ask them a ­simple question like, 
“Are you watching the news more?” or “Are you understanding the issues more?” I 
think that intrinsic motivation is a very impor­tant ­thing for higher education in gen­
eral. ­There is too much discussion ­going on about the cost of education, so every­
one’s talking about ­doing something, and ­we’re all aware of the fact that the next 
financial ­bubble is the financial aid ­bubble that is ­going to burst if students keep 

148    Game On!
defaulting. So parents, not all parents but most, shop by the course cost not by the 
experience. I had this in­ter­est­ing discussion with some parents the other day. ­These 
­were parents of kids who are very hyper-­athletic (travel team and every­thing ­else) 
who are looking to get a scholarship [at] any costs. I said to them, “Did you ever 
think what you would do if you got the scholarship but it is for a Division III school 
with a very poor alumni base, or it’s for a liberal arts degree where they ­will certainly 
make it through the program but they ­won’t get a job?” Clearly I’m being anec­
dotal, but if you get ­people to understand that when ­you’re looking at an educa­
tional institution you must look at the full breadth of it as best you can and ask 
yourself what kind of experience is it ­going to be both in and out of the classroom? 
I think, I get the sense that, that’s getting lost. So I keep trying to tell ­people, to help 
parents when ­they’re shopping ju­nior year and se­nior year of high school, that ­these 
are the ­things you should want and that’s what you should be looking at. You know, 
the last time a lot of ­these parents ­were in school was 20–25 years ago, and now, all 
of a sudden, they are shopping for their kids, and ­they’re thinking it’s still 1986, and 
it’s not. It’s a lot dif­fer­ent and a lot more expensive. Their kids need to come out 
with clear, marketable skills and, even more importantly, be­hav­iors that ­will stand 
them in good stead for the next three to four de­cades of their ­career in this chang­
ing world. Getting ­people to be motivated—­the Indiana Jones spirit, I call it—­I want 
them to be seekers, to be ready for change, to be able to analyze and deal with un­
certainty. To be motivated even when you ­don’t know all the answers.
BELL—­Generally is the tactic to use the game ele­ment to get them through fear of fail­
ure then get them to engagement with the subject ­matter?
AEBLI—­There is the weird academic notion that it must be rigorous and, to an extent, 
not fun ­because that’s what we do and if it’s not hard and challenging and super-­
serious (you ­don’t get a C or a D) . . . ​you know, it’s like that . . . ​I started out one of 
my talks with, “Why ­can’t learning be fun?” I know certain ­things are hard, but even 
­things that are hard can be fun.
The one observation I made in my class as we debriefed at the end [with the 
students] is that the authenticity of the subject ­matters of the activities is critical. To 
illustrate how they re­spect this aspect, recently a professor who left our institution, 
an expert in terrorism and the psy­chol­ogy of terrorism, made himself available for a 
live interview session. The students ­were asking him ­whether ­there might be a way 
to use predictive analytics in a similar way as they are used in the business world to 
identify or predict the likelihood that an individual is, or might become, a radical­
ized person. My former colleague was adamant about the fact that it was not a fea­
sible application. He said, “No, ­there are far too many risk ­factors and you ­can’t 

Threat of Crime and Terrorism    149
come up with a complex enough equation that would accurately do that.” So my 
students heard that talk and we discussed it, and they somewhat begrudgingly 
accept[ed] his opinion. About two months ­later, near the end of the course, the 
White House announced out that ­they’re ­going to spend $500 million on a new 
program called Gecko. This is a new browser-­based advertising program that’s 
­going to be dropping banner ads on select individuals’ PCs who they think may be 
potential radical candidates. The students ­were like, “So if all this data over ­here is 
saying ­you’re not ­going to be able to do that yet the White House is ­going to go out 
and spend all ­these millions of dollars to do this, then who is out of alignment ­here?” 
I was ­really proud of them at that moment ­because they picked up on that before I 
did, before I recognized the contradiction. So I pulled out a bunch of material in 
class that day and said “Let’s look at this, talk about this.” And it was that moment 
where I saw most clearly how comprehensively they ­were engaged in the material. 
It was a ­really cool discussion, and it ­wasn’t just two guys sitting in the class holding 
the ­whole discussion. They or­ga­nized into groups enthusiastically arguing dif­fer­ent 
sides of the story. That engagement piece arrived through the proj­ect, so that’s 
cool. It’s a fun, fun approach, and I wish I had learned it sooner.
BELL—­You’re making critical thinkers of your students—­that’s a dangerous path you 
have started on.
AEBLI—­Yeah, so it makes you walk out saying, “What have I done?” In my formative 
student days, as an undergrad, I took discrete math, a philosophy course on existen­
tialism, and a Pascal programming course all in one semester. The result was I came 
out thinking that I ­couldn’t believe in anything. I had just proved 1 + 1 equaled 2, 
while I had read Nietz­sche pretty much proving that I ­didn’t exist. Then I had the 
programming class, which was challenging of its own merit. In it I had to create a 
game of solitaire, but I had never played solitaire. So I had to sit down with my 
grand­mother when I got home so she could teach me solitaire—so my life was com­
plicated. I was on pretty uncertain ground at that stage of my academic life, but it 
forced me into critical thinking and reflection. I think that’s part of what inspired me 
as an educator—­get the students outside their comfort zone. It’s a ­really cool jour­
ney to take students on, and I believe it makes them better students and hopefully 
better members of society.

C H A P T E R   E I G H T
Assessing Gamification
C O N C L U S I O N S  A N D  I M P L I C A T I O N S
The cases and prac­ti­tion­ers analyzed to this point have approached the ques­
tion of gamification in quite dif­fer­ent ways, from Easter eggs and hero’s jour­
neys through games exploring ethical decision making, fighting bosses in 
the realm of Log­os, and solving threats of international terrorism. The range 
of implementations makes direct comparison and even relative assessment a 
challenge. None of the cases have the longitudinal or quantitative data to 
proclaim significance in a true statistical sense. We should certainly be wary 
of seeking to unequivocally say which works better or even forming a tem­
plate for interested educators to follow in ­these pioneers’ footsteps. So much 
is dependent on the energy and enthusiasm of the instructor that ­these ex­
amples may not be replicable without the specific personality and/or circum­
stance of the person who dreamed up the example. In ­these early stages, with 
beta versions and low-­tech implementations, the instructor’s passion for 
what he or she is ­doing (with acknowledgement of the homogeneity of the 
sample set of instructors) is crucial for getting students on board. Any in­
structor who tries to implement a system or model of a gamified course in a 
mode that he or she does not feel passionate about is not likely to succeed. My 
candid and ­simple advice to instructors interested in gamifying a course should 
prob­ably be to just go with whichever version/chapter spoke most clearly to 
you and made you think, “Wow, that’s cool!” If you are not a Dungeons & Drag­
ons fan or a former player, as I’m not, then a Dungeons and Discourse (or a 
Dungeons and Anything) course is likely not for you. If you like hunting and 
puzzles, then you could prob­ably carry off an Easter egg–­based model.
Having said that, and having stressed that ­there are clear differences be­
tween the models, if we are able to strip away some of the win­dow dressing to 
get to fundamental princi­ples, then I believe that we ­will start to see similar 
traits and under­lying concepts. When we start to look for commonalities, 
rather than differences, we can then contemplate moving to a position of re­

Assessing Gamification    151
view against some form of consistent criteria. Starting from the point of the 
instructors’ motivation ­behind the builds, why they chose to pursue this work, 
we see obvious common ground. The goal of improving student engagement 
and boosting low completion rates is a strikingly resonant and consistent aim 
of all five prac­ti­tion­ers.
To facilitate cross-­case comparison and provide valuable feedback on gam­
ification choices and effects, we ­really need to be able to apply some sort of a 
framework or a structured rubric to review and compare the example courses. 
The goal of this chapter, then, is to provide a form of cross-­case analy­sis, a 
means of getting beyond “this is cool” or “I ­don’t like that idea” to something 
more scientific. I would like to see if we can discern why ­these courses, to the 
extent that they do, succeed in producing encouraging results by increasing 
student engagement and, in a variety of ways, enhancing student outcomes. 
With some means of better breaking down and analyzing what is happening 
in the five cases, we should be able to develop a means of assessing pos­si­ble 
­future courses’ plans and ideas, determining pos­si­ble enhancements, and 
suggesting foci for practice and ­future research.
Figure 19. Gamifying math study—­subject: author’s (second) ­daughter.

152    Game On!
Before we get to the analy­sis, let’s review exactly how gamification is in­
corporated into ­these courses. The findings from the five examples we have 
suggest the need to consider three under­lying ele­ments:
What technological skill set is needed to implement a gamified course?
Who can or is ­doing this kind of incorporation?
Why are they ­doing it in this way?
The individual cases illustrate how specific and distinct ele­ments can be 
used to deliver gamification in a variety of flavors. Let’s look at ­these three 
criteria in order.
What Technological Skill Set Is Required?
In the examples, gamification runs the gamut from specifically defined and 
discrete ele­ments, leaderboards, and Easter eggs to faculty be­hav­iors (providing 
timely feedback, recognizing effort) and conceptual, comprehensive nar­
rated scenarios. ­These scenarios, of course, include the student as a hero (Uni­
versity of New Hampshire, UNH) and as an explorer across mysterious lands 
(Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts, MCLA). The practitioners/pioneers 
have implemented gamification ele­ments through a can-do blend of basic 
programming skills, good intentions, and individual effort. In the University 
of South Florida (USF) and MCLA cases, faculty prac­ti­tion­ers who had branched 
out to academic technology-­support positions utilized basic HTML and LMS 
features. In the UNH case, the visionary drive of Neil Niman carried a very 
enthusiastic, but inexperienced, team of developers with limited technical 
skills. Only the University of Waterloo (UW) course benefitted from external 
technical team support for what was still quite a basic technical build. The 
tech team at UW was responsible for some build-­out of scenarios hosted in 
the LMS and the main ele­ment build-­out of a leaderboard that was able to 
actually work based on scenario grading, providing an anonymous view of 
each student’s position in the class with anonymized peers above and below. 
This build, arguably the most complex ele­ment of all the course builds, was 
still a relatively small investment and significantly less than that spent on a 
typical technical implementation.
Most instructors and students stressed that their experiences would have 
been enhanced with richer implementations and greater functionality, yet 
they remained supportive. As the cases illustrate, initial wireframe or pen­
cil and paper versions can prove concept and provide feedback. Given the 

Assessing Gamification    153
amount of revisions and tweaks that prac­ti­tion­ers made between course runs, 
I would not advise investing in a costly build-­out too soon only to have to 
deconstruct and start again. However, to support maturing plans to move 
beyond the pencil and paper versions, and to scale for impact across a wider 
student body, institutions ­will need to provide significant technical support 
and indirect funding in the form of teaching assistants or course releases to 
allow faculty developers the time and space to develop their ideas.
Who Is Incorporating Gamification?
The development of each of the courses in ­these cases was driven by the proj­
ect lead. In my sample, all five proj­ect leads ­were male and all around their 
early to mid-­forties. This demographic (the first generation exposed to large-­
scale arcade video games—­remember Space Invaders in 1978 and PacMan in 
1980) is now reaching positions in academia, and in society at large, where 
they are established enough to experiment with concepts they find engaging. 
The maturation of this first video or arcade game generation could be one 
reason why we are now starting to see serious experimentation with gamifi­
cation that earlier (or older) educators might not have felt was appropriate in 
a formal academic or corporate setting. Clearly this is not a gender or age-­
specific set of princi­ples. In workshops that I have delivered on the subject of 
gamification between 2014 and 2016, the participants are predominantly fe­
male (in classes of 25, typically 21–22 are female) and are a mix of back­
grounds and ethnicities. I would expect that hero-­centered narratives may be 
more to male tastes, but the majority of the princi­ples of the cases in this 
work seem to be demographic agnostic with the pos­si­ble caveat, mentioned 
earlier, that midcareer educators seem to be in a place where they have the 
confidence to try this kind of experiment.
Why Are They Gamifying Courses in This Way?
The relative paucity of communication between each instructor and their 
institutional leaders may be related to the personality of the proj­ect leads and 
their desire to retain a degree of autonomy. All of them seemed somewhat 
wedded to being on the periphery of mainstream academe. Adding another 
level of intrigue might be the evolution of the term gamification itself. During 
my interviews and materials review it became apparent that ­there is already a 
double-­edged sword ele­ment with regard to both the term and the concept of 
gamification. The term is current and dynamic, and it gains attention quickly. 

154    Game On!
Yet gamification is frequently dismissed as a fad, like the next massive open 
online course (MOOC). This mixed perspective seemingly accentuated the 
prac­ti­tion­ers’ desire to stay off the radar, at least ­until their ideas ­were out 
and tested. Even when higher-­level institutional ac­cep­tance was apparently 
likely (recalling USF’s promotional tweeting of the course), so is/was the 
scorn of ­those jaded by a wave of recent “next big ­thing” proclamations. Hav­
ing been involved in the hype around multiuser synchronous communication 
and virtual worlds (Second Life was once “the ­future”) and, most recently, 
MOOCs, it may well be prudent of prac­ti­tion­ers to initially duck the spotlight 
and make their errors and tweaks in the shadows. Perhaps once their gami­
fied concept is refined and once their student outcome data has started to 
prove the efficacy of their work, then they ­will be willing to emerge from the 
shadows. This subterfuge of taking on the world in a private ­battle (initially) 
could also just be resonant with the gaming mindset. Remember that some 
of ­these ­people ­were interplanetary warlords in their youth. They need a 
challenge or perhaps even a crusade—­the edgier the better.
The only downside of ­these lone-­wolf innovators, as Gerol Petruzella of 
MCLA notes, is that their experiments tend to remain isolated and unlikely 
to impact education more broadly—­even at their own institutions. Breaking 
out of this isolation status is the next challenge if widespread dissemination 
is the goal. In chapter 9 we ­will look at the only one of the five cases that does 
seem to have shed itself of its off-­the-­radar status and has prompted a much 
wider institutional adoption of gamification princi­ples. Be thinking, dear 
reader, about which case you believe is most likely to ­really catch on, or to 
catch fire, from the ones you have read (or skimmed) thus far.
Though the five cases are all distinct in the way that they have been gami­
fied, a valuable line of thought is ­whether we can assess the degree of gamifica­
tion as a means of incrementally encouraging more intentional and widespread 
implementation at an institution. It is impor­tant to clarify that it is not par­
ticularly helpful to try to quantify gamification inputs or efforts and cer­
tainly not to simply rate them as successes or failures. However, the obvious 
research questions and pathways to widespread adoption ­will raise the ques­
tion of variable correlation between the degree of gamification and, as best 
we have them, standardized or consistent mea­sures of student engagement 
and learning outcomes. Any kind of correlation or degree of gamification and 
student engagement, particularly with larger datasets, could drive wider in­
stitutional acceptance—­a proposal supported by the prac­ti­tion­ers. The fact 

Assessing Gamification    155
that gamification has not coalesced into a fixed set of rules may, in fact, be ben­
eficial in that it negates the need to describe a one-­size-­fits-­all package to insti­
tutions. In terms of institutional support, the University of Waterloo appears 
unique given its location (Canada’s high-­tech ­belt), its administration’s sense of 
entrepreneurialism, and its faculty’s technical experimentation. Nonetheless, 
their vice provost asserted that she would need more concrete, quantified data 
on the positive effects of gamification on student outcomes before she would be 
comfortable advocating for sustained institutional endorsement.
It is unlikely that any of the formats or instructor strategies in the selected 
courses ­will be universally successful for all students. Where competition 
works for some, collaboration or cooperation ­will work better for ­others. Even 
in the small sample in this study, gamification, or certainly ele­ments of gam­
ification, appear to show enough potential to merit further research. My con­
clusion separates MOOCs from other online courses, as I believe MOOCs 
have a quite dif­fer­ent potential as vehicles for gamification.
MOOCs
MOOCs are still, as of 2016, a relatively new format with audiences and de­
mographics aty­pi­cal for tertiary education. ­Under the heading “MOOCs Are 
Not Reaching the Disadvantaged,” a 2013 E. J. Emanuel study drawing from 
over 34,000 MOOC (Coursera) participants in 32 courses found that 83% of 
the surveyed students already had a two-­ or four-­year postsecondary degree. 
Although the survey response rates ­were quite low, it is likely that MOOCs do 
not tend to enroll the demographic that most institutions are trying to reach 
through online program expansion. As Emanuel concluded, “Far from real­
izing the high ideals of their advocates, MOOCs seem to be reinforcing the 
advantages of the ‘haves’ rather than educating the ‘have-­nots.’ ”
While MOOC participants are demonstrating through their enrollment 
an inherent interest in the subject of the course, they do not generally need 
or pay for credits. It would seem likely, as the instructor of the fairy tale MOOC 
asserts, that a lightly gamified MOOC course with limited instructor connec­
tivity would not have a huge influence on engagement or completion. As with 
most MOOC data gathered so far (Emanuel 2013; Perna et al. 2013), Kevin Yee’s 
USF course is typical in that it had slightly elevated, but still extremely low, 
course-­completion rates.
Gamification may promote engagement, but given that only 5% of partici­
pants complete MOOCs, they clearly need more work on their basic format 

156    Game On!
and goals. Fundamental MOOC challenges such as instructor responsiveness 
and the lack of student buy-in need to be addressed before a sustained gami­
fication proj­ect is ­going to be of value. Ele­ments of gamification may well 
increase completion rates in MOOCs; Yee’s course had a completion rate 
slightly above average. In terms of format, if the MOOCs ­were to target smaller 
numbers of participants engaged enough to cooperate and compete, then gam­
ification might have more of an effect. The resultant product could be re­
branded as a “Modest [sized] [not so] Open Online Course.”
More Typical Online Courses
The UNH and MCLA courses, while covering dif­fer­ent subjects, are both tar­
geted at naïve, inexperienced students—­that is, students potentially lacking 
confidence and perhaps motivation around the subject ­matter. The instruc­
tors and developers of both courses suggest that gamification might have the 
most benefit for entry or introductory-­level courses. Petruzella suggests that 
gamification, or a gamified course, may be a way of transitioning students 
from an environment of “staid high school chalk-­and-­talk” to one where par­
ticipation, critical thinking, and creativity are encouraged. The enhanced 
participation relayed clearly by his students and their self-­declared enthusi­
asm for the subject and the format certainly seem to bear out that view.
The UNH students involved in the development team felt that adding 
gamification to a core economics course particularly would help students 
who ­were somewhat math-­phobic but ­were required to take math or math-­
based courses (microeconomics by way of example). The mnemonic value of 
the personal narrative, in terms of providing memorable meta­phor and help­
ing students retain key concepts, suggests that low-­ or entry-­level students 
whose intrinsic motivation for their subject ­matter has not yet flourished in­
deed might benefit most from this format.
Somewhat contradicting the suggestion that fragile learners may be ­those 
best supported by gamification was UW’s Greg Andres’s assertion that his 
real-­world-­connected scenario games might appeal more to mature students. 
Andres’s perspective certainly underscores the value of authenticity in as­
signments or scenarios but does not necessarily speak to the value of the 
gamified ele­ments in his course or a gamified course per se. The format of the 
pass/fail co-op class at UW as a means of supporting and keeping students 
connected to the institution during a remote work experience is unusual, and 
it is genuinely hard to extrapolate more widely applicable conclusions. If An­

Assessing Gamification    157
dres is correct, then ­there may be a continued or extended role for this kind of 
approach within the broader area of workforce retraining and serving the learn­
ing needs of adult working students. However, the class-­wide student engage­
ment and completion of nonessential content and activities in his model was 
encouraging and suggests pos­si­ble wider efficacy than he himself suggested.
Applying Frameworks: Cross-­Case Analy­sis
As the analyses of the examples in earlier chapters indicates, gamification 
or gameful design is not a black/white or on/off feature. In order to better 
review the effectiveness of princi­ples of gamification in developed sample 
courses, two antecedents in the field are worth revisiting. The works of Kapp 
(2012) and Csikszentmihalyi (1975) include their frameworks to evaluate 
gamification (Kapp) and the likelihood of an experience engendering flow 
(Csikszentmihalyi). Combined they provide a means of evaluating degree of 
gamification or the potential to engender intrinsic motivation (a hugely valu­
able metric if it can be used with consistency).
The Kapp Framework
In his 2012 text The Gamification of Learning and Instruction, Karl Kapp de­
scribes constituent parts of gamified courses ­under the heading, “It’s in the 
Game: Understanding Game Ele­ments.” His work has ­great applicability to 
this study, as he breaks down gamified courses into constituent ele­ments 
with a view to prompting discussion about the degree, nature, and effect of 
gamification. It was apparent through interviews and reviews of course mate­
rials that the vari­ous faculty, developers, and prac­ti­tion­ers had directly or 
indirectly incorporated many of the ele­ments described by Kapp. Instructor 
preference seemed to drive most design/gamification decisions, although the 
dif­fer­ent formats of courses (MOOC, co-op support, for-­credit) and the differ­
ing demographic characteristics of their targeted students also may have 
influenced design choices. I found it in­ter­est­ing to speculate which course 
format would score most highly when reviewed against Kapp’s criteria. I as­
sessed the courses quantitatively against the Kapp framework by scoring the 
extent to which each course addresses his key tenets on a scale from zero to 
two (­table 1). A concept that is not addressed in any way scores a zero, one that 
is touched upon perhaps only scantly receives a one, and an ele­ment that is 
clearly emphasized and intentionally included as an integral part of the course 
by the proj­ect lead is marked as two.

158    Game On!
Applying the Kapp Analy­sis
Yee’s USF course does a reasonable job across a number of Kapp criteria. The 
Easter egg focus scores well on ele­ments like competition and reward. His 
course’s clear goals (finding eggs through accessing content) and the compe­
tition this engendered, even though collaboration and conflict ­were not em­
phasized, also rate highly. The instructor’s time constraints, including the 
fact that he had to forgo some of the other ele­ments that he had planned, do 
negatively affect the course’s overall score. If he had not dropped his plans 
for course badges and his analogy for team pro­gress, his course would have 
scored higher in curve of interest, storytelling, feedback, and reward categories. 
For a solo effort undertaken on top of other duties and responsibilities, Yee’s 
work shows ­great promise. However, in the absence of extensive automation 
­Table 1. Analy­sis of the five gamified courses, based on the Kapp (2012) criteria for 
assessing gamification
USF Fairy Tale 
MOOC
UNH 
EconJourney
UW Ethical 
Decision 
Making
MCLA 
Dungeons 
and Discourse
Penn State 
Threat of 
Terrorism
Abstraction of 
concepts and real­ity
1
2
1
2
0
Goals
2
2
1
2
2
Rules
0
1
1
2
2
Conflict, competition, 
cooperation
2
1
2
2
2
Time
0
1
0
1
1
Reward structures
1
1
2
2
2
Feedback
1
2
2
1
2
Levels
1
2
1
2
2
Storytelling
1
2
1
2
2
Curve of interest
1
2
1
1
2
Aesthetics
2
1
1
2
1
Replay or do-­over
1
2
1
1
2
Totals
13
19
14
20
20
Note: USF = University of South Florida, UNH = University of New Hampshire, UW = University of 
Waterloo, MCLA = Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts.

Assessing Gamification    159
and technical build, it is again apparent that the delivery of a highly gamified 
course—as defined by the Kapp criteria—­requires major instructor commitment 
and/or more extensive institutional support, perhaps via supplemental facilita­
tors or teaching assistants. While this requirement of commitment, especially 
in low-­tech or pi­lot gamified courses, is a pos­si­ble barrier to entry and certainly 
needs to be noted, instructor enthusiasm and advocacy in all examples brought 
encouraging results. Yee’s study was clearly an example of this, with the pos­si­ble 
extra caveat that some of the challenges to his connectivity ­were consequences 
of his decision to run the course as a MOOC. The enrollment numbers, though 
not massive, ­were certainly large enough to make course management, even 
with his ideas of grouped participants, rewards, and feedback, near impossible. 
If he ­were to gamify a fixed-­enrollment course, with a more typical enrollment 
of 20 to 25 students, he doubtless would be able to realize his ideas more fully, 
and his course likely would score higher.
Niman’s UNH course scores higher in a number of areas that Yee did not 
even attempt in his USF course. The proj­ect scores maximum points in catego­
ries such as abstraction of concepts and real­ity, storytelling, and curve of inter­
est. Of all the cases examined in this book, Niman’s course made the most 
concerted attempt to weave gamification intrinsically into course content. 
His personal lack of conviction for what he called “­simple rewards systems” or 
“feedback structures” explained his focus on tying pro­gress in the course to 
the students’ personal stories. While he had challenges in early iterations of his 
course, obligating multiple revisions and tweaks to his strategies, his high score 
on the scale indicates, by Kapp’s criteria, an extremely gamified course.
The second takeaway from the cross-­case analy­sis is that weaving gamifi­
cation themes and ele­ments throughout a course and/or wedding core con­
tent to a creative story perhaps provides a disproportionate boost on the Kapp 
scale. In presenting on this topic, my finding is that ­people think of narrative 
development and creative storytelling as the hardest ele­ment to conceptualize. 
My counsel has typically been that very effective, intrinsically motivating 
courses can be developed that ignore the ele­ments that aspirant developers 
finding daunting. Again, as the cases show, not all boxes need to be checked 
to produce a good experiment. Ac­cep­tance of an imperfect test model is a 
condition of all the studied prac­ti­tion­ers, reflecting their gameful/techie na­
ture. “Launch then tweak” is their mantra.
Andres’s Ethical Decision Making course returns mixed results when mapped 
to the Kapp framework. This finding was not totally unexpected given the 

160    Game On!
way that the games ­were isolated from other ele­ments of the course. The 
content-­related ethical games provided instant feedback, a sense of reward 
(accentuated by the leaderboard), and a level of competition. However, of the 
five cases, Andres’s game ele­ments are the most extrinsic and the least intrin­
sically woven into the fabric of the course. They serve more as self-­checks or 
enhanced multiple-­choice quizzes. The activities absolutely did serve a pur­
pose as a form of relief from traditional course fare (e.g., text and discussion 
boards). Students, particularly ­those who consumed them all in one sitting, 
certainly found them engaging, but the effects are likely finite and only felt 
while engaged in the games rather than in the course as a ­whole.
Petruzella’s MCLA Dungeons and Discourse course (like the UNH Econ­
Journey) scores well across multiple categories by virtue of the embedded 
game reward mechanisms, a sense of levels (culminating in boss levels), at­
tempts at an aesthetic theme, and notions of conflict, cooperation, and com­
petition. The higher scores on the Kapp criteria would seem to confirm that 
deeper integration of game ele­ments with more course ele­ments tied directly to 
games or game princi­ples are reflective of a more gamified course. His course 
only skips ele­ments of time and feedback, again consequences of his limited 
availability given other duties and a low-­tech build with minimal automated 
feedback and ­little support for scale.
Fi­nally, Aebli’s terrorism course jointly holds top scores across the Kapp 
­matrix. His competitive nature, his interest in the comprehensive Disney expe­
rience, and his affinity for games of all stripes, including basic board games, 
positions him and his work in an exciting place. The more homogenous class 
structure of his discipline at his institute facilitates his ability to implement a 
very game-­like environment with quite rigid rules and competitive formats. 
Again, in quite a low-­ to mid-­tech build, he drives the pro­cess through his 
­energy and through a lot of ­behind the scenes work in preparing materials, up­
dating scenarios and tracking pro­gress. His score is penalized, perhaps unfairly, 
by the lack of abstraction of concepts in a gameful narrative. It is more likely a 
weakness of the matrix than of Aebli’s work that his authenticity and realism 
are not fully acknowledged as a driver of student motivation. By all accounts, 
including student feedback and grades, his model was extremely effective.
In conclusion, while the matrix offers a useful framework for cross-­case com­
parison, the application of this framework is also somewhat limited. In the long 
term and with greater numbers among the practitioner student pools, we should 
be looking to directly correlate evaluative scores with student engagement, 

Assessing Gamification    161
course completion, or longer-­term per­sis­tence. Having said that, even this some­
what rudimentary assessment is valuable for practitioner discussion around 
aspects of their courses that are ­either undeveloped or worthy of enhancement. 
Research comparisons should compare gamified versus not-­gamified (in any 
way) courses to see if any difference in student engagement and other student 
outcomes is detected. If one ­were able to confirm a relationship between Kapp 
scores and student engagement, then ­these early models could be made more 
effective and ultimately more widely disseminated and ­adopted.
Csikszentmihalyi’s Flow Framework
As a second means of evaluating the likelihood of efficacy in the practitioner 
models, I look to the work of Csikszentmihalyi who, in 1975, described eight 
components as critical in engendering flow in any environment, be it aca­
demic, sporting, or social. As a form of insurance, and in an attempt to pro­
vide more of a psychological review of what was happening in the cases, I 
compared the individual cases against eight components of a typical Csik­
szentmihalyi flow analy­sis. My hope was that this supplemental analy­sis 
might help assess the relative worth of implementing gamification ele­ments 
in light of their propensity to engender a state of flow in ­those accessing the 
courses. Facilitating flow states could be critical for encouraging students to 
engage with academic content in a similar way as they do with game content. 
When flow has been achieved, the only ­thing the participant is thinking 
about is the activity (concern for self dis­appears), and the participant experi­
ences a notable loss of sense of time (hours feel like minutes). Translated to an 
academic course, the nature or amount of flow might be a key determinant 
for student engagement. The positive correlation between sense of flow and 
engagement with materials is more than likely. This is of par­tic­u­lar importance 
given that the correlation between engagement and student success, defined 
as course completion including passing any exams, has been demonstrated 
in many studies including, significantly, by the US Department of Education in 
2010. Whereas Kapp’s framework assesses “how gamified” the course is, the 
Csikszentmihalyi framework may show “how effective a game is” or how the 
specific gamified ele­ments add up.
Applying Flow Analy­sis
The goal of this review was to assess ­whether any degree of flow is likely as 
a direct result of an instructor’s efforts at gamification. As with the Kapp 

162    Game On!
analy­sis, I reviewed each course, using a zero-­to-­two-­point scale indicating 
lack of presence (zero), nominal presence (one), and strong focus/emphasis 
(two). The results are presented in ­table 2.
Selected student testimonials (­those who “got it”) in the USF MOOC indi­
cate that, for some, participation in the gamified ele­ments (the Easter egg hunts) 
was associated with time passing quickly. ­Those individuals spent a ­great deal 
of time in the thrall of the class, in a sense, engaging with course materials 
and, in another sense, simply looking for eggs. In an open or voluntary par­
ticipation MOOC environment, the Csikszentmihalyi concept of class rules 
was always ­going to be difficult to enforce, while the large numbers, even in 
this midsized MOOC, meant that immediate and/or continual feedback was 
beyond the instructor’s capacity. For Yee’s course, ­these challenges of scale 
and lack of time or resources to implement automated feedback mechanisms 
for support translate to a low score on a number of the Csikszentmihalyi ele­
ments, as they did on the Kapp scores. Student survey feedback indicates that 
for the engaged participants, time flowed in the hunts that had clear, achiev­
able goals requiring concentration, so the course scored well in the first few 
categories. It would be in­ter­est­ing to test ­whether a more fully gamified 
MOOC with participants agreeing to rules for participation (akin to an honor 
code) and with systems in place to provide instant, corrective feedback might 
further ameliorate per­sis­tent MOOC retention issues.
­Table 2. Analy­sis of the five gamified courses, based on the Csikszentmihalyi (1975) criteria 
for assessing flow
USF Fairy Tale 
MOOC
UNH 
EconJourney
UW Ethical 
Decision 
Making
MCLA 
Dungeons 
and Discourse
Penn State 
Threat of 
Terrorism
Achievable
2
2
2
1
1
Requiring concentration
2
2
2
2
2
(Tasks have) clear goals
2
1
2
2
2
Immediate and continual 
feedback
0
1
2
1
2
Effortless involvement
2
1
1
1
2
Control over actions
1
1
2
1
2
Totals
9
8
11
8
11
Note: USF = University of South Florida, UNH = University of New Hampshire, UW = University of 
Waterloo, MCLA = Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts.

Assessing Gamification    163
The UNH EconJourney model focuses the learning on a game environ­
ment. Niman’s deconstruction of his course and his conscious rebuild around 
key ele­ments of the hero’s journey was both complex and ambitious. Apply­
ing the Csikszentmihalyi analy­sis, the course scores lower than ­others in 
terms of clarity of goals, immediacy of feedback, and control—­all of which 
could impede students getting to flow. Niman’s development team consisted 
exclusively of highly motivated “overachievers,” who perhaps lacked perspec­
tive on clarity and high-­support needs. Ele­ments that speak to academically 
high-­achieving students may not resonate with fragile learners. As Niman 
relayed in follow-up conversations, initial (beta) launches allowed him to 
hone the product. In versions 2.0 and then 3.0 he experimented with varia­
tion of guidance and prescriptiveness of course par­ameters. His course devel­
opment and revision cycle best illustrated the need to get just right the level 
of challenge and the support structures when trying to get participants close 
to flow. If students, including ­those challenged and lacking confidence when 
facing economic concepts, buy into the spirit of the game, develop effective 
personal narratives, and enjoy the comparisons (e.g., sharing and voting up 
or down their classmates’ versions) then the course is well structured to get 
them to flow. In his initial format, the one reviewed for this study, it was not 
clear that students ­were envisioning clear goals or feeling any sense of con­
trol over their actions. In ­later versions, when Niman and the UNH team 
­were able to get more students beyond the early, conceptual stages of the 
course and engage them in the development of a dynamic, personalized nar­
rative, the course would score higher on the ele­ments in this framework.
In Andres’s Ethical Decision Making course at UW, although the games 
provide rewards they are distinct from the core coursework. When students 
­were immersed in the games, time was clearly deemphasized, as illustrated by 
the students who ran through all of the games in quick time to top the lead­
erboard. I gave the course a high Csikszentmihalyi score for its game time 
rather than engagement with the majority of the other course content. The 
lack of integration of gamification deeper into the course materials suggests 
that the course could have lower student engagement in the substantial non­
gamified sections. The games accounted for 18% of the course grade, but that 
score was attained for attempting the game in any way. Students actually 
could complete the course and gain a passing grade ­either by ignoring or per­
functorily attempting the games. Andres’s course is one of the least gamified 
per the Kapp framework, but the games that are implemented do induce 

164    Game On!
high-­level Csikszentmihalyi flow. The lesson would seem to be that with bet­
ter integration of the game ele­ments and extension of more sustained feed­
back throughout the course, the approach would have ­great potential as a 
template for a ­simple non–­journey/narrative model. The value of discrete 
Q&A, multiple-­choice, or knowledge-­checking “games” should not be dis­
missed, as certainly they engendered interest among what other­wise could 
be a passive, perfunctory group.
Petruzella’s Dungeons and Discourse implementation at MCLA in some 
ways received the harshest end-­user feedback from experienced gamer stu­
dents, but it was the only course held to ­those very high (gamer) standards. 
According to Kapp’s criteria, Petruzella’s MCLA course is the most gamified 
course. The Csikszentmihalyi analy­sis captures the limitations of his format 
in that it is wedded to nonautomated classroom sessions where the students 
barter for gold. Adoption of an interactive interface, where students would be 
able to control their own actions and receive immediate and continual feed­
back, would increase the flow score substantially. His student feedback was very 
specific in this re­spect, as it identified that the ability to track (or control) their 
pro­gress across dynamic landscapes representing the vari­ous realms would 
have been a valuable and appreciated enhancement.
Aebli’s Penn State Threat of Terrorism and Crime course dropped Csikszent­
mihalyi points only in the achievable category. In his first few iterations, no 
students scored maximum points by uncovering the full plot details. Subse­
quently, as he reported in his catch-up call, one class of overachiever ­students 
did solve the ­whole plot. It would seem that the authenticity and immediacy 
of his materials engage students to strive for what might even have seemed 
totally unachievable. He effectively used the tools available to him to pro­
vide feedback and to clarify rules and goals. His case may have been a ­little 
skewed in that he was, to lapse into the vernacular, pitching geeky guy stuff 
to geeky guys. However, he deserves praise above and beyond that pos­si­ble 
caveat given his efforts to engage more gender balance in his class and even 
in the decision to work in a subject area that is po­liti­cally sensitive and to 
encourage moving beyond knee-­jerk journalism to real-­world global per­
spective by fostering critical thinking and thoughtful consumption of wider 
media messaging. ­These outcomes, perhaps even beyond his more tradi­
tional curricular ele­ments, prove a serious motivator, as students sense they 
are achieving more than checking a box and moving on with accumulated 
credits.

Assessing Gamification    165
Comparison Results from the Cross-­Case Analy­sis
Overall, the cross-­case reviews suggest that the UNH, MCLA, and Penn State 
courses are the most gamified in terms of the criteria outlined by Kapp. The 
Csikszentmihalyi analy­sis adds flavor, but in most cases, technical simplicity 
places barriers that hamper flow state. The high-­scoring UW course is in­
flated by the emphasis on the game scenarios, which are only a small part of 
the course. If weighted across the ­whole course, the UW figure likely would 
be closer to the other­wise quite consistent scores for the other courses. The 
likelihood of gamified courses getting to Csikszentmihalyi’s flow is most im­
pacted by the lack of immediate and continual feedback in ­these models. 
Without more technical support and a build that would accommodate greater 
automation, ­these courses are not ­going to achieve maximal flow. Aebli’s ter­
rorism course comes closest given that the feedback systems are augmented 
by well-­structured peer support and encouragement). He also has the clearest 
and easiest to pick up and play goal (solve a plot) and the clearest rules (dead­
lines, points, and penalties).
The Kapp analy­sis would seem to suggest that a more substantial alignment 
of ­actual coursework and core content with game ele­ments, particularly around 
a central narrative, is most likely to positively affect gamification and likely stu­
dent engagement. The USF and UW courses have added some game ele­ments 
(leaderboards, Easter eggs, game scenarios), but both stopped short of an inte­
grated and gamified course in ­these initial, experimental versions. An amal­
gamated model featuring MCLA and UNH-­like centrality of narrative with 
added self-­checks and UW-­like distinct games would, applying the Kapp crite­
ria, be the most likely to approximate the type of engagement that could lead to 
enhanced student outcomes. From Csikszentmihalyi we take the value of sim­
plicity, clear rules, clear target, challenge, and the value of competition and a 
chase. Aebli’s terrorism case illustrates the value of realism and authenticity as 
an incentive, which is both at odds and in line with Kapp’s narrative need.
Part of the excitement, and also part of the confusion, around gamifica­
tion comes from the fact that it is a general banner term that can be inter­
preted by prac­ti­tion­ers as they see fit. Looking at this with a glass-­half-­full 
perspective, it is also worth noting that students are generally tolerant of any 
and all efforts to incorporate even rudimentary ele­ments beyond a staid read-­
post-­respond format. Administrators, when consulted, are tentatively sup­
portive, and most recognize that student demographics and expectations are 

166    Game On!
changing. On the downside, ­there is limited collaboration between academic 
prac­ti­tion­ers and potential supporters, funders, or entrepreneurs. Within the 
administrative side of academia, ­there is not yet motivation to propagate 
princi­ples or get them more widely disseminated. Significantly enhanced stu­
dent learning outcomes, if shown to correlate to the kind of increased stu­
dent engagement referred to in this study, may well be the catalyst to wider 
adoption. Coordinated support in the shape of academic buy-in from peers 
and academic leaders is necessary for ­these solo efforts to gain traction. Insti­
tutional embrace, touting of enhanced student outcomes, and resource allo­
cation in the form of technical support and investment are essential if the 
field is to get beyond the auspices of enthusiastic but isolated instructors.
The takeaways from the case studies and cross-­analyses are instructive. 
The time constraints and small numbers involved in this study meant that 
prac­ti­tion­ers are not yet ­going beyond possibilities and low-­level correla­
tions. Nonetheless, ­these possibilities and tentative conclusions do allow for 
some suggestions and recommendations. The evolution of a consistent, sin­
gle framework that could be used to assess a wider swath of gamified courses 
would make conclusions more robust. Although the Kapp analy­sis was more 
immediately applicable to the cases in this study, aspects of flow, per Csik­
szentmihalyi, incorporated into a meta-­framework could produce a solid 
means of evaluating greater investment in gamified models. In pre­sen­ta­tions 
and review of this work with academic faculty, the need to mea­sure against 
criteria that academics can relate to become apparent. In 2015, looking to 
develop the motivation aspect and reflecting on the impacts reported on stu­
dents from at-­risk demographics, my team and I at Northeastern University 
pulled the matrix ele­ments into a single rubric and used this to assess vendor 
adaptive learning products. On the back of that work, we ­were awarded sig­
nificant federal funding for a proj­ect designed to increase intrinsic motiva­
tion of underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and 
math fields. ­Table 3 pres­ents our results.
Comparison testing of gamified versus nongamified courses at scale, look­
ing at pre-­ and post-­tests (before and ­after gamification), ­will confirm ­whether 
gamification treatments are having a quantifiable, tangible effect. Correlation 
between the degree of gamification (mea­sured by a tool like the one above) 
against student connectivity, frequency of logins, or other activity within the 
LMS would support engagement theories. The challenge of developing a tool 
assessing “degree of gamification” is that it is, by nature, subjective. This is 

Assessing Gamification    167
preferable, however, to the on/off prior suggestion that a course is gamified or 
it ­isn’t. This kind of scoring system should at least provoke discussion and al­
low prac­ti­tion­ers to consider ele­ments that they are or are not addressing. My 
hope is that this ­will encourage prac­ti­tion­ers to experiment more methodi­
cally, seeking to discern ­whether affordable and scalable gamification might be 
applied to online courses given potential implications for student engagement. 
Implementation and evolution of this kind of gamification matrix, building on 
the work of the likes of Kapp and Csikszentmihalyi, with development and 
delivery overheads clearly stated and likely outcomes captured, would facilitate 
better decision making and support the kinds of pioneers explored in this text.
­Table 3. The ­SIMPLE matrix
Absent 
(0 pts.)
Arguably / 
could be 
(1 pt.)
Established / 
functional 
(2 pts.)
A signature 
ele­ment 
(3 pts.)
Rules clear and effective
Effortless involvement—­pick up 
and play (think iPod)
Appropriate level of challenge 
(white-­water rafting)
CCCP: conflict, cooperation, and 
competition are all pos­si­ble
Clear goals with inherent, clear 
reward structures
Immediate and continual 
feedback from instructor, system, 
and/or peers
Leveling up or at least a clear 
sense of pro­gress
Narrative / curve of interest—­can 
be “real world” based
Stunning aesthetics
Fear of failure reduced (mindsets)
Student control over actions (they 
get choices at ­every step)
Note: ­SIMPLE = student intrinsic motivation for per­sis­tence in learning environments 
(Bell 2014).

C H A P T E R   N I N E
Catching Fire
T H E  M O D E L  T H A T  B U R N E D  B R I G H T E S T
So, dear reader, this is the penultimate section of the text before it all gets 
wrapped up with a ribbon and we wait for the movie version. Having made it 
this far, I won­der ­whether you are ready for a bit of sleuthery. As a reward for 
carefully reading the cases, or even if you gamed the system by skimming 
them, I pres­ent to you now a game puzzle in this book on gameful design, an 
Easter egg of an activity if you like.
My questions for you, based on your (careful) reading of the cases:
Which blend of tactics, politics, and personalities among the proj­ects and 
prac­ti­tion­ers you have just closely studied do you feel had the best 
chance of setting something serious in motion on their campus?
Who was most likely to get traction?
Whose germ of an idea is on the way to becoming massive?
When I first met the prac­ti­tion­ers in 2013, they had similar troves of en­
thusiasm, roughly comparable degrees of institutional support, similar/mini­
mal funding, and a degree of isolation or “off-­the-­radar-­ness” that they (sort 
of) relished. In chapter 8, I presented two frameworks and a matrix as means 
of evaluating three key ele­ments: the degree of gamification, flow, and the 
cumulative effect of overlapping intrinsic motivators. While the matrix is 
intended to broker discussion rather than to prove one model’s efficacy over 
another, none of them, ­either in isolation or combination, can fully predict 
the likelihood that a proj­ect ­really gets traction and succeeds in inspiring a 
wider audience, even at the proj­ect lead’s own institution. Mapping each case 
to the student intrinsic motivation for per­sis­tence in learning environments 
(­SIMPLE) matrix (­table 4) provides further insight.
Results
Kevin Yee’s Fairy Tale MOOC: 14 points
Neil Niman’s EconJourney: 19 points

Catching Fire    169
Greg Andres’s Ethical Decision Making: 15 points
Gerol Petruzella’s Dungeons and Discourse: 21 points
Fred Aebli’s Threat of Crime and Terrorism: 25 points
It strikes me that this does better reflect the efficacy of the cases. The meld 
of Kapp and Csikszentmihalyi ele­ments produces a better balance of ele­
ments, and I think that the ratings do capture the strengths and weaknesses 
of the models. Yee absolutely acknowledged that he strug­gled to keep up with 
the feedback and rewards of the system. Andres’s proj­ect featured engaging 
­Table 4. The comparison study ­table
Absent 
(0 pts.)
Arguably / 
could be 
(1 pt.)
Established / 
functional 
(2 pts.)
A signature 
ele­ment 
(3 pts.)
Rules clear and effective
SF / NH
W / M
P
Effortless involvement—­pick up 
and play (think iPod)
NH / M
W / P
SF
Appropriate level of challenge 
(white-­water rafting)
SF / W / P
NH / M
CCCP: conflict, cooperation, 
and competition are all pos­si­ble
SF
W
NH / M / P
Clear goals with inherent, clear 
reward structures
W
NH / M
SF / P
Immediate and continual 
feedback from instructor, system 
and/or peers
SF
NH / W / M
P
Leveling up or at least a clear 
sense of pro­gress
SF / W
NH / M
P
Narrative / curve of interest—­can 
be “real world” based
SF
NH / W / M
P
Stunning aesthetics
SF / NH / 
W /M / P
Fear of failure reduced (mindsets)
W
SF / NH / P
M
Student control over actions 
(they get choices at ­every step)
SF
W
NH / M / P
Note: SF = University of South Florida Fairy Tale MOOC, NH = University of New Hampshire 
EconJourney, W = University of Waterloo Ethical Decision Making, M = Mas­sa­chu­setts 
College of Liberal Arts Dungeons and Discourse, P = Penn State Threat of Terrorism.

170    Game On!
games, but they ­were a ­little separate from the core of the class. Petruzella 
and Aebli ­really worked on the narrative, rewards, and sense of progression, 
while Niman’s first instance of the course (when we assessed it) was challeng­
ing and somewhat confusing for the students, who found it hard to think 
creatively to create their own narrative.
Though I’m confident that we can get closer to an effective assessment tool, 
­running formats against ­actual retention in massive numbers would be the 
goal ­going forward. No ­SIMPLE matrix score ­will guarantee institutional up­
take and proliferation. It ­will likely take years of quantified data and concrete 
correlations between inputs and outputs before that level of certitude sets in. 
In the absence of that concrete support, my question becomes, “What sets of 
circumstances or what practitioner be­hav­ior that we have seen in the cases 
make wider uptake pos­si­ble? Or feasible? Or even likely?” To further investi­
gate that question, we can return to the cases, reflect on the practitioner com­
mentaries, and see ­whether the work of Niman, Petruzella, Yee, Andres, and 
Aebli did have longer-­term or wider ramifications. If we are to go with the 
assertion that proliferation of this kind of model is worthwhile and of poten­
tial benefit to a wide community of users, then it is of value to ask, and where 
evidence exists to review, what makes that happen?
As I noted in the interview updates to each chapter, one or two of the 
models definitely had (or have) a shelf life. Subsequent iterations have been 
supported and even successfully received without ­really sparking wider insti­
tutional propagation. While Yee’s MOOC has stayed mostly in its packaging, he 
has disseminated ele­ments of his learning to other instructors at his insti­
tution, who look to him for support on technical and pedagogical issues. 
Petruzella’s Dungeons and Discourse was certainly given an audience at 
the Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts, and his work has provoked help­
ful discussion at his institution around equity, instructors’ inherent uninten­
tional bias, and support for first-­generation and low socioeconomic status 
students. Andres, professor of the year winner and all-­round ­great guy at Wa­
terloo, inspired a lot of conversation and review of teaching practice at his 
institution. Aebli at Penn State engaged his provost and ­others in significant 
dialog around media bias and critical thinking. Pushing him, by a nose, into 
nominal runner-up in the “did the proj­ect grow wings (or legs)?” category, 
Aebli has been asked to lead orientations at Penn State, where he has pushed 
students to embark on their studies with grit and determination while stress­
ing that they should be using their time in higher education to evolve as 

Catching Fire    171
collegial, critical, contributing members of society. His language and persona 
help, as do his general worldview and ethos, but I suspect that his institution 
feels comfortable encouraging him to take on this kind of critical role ­after 
witnessing his students’ rapt engagement with his (gameful) teaching. My 
admiration for all ­these prac­ti­tion­ers is substantial; I hope that that has 
come through in the chapter descriptions. They have cumulatively touched 
the lives of many hundreds of students fortunate enough to be exposed to 
passionate, challenging instructors who clearly are themselves motivated by 
the pro­cess of motivating. While, like the indulgent parent, I feel general pride 
and have no favorites, one (over)-­achiever stands out even in this exalted 
com­pany.
With his resolute confidence and calmly effervescent personality, Niman 
at the University of New Hampshire (UNH) drove his team to redesign the 
EconJourney experience numerous times between 2013 and 2016, learning 
from each iteration and listening to feedback. The revamped course features 
carefully calibrated levels of support, reward, and challenge and has benefit­
ted by high usage and high frequency of scheduling (it was used in three 
courses in the final twelve months of my work with him). Results have been 
incrementally, but increasingly, positive, while Niman’s willingness to sup­
port his design princi­ples with solid, academically rigorous notation and re­
porting has provided a platform for him to gain significant credibility at his 
institution. While I have categorized the gamer educator as a somewhat edgy 
disrupter who prefers to dwell on the outskirts or off the radar, Niman charged 
straight into the key influencers in his world. His book The Gamification of 
Higher Education: Developing a Game-­Based Business Strategy in a Disrupted Mar­
ketplace was published in 2014, and each of his proj­ects is supported by highly 
or­ga­nized and professional white papers that provide validation and support 
for his ideas. While the EconJourney course/concept has shown ­great prom­
ise in the realm of student engagement and per­sis­tence, particularly for non-­
STEM majors, a potential game-­changer (no pun intended) has also been 
spawned at UNH on the back of Niman’s work. The combination of encourag­
ing early class results, solid research protocols, and polished documentation 
of his work has combined into this perfect storm. This final development, 
Niman’s promotion to the position of associate dean, cemented the foundation 
for a wider dissemination of bigger ideas that he had somewhat whimsically 
(I thought) shared back in 2012 when we first met. He had long held an idea 
that the needle on better student be­hav­ior, not only academically but also in 

172    Game On!
social, health, and community-­related contexts, might be moved by imple­
menting intrinsically motivating life-­related game dynamics on a campus level.
Fast-­forward to late summer 2016, when a specific set of planets seem to have 
aligned in the case of the UNH, among them the drive of Niman, the work of 
his enthusiastic gradu­ate assistants, good feedback on his gamification work to 
that point, and the support of Todd Leach, the UNH system chancellor. What 
they have developed, led by Niman, is a large-­scale, business-­school-­wide 
implementation of a series of gamefully-­designed activities melded to course­
work that significantly impacts curricular and extracurricular challenges faced 
by business freshmen in their first months on campus. Niman, now working 
as Associate Dean of Academic Programs and Associate Professor of Econom­
ics within the Peter T. Paul College of Business and Economics, has lost none 
of his joie de vivre or bonhomie.
Paul College, as it tends to be called within the community, enrolls 2,600 
undergraduate and 300 gradu­ate students with a 65% male to 35% female 
split. According to the college website, it “prepares students for ­future ­careers 
in management, public ser­vice, research, and education.” ­There is a clear em­
phasis on rounded individuals, with the liberal arts side of the curriculum 
actually valued rather than being seen as a necessary evil. It is felt within 
Paul College, and indeed for all 3,200 undergraduate first-­year students at 
UNH, that a traditional residential campus experience is a key part of the 
student lifecycle. It is in this firmament that Niman has allowed himself a 
slightly contrived yet mnemonically valuable acronym to explain his extended 
gamification proj­ect. The Freshman Innovation and Research Experience 
(FIRE Program, figure 20) is designed to provide a comprehensive framework 
and inherent guidelines for a healthy body, healthy mind initial immersion to 
college life. It is intended to get new students familiar and comfortable with 
academic practices and to assimilate college/social culture, couched in a con­
text of healthy, or at least healthier, living. Special focus is spent on ­mental 
health and well-­being.
The program is intentionally outcomes-­based, conveying to students the 
skills, knowledge, and experiences they ­will need to reach academic goals 
without falling victim to the vicissitudes of life as young adults living away 
from home for the first time. It is intended to be a comprehensive, holistic 
experience that firmly establishes per­sis­tent strategies and practices to in­
crease student likelihood of success while illustrating and suggesting to them 
ways of dealing with the varied challenges they ­will experience as new stu­

Catching Fire    173
dents on campus. Niman describes the intent of the program as a “dual, 
broad brush-­stroke goal,” providing an environment in which development 
of “social ties among fledgling communities of engaged learners” is encour­
aged while introducing newly arrived first-­years to the traditional residential 
experience.
From a curricular perspective, students are required to take two foundational 
courses: First-­Year Academic Experience I and II (PAUL 405 and 406). ­These 
two courses are contained within the larger general education program that 
runs across both spring and fall terms. Each class consists of a weekly one-­
hour face-­to-­face session, with an expectation that the students ­will spend 
approximately two additional hours a week outside of class working on re­
lated assignments. Around 700 students of the entering UNH business class 
­were sorted (Hogwarts-­style) into teams of 20–25 ­people based on their ma­
jor, echoing the dependent hero contingency ele­ment that we saw in a num­
ber of earlier examples.
In their paper “The Paul College FIRE Program,” Niman and his coauthors 
describe the proj­ect as an, “integrated, team-­based game-­like experience” 
(Niman, Rury, & Stewart 2015). The game ele­ments are layered onto the 
academically recognized one-­credit core courses as a means of intrinsically 
motivating participants to engage with the core learning goals. The formal 
goals are listed as
•	
Informing UNH students of the resources and opportunities avail­
able to them for ­career and academic assistance.
Figure 20. Logo from the UNH FIRE program. © UNH/Niman; reproduced with 
permission of Neil Niman, University of New Hampshire.

174    Game On!
•	
Developing skills needed to succeed as a UNH and PAUL College 
student, as well as in business and professional situations throughout 
their ­career.
•	
Encouraging students to get involved in (healthy) campus activities 
and pursuits.
•	
Giving each student an opportunity to stand out (illustrating how 
each student has individual strengths, weaknesses and differences; 
and that they can all be celebrated and leveraged).
The embedded academic curriculum is intended to engender students 
with the ability to
•	
Approach and solve complex prob­lems using a variety of dif­fer­ent 
techniques.
•	
Effectively pres­ent a business concept and corresponding research.
•	
Experience and develop the culture of being part of a team.
•	
Locate and evaluate to potential majors, internship opportunities 
and the corresponding ­career paths.
•	
Recognize the importance of mentorship and the value of the 
broader UNH community network in a “low-­risk” environment.
The above aspects are arranged around what Niman and his team calls the 
three foundational pillars that or­ga­nize and categorize the students’ learning 
goals. The pillars are mentorship, the ­grand academic challenge, and gamification.
To illustrate the value of mentorship, ju­niors or se­niors are selected to 
serve as peer advisors and support the freshmen participants in their early 
transitions. The application pro­cess for the mentor positions is rigorous, with 
all candidates interviewed prior to ac­cep­tance. Peer advisors are required to 
take the bespoke two-­credit course PAUL 696: Supervised Student Teaching, 
which is jointly taught by the director of undergraduate programs and the 
FIRE program coordinator. PAUL 696 is designed to imbue participants with 
the princi­ples of effective mentorship and student teaching practice. It is 
fleshed out with case studies and worked examples of prior situations in the 
FIRE program where students faced challenges and needed mentor support to 
get through them. ­These worked examples provide real-­time means for men­
tor trainee participants to share experiences and discuss means and best 
practices in supporting peers in who may be experiencing challenges. In 
most cases, ­these ju­niors and se­niors are based on or near campus, physically 

Catching Fire    175
close by their mentees (the first year participants in the FIRE program). In 
this small college town, by virtue of their walking the same streets, using the 
same gyms, and perhaps ­going to the same bars, they are indeed well placed 
to support in loco parentis.
Another layer of support and expertise is provided by the involvement of 
alumni mentors who are invited back to participate and reflect on their expe­
riences. Niman found that this has proven a serendipitous bridge to more re­
cent alumni that doubtless delights his advancement colleagues at UNH. The 
alumni participants are typically younger recent gradu­ates who want to give 
back to the institution. As they are not yet in a position to do so financially, 
they contribute with in-­kind time and support. Alumni typically interact 
with FIRE participants virtually without physically returning to campus. 
Niman describes ­these alumni mentors as “a bridge to the real world,” supply­
ing practical experience that provides “illustrative context and rationale for 
many of the concepts that, to the insular freshmen, may seem irrelevant or less 
impor­tant.” The “bridge” aspect is the connection from what may well ap­
pear to be a less-­than-­authentic, theoretical academic study of princi­ples 
and concepts to applied real-­world value. As Niman notes, for most of us this 
awareness typically only becomes apparent quite a few years ­after gradua­
tion, by which time opportunities may have been missed and ­mistakes al­
ready made. Alumni mentors typically emphasize skills such as the value 
of clear communication techniques, teamwork, and professional business 
etiquette.
The context and narrative of the FIRE program ­really kick in with ­grand 
academic challenges. In the early stages (the first four weeks of the program) 
students can accumulate points that count ­towards team totals. ­These totals 
provide early competition and camaraderie and lead in to the next stage of 
the game. Niman refers to the ­grand academic challenge as the “centerpiece 
of the experience.” The highest-­scoring team ­after the opening four weeks 
gets first choice between a number of provided contexts for the next stage or 
level. Recent challenges have included
•	
Colonizing Mars;
•	
Living virtually;
•	
Prolonging life;
•	
Powering the Northeast; and
•	
Surviving extreme weather.

176    Game On!
­These challenges are intended to provide a motivating context (in our ear­
lier chapters, Kapp’s “narrative” category would be checked) and a milieu in 
which core skills can be cultivated. The skills are intended to translate quickly 
and with fidelity to au­then­tic business situations. The challenges are large 
and ambitious but motivate and foment practice in real-­world-­applicable 
skills and competencies. Within each of the teams, students are divided into 
subteams and tasked with reviewing ­these challenges through one of four 
lenses: economic, po­liti­cal, social, or techno-­scientific. The initial intent is to 
have students realize the complex, yet interdependent, aspects of larger is­
sues when viewed from dif­fer­ent perspectives. In conjunction with UNH’s 
research librarians, Niman’s team produced research guides that provide con­
text and critical information on each challenge area for the participants. 
Small activities and mini-­games are woven in and through the content in the 
guides to train students in be­hav­iors and skills while modeling how they can 
succeed in their studies and substantiate their research.
The third key aspect of the FIRE proj­ect, the gamification pillar, is accen­
tuated through the cooperation of the team members, the challenge be­
tween teams, the narrative that is developed around the challenges, and the 
feedback mechanisms built into the system. Figure 21 is a screenshot of the 
team leaderboard showing the scores and positions of the top 10 teams (“de­
pendent hero contingency,” again). ­There is also an individual leaderboard 
and numerous bonus recognitions and awards that channel Niman’s favorite 
sport (cycling) and its hallmark event, the Tour de France. In the Tour ­there 
are a large number of individual and team awards (specialist sprint awards, 
best mountain climber, fastest team, ­etc.) that, when converted to Niman’s 
FIRE world, allow for multiple recognitions and opportunities for individuals 
and teams with what he calls “dif­fer­ent strengths” to be recognized and cele­
brated alongside the eventual winner and the team trophy.
Students win awards and points for academic aspects that count ­toward 
team totals. They also win credits and score points for certain be­hav­iors on 
campus, such as participating in university events and activities (healthy, 
social community events that ­don’t involve copious amounts of alcohol or 
pizza). As Niman puts it, “By creating a nexus that facilitates the making of 
connections that can serve as ­either a substitute or a complement for what 
exists in their residence hall, students in the FIRE program are provided with 
an expanded pool of opportunities for building meaningful social relation­
ships.” The game-­connected point and incentive systems give students rea­
sons to participate and help get them over shyness and initial inertia by 

Catching Fire    177
encouraging them to attend events with fellow team members and adding 
bonus points for inclusiveness. Point-­based feedback is augmented with prizes 
given at specific events, including FIRE-­branded merchandise and what the 
organizers call Luminary Awards for advancing in the game. The latter speaks 
to what we have seen multiple times in the practitioner examples described 
as “reduced fear of failure,” while the former has engendered a sense of 
pride, illustrating the value of aesthetics elevating the status of FIRE “merch” 
at UNH.
On the academic side of FIRE, tangible deliverables include three graded 
assignments in the fall semester and four in the spring. PAUL 405, the first 
course, requires that the students submit what is referred to as an academic 
autobiography, a self-­assessment piece requiring that they candidly assess their 
strengths and weaknesses before presenting their work on the ­grand chal­
lenges with their assigned lens or role in the team. The second part of the 
lens work is a group pre­sen­ta­tion where they share and meld their findings 
within the team before presenting to the panel. This challenge culminates in 
a real­ity TV-­like playoff in front of a panel of judges who assess each team’s 
pre­sen­ta­tions, which, at a meta-­level, outlines a business opportunity in the 
area of their challenge. ­These sessions ­were held at the university’s Under­
graduate Research Conference and, according to Niman, ­were extremely well 
attended and notable for the maturity of the proj­ects and the skills and poise 
of the presenters.
Figure 21. Screenshot: Team leaderboard from the UNH FIRE proj­ect, 2016. Reproduced 
with permission of Neil Niman, University of New Hampshire. 

178    Game On!
PAUL 406, the second academic course within FIRE, focuses on the stu­
dents’ choices, looking further out to minors, majors, and extra possibilities at 
UNH including study abroad and internship proj­ects. The students in the sec­
ond (spring) term work closely with the alumni mentors, who provide tailored 
support in areas such as resume writing, networking, and associated real-­
world skills. To accentuate the importance of ­these skills and to provide a 
further ele­ment of experiential learning during this term, the university hosts 
a networking reception and a ­career boot camp. Attendance and participation 
at this reception are high, and, as an external metric suggesting validation, 
first-­year student participation at the annual spring ­career fair was almost 
doubled in the year ­after the FIRE launch. Niman was confident of the causal­
ity as well as the correlation. The ­grand challenge documentation included 
multiple drafts and revision cycles, group work, and self-­reflection, all empha­
sizing the need for polished, professional writing, pre­sen­ta­tion, and commu­
nication skills.
Student Stories
A student who recently participated in the FIRE program relayed her experi­
ence of the ­grand challenge and the team interaction:
Our group challenge was to create a product or ser­vice that could help ­those affected 
by extreme weather. ­After a review of real prob­lems facing the world ­today, our 
team deci­ded that fresh ­water would play an even more critical role globally. Our 
product, Oasis, is a compact ­water purifier specifically designed for natu­ral and en­
vironmental disasters (e.g. floods, hurricanes, contaminants).
I enjoyed the opportunity to be one of our team’s five presenters. I recognized the 
importance of the detailed preparation that went into our business plan. Each of the 
members of my team played a critical role. No one person can be credited with our 
team/company success. As previously mentioned, “If it’s about the com­pany, then 
it’s about the team.”
We made it through the first round with a very relevant product combined with an 
impactful pre­sen­ta­tion. I believe we won in the final round ­because judges found 
our team to be professional and our pre­sen­ta­tion well designed. Winning the URC 
[Undergraduate Research Conference] for FIRE was so satisfying ­because it was at 
that point I recognized the true value of the UNH curriculum.

Catching Fire    179
One of the peer advisors reflected on his experience mentoring and sup­
porting FIRE participants:
My experience as a peer advisor has been very rewarding. Not only have I facilitated 
student growth and development, I have learned and fine-­tuned many skills of my 
own. Additionally, I have expanded my network to include a variety of in­ter­est­ing 
alumni, teachers, students and advisors who have provided me with valuable in­
sights and lessons. Lastly, being a peer advisor has been very enjoyable! ­Whether it 
was joking around with the advisors in the office or participating in team events, I 
have had a ­great time. Paul College has some tremendous ­people, and meeting 
them has been both eye opening and fun. Without the experiences obtained as a 
peer advisor, I would not be the person I am ­today.
A third student commented looking back on his experience and forward 
to his and the program’s ­future:
The beauty of FIRE is that we are being rewarded for taking advantage of ­these op­
portunities. It is not another obligation but rather an opportunity in itself. I was able 
to win the first semester of FIRE ­because I was not afraid to listen to advice from 
­people who knew more and got involved. FIRE allowed me to see what I wanted to 
get involved in at UNH and through that what I want to do for the rest of my life. 
FIRE is essentially an awareness program. We are learning, hands on, all of the skills 
we need to be successful students and, therefore, successful professionals. ­We’re 
taught about UNH so we can utilize our resources. We are motivated to get involved 
to access ­every opportunity. Most importantly, we focus on professional and per­
sonal development so we can excel beyond schooling.
Combustion
The perfect storm of push-­pull came into being at UNH when Niman’s enthu­
siasm, his track rec­ord, and his mostly successful EconJourney proj­ect arrived 
just as the freshman academic experience course was hitting its nadir in terms 
of relevance (for the students) and efficacy (per institutional metrics). As with 
many first-­year experience courses, students ­were dragging their heels, “mail­
ing in” their work, and not ­really retaining anything they ­were purported to 
have learned. The re­spect with which Niman was regarded at UNH, along with 
his periodic but effective communication with the UNH system chancellor, 
Leach, positioned him, his team, and his proj­ect to gain enthusiastic sponsor­
ship and institutional support when opportunity arose. The implementation 

180    Game On!
of FIRE has been, by most methods of review, a roaring success. As the team 
puts it, “Attending class has become an opportunity to connect with friends. 
By building on each other, assignments have a rationale and reason with an 
achievable goal at the end. More Paul College students are joining clubs and 
participating in extracurricular activities. The library guides supporting the 
­grand challenges are the most visited pages at the UNH library.”
Figure 22 shows student activity in the LMS, with spikes corresponding to 
assignment due dates or key times around when rankings ­were assessed. Stu­
dent surveys indicated that FIRE participants ­were participating in a greater 
number of extracurricular activities than students did back in pre-­FIRE years. 
In the fall semester survey more than half of responding students reported 
participating in at least five events or activities. Eighty-­four ­percent of stu­
dents reported making friends within their FIRE team, while 96 ­percent felt 
comfortable approaching their peer/mentor with a concern.
In terms of academics, a general census across first-­year courses showed 
upticks in FIRE students’ grade point averages (GPAs) (­table 5). The improve­
ments ­were particularly noted in courses where writing and pre­sen­ta­tion skills 
­were emphasized (­table 6). The three courses Introduction to Business (ADMN 
400), First Year Writing (ENGL 401), and Ethics (PHIL 430) all reported sig­
nificant increases in course grades for FIRE participants.
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Number of participants
Date of event/activity
29 Aug 15
05 Sep 15
12 Sep 15
19 Sep 15
26 Sep 15
03 Oct 15
10 Oct 15
17 Oct 15
24 Oct 15
31 Oct 15
07 Nov 15
14 Nov 15
21 Nov 15
28 Nov 15
05 Dec 15
Figure 22. UNH FIRE participation. Reproduced with permission of Neil Niman, 
University of New Hampshire.

Catching Fire    181
Conclusions
The stated goal of the FIRE program was “to strengthen the tie between aca­
demics, the student experience and ­career preparation.” It achieved its goal 
through application of mentorships and gameful design. The game frame­
work allows participants to engender social ties and practice skills with re­
duced fear of failure in a game-­based context. The incentives and gameful 
cooperation, competition, and reward provide a power­ful impetus and re­
move many of the excuses for not engaging with the college experience.
While not scoring outright first in my ­SIMPLE review, Niman’s model 
was well placed. He then benefitted more than the ­others by virtue of his 
standing, his documentation, his willingness to keep tweaking his format, 
his empathetic chancellor, and his relentless confidence and humor. Hav­
ing extended his EconJourney class and the learning and experience therein 
to the ­whole first-­year experience and the FIRE proj­ect, Niman ­doesn’t see a 
need to stop ­there. He is confident that the model ­will work outside of the 
business envelope. The interdisciplinary nature of the ­grand challenge work 
and the ubiquitous skills needed in the vast majority of ­careers suggest to 
him that he can (and ­will) extend the proj­ect to all incoming students at 
UNH. He has even spoken with other institutions and is confident that he 
­Table 5. Student GPAs before and ­after FIRE participation
Fall 2015
Fall 2014
Number of 
students
Percentage 
of class
Number of 
students
Percentage 
of class
At or above 3.0
405
60.72
369
54.03
At or above 3.5
178
26.69
142
20.79
At or above 3.75
95
14.24
49
7.17
At 4.0
28
4.20
9
1.32
­Table 6. Student per­for­mance in courses emphasizing writing and pre­sen­ta­tion skills 
at UNH before and ­after FIRE participation.
Fall 2015
Fall 2014
Number of 
students
Average 
GPA
Number of 
students
Average 
GPA
GPA change 
(%)
ADMN 400
585
3.29
614
3.02
+8.94
ENGL 401
105
3.44
141
3.24
+6.17
PHIL 430
305
3.16
22
2.76
+14.49

182    Game On!
could support external installs of this clearly effective program. I have ab­
solutely no doubt that he can continue to achieve what­ever he thinks is 
feasible. His, and indeed all ­these gamer-­educators’, adventures are clearly 
not over.

Captain’s Epilogue
The narrative of this text began with Space Invaders and PacMan (and Ashton 
Kutcher for a reason that now escapes me). As I come to conclusions and at­
tempt to wrap the text with pithy conclusions, I am ­going to timestamp and 
date this with a reflection on the craze of the current day (early 2017). The Space 
Invaders references described the first time technology was added to the mix of 
gaming on a massive scale and how that, perhaps belatedly, is influencing 
teaching and learning 40 years on. Pokémon Go is an in­ter­est­ing social phenom­
enon given its gameful ele­ments and the amount of commitment and work 
being put in by ­those caught in its spell. It has eclipsed porn, news, and weather 
in terms of web-­search popularity and is, by most definitions, the most success­
ful mobile game ever created. While Space Invaders generated similar levels of 
addiction, GPS tracking (obviously not available in 1978), 4G, and smartphones 
facilitate mobility, allowing the game developers to accentuate intrinsic moti­
vators and effectively address all of the ele­ments described in chapter 8.
Created by Nintendo, the Pokémon Com­pany, and Niantic (a Google spi­
noff), Pokémon Go added a near-­immediate $17.6 billion in market capitaliza­
tion to Nintendo’s stock price, almost doubling its value, when it launched. A 
subsequent dip when Nintendo clarified that they in fact only had a 17% 
stake in Niantic did not detract from the sentiment that they made a wise 
move expanding to mobile gaming from the console base that they had held 
on to since the eighties. If we assess Pokémon Go against the ­SIMPLE matrix 
(­table 7), it is apparent that they have leveraged almost ­every means of ramp­
ing up intrinsic motivation in their users.
As ­table 7 indicates, Pokémon Go should be a highly addictive, highly 
motivating activity. And guess what? It is. The aesthetics are not particu­
larly “stunning,” and the play, catch, repeat narrative may get repetitive for 
some players. But even with ­those caveats stated, it apparently should come 
with a health warning. A ­couple in Arizona was recently charged with child 

184    Game On!
endangerment having left their toddler unattended for 90 minutes in 90-­degree 
heat while they played. Another player traveled to Australia to catch a Kan­
gaskhan but was hit by a car while attempting to do so. As he relayed to Busi­
ness Insider, “I thought to myself, I could have died searching for Pokémon . . . ​
what has my life arrived to?”—­indeed.
It is often said that in terms of looking for means of engaging customers, 
pornography is streets ahead of any other, ahem, diversion. When a ­free mo­
bile game, with no tangible prizes and none of the inherent compulsions 
that drive consumers to porn, outstrips (no pun intended) that commitment, 
something significant is happening. When a mobile gaming app hits our tar­
get demographic right between the eyes and confirms much of what we are 
theorizing might work in higher education, we can safely say that we are at a 
­Table 7. The Pokémon (high) bar
Absent 
(0 pts.)
Arguably / 
could be 
(1 pt.)
Established / 
functional 
(2 pts.)
A signature 
ele­ment 
(3 pts.)
Rules clear and effective
X
Effortless involvement—­pick up 
and play (think iPod)
X
Appropriate level of challenge 
(white-­water rafting)
X
CCCP: conflict, cooperation, and 
competition are all pos­si­ble
X
Clear goals with inherent, clear 
reward structures
X
Immediate and continual feedback 
from instructor, system and/or 
peers
X
Leveling up or at least a clear 
sense of pro­gress
X
Narrative / curve of interest—­can 
be “real world” based
X
Stunning aesthetics
X
Fear of failure reduced (mindsets)
X
Student control over actions 
(they get choices at ­every step)
X

Captain’s Epilogue    185
nexus, a point of inflection, a watershed, or a defining moment. Demograph­
ically, 63% of Pokémon Go players are female compared to 37% who are male, 
46% of players are between the ages of 18 and 29, and 45% of them make over 
$50,000 per year. Detractors against gamification and gameful design often 
talk of the dumbing-­down effect—­the catering to juvenilia. This Pokémon 
Go–­playing demographic is not a brain-­dead kid. We could do worse (clearly) 
than to chase the chasers, but we ­will have to offer them something at least a 
­little bit engaging in their education.
Technologies like ­those employed in the Pokémon Go game are becoming 
increasingly accessible for developers and affordable for institutions. Low-­
tech, “napkin sketch” versions of gamified classes have proven our concept, 
and the evolution of practitioner work (Niman’s FIRE proj­ect in chapter 9) 
suggests that administrators and academics alike are developing a willing­
ness to embrace and encourage even fledgling efforts. The technical and ad­
ministrative challenges all seem surmountable. How many of us would have 
identified Niman’s EconJourney as the one of the five cases that would lead to 
such an enhanced and extended implementation? From my engagement 
with Niman, his team, and the environment at the University of New Hamp­
shire, I would categorize the progenitors of his success in three basic catego­
ries. A review of the traits in ­these categories (below) could well be instructive 
to ­future prac­ti­tion­ers as they contemplate gamefully designed activities or 
classes. ­Here are the key ele­ments that, when aligned, have led to a very suc­
cessful, institutionally supported, and well-­funded implementation.
Practitioner Traits
•	
Unflappable-­ness;
•	
Gamer traits (fun, playful, determined, no fear of failure);
•	
Confidence in the value of the work;
•	
Ability to lead teams and willingness to give it a go with what you 
have to hand in terms of available, nearly ­free resources (smart, 
willing grad assistants, tools that are not so complex they alienate or 
confuse the community);
•	
A solid research background for generating academic/institutional 
buy-­in;
•	
Articulate and good at documentation; and
•	
A level of se­niority that provides some degree of autonomy (reduced 
fear of failure).

186    Game On!
Implementation Traits
•	
Good use of, and integration with, established, familiar institutional 
technologies;
•	
Minimal tech for the sake of tech add-­ons that are not integral to the 
­product;
•	
Low-­threshold apps—­all developments able to be quickly launched 
without too much drama or need for large-­scale tech support (at least 
­until proof of concept is in);
•	
Quick turnaround on incremental improvements; and
•	
Flexible means for students to play (not too locked in).
Institutional Traits
•	
Leadership that is open to innovation;
•	
A defined and identifiable need with a concise elevator pitch (in 
Niman’s case, engagement of at-­risk first-­year students); and
•	
Willingness for, or at least a tolerance of, novelty and ambiguity.
In uniting ele­ments of cognitive science, adaptive learning, learning ana­
lytics, and (very simply) inspired and fun teaching, gamification clearly has 
appeal and real potential for improving student engagement. Further devel­
opment ­will be motivated by a societal and institutional need to scale online 
courses, unparalleled access to learning management system data, and new 
desires to improve student engagement. Given the extended access possibilities 
of online instruction, as opposed to traditional campus-­based education, ad­
vocates for the underserved and legislators in states with ambitious educational 
attainment goals should explore, or at least support, research into any and all 
pos­si­ble ave­nues for student engagement and retention.
Many of the ­factors attracting students to traditional institutions are 
not ­viable in the online environment. The charisma of engaging instruc­
tors, ­human empathy, and personality are almost impossible to replicate in 
an online environment. However, incremental adjustments to aspects of the 
online environment, including the nature and format of materials and the 
information architecture of a course (how the materials are presented), can 
be tried and monitored without large investment or extra allocation of sig­
nificant resources. This low-­cost flexibility to change modes of delivery incre­
mentally and monitor the impact of ­these changes confirms that intentional 
online course development has ­great capacity to try out new concepts in the 
hope that at least one, possibly more, ­will make a significant difference. If 

Captain’s Epilogue    187
research into gamification produces findings that enhance student engage­
ment or per­sis­tence, it could translate into massive benefits to society and the 
field of higher education given ­these large and still-­growing numbers.
­Going forward, it would be helpful to examine ­whether par­tic­u­lar for­
mats and audiences benefit disproportionately from course gamification, as 
some prac­ti­tion­ers suggested. Research should explic­itly explore the working 
hypothesis—­articulated in the Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts and, to 
a lesser extent, the University of New Hampshire case—­that fragile learners, 
first-­generation college students, and ­those for whom education has always 
seemed a daunting prospect may be helped by less threatening, gamified 
courses. Emerging disrupted models of education such as competency-­based 
education and direct assessment provide further opportunities to build in 
rewards, immediate feedback, and other par­ameters from Kapp (2012), Csik­
szentmihalyi (1975), and the ­SIMPLE matrix (Bell 2014). Gamification may 
provide a means by which newer, disrupted formats for delivering education 
have an increased chance of success with critical demographics for whom 
­there are few other options.
My motivation in engaging with the prac­ti­tion­ers and the cases studied 
was to dig deeper into aspects of online education that the lit­er­a­ture suggests 
­matter for improving student engagement and learning outcomes. It turned 
out that the most in­ter­est­ing alignment of ­these ele­ments was manifest in 
gamified courses. As I have tried to demonstrate, this is not capturing a new 
cult or a new fad. I have seen ­SIMPLE traits in many classrooms, and it is 
my belief that what we are seeing with gamified classes (face to face, hybrid, 
or fully online) is merely a means of accentuating what effective, motivated 
instructors do on a daily basis in their classes. I hope that this collection 
also provides inspiration for institutions, developers, and faculty members 
who are tempted to have a go at gamified courses in the ­future. As the prac­ti­
tion­ers and my own interviews demonstrated, students are bored. Typically 
their classes are not (almost cannot be) as engaging as Facebook, Snapchat, 
or Pokémon Go. No one is expected to approximate or outdo ­these sticky 
apps. Students ­don’t want their education to spill over into their social lives. 
They are, however, happy to say, “Give it a go. Give me something vaguely 
in­ter­est­ing that speaks to me and that shows that you have made an effort to 
meet me halfway.” Students who commented on the low-­tech builds encour­
aged more sophisticated (­later) versions but did so in a supportive, construc­
tive manner.

188    Game On!
Clearly ­there are, or ­will be in many institutions, structural issues particu­
larly with regard to the availability of technical support and platform. ­There 
are ­going to be po­liti­cal impediments, perhaps even governance issues, and 
naysayers to navigate. In the first person, I implore you to take lessons from 
the wonderful, positive instructors in this story. Give it a go. Be open to fail­
ures as well as successes. Learn from the former, and use the latter to further 
the proj­ect. Look at the achievements in this book. ­Will increased student 
engagement gain interest at your institution? ­Will potential inclusion and 
removal of instructor unconscious bias be noted? ­Will support and motiva­
tion of low-­SES, fragile, or first-­generation students gain attention? ­Will it be 
fun for you? At worst, you’ll be a happy, motivated instructor having fun, 
meeting the students on their level, and learning with and from them—­can’t 
be all bad, can it?
Gamification very possibly has a role to play in moving the needle on stu­
dent engagement, the clearest mea­sur­able associate to success that we have. It 
may be a minor role or a major one. It could be the Holy Grail or akin to one 
Sokolow wedge in a save the planet challenge. ­Either way, I ­don’t know that 
the scale of success ­really ­matters in rumination over a try/don’t try decision. 
­Future work ­will doubtless unlock more of the keys to engagement and moti­
vation that could turn fragile learners into lifelong learners. If we can focus 
effort yoked to a have a go attitude, we could make dull, impossible courses 
feel compelling and achievement feasible for ­those who currently have the 
worst prospects of success. If this gives anyone a shot at helping any and 
all students, why would we not? If we can disproportionately encourage un­
derserved and individuals typically “dropped out” by both society and aca­
demia, one could argue that we must do so. Motivating and encouraging 
student achievement is the main reason most of us work in higher education. 
In engaging students, especially ­those who are struggling, we ­will have taken 
a significant step ­toward a more educated and inclusive society.
Go ahead: Soar once again. Save the planet. Zap antipathy and boredom. 
Be the Gorfian Space Avenger you once ­were. Get to level 27. Game on!

Bibliography
ACT. 2014. “The Condition of STEM.” Retrieved from www​.­act​.­org​/­content​/­act​/­en​
/­research​/­condition​-­of​-­stem​-­2014​.­html.
Ambrose, S. 2010. How Learning Works. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-­Bass.
Arum, R., and Roska, J. 2011. Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on College Campuses. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Asgari, M. 2005. “A Three-­Factor Model of Motivation and Game Design.” Paper 
presented at the 2005 International DiGRA Conference, Vancouver, British Colum­
bia, Canada.
Auletta, K. 2012. “Get Rich U.” The New Yorker, April 30. Retrieved from www​.­new​
­yorker​.­com​/­magazine​/­2012​/­04​/­30​/­get​-­rich​-­u.
Baggett, P. 1984. “Role of Temporal Overlap of Visual and Auditory Material in 
Forming Dual Media Associations.” Journal of Educational Psy­chol­ogy 76(3): 
408–417.
Bandura, A. 1997. Self-­Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Blackboard Inc. 2013. “Blackboard Expands Support for Retention Efforts with Early 
Warning Analytics.” Press release, April 24.
Bloom, B. S. 1956. Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook I, The Cognitive Domain. 
New York: David McKay.
Bogdan, R., and Bilken, S. K. 2006. Qualitative Research for Education: An Introduction to 
Theory and Methods (5th ed.). Upper ­Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Boston, W. 2014. Lecture at the University of Pennsylvania to the EdD Higher 
Education Management program (cohort 12). Philadelphia, PA, February.
Breit, W., and Elzinga, K. G. 2002. “Economics as Detective Fiction.” Journal of Economic 
Education Fall 2002: 367–376. Retrieved from www​.­iei​.­liu​.­se​/­nek​/­730A17​/­artiklar​
/­1​.­283067​/­Detectivestory​.­pdf.
Brophy, J. E. 2004. Motivating Students to Learn (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Brusilovsky, P., Sosnovsky, S., and Yudelson, M. 2009. “Addictive Links: The Motiva­
tional Value of Adaptive Link Annotation.” New Review of Hypermedia and Multime­
dia 15(1): 97–118.
Bulger, M. E., Mayer, R. E., Almeroth, K. C., and Blau, S. D. 2008. “Mea­sur­ing Learner 
Engagement in Computer-­Equipped College Classrooms.” Journal of Educational 
Multimedia and Hypermedia 17(2): 129–143.
Campbell, J. 1949. “The Hero with a Thousand ­Faces.” New York: Pantheon Books.
Carroll, J., and Olson, J. 1988. ­Mental Models in Human-­Computer Interaction. Washing­
ton, DC: National Acad­emy Press.

190    Bibliography
Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. 1991. “Cognitive Load Theory and the Format of Instruc­
tion.” Cognition and Instruction 8(4): 293–332.
Chen, P.-­S. D., Gonyea, R., and Kuh, G. 2008. “Learning at a Distance [Electronic 
Version].” Journal of Online Education 4.
Chickering, A. W., and Gamson, Z. F. 1987. “Seven Princi­ples for Good Practice in 
Undergraduate Education.” AAHE Bulletin 39(7): 3–7.
Christensen, C., and Eyring, H. 2011. The Innovative University: Changing the DNA of 
Higher Education from the Inside Out. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-­Bass.
Clark, R. 2005. “Instructional Strategies.” In H. F. O’Neil (ed.), What Works in Distance 
Learning Guidelines (pp. 43–61). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Cline, E. 2012. Ready Player One. Danvers, MA: Broadway Books.
Compeau, D. R., and Higgins, C. A. 1995. “Computer Self-­Efficacy: Development of a 
Mea­sure and Initial Test.” MIS Quarterly 19(2): 189–211.
Cordova, D. I., and Lepper, M. R. 1996. “Intrinsic Motivation and the Pro­cess of 
Learning: Beneficial Effects of Contextualization, Personalization and Choice.” 
Journal of Educational Psy­chol­ogy 88(4): 715–730.
Cowan, N. 2009. “What Are the Differences between Long-­Term, Short-­Term, and 
Working Memory?” Pro­gress in Brain Research 169: 323–338.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1975. “Play and Intrinsic Rewards.” Journal of Humanistic Psy­chol­
ogy 15(3): 41–63.
—­—­—. 1990. Flow: The Psy­chol­ogy of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper.
Dawson, S., and McWilliam, E. 2008. Investigating the Application of IT Generated Data 
as an Indicator of Learning and Teaching Per­for­mance. Queensland University of 
Technology and the University of British Columbia. Retrieved from www​.­olt​.­gov​
.­au​/­project​-­investigating​-­application​-­it​-­qut​-­2007.
Deneen, L. “What Is Student Engagement Anyway?” Educause, March 3. Retrieved 
from www​.­educause​.­edu​/­ero​/­article​/­what​-­student​-­engagement​-­anyway.
DeTure, M. 2004. “Cognitive Style and Self-­Efficacy: Predicting Student Success in 
Online Distance Education.” American Journal of Distance Education 18(1): 21–38.
diSessa, A. 1982. “Unlearning Aristotelian Physics: A Study of Knowledge-­Based 
Learning.” Cognitive Science 6: 37–75.
Dogan, B. 2008. “Association Rule Mining from an Intelligent Tutor.” Journal of Educa­
tional Technology Systems 36(4): 433.
Drucker, P. 2006. Innovation and Entrepreneurship. New York: Harper Business.
Dungeons & Dragons official home page. 2013. Retrieved from www​.­wizards​.­com​/­dnd​
/­Feature​.­aspx​?­x​=­new​/­whatisdnd.
Ecclestone, K. 2008. “The Rise of the ‘Fragile’ Learner.” Retrieved from https://­wiki​
.­brookes​.­ac​.­uk​/­display​/­teachingnews​/­The+rise+of+the+%27fragile%27+learner.
Emanuel, E. 2013. “Online Education: MOOCs Taken by Educated Few.” Nature 503: 
342. doi: 10. 1038/503342a.
Galarneau, L. 2005. “Au­then­tic Learning Experiences through Play: Games, Simulations 
and the Construction of Knowledge.” Retrieved from http://­papers​.­ssrn​.­com​/­sol3​
/­papers​.­cfm​?­abstract​_­id​=­810065.

Bibliography    191
Gardner, H. E. 1983. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New York: 
Basic Books.
Gee, J. P. 2003. What Video Games Have to Teach Us about Learning and Literacy. New York: 
Palgrave MacMillan.
Gentile, D. A., and Walsh, D. A. 2002. “A Normative Study of ­Family Media Habits.” 
Applied Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 23: 157–178.
Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., and Res­nick, L. B. 1996. “Cognition and Learning.” In 
D. C. Berliner and R. C. Calfee (eds.), Handbook of Educational Psy­chol­ogy (pp. 15–46). 
New York: Macmillan.
Guo, P. 2013. “Optimal Video Length for Student Engagement.” Retrieved from www​
.­edx​.­org​/­blog​/­optimal​-­video​-­length​-­student​-­engagement.
Hart, Hugh. 2008. “Dicaprio to Play Nolan Bushnell in Atari.” Wired magazine. Retrieved 
from www​.­wired​.­com​/­2008​/­06​/­leo​-­dicaprio​-­at​/­.
Hawtrey, K. 2007. “Using Experiential Learning Techniques.” Journal of Economic 
Education 38(2): 143–52.
Hunicke, R. 2009. “Wild­flowers: The UX of Game/Play.” Retrieved from http://­vimeo​
.­com​/­6984481.
Inan, F. A., and Lowther, D. L. 2007. “Comparative Analy­sis of Computer-­Supported 
Learning Models and Guidelines.” In F. M. M. Neto and F. V. Brasiliero (eds.), 
Advances in Computer Supported Learning (pp. 1–20). Harrisburg, PA: Idea Group.
Kapp, K. M. 2012. The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: Game-­Based Methods 
and Strategies for Training and Education. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer/ASTD.
Ke, F. 2009. “A Qualitative Meta-­Analysis of Computer Games as Learning Tools.” In 
R. E. Ferdig (ed.), Effective Electronic Gaming in Education, vol. 1 (pp. 1–32). Hershey, 
PA: Information Science Reference.
Kolb, D. A. 1984. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Develop­
ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Krause, K. L., and Coates, H. 2008. “Students’ Engagement in First-­Year University.” 
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 33(5): 493–505.
Kuh, G. D. 2009. “The National Survey of Student Engagement: Conceptual and 
Empirical Foundations.” New Directions for Institutional Research 141: 5–20.
Lepper, M. R. 1988. “Motivational Considerations in the Study of Instruction.” Cognition 
and Instruction 5(4): 289–309.
Litow, L., and Pumroy, D. K. 1975. “A Brief Review of Classroom Group-­Oriented 
Contingencies.” Journal of Applied Be­hav­ior Analy­sis 8: 341–347.
McGonigal, J. 2012. Real­ity Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can 
Change the World. New York: Penguin.
Malone, T. W. 1981. “­Toward a Theory of Intrinsically Motivating Instruction.” Cognitive 
Science 5(4): 333–369.
Malone, T. W., and Lepper, M. R. 1987. “Making Learning Fun: A Taxonomy of Intrinsic 
Motivations for Learning.” In R. E. Snow and M. J. Farr (eds.), Aptitude, Learning and 
Instruction, vol. 3, Cognitive and Affective Pro­cess Analyses (pp. 299–253). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.

192    Bibliography
Marandi, E., ­Little, E., and Hughes, T. 2010. “Innovation and the ­Children of the 
Revolution: Facebook and Value Co-­Creation.” Marketing Review 10 (2): 169–183.
Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts. 2013. “Profile Brochure.” Retrieved from www​
.­mcla​.­edu​/­About​_­MCLA​/­.
Mautone, P., and Mayer, R. 2001. “Signaling as a Cognitive Guide in Multimedia 
Learning.” Journal of Educational Psy­chol­ogy 93(2): 377.
Mayer, R. 2003. “The Promise of Multimedia Learning: Using the Same Instructional 
Design Methods across Dif­fer­ent Media.” Learning and Instruction 13(2): 125.
Mayer, R. E., and Moreno, R. 2002. “Animation as an Aid to Multimedia Learning.” 
Educational Psy­chol­ogy Review 14(2): 87–100.
Merrill, M. D. 1983. “Component Display Theory.” In C. Reigeluth (ed.), Instructional 
Design Theories and Models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Moorhead, H. J. H., Neuer Colburn, A. A., Edwards, N. N., and Erwin, K. T. 2013. 
“Beyond the Myth of the Pajama Party: Delivering Quality Online Counselor 
Education and Supervision.” Paper based on a program presented at the 2013 
American Counseling Association Conference, Cincinnati, OH, March 23–27.
Moreno, R. 2007. “Optimizing Learning from Animations by Minimizing Cognitive 
Load: Cognitive and Affective Consequences of Signaling and Segmentation 
Methods.” Applied Cognitive Psy­chol­ogy 21(6): 765–781.
Niman, N. 2014. The Gamification of Higher Education: Developing a Game-­Based 
Business Strategy in a Disrupted Marketplace. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Niman, N., Rury, S., and Stewart, S. 2015. “The Paul College FIRE Program.” Retrieved 
from www​.­unh​.­edu​/­unhtoday​/­2016​/­04​/­catching​-­fire​-­paul​-­college.
Obama, B. 2009. “Remarks to Joint Session of Congress, Tuesday, February 24, 2009.” 
Retrieved from www.­whitehouse.­gov/­the_­press_­office/­Remarks-­of-­President-­ 
Barack-­ Obama-­Address-­to-­Joint-­Session-­of-­Congress.
Palmer, S. R., and Holt, D. M. 2009. “Examining Student Satisfaction with Wholly 
Online Learning.” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25(2): 101–113.
Papanikolaou, K. A., Grigoriadou, M., Kornilakis, H., and Magoulas, G. D. 2003. 
“Personalizing the Interaction in a Web-­Based Educational Hypermedia 
System: The Case of INSPIRE.” User Modeling and User-­Adapted Interaction 13(3): 
213–267.
Papert, S. 1997. The Connected ­Family: Bridging the Digital Generation Gap. Marietta, 
GA: Longstreet Press.
Perna, L., Ruby, A., Boruch, R., Wang, N., Scull, J., Evans, C., and Ahmad, S. 2013. “The 
Life Cycle of a Million MOOC Users.” Pre­sen­ta­tion at the MOOC Research Initiative 
Conference, University of Texas–­Austin, December 5.
Plowman, L. 1996. “Narrative, Linearity and Interactivity: Making Sense of Interactive 
Multimedia.” British Journal of Educational Technology 27: 92–105. doi:10.1111
/j­​.1467-8535.1996.tb00716.x.
Pollock, E., Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. 2002. “Assimilating Complex Information.” 
Learning and Instruction 12(1): 61–86.

Bibliography    193
Prahalad, C. K., and Ramaswamy, V. 2004. “Co-­Creation Experiences: The Next Practice 
in Value Creation.” Journal of Interactive Marketing 18(3): 5–14.
Prensky, M. 2001. Digital Game-­Based Learning. New York: McGraw-­Hill.
Randel, J. M., Morris, B. A., Wetzel, C. D., and Whitehill, B. V. 1992. “The Effectiveness 
of Games for Educational Purposes: A Review of Recent Research.” Simulation 
Gaming 23(3): 261–276.
Rankine, L., Stevenson, L., Malfroy, J., and Ashford-­Rowe, K. 2009. “Benchmarking 
Across Universities: A Framework for LMS Analy­sis.” Paper presented at the Ascilite 
conference, Auckland, December 6. Retrieved from www.ascilite.org/conferences/
auckland09/procs/rankine.pdf.
Recruiter​.­com. 2014. “­Career Outlook for Instructional Designers and Technologists.” 
Retrieved from www​.­recruiter​.­com​/­careers​/­instructional​-­designers​-­and​
-­technologists/outlook/.
Reeves, B., and Read, J. L. 2009. Total Engagement: Using Games and Virtual Worlds to 
Change the Way ­People Work and Businesses Compete. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
Press.
Reiff, J. C. 1992. Learning Styles. What Research Says to the Teacher 7. Washington, DC: 
National Education Association.
Rigby, C. S., Przybylski, A. K., Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. 2014. “Competence-­Impeding 
Electronic Games and Players’ Aggressive Feelings, Thoughts, and Be­hav­iors.” Journal 
of Personality and Social Psy­chol­ogy 106(3): 441–457.
Ryan, R. M., and Deci, E. L. 2000. “Self-­Determination Theory and the Facilitation of 
Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-­Being.” American Psychologist 
55: 68–78.
Savitz, E., and Tedford, J. 2012. “Facebook Timeline for Brands: It’s about Storytell­
ing.” Forbes, February 29. Retrieved from www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­ciocentral​/­2012​/­02​
/­29​/­facebook​-­timeline​-­for​-­ brands-­its-­about-­storytelling.
Scardamalia, M. 2000. “Can Schools Enter a Knowledge Society?” In M. Selinger and 
J. Wynn (eds.), Educational Technology and the Impact on Teaching and Learning. 
Abingdon, UK: RM Education.
Schell, J. 2008. The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses. Waltham, MA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.
—­—­—. 2010. “Design Outside the Box.” Keynote speech at the Design Innovate 
Communicate Entertain Conference, Las Vegas, NV, February 17.
Schrum, L., and Benson, A. 2001. “Establishing Successful Online Distance Learning 
Environments: Distinguishing ­Factors that Contribute to Online Courses and 
Programs.” In R. Discenza, C. Howard, and K. Schenk (eds.), The Design and Manage­
ment of Effective Distance Learning Programs. Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
Siemens, G. 2011a. “Duplication Theory of Educational Value.” Retrieved from www​
.­elearnspace​.­org​/­blog​/­2011​/­09​/­15​/­duplication​-­theory​-­of​-­ educational-­value/.
—­—­—. 2011b. “Learning and Academic Analytics.” Retrieved from www​
.­learninganalytics​.­net​/­​?­p​=­131.

194    Bibliography
Sitzmann, T. 2011. “A Meta-­Analytic Examination of the Instructional Effectiveness 
of Computer-­Based Simulation Games.” Personnel Psy­chol­ogy 64(2): 489–528.
Skinner, B. F. 1971. Beyond Freedom and Dignity. Cambridge, MA: Hackett.
Soares. L. 2013. “Post-­Traditional Learners and the Transformation of Postsecondary 
Education: A Manifesto for College Leaders.” Retrieved from www​.­acenet​.­edu​/­news​
-­room​/­Documents​.­​/­Soares​-­Post​-­Traditional​-­v5​-­ 011813.pdf.
Song, L., Singleton, S. E., Hill, J. R., and Koh, M. H. 2004. “Improving Online Learning: 
Student Perceptions of Useful and Challenging Characteristics.” Internet and Higher 
Education 7(1): 59–70.
Song, S. H., and Keller, J. M. 2001. “Effectiveness of Motivationally Adaptive Computer-­
Assisted Instruction on the Dynamic Aspects of Motivation.” Educational Technology 
Research and Development 49(2): 5–22.
Staples, D. S., Hulland, J. S., and Higgins, C. A. 1999. “A Self-­Efficacy Theory Explana­
tion for the Management of Remote Workers in Virtual Organ­izations.” Organ­ization 
Science 10(6): 758–776.
Stewart, P. H., Jones, V. N., and Pope, J. V. 1999. “Learning Styles: Charting with 
Iconic Learners.” ERIC Document Reproduction No. ED 428 403. Retrieved from 
https://­eric​.­ed​.­gov​/­​?­id​=­ED428403.
Sweller, J., Van Merriënboer, J., and Paas, F. 1998. “Cognitive Architecture and 
Instructional Design.” Educational Psy­chol­ogy Review 10(3): 251–296.
Tsandilas, T., and Schraefel, M. C. 2004. “Usable Adaptive Hypermedia Systems.” New 
Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 10(1): 5–29.
Tsianos, N., Germanakos, P., Lekkas, Z., Mourlas, C., and Samaras, G. 2009. “An Assess­
ment of ­Human ­Factors in Adaptive Hypermedia Environments.” In C. Mourlas and 
P. Germanakos (eds.), Intelligent User Interfaces: Adaptation and Personalization Systems 
and Technologies (pp. 1–18). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference.
Urban Dictionary. 2013. “Boss ­Battle.” Retrieved from www​.­urbandictionary​.­com​
/­define​.­php​?­term​=­boss+­battle.
US Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 2013. The 
Condition of Education. NCES 2013-037. Washington, DC.
US Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development. 
2010. Evaluation of Evidence-­Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-­Analysis and 
Review of Online Learning Studies. Washington, DC.
Vogler, C. 1992. The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers. San Francisco, CA: 
M. Wiese.
Walstad, W. B., and Allgood, S. 1999. “What Do College Se­niors Know about Economics?” 
American Economic Review 89(2): 350–354.
Wolfe, J. 1997. “The Effectiveness of Business Games in Strategic Management Course 
Work.” Simulation and Gaming 28(4): 360–376.
Wood­house, K. 2015. “Lazy Rivers and Student Debt: Inside Higher Ed.” Retrieved 
from www.­insidehighered.­com/­news/­2015/­06/­15/­are-­lazy-­rivers-­and-­climbing​
-­walls-­driving-­cost-­college.

Bibliography    195
Zichermann, G. 2011. Pre­sen­ta­tion at the For the Win (Serious Gamification) confer­
ence at the Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania, August 8–9. 
Retrieved from www​.­gamification​.­co​/­2011​/­08​/­10​/­lies​-­damned​-­lies​-­and​-­academics.
Zichermann, G., and Cunningham, C. 2011. Gamification by Design: Implementing 
Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media.

This page intentionally left blank

academia, business terminology in, 5
Academically Adrift (Arum and Roska), 4
academic autobiography, 177
academic degrees, lifetime salaries and, 6
active learning, 24
Adapt Courseware, 33
adaptive learning, 26, 30, 32–33, 35, 42, 166
Adaptive Learning Market Acceleration 
Program, 33
Adaptive Learning Research Grant 
Program, 33
Adventure, 51
Aebli, Fred, 131–49, 160, 164, 169–71
aesthetics, 40, 41
Agricultural College of Pennsylvania, 131
Allgood, S., 78
American Public Education, 24
Andres, Greg, 96–110, 156–57, 159–60, 
163–64, 169–70
Angel LMS, 134, 136
anonymity, 99, 152
apps, engagement with, 3, 17–18
arcade games, 1–2
Arizona State University, 15
Arneson, Dave, 112
Arum, R., 4
Asgari, M., 34, 38
Assaf, Elizabeth, 76, 87
assessment, 23, 28, 98, 162–70; scaling of, 
119–20; unexpected, 106
asynchronous discussion, 95
Atari, 2, 51, 132
autonomy, 18, 84, 153
Bally, 1
Battlefield 4, 70
Berkshire Hills Internship Program, 111
Berry, Richard, 18
Betti, Ross, 114, 116, 117, 120, 122–23
Biklen, S. K., 43
Blackboard, 7, 29, 33, 86
Bloom, B. J., 22
Bloom’s Taxonomy, 22
board games, 134–35
Bogdan, R., 43
boss ­battles, 81, 118–19
boss levels, 58
Boston, Wallace (Wally), 24
Bottom Line Up Fronts (BLUFs), 136
Breakout, 2
Breit, William, 77
Bushnell, Nolan, 2
Campbell, Joseph, 41, 79
campuses, residential, 8
Candy Crush, 3
Canvas LMS, 47, 52, 53, 99, 113, 118, 125, 
134, 141
CBE. See competency-­based education
CEL. See Centre for Extended Learning
Center for Academic Technology (MCLA), 129
Center for Teaching Excellence (UW), 108
Centre for Extended Learning (UW), 99, 
105, 109
Cerego, 32
challenge, 39, 53–54, 57–58
Chaturanga, 35
Chen, P.-­S., 28
Chickering, A. W., 29
Christensen, Clayton, 11–12, 15
chunking, 24, 25, 31–32
Clark, Richard, 25, 31
class participation, 116–18
Clerkin, Kris, 16
Cline, Ernest, 51
co-­creation, 73–75, 77, 78, 84
Codak, Dresden (Aaron Diaz), 112
coding boot camps, 6
Index

198    Index
CogBooks, 32
cognitive load theory, 31
cognitive science, 26, 28, 30–32, 42
cognitive task analy­sis, 31
collaboration, 117
Collins, A. M., 35
commitment, transference of, 3
Compeau, D. R., 30
competency-­based education, for online 
student support, 15
competition, 40, 45, 53–54, 75–76, 83, 85, 128, 
137; personalization and, 113–14; students’ 
enjoyment of, 69; team, 57. See also 
motivation
completion rates, 8, 10, 20
Condition of STEM (ACT), 11
conflict, 40
constructivism, 95
contextualization, 10, 39
contract grading, 126, 127
control, 39
cooperation, 40, 85, 175–77; motivation and, 
138, 145–46
cooperative education, 94, 97–98, 109
course completion: rates of, 8, 10, 20; 
time-­on-­task and, 14, 16
Coursera, 47, 52, 155
Creative Commons, 115
credentialing, alternate, 6
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 38–39, 157, 
161–65, 187
curiosity, 39
Dartmouth College, 71–72
data visualization, 140
Davis Educational Foundation, 10
dependent hero contingency, 54, 66, 176
design, 34. See also aesthetics
Desire2Learn, 29, 107
Diaz, Aaron, 112
DiCaprio, Leonardo, 2
Dickey, Michelle, 69
difficulty, calibration of, 45
disadvantaged students, 129–30. See also 
underrepresented minorities
discussion boards, 18, 23, 26, 55, 61, 101–2, 
107
Disney World, 143
diversions, 45–46
Drucker, Peter, 7
D2L. See Desire2Learn
Dungeon Defender II, 70
Dungeons and Discourse, 111–30, 158, 165; 
flow criteria and, 162, 164; Kapp analy­sis 
of, 160, 164; ­SIMPLE matrix assessment of, 
169, 170
Dungeons & Dragons, 112, 132–33
Easter eggs, 51, 55–58, 62–63, 162
Ecclestone, Kathryn, 26
EconJourney, 76–93, 165, 171; flow criteria 
and, 162, 163; Kapp analy­sis of, 159, 160; 
­SIMPLE matrix assessment of, 168, 169, 
170
economics: gamification of, 71–93; interdisci­
plinary approach to, 78, 88–89; personaliz­
ing, 77–78
education, action versions of, 36
educational games, 14, 34
EdX, 47
elemental tetrad, 39
Elzinga, Kenneth, 77
Emanuel, E. J., 155
Embanet, 25
empathy, 3
employability, 6
engagement, 14–15, 127, 141, 143–44; best 
types of, 38; built in, 30; concepts related to, 
30; definitions of, 28–29; enhancing, 
113–14; fostering, princi­ples for, 29; 
gamification and, 27, 186; mea­sures of, 
28–30; psy­chol­ogy of, 27; supporting, 17
Ethical Decision Making (UW course), 95–110, 
158, 165; flow criteria and, 162, 163–64; 
Kapp analy­sis of, 159–60, 163; ­SIMPLE 
matrix assessment of, 169–70
Evaluation of Evidence-­Based Practices in 
Online Learning (US Department of 
Education), 16
Everspring, 25
experience, shared cross-­generationally, 3
experiential education, 95–96, 98, 178
experimentation, perception of, 106
expert blind spot, 25

Index    199
Facebook, 78–79
facilities, enhancement of, 7, 8
faculty: connectivity of, 42; demands on, 12, 
42, 60, 120, 142; fear of, 49; isolation of, 
124, 153, 154; role of, unbundling of, 15, 
22; visibility of, 21–22, 42, 61
failure, 36, 41, 75–76, 88, 129–30, 148
Fairy Tales: Origins and Evolution of Princess 
Stories, 44–70, 165; flow criteria and, 162; 
Kapp analy­sis of, 158–59; ­SIMPLE matrix 
assessment of, 168–70
Fallon, Anne, 105–6
­Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, 
21, 50, 54, 85, 145
fantasy, 39
Farmer’s High School of Pennsylvania, 131
feedback, 40–41; immediate, 21; from 
instructors, 100–101, 103; on narratives, 83
FERPA. See ­Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act
FIRE program. See Freshman Innovation and 
Research Experience
first-­year experience courses, 172. See also 
Freshman Innovation and Research 
Experience
Fitbit activity tracker, 9
Flappy Bird, 3
flipped classroom, 68
flow, 13–14, 157, 161–66; components of, 
38–39; gamification and, 37–38
Fly Teams, 137, 139, 140
for-­profit schools, 5
FourSquare, 9, 48–49, 50
fragile learners, 12, 13, 62, 156, 163, 187; 
engagement of, 25–26; support for, 26. 
See also underrepresented minorities
freedom, academic, 105
Freshman Innovation and Research Experi­
ence (FIRE; UNH), 172–82
gameful design, 35, 42; application of, 17; 
characteristics of, 13, 16–17; democ­
ratization and, 18; ele­ments of, 185–86. 
See also gamification
game mechanics, 34
games: aligning educational content with, 
165; assessment and, 106; ele­ments of, 
defining, 39–40; goals of, 40, 108; as 
instructional tools, 36–38; levels in, 41; 
motivational qualities of, 39; princi­ples of, 
3; in retail, 48; resources for designing, 14, 
36; in social media, 48
game theory, 96–99
gamification, 18, 26, 28, 174; adoption of, 
154–55, 166; authenticity and, 138–41, 
146; balancing pro­cess with, 53; behavioral 
change and, 33, 40–41, 147; bias against, 
127; chunking and, 31–32; class participation 
and, 116; creating interest through, 67–68; 
critical thinking and, 63, 117, 144, 148–49; 
cross-­case analy­sis of, 151, 157–67; defined, 
26, 35, 40; demo­cratizing participation, 116; 
design choices for, 157; disengagement with, 
136; educational, 34; ele­ments of, 53–58, 
87–88, 98, 113–24; engagement and, 27, 61, 
113–14, 127, 138–41, 186; evaluation of, 16, 
98, 157, 166–67; in everyday life, 147; factions 
in, 36; faculty time and, 60–64; fear of, 49; 
feedback and, 40–41; first-­year experience 
and, 172–74; flow and, 37–38, 161–64; grades 
and, 54, 136, 142–43; in the instructional 
design community, 34; introductory courses 
and, 122; in the military, 35; mnemonics 
and, 48, 74; modifying traditional academia, 
62; MOOCs and, 49 (see also massive open 
online courses); motivation and, 122, 156; 
narratives and, 159; parenthood and, 49; 
pedagogy and, 26, 129; per­sis­tence and, 
27, 74, 123–24; prac­ti­tion­ers of, 153–54; 
reaction to, 67–68, 146–47, 154; resources 
for, 50; retained knowledge and, 141; reward 
structures in, 40 (see also rewards); role of, 
124; safe zones with, 75; smartphones and, 
48–50; support for, 105, 165–66, 188; 
technological skill set for, 152–53; user 
enjoyment and, 37–38
Gamification conference, 94–95, 106
Gamification of Higher Education, The (Niman), 
171
Gamification of Learning and Instruction, 
The (Kapp), 157
gaming: in arcades, 3–4; extensions of, 34–35; 
low-­tech, 36; optimism and, 9; social nature 
of, 117

200    Index
gaming theory, 34
Gamson, Z. F., 29
Gates, Bill, 18
Gates (Bill and Melinda) Foundation, 10, 33
Gee, James Paul, 9–10, 12, 35, 36, 38
G8, 135–36
Generation X, as gamers come of age, 2–3
Gonyea, R., 28
Google, hiring at, 6
grade inflation, 142–43
graduation rates, 8. See also completion rates
­grand academic challenge, 174, 175–78
graphic/multimedia support, 23
Greeno, J. G., 35
Gugax, Gary, 112
Hahr, Abigail, 76
hard fun, 38
Harry Potter proxy protocol, 54
Hawtrey, K., 79
Hay Day, 3
Hennessey, John, 52
heroes, role of, students adopting, 77
hero’s journey, 41, 79–83, 85, 86, 89, 152, 
163
Hero with a Thousand ­Faces, The (Campbell), 79
Higgins, C. A., 30
higher education, 5–7; commodification of, 
130
Hulland, J. S., 30
Hunger Games, The (Collins), 84
Hunicke, R., 41
information systems technology, courses for, 
133–34
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (Drucker), 7
Innovative University, The (Christensen), 11
instruction, intrinsically motivated, 39
instructional design, 22–23, 127–28; challenge 
for, 25–26; early focus of, 28; implementa­
tion of, 28; instructor-­provided content and, 
26; student motivation and, 33
Instructional Design Princi­ples for Intrinsic 
Motivation, 39
Instructure, 29
integrated learning, 10
interactive technology, 16
interest, curve of, 41
Interplay, 48
intraocular percussion test, 43
intrinsic motivation, 28, 144, 157
IST Club (Penn State–­Worthington Scranton), 
134
Jobs, Steve, 2, 18
Jobs (dir. Boyle), 2
juicy feedback, 41
Kapp, Karl, 26, 35, 40–41, 69, 75, 157–61, 
187
Kapp analy­sis, 158–60, 163–66
Ke, F., 37
Keller, J. M., 32–33
Key, Francis Scott, 18
Knewton, 32
Kuh, George, 14–15, 28, 29
Kutcher, Ashton, 1, 2
Laytnera, Patrick, 103–4
Leach, Todd, 172
leaderboards, 54, 99–103, 105, 176
League of Extraordinary Gamers Club (Penn 
State–­Worthington Scranton), 134–35
learner at the center, 24
learning: active participation in, 35; compared 
to gaming, 35; Copernican revolution in, 
18–19; failing and, 36
learning analytics, 26, 28, 30, 33–34
learning architects, 23
learning goals, pillars for, 174
learning management systems, 16, 29, 49; 
analytics and, 33; data captured from, 29; 
specialists in, 23
learning styles, 28, 32
learning technology, complexity of, 23
LeBlanc, Paul, 15–16
lecturing, 24, 78
Lepper, M. R., 39
likes, desire for, 21, 75, 88
Litow, L., 54
LMS. See learning management systems
Louisiana State University, 7
low-­threshold technology, 14
Lucas, George, 79, 81

Index    201
macroadaptivity, 32
Malone, T. W., 39
Mas­sa­chu­setts College of Liberal Arts, 111–30, 
152, 158, 160, 162, 164, 165, 170, 187
massive open online courses (MOOCs), 5, 
29, 42; challenges in, 58; decline in, 21; 
completion rates for, 89, 155–56; explosion 
of, 20; gamification and, 49; flow analy­sis 
and, 162; gamification of, 155–56; instructor 
load for, 54–55; lessons from, 21; media 
frenzy and, 52; outcomes of, 58–60; 
potential of, 155–56; reusability and, 52–53; 
scalability of, 60. See also Fairy Tales: Origins 
and Evolution of Princess Stories
mastery, 18
McGonigal, Jane, 9
MCLA. See Mas­sa­chu­setts College of 
Liberal Arts
Meaningful Gaming conference, 146–47
mechanics, 39–40
mentorship, 174–75
Merrill, M. David, 25
microadaptivity, 32
Millennials: apps and, 3, 17–18; feedback and, 
88; storytelling and, 77
Miller, Chris, 72
mnemonics, 48, 74, 83, 88
MOOCs. See massive open online courses
Moreno, R., 31
motivation, 17, 148; cooperation and, 138, 
145–46; gamification and, 156; increasing, 
51; intrinsic, 144, 157; relative position 
and, 75
MS Visio, 142
multiple intelligences, 28
narratives: co-­creation of, 73–75; ele­ments of, 
46, 56–57; Facebook and, 78–79; mnemonic 
value of, 48, 156; role of, 71, 73–74
National Survey of Student Engagement, 29
New Hampshire College of Agriculture and 
the Mechanic Arts, 71
new majority students, access/completion 
challenges for, 10–11
Niantic, 183
Niman, Neil, 6–7, 19, 71, 73–93, 152, 159, 163, 
168–74, 179–82, 185
Nintendo, 183
Nishikado, Tomohiro, 1
noncognitive student characteristics, 28
North Adams (MA) Normal School, 111
Obama, Barack, 8
online curriculum/assessment specialists, 23
online education, 5; access to, 9, 15, 26; 
analytics software for, 28; assessment of, 23, 
28; automated feedback and support in, 15; 
benefits of, 8–9; best practices for, 23–24; 
changes in, 23–25; chunking of, 24, 25; 
cognitive science and, 31; completion rates 
for, 89; design of, 18, 22–23, 27; develop­
ment of, 25–26, 32; early years of, 20–21; 
engagement in, 29, 30; external vendors 
and, 25; faculty presence and, 21–22; 
feedback and, 21; interest in, increasing, 
20–21, 27; pedagogy for, 23–24; read-­post-­
respond discussions, 18; potential for, 
22–23; retention in, 9; staff positions 
supporting, 22; URMs in, 11–12
Online Learning Consortium International 
Conference, 132
oracles, 126
Oral Roberts University, 9
overindexing, 3
Paas, F., 31
Papert, S., 38
participation-­incentive system, 115–16
Paul (Peter T.) College of Business and 
Economics (UNH), 172–82
peer advisors, 174, 179
peer grading, 120
peer interaction, 83, 85, 88, 95, 101, 103, 165
peer pressure, 11, 54, 66, 145
Penn State College, 131
Pennsylvania State University, The (Penn 
State)–­Worthington Scranton Campus, 
131–49, 158, 160, 162, 165, 170–71
per­sis­tence, gamification and, 27, 74, 123–24
personalization, 113–14
Petruzella, Gerol, 111–30, 154, 164, 169, 170
PHIL 100: A First Course in Philosophy. See 
Dungeons and Discourse
philosophy, gamification of, 112–30

202    Index
play, in classrooms, 15
Plowman, Lydia, 71
plug-­and-­play technologies, 14
Pokémon Com­pany, 183
Pokémon Go, 183–85
Pong, 2
post-­traditional learners, 26–27
Post-­Traditional Learners and the Transformation 
of Postsecondary Education (Soares), 26
Prahalad, C. K., 77, 84
predictive analytics, 148–49
Prensky, M., 34, 38
production specialists, 23
professional development courses, 104
Pumroy, D. K., 54
quests, 114–15. See also hero’s journey
Ramaswamy, V., 77, 84
Ready Player One (Cline), 51
Real­ity Is Broken (McGonigal), 9
Reddit, 120
Reid-­Selth, Bradley, 51
relatedness, 18
relative position, 75
replays, 41
repurposing, 52
Res­nick, L. B., 35
retention, 14–15
reusability, 52
rewards, 40, 45, 115–16, 120, 123, 125, 
140–41, 176–77
Rigby, C. Scott, 18
Robinett, Warren, 51
role-­playing games, development of, 133
Roma-­Lyons group, 135–36
Roska, J., 4
Rutherford, LeAnne H., 16
Savitz, E., 78–79
scaling, 6, 8, 15, 20, 21, 25, 42, 47–48, 60, 
119–20
scenario grading, 152
Schell, Jesse, 27, 34, 39, 40, 41, 75
SCL. See student-­centered learning
security and risk analy­sis, 133–34. See also 
Threat of Terrorism and Crime
self-­efficacy, 30–31
Seven Princi­ples for Good Practice in Under­
graduate Education (Chickering and 
Gamson), 29
Siemens, G., 33
­SIMPLE matrix, 167–70, 183–84, 187
simulations, resources for designing, 14
Skinner, B. F., 22
Soares, Louise, 26
social interaction, 83
social media, 9
social network analy­sis, 140, 142
social support, 88
Song, S. H., 32–33
Southern New Hampshire University, 
15–16, 22
Space Avenger, 13
Space Invaders, 1, 13, 16–17, 183
spotlight awards, 104
SRA 211. See Threat of Terrorism and Crime
Stanley, Nate, 115–16, 121, 123
Staples, D. S., 30
Star Wars (dir. Lucas), 1, 2, 132
STEM fields, 11
Stewart, Mark, 99
student-­centered learning, 24, 84
storytelling, 40–41, 46, 73, 76–77
students: classroom personas and, 87; 
engagement of (see engagement)
student ser­vices, 13
­Sullivan, Teresa, 5
sustainability, 72–73
Sweller, J., 31
Taito Corporation, 1
teamwork, importance of, 117–18. See also 
cooperation
Tedford, J., 78–79
tele­vi­sion, viewers’ control of, 18
textbooks, moving away from, 115
Thompson, Benjamin, 72
Threat of Terrorism and Crime (SRA 211; Penn 
State–­Worthington Scranton), 133–49, 
158, 165; flow criteria and, 162, 164; Kapp 
analy­sis of, 160; ­SIMPLE matrix assessment 
of, 169, 170
time, as gamification ele­ment, 40

Index    203
time-­on-­task, 14, 16, 27, 28–29
Trudeau, Jennifer, 73–75, 79, 84, 89–90
underrepresented minorities, 10–13, 112–13. 
See also fragile learners
University of New Hampshire (UNH), 71–79, 
86–89, 93, 152, 156, 158, 160, 162, 163, 165, 
171–74, 185, 187. See also Paul College
University of South Florida, 44–47, 52–53, 
64–69, 152, 154, 155, 158, 162, 165
University of ­Virginia, 5
University of Waterloo, 94–110, 152, 155, 158, 
162–65, 170
URMs. See underrepresented minorities
USF. See University of South Florida
UW. See University of Waterloo
Van Merriënboer, J., 31
video games: learning theory in, 9–10; 
princi­ples of, 45–46; teaching techniques 
and, 12
Video Whizball, 51
Virga, Samantha-­Jo, 86
Vogler, Christopher, 41, 79
Walstad, W. B., 78
war games, 35
Waterloo Professional Development, 95–96, 
107–10. See also Ethical Decision Making
WatPD. See Ethical Decision Making; Waterloo 
Professional Development
wearables, 9
Wellman, Jane, 7
Western Governors University (UT), 22
What Video Games Have to Teach Us about 
Learning and Literacy (Gee), 9–10
Wolfe, J., 37
WordPress, 86, 92–93
workforce retraining, 157
working memory, capacity of, 31
World of Warcraft, 36
Wozniak, Steve, 2
writing skills, 4, 75, 83, 88, 90–92, 136, 180
Yee, Kevin, 44–70, 155, 156, 158–59, 162, 
168–70
Zichermann, Gabe, 34
Zuckerberg, Mark, 18

