parrhesia 31 · 2019

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 1-16
gaston bachelard and 
contemporary philosophy
massimiliano simons, jonas rutgeerts, 
anneleen masschelein and paul 
cortois1
There are philosophers whose name sounds familiar, but who very few people 
know in more than a vague sense. And there are philosophers whose footprints 
are all over the recent history of philosophy, but who themselves have retreated 
somewhat in the background. Gaston Bachelard (1884-1962) is a bit of both. With-
out doubt, he was one of the most prominent French philosophers in the first half 
of the 20th century, who wrote over twenty books, covering domains as diverse 
as philosophy of science, poetry, art and metaphysics. His ideas profoundly influ-
enced a wide array of authors including Georges Canguilhem, Gilbert Simondon, 
Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, Bruno Latour and Pierre Bourdieu. Up until the 
1980s, Bachelard’s work was widely read by philosophers, scientists, literary theo-
rists, artists, and even wider audiences and in his public appearances he incar-
nated one of the most iconic and fascinating icons of a philosopher. 
And yet, surprisingly, in recent years the interest in Bachelard’s theoretical oeuvre 
seems to have somewhat waned. Apart from some recent attempts to revive his 
thinking, the philosopher’s oeuvre is rarely discussed outside specialist circles, 
often only available for those able to read French.2 In contemporary Anglo-Saxon 
philosophy the legacy of Bachelard seems to consist mainly in his widely known 
book Poetics of Space. While some of Bachelard’s contemporaries, like Georges 
Canguilhem or Gilbert Simondon (see Parrhesia, issue 7), who were profoundly 
influenced by Bachelard, have been rediscovered, the same has not happened for 

2 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
Bachelard’s philosophical oeuvre. 
This special issue aims to redress the balance and to open up his work beyond a 
small in-crowd of experts and aficionado’s in France. It aims to stimulate the dis-
covery of new and understudied aspects of Bachelard’s work, including aspects of 
the intellectual milieu he was working in. Fortunately, for this purpose we were 
able to rely both on renowned Bachelard specialists, such as Hans-Jörg Rheinberg-
er, Cristina Chimisso and Dominique Lecourt, as well as on a number of younger 
scholars who are discovering their work in a different intellectual context. At the 
same time we also want to reassess the value of this oeuvre, which also entails 
examining the reasons and causes of the relative neglect of Bachelard’s work in 
recent times. Has it exhausted its possibilities? Does it have intrinsic limitations 
that have contributed to the eclipse, as some influential, mainly French, philoso-
phers have more or less explicitly suggested?3 
Thus we want to open a discussion about the legacy of Bachelard’s colourful and 
multifaceted philosophy, not in order to idolize it, but to rethink the potential 
relevance of his work for contemporary debates. For while—as with every inter-
esting philosophical oeuvre—there may be good reasons to critically reconsider 
Bachelard’s thinking, there are no good reasons, we claim, to forget about Bach-
elard. He remains one of the most fascinating and productive figures of twentieth 
century thought. Throughout his oeuvre Bachelard has launched provocative and 
novel ideas on the then newest scientific developments as well as on the elements 
and dynamics of the poetic imagination, and he addressed important metaphysi-
cal subjects such as the philosophy of time. He gave us concepts such as phéno-
ménotechique, surrationalisme, rhythmanalyse, métapoétique, rupture épistémologique, 
intermatérialisme, or obstacle épistémologique.
To open this debate we have chosen for a twofold approach. On the one hand it 
traces the manifold afterlives of concepts coined by Bachelard to uncover how 
his theoretical oeuvre still (explicitly or implicitly) permeates contemporary de-
bates. On the other hand, we revisit concepts and theoretical constellations of 
Bachelardian origin that have disappeared in the folds of history to see whether 
and how these concepts could help us rethink contemporary debates in philoso-
phy, science and technology studies, literature theory and cultural studies. Such 
a twofold approach will allow us both to assess in what way Bachelard’s thought 
can still be relevant today but also what must be taken into account if one wants 
to understand what is at stake in contemporary French philosophy. 

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 3 
THE LIFE AND WORK OF BACHELARD
A superficial look at his biography already makes clear that Bachelard never fol-
lowed standard trajectories. Born on 27 June 1884 in Bar-sur-Aube, at the border 
between Champagne and Burgundy, he starts his career as a postmaster in his 
hometown. He performs his military service in telegraphy. This job also brings 
him to Paris in 1907. At the same time, he starts studying mathematics and natural 
science. Just before his mobilization for the First World War, he marries Jeanne 
Rossi, a teacher from his hometown. Bachelard stays for more than four years at 
the war front. His young wife will die shortly after the war, leaving him a daughter, 
Suzanne Bachelard. A less well-known fact is that in the fifties and until the eight-
ies, Suzanne Bachelard would also become an important philosopher and episte-
mologist in her own right, working at the interface of philosophy of science and 
phenomenology. From the twenties on, the Bachelards will always be together, 
discussing and influencing each other’s ideas, dividing their time between Paris 
and Burgundy.
In the years after the Great War, Bachelard teaches physics and chemistry in Bar-
sur-Aube. Simultaneously, however, he debarks on a study of philosophy, result-
ing in his agrégation in 1922 and his doctorate in 1927 (thèses supervised by Abel 
Rey and Léon Brunschvicg). Shortly afterwards, aged 46, he takes up a position at 
the university of Dijon.
Bachelard’s early work is mainly situated within the philosophy of science, and 
focuses on physics and chemistry. He is especially interested in the recent con-
ceptual revolutions in 20th century physics, relativity and quantum mechanics, 
and their consequences for science’s epistemology (épistémologie, in the French 
sense of the term).4 Apart from detailed studies of specific phases of the history 
of science, or the early phases of thermodynamics, his most famous books writ-
ten in the thirties are Le Nouvel esprit scientifique (1932) and La Formation de l’esprit 
scientifique (1938). Already in the former it becomes clear that Bachelard’s take 
on epistemology is not a standard one. Notwithstanding the fact that he clearly 
knows his classics,5 Bachelard introduces new elements and a new style in the 
philosophy of science from the start.
Already in Le Nouvel esprit scientifique, for instance, Bachelard denies the classic 
division of labor and territories between philosophy and the human and cultural 
sciences with respect to the study of knowledge and science. This denial is not 

4 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
just a theoretical principle, but influences the way he proceeds, exemplified in 
the exposition of his cases. Bachelard was not the first to blend the history and 
the philosophy of science, with a little help from the young sciences of man, in 
fact he may have been inspired in this by his supervisor Brunschvicg. But the way 
in which the psychology and pedagogy of science intervene in Bachelard’s philo-
sophical texts about science, is undeniably inspired by Bachelard’s experiences 
of teaching science to lycéens and makes it very concrete and productive. What 
is at stake is the mindset of the pupil of science, including all the pre-reflexive 
elements, the ‘pre-judgements’ that are present in it, and that set obstacles for 
a real understanding of physical and chemical phenomena. Breaking away from 
transmitted intuitions about a phenomenon, it has to be understood, i.e. to be 
captured in the net of new and rigorous concepts. Phenomena, moreover, have to 
be produced, and this is what happens in an experiment that is foremost a tech-
nical manipulation intervening in nature, creating effects—a phénoménotechnique 
rather than a phenomenology.
In the 1938 book, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, the notion of ‘epistemologi-
cal obstacle’ becomes the focus of Bachelard’s attention. Bachelard embarks on 
a new approach to epistemology that encompasses a ‘psychoanalysis of objec-
tive knowledge’ directed towards the description of the imaginary resistances and 
fixations that stand in the way of the desired real knowledge of the phenomenon 
that intrigued us in the first place. Images that occupy the mind are such obsta-
cles. For instance, the image that impels us to see the essence of the phenomenon 
in terms of substances—the element of fire as the substance of heat that is later on 
in late eighteenth century French chemistry replaced by the fluid called caloric—
or the animist image of an organism as directed by an entelecheia. Prejudices like 
these are also associated with such obstacles, such as the belief that general philo-
sophical knowledge should be more fundamental than specialized inquiry, or with 
verbal obstacles, like seeing a word as the expression of an essence, as in Molière’s 
famous parody of the virtus dormitiva of opium. In When memory flows into reason 
the notion of an epistemological obstacle is revisited by Jan Maršálek in order to 
stress the relevance of the distinction between an epistemological obstacle in the 
transition of prescience to science, and a similar but distinct type of obstacle that 
emerges in mature scientific fields.
The aims and tasks now ascribed to epistemology are twofold: on the one hand an-
alyzing obstacles retarding the development of objective knowledge; on the other, 
showing how the dialectic, even polemical work of rationality—the application of 

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 5 
rigorous concepts and technical manipulations of phenomena in experiments for 
instance—counteracts against the forces of the imaginary. This results in a new 
kind of open and dynamic rationalist view, devoid of any desire to settle down in a 
philosophical system. Science should not be patronized by philosophical a prioris. 
But Bachelard does not just advocate a ‘purification’ of scientific knowledge from 
all pre-scientific practices, denouncing for instance how the persistent temp-
tation for the primal alchemistic intuition impedes the birth of real chemistry. 
While denouncing substantialist and other images as false origins of knowledge, 
Bachelard at the same time calls for a study of the imaginary reality of the natural 
‘elements’ in their own right. In this view, the four elements of the first so-called 
philosophies of nature are the basic ingredients for an imaginative conception of 
the material universe. Bachelard does not connect these elements to nature itself, 
but to nature as it is imagined and experienced in literary texts invoking natural 
phenomena, or in daydreams. Which is to say the elements are elements of poetic 
imagination, that also must be studied independently. The ‘discovery’ of these 
elements through a kind of epistemic ‘psychoanalysis’ is not only an occasion for 
the rationalist’s verdict on the obstacles, but also a starting point for a specific 
study of the imagination, that will take shape in a second series of works in a new 
genre, the poetics of the imagination. Each of these well-known monographs cir-
cle around special clusters of images and metaphors, gathered from Bachelard’s 
readings of poets and novelists who are drawn to peculiar elements as machines 
that produce specific types of metaphors. The volume on fire, Psychanalyse du feu, 
1938 is almost a companion volume to La Formation, others are devoted to air, wa-
ter, and earth. Apart from the elements, Bachelard also studies imaginary objects 
as small and imperceptible as a candlelight (La flamme d’une chandelle, 1961) and 
as pervasive as space (La Poétique de l’espace, 1957), and phenomena ranging from 
work (travail), to dream (rêve, reverie), the will (La Terre et les rêveries de la volonté, 
1948) and rest (La Terre et les rêveries du repos, 1946).
In the early thirties Bachelard also wrote two intriguing books that can be situated 
in between his epistemological and poetical works: L’intuition de l’instant (1932) 
and La dialectique de la durée (1936). Here he advances the intriguing thesis that 
time is constructed out of singular instants: if anything deserves to be called real 
and immediate, it is the instant. The temporal continuum is only a temporal con-
struction, an assemblage of instants that are strung together. This is a complete 
reversal of the, at the time, immensely popular Bergsonian philosophy of dura-
tion, where the instantaneous moment was considered as a secondary construc-
tion (and a spatialized fixation, for that matter, linked to clock time) abstracted 

6 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
from the only reality, the continuous flow of duration. 
At the beginning of the Second World War, in 1940, Bachelard receives a profes-
sorship at the Sorbonne in the history and philosophy of science, as the succes-
sor of Abel Rey.6 During the war, Bachelard also takes up Rey’s presidency of the 
Institut d’histoire des sciences et des techniques in Paris (later called Institut d’histoire 
et de philosophie des sciences et des techniques, currently a CNRS group within the 
framework of Paris-I). At the same time, he is increasingly well-known for his se-
ries of books on poetics. While this may add up to a somewhat strange public im-
age, there is no chronological break between the poetical and the epistemological 
Bachelard. He continues to write three more works on the philosophy of science: 
Le rationalisme appliqué (1949), L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine 
(1951), and Le matérialisme rationnel (1953) along with his work on poetics. Evi-
dently, Bachelard’s firm belief that poetic imagination should be separated from 
scientific thought did not refrain him from working in both fields, never ceasing 
to express his unrestricted admiration for his two types of heroes: the scientist 
and the poet. 
Eventually, Bachelard retires in 1954, with Georges Canguilhem as his successor 
at the Sorbonne as well as at the Institut d’histoire et de philosophie des sciences et 
des techniques.7 In 1955, Bachelard is elected as a member of the Académie des sci-
ences morales et politiques and he continued writing until his death on 16 October 
1962 in Paris. Among his latest works is La Poétique de l’espace (1957), a book that, 
possibly under the influence also of his daughter, brought him closer to phenom-
enology. This book would make him posthumously famous outside the French-
speaking world. At the end of his life, he was also working on a complete revision 
of the very first of his ‘psychoanalytic files,’ the one on fire. Suzanne Bachelard 
posthumously edited these reflections in Fragments d’une poétique du feu (1988), 
about, among other things, resurrection and the figure of the phoenix, a forgotten 
mythical persona rising from the ashes of oblivion—who symbolizes our current 
undertaking…
THE FRENCH RECEPTION OF BACHELARD’S WORK
To fully grasp the importance of Bachelard’s oeuvre, its reception both in France 
and abroad must be taken into account. Although he was very productive since 
the end of the 1920s, the first more substantial reception of his work occurs after 
the Second World War. Apart from occasional brief mentions and references, the 

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 7 
first real articles on his work would only date from the 1950s, for instance by Jean 
Hyppolite or in Bachelard’s liber amicorum, published in 1957.8 Of course, this does 
not mean that his work went unnoticed before: Bachelard was very present and 
well-known among his colleagues, students and friends—presumably too present 
to already become an object of study. And, despite the fact that Paris was more in-
clined towards existentialism in those years, his classes were massively attended, 
by students, scientists and artists. 
It is evident that the initial interest for Bachelard in France was divided between 
his epistemology and his work on imagination. In the 1960s there were major pub-
lications on Bachelard’s views of the imaginary and rêverie.9 Many of these publi-
cations are linked with the French New Criticism or nouvelle critique, with authors 
such as Roland Barthes, who saw Bachelard as one of their main inspirations. At 
the same time Bachelard’s writings on historical epistemology and philosophy of 
science were picked up by a new generation of philosophers and scientists. Au-
thors such as Georges Canguilhem or François Dagognet wrote early studies on 
his philosophy of science.10 Similarly, many of his epistemological concepts played 
a role in the work of Alexandre Koyré, Jean-Toussaint Desanti or Michel Foucault. 
Foucault, for example, famously placed Bachelard on “the line that separates a 
philosophy of experience, of sense, and of subject and a philosophy of knowledge, 
of rationality and of concept” where “one network is that of Sartre and Merleau-
Ponty” while the other is “that of Cavaillès, Bachelard and Canguilhem.”11
Considering the case of Foucault already makes clear that Bachelard’s influence 
is not limited to thought about the natural sciences, but that his work proved 
to be a productive philosophy for the social sciences as well. This is also clear 
in the work of Gilles-Gaston Granger, student of Bachelard and Cavaillès, who 
applied insights from Bachelard, combined with structuralism and analytic phi-
losophy, to the philosophy of the social sciences.12 But equally unexplored is Bach-
elard’s legacy in fields like sociology, through the work of authors such as Georges 
Gurvitch and Pierre Bourdieu. The latter’s ‘handbook’ for sociology, has, for in-
stance, been described as “almost exclusively built on Bachelard’s philosophy of 
science.”13 Although Bruno Latour himself expressed it as criticism of Bourdieu’s 
work, this remark does not seem unwarranted. Latour is part of a new generation 
of Francophone philosophers of science that critically revisit Bachelard’s work. 
This is especially true for Michel Serres, one of Latour’s main sources of inspira-
tion. Serres started out as a master student of Bachelard, but became very critical 
from the 1970s onwards. A good example of his critique can be found in the text 

8 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
The Reformation and the Seven Sins (“La Réforme et les sept péchés”), for the first time 
translated in this special issue, in which Serres critiques his former tutor’s wish 
to subject epistemic practices to a thorough purification before they could aspire 
to be conceived of as science. Similar criticisms and attitudes can be found in the 
work of Latour and Isabelle Stengers.
Bachelard’s work was also mobilized in a somewhat surprising context: Marxism. 
Louis Althusser, the new rising star of the left and a student of Bachelard, used 
Bachelard’s ideas to support his radically new view on Marx’s oeuvre, claiming 
that there exists a fundamental divide between the early humanist writings of 
Marx and his later ‘scientific’ work. To define this divide, Althusser invoked a no-
tion from Bachelard’s work: the epistemological break (coupure épistémologique). 
Although Bachelard himself never used the notion of ‘break’ (coupure) and only 
rarely that of ‘rupture,’ the term suddenly came to be conceived of as one of the 
philosopher’s main concepts.14 Many authors have, based on more or less the same 
‘argument’ (but not for the same reasons) considered Bachelard as a Kuhnian-
avant-la-lettre: this observation already suffices to seriously question the signifi-
cance of analogies of the kind.15 It is a fact that at least two types of discontinuities 
play an important role in Bachelard’s own epistemology: the ‘synchronic’ discon-
tinuity between science and common sense (or primary intuitions), and the ‘dia-
chronic’ discontinuity separating prescientific phases of a field of epistemic activ-
ity from the scientific stage (from which, in turn, a ‘new scientific mindset’ would 
eventually emerge). In his contribution about the relation between Bachelard and 
Althusser, David Maruzzella argues that although the early Althusser was inspired 
by Bachelard, his philosophy paradoxically became more truly Bachelardian in his 
later work, when he breaks with his earlier epistemological ambitions in order to 
pursue a more political project.
In the 1960s and 70s, the work of Bachelard was thus suddenly drawn into the 
center of the philosophical debates in France, including the larger discussion on 
Marxism and Structuralism.16 Althusser took up a leading role in the develop-
ment of a scientific reformulation and regeneration of Marxism by proposing that 
Marxism become Structuralism, in the hope that, this way, Structuralism would 
become Marxism. Other students of Althusser soon took up the notion of coupure, 
and/or rupture attributed to Bachelard.17 One of those students was Dominique 
Lecourt, who wrote his doctoral thesis L’epistemologie historique de Gaston Bach-
elard under the supervision of Canguilhem, The companion volume Bachelard ou 
Le jour et la nuit would define the way Bachelard has been read in the 70s and 

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 9 
the 80s as a crypto-Marxists thinker.18 In “Anti-Bachelardianism in Contempo-
rary French Philosophy” Lecourt himself historically contextualizes and critically 
reflects on this kind of once dominant reading of Bachelard, and argues that the 
time has come to develop a more complex understanding of the latter’s signifi-
cance. Lecourt’s writings have also played an important role in the strict divi-
sion of Bachelard’s thinking into epistemological work, or ‘Bachelard of the day,’ 
and his writing on poetical imagination, the ‘Bachelard of the night.’19 As a result, 
many authors who have taken up Bachelard’s work focus only on half of his work, 
ignoring the other part. 
In recent years, however, we can witness a countermovement in France. A range 
of authors has refused to reduce Bachelard to either an epistemologist or an aes-
thetic theorist highlighting instead the metaphysical and philosophical theories 
that fuel his thinking in both domains. This has been one of the main merits of the 
work of Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, linked with the International Gaston Bach-
elard Association (Association Internationale Gaston Bachelard, A.I.G.B), founded 
in 1984.20 From 1998 onwards, the association has also been publishing a range 
of Cahiers Gaston Bachelard, dealing with specific topics ranging from Bachelard’s 
relation to German philosophy, to the influence of psychoanalysis on his work. 
One of the most productive discussions in this context has been a revived interest 
in Bachelard’s metaphysically oriented works, such as L’intuition de l’instant and 
Dialectique de la durée. Bachelard’s philosophy of time influences both his subse-
quent writings on epistemology and on imagination. Entering into a polemical 
debate with the work of Henri Bergson, Bachelard develops a time that is dialec-
tical and discontinuous. The fierceness of his tone, however, raises questions to 
what extent his own work is indebted to Bergson.21 In “Towards an Interdisci-
plinary Anthropology?” Johannes D.M. Schick focuses on the similarities in the 
thinking of Bachelard and Bergson, and Georges Simondon as a figure who allows 
for an escape from the theoretical deadlock between the two contemporaries. In 
“Becoming Rhythm,” Jonas Rutgeerts proposes a more nuanced understanding of 
the polemical discussion between Bergson and Bachelard by exploring the impor-
tance of the notion of rhythm in both philosophical systems.
Another of Bachelard’s notions that blurs the distinction between science and 
art—day and night—is surrationalism. Bachelard launched the term in a text of 
1936, and it pops up in later texts, such as in his Philosophie du non (1940). Next 
to its obvious reference to surrealism (a movement Bachelard had frequented for 
some years), the term is also closely linked to Bachelard’s idea of an ‘open ratio-

10 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
nalism.’ In Bachelard’s view, the rationality of science is a dynamic and open one, 
operating in the modus of a permanent rectification of concepts and theories. 
Such a dynamic openness can be found both in his work on science and in that of 
poetics. The thesis has been taken up again in a recent book by Zbigniew Kotowicz, 
who argues that for Bachelard philosophy “is not the business of contemplating 
reality but of surpassing it.”22 Kotowicz also provides an English translation of the 
text on surrationalism as an appendix to his first chapter. Massimiliano Simons’ 
text “Surrationalism after Bachelard” takes up this notion in order to re-read the 
relation between Bachelard and Michel Serres, with a focus on the latter’s early 
project of writing about the nouveau nouvel esprit scientifique, an attempt to update 
Bachelard through new scientific findings in information theory and molecular 
biology Through this attempted update Serres would come to one of his later 
criticisms of Bachelard. Simons shows that, despite Serres’ self-proclaimed turn 
away from Bachelard, there are still significant parallels between Serres and his 
predecessor.
 
THE ANGLO-SAXON RECEPTION OF HIS WORK
The reception of Bachelard’s work abroad, especially in the Anglo-Saxon context 
is probably even more capricious than the French one.23 Bachelard himself has 
hardly published anything in English, except for a text in a Festschrift for Albert 
Einstein.24 The Anglo-Saxon world therefore had to rely on secondary works and 
translations, both profoundly coloring its reception. 
One of the elements that heavily influenced the Bachelard reception in the Anglo-
Saxon world is the fact that, while all the major works on poetics and imagination 
have been translated early on, Bachelard’s epistemological works have only slowly 
and selectively found their way to Anglophone audiences.25 The first translations 
of The Poetics of Space and The Psychoanalysis of Fire (both in 1964) were followed 
by The Philosophy of No, dealing with epistemology, in 1968. In 1981, inspired by its 
director Joanne H. Stroud, the Dallas Institute of Humanities and Culture con-
tracted a project with the editor José Corti to translate all of Bachelard’s books 
on the imagination. This resulted in eight additional translations, such as Air and 
Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement (1988), The Flame of a Candle 
(1989) and The Right to Dream (1990). During this period, no epistemological 
works were translated, except for The New Scientific Spirit, appearing in 1988. 

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 11 
Only more recently, a few new translations have been published, such as The For-
mation of the Scientific Mind (2002), Intuition of the Instant (2013), and Dialectic 
of Duration (2018).26 However, several of Bachelard’s major books in philosophy 
of science are to this date not yet available for international audiences. In the 
Anglo-Saxon context, this situation has contributed to an image of his work as 
only or largely dealing with imagination and literature. Taking at least a small 
step to overcome this lacuna, this special issue includes the translation of the 
first chapter of Intuitions Atomistiques (1933): “The Metaphysics of Dust” in which 
Bachelard analyses the various shapes of dust and their relation to a philosophy of 
atomism. Written in 1933, in between L’Intuition de l’instant and La Dialectique de la 
durée, Bachelard’s essay on atomism can be seen as one of his first ventures into 
metaphysics. At the same time, however, it also prefigures Bachelard’s passion for 
poetic imagery. Despite the fact that Bachelard condemns the “traditional prin-
ciples of atomism” for being essentialist, i.e. ascribing essential characteristics to 
the atoms, and advocates to replace this essentialist vision with a mathematical 
one, in which the atoms derive their properties from their constellation, “The 
Metaphysics of Dust” still displays a great interest in all those traditional versions 
of atomism. Rather than simply brushing over obsolete ideas, Bachelard describes 
the image of dust in great detail. Here, we can already witness the germs of his 
fascination for the ‘natural elements’ to which he will devotes several books. 
In the Anglo-Saxon secondary literature, a second bias can be pointed at. It has, 
for instance, been proven crucial that one of the first books on Bachelard available 
in English was precisely a translation of the work of Dominique Lecourt.27 To-
gether with early translations of Althusser’s own work, such as For Marx (in 1969) 
and Reading Capital (in 1970), Lecourt’s book has contributed the incorrect view 
that Bachelard himself was a Marxist-inspired philosopher of science and even led 
some to claim that Bachelard’s work aimed to “portray scientists as a proletariat 
exploited by bourgeois philosophers who held them accountable to standards not 
of their own making.”28
A similar bias exists within the field of Science and Technology Studies (STS), due 
to the fact that many of Latour’s books were available in English long before those 
of Bachelard. In Laboratory Life (1979), written together with Steve Woolgar, La-
tour introduces the notion of phénoménotechnique to argue that within scientific 
practices it “is not simply that phenomena depend on certain material instrumen-
tation; rather, the phenomena are thoroughly constituted by the material setting 
of the laboratory.”29 According to some, the result was an incorrect “association, 

12 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
made by social constructivists, between phenomenotechnique and their own 
claims concerning the socially determined character of scientific practices.”30 In 
“Gaston Bachelard’s Philosophy of Science: Between Project and Practice” Bas de 
Boer looks at contemporary debates into science studies through the lens of phe-
nomenotechnique. With Bachelard, de Boer stresses that science is neither com-
pletely ahistorical and rational, nor completely situated and constructed. Rather, 
science is the particular execution of a universal project.31
In light of this, Bachelard’s work has been taken up by a range of scholars under 
the banner of ‘historical epistemology,’ for instance in the work of Ian Hacking or 
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger.32 The notion of phenomenotechnique is one of the cen-
tral Bachelardian concepts in this tradition and demonstrates an interesting ten-
sion between historical epistemologists and STS. Whereas the first group tends to 
be positive about Bachelard, the second has become quite critical, although both 
groups do not necessarily diverge substantially about the positions they defend. 
Thus it remains an open question to what extent there is an actual conflict be-
tween Bachelard and fields such as ‘science studies’ or to what extent they could 
enrich one another.33
Within STS, however, the notion of phenomenotechnique has also been linked to 
another concept, that of ‘technoscience,’ often falsely attributed to Bachelard.34 
The concept of ‘technoscience’ itself was originally coined by Gilbert Hottois in 
the 1970s, but was later popularized by authors such as Jean-François Lyotard 
and Latour, both partly inspired by Bachelard.35 Technoscience refers to how sci-
ence is always linked with applications and with broader societal goals, such as 
efficiency and performativity. Bachelard himself never used the concept, but it 
approximates some of his ideas related to phenomenotechnique and his ‘applied 
rationalism.’ On the one hand, the role of concepts and theories within the con-
temporary sciences is highlighted, on the other hand, concepts and theories can 
no longer be clearly demarcated from technical applications and conditions. 
In “The new axiomatic method: Bachelard on the meaning and deformation of 
concepts,” Boris Demarest stresses that one must be weary of all-too facile equa-
tions such as of phenomenotechnique with technoscience. Instead, Demarest ar-
gues that for Bachelard phenomenotechnique must be linked first of all to con-
cept formation, which must be understood in connection with David Hilbert’s 
axiomatic method. For Demarest, contemporary re-readings of notions such as 
phenomenotechnique ought to be subjected to a substantial dose of skepticism.

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 13 
WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM BACHELARD TODAY?
Given this state of the art, numerous questions can be raised about the influenc-
es, interactions and relations of Bachelard and his contemporaries, subsequent 
generations, and broader scientific and cultural developments. As with Bergson, 
one may wonder how Bachelard’s philosophy relates to classic authors such as 
Descartes, Spinoza, Hegel or Nietzsche, all of whom seem to play a role in Bach-
elard’s work and are occasionally referred to by him. Similar questions can be 
raised about interactions with his contemporaries and immediate predecessors 
or successors, such as Léon Brunschvicg, Emile Meyerson, Jean Cavaillès, Ferdi-
nand Gonseth or Hélène Metzger. And how to estimate Bachelard’s use of then 
recent scientific domains such as quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity? 
His ‘new scientific spirit’ was nothing else than an attempt to grasp the novelty 
of these new sciences. But how to map his interpretation of these novel sciences 
among the many possible (and actual) interpretations that have been given? What 
about his comments on the scientific and philosophical views of, for example, 
Einstein or Louis de Broglie? What about his views on earlier phases of sciences, 
e.g. on sciences that already took their great leap forward before the advent of the 
so-called new scientific spirit? Chemistry, for instance, was crucial in the educa-
tion of Bachelard and many of his contemporaries, such as Meyerson, Metzger 
and Duhem, or more recently, François Dagognet, Isabelle Stengers and Berna-
dette Bensaude-Vincent.36
Then again, this is not a plea to just shift the focus back to the context of epis-
temology: similar questions must be asked about Bachelard’s attitude towards 
psychoanalysis, existentialism or phenomenology. It is important even to look 
beyond the field of philosophy proper, and review Bachelard’s relations with art-
ists and scientist. In his article, Rheinberger attempts to analyze one of those 
‘external relations,’ as he explores the fruitful collaboration between the French 
philosopher and the relatively unknown engraver Albert Flocon. This will hope-
fully stimulate a contemporary audience to not only consider Bachelard’s ‘new 
scientific spirit’ in relation to the cultural, philosophical and scientific develop-
ments of his own time, but also in relation to the sciences and cultures as they are 
happening, in our time and into the future. 

14 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
NOTES
1. This special issue and several of its contributions result from a bilingual conference entitled 
‘Bachelard Today/Bachelard Aujourd’hui: Gaston Bachelard and Contemporary Philosophy,’ held 
at the Institute of Philosophy (Hoger Instituut voor Wijsbegeerte, HIW) at the KU Leuven, Bel-
gium at 24 and 25 April 2017. The contributors were Francesco Carpanini (University of Bolo-
gna), Cristina Chimisso (Open University), Paul Cortois (KU Leuven), Bas De Boer (University 
of Twente), Boris Demarest (University of Amsterdam), Lucie Fabry (ENS), Gilles Hieronimus 
(Université de Lyon III), Julien Lamy (Université de Lyon III), Jan Maršálek (Institute of Philoso-
phy of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic), David Maruzzella (DePaul University), 
Julien Pieron (Université de Liège), Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (Max Planck Institute for the History 
of Science), Jonas Rutgeerts (KU Leuven), Ilaria Salonna (University of Warsaw), Johannes Schick 
(a.r.t.e.s. Graduate School for the Humanities Cologne), Massimiliano Simons (KU Leuven) and 
David Webb (Staffordshire University). An additional word of thanks goes to Florence Caeymaex 
(Université de Liège), Jens De Vleminck (University of Ghent), Darian Meacham (Maastricht 
University), Jonathan Sholl (Aarhus University), Getrudis Van de Vijver (University of Ghent), 
Maarten Van Dyck (University of Ghent) and Hanna Vandenbussche (KU Leuven) for contribut-
ing to the organization of the conference. Finally, we wish to thank the Institute of Philosophy, KU 
Leuven and the Flanders Research Foundations (FWO) for their financial support.
2. See for example, Cristina Chimisso, Gaston Bachelard: Critic of science and the imagination. Lon-
don: Routledge, 2001; Zbigniew Kotowicz, Gaston Bachelard: A Philosophy of the Surreal. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2016; Roch Smith, Gaston Bachelard, Revised and Updated: Philosopher 
of Science and Imagination. SUNY Press, 2016; Eileen Rizo-Patron, Edward S. Casey, Jason M. Wirth 
(eds.), Adventures in Phenomenology: Gaston Bachelard, New York: SUNY, 2017; Miles Kennedy, 
Home: A Bachelerdian Concrete Metaphysics, Oxford: Peter Lang, 2011.
3. See Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press, 
1993; Michel Serres and Bruno Latour, Conversations on science, culture and time. Ann Arbor: Michi-
gan university press, 1995.
4. I.e., as ‘history and philosophy of [the] science[s],’ rather than as a general theory of knowl-
edge.
5. One specific ‘classic’ that has a major influence on Bachelard’s work was his teacher Léon 
Brunschvicg (1869-1945). Recently scholars seem to come to agree that Bachelard was much 
more influenced by his master than was earlier thought, See e.g. Cristina Chimisso, “From phe-
nomenology to phenomenotechnique” in Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci 39(2008), p. 384-392, §2.
6. Bachelard’s daughter Suzanne is at that moment one of the prominent pupils of his friend Jean 
Cavaillès, the mathematical philosopher and Resistance hero who was killed in 1944: among these 
pupils are such fellow epistemologists and philosophers of science as Gilles Gaston Granger, Jean-
Toussaint Desanti, Tran duc Thao, and Jules Vuillemin. A select club of Bachelard’s and Cavaillès’ 
students and friends (notably also Albert Lautman, killed in 1943, aged 36, and posthumously one 
of the important inspiring figures for Gilles Deleuze) has been involved in far-reaching clandes-
tine activities at that time.
7. Canguilhem was himself succeeded there by Suzanne Bachelard in 1972.
8. Jean Hyppolite, “Gaston Bachelard ou le romantisme de l’intelligence,” Revue Philosophique de la 
France et de l’Étranger, 144 (1954) : 85-96 ; Hommage à Gaston Bachelard : études de philosophie et d’his-
toire des sciences. Eds. Georges Bouligand, P. Costabel and Georges Canguilhem. Paris : PUF, 1957.

gaston bachelard and contemporary philosophy · 15 
9. Micel Mansuy, Gaston Bachelard et les éléments. Paris : Corti, 1967; François Pire, De l’imagination 
poétique dans l’œuvre de Gaston Bachelard, 1967; Jacques Gagey, Gaston Bachelard ou La conversion à 
l’imaginaire. Paris : Rivière, 1969; Julien Naud, Structure et sens du symbole: L’imaginaire chez Gaston 
Bachelard. Tournai : Desclée, 1971.
10. Georges Canguilhem, “L’Histoire des Sciences dans l’œuvre épistémologique de Gaston Bache-
lard,” Annales de L’université de Paris 33 (1963) : 24-39 ; François Dagognet, Gaston Bachelard: Sa vie, 
son œuvre, avec un exposé de sa philosophie. Paris : PUF, 1965.
11. Michel Foucault, “Introduction,” in Georges Canguilhem, The Normal and the Pathological. New 
York: Zone Books, 1991, 8.
12. Gilles-Gaston Granger, Formal thought and the sciences of man. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983.
13. Bruno Latour, Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network theory. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2005, 41 n36. See Pierre Bourdieu, Jean-Claude Chamboredon and Jean-Claude 
Passeron, The Craft of Sociology : Epistemological preliminaries. Berlin/New York : Walter de Gruyter, 
1991.
14. Louis Althusser, For Marx. Harmondsworth: Penguin books, 1969.
15. For the relation between Kuhn and French epistemologists such as Bachelard, see Massimilia-
no Simons, “The Many Encounters of Thomas Kuhn and French Epistemology,” Studies in History 
and Philosophy of Science 61 (2017): 41-50.
16. Michel Vadée, Gaston Bachelard ou Le nouvel idéalisme épistémologique. Paris : Ed. sociales, 1975.
17. Michel Pêcheux and Michel Fichant, Sur l’histoire des sciences. Paris : François Maspero; Eti-
enne Balibar, “From Bachelard to Althusser: the concept of ‘epistemological break,’” Economy and 
Society 7, no. 3 (1978): 207-237; Pierre Macherey, “Althusser and the Concept of the Spontaneous 
Philosophy of Scientists,” Parrhesia 6 (2009): 14-27.
18. His doctoral thesis (published in 1969) is translated together with another book from 1972 as 
Dominique Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology: Bachelard, Canguilhem and Foucault. London: NLB, 
1975. See also Dominique Lecourt, Bachelard ou Le jour et la nuit: un essai du matérialisme dialectique. 
Paris : Grasset, 1974.
19. Lecourt, Le jour et la nuit.
20. See Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, Gaston Bachelard, poétique des images. Paris : Mimesis, 2012. For 
the organization, see https://gastonbachelard.org/association/.
21. Compare Frederic Worms and Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, Bachelard et Bergson: Continuité et 
discontinuité, Paris : PUF, 2008.
22. Kotowicz, Gaston Bachelard, 12.
23. For Bachelard’s reception in other contexts, see Jean Gayon and Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, 
Jean-Jacques, Bachelard dans le monde. Paris: PUF, 2000.
24. See Gaston Bachelard, “The Philosophic Dialectic of the Concepts of Relativity,” in Albert Ein-
stein, Philosopher and Scientist, ed. P. A. Schilpp. New York: Tudor (1951): 565-580. This could have 
been different. Bachelard was for instance invited to write a text on ‘philosophy of science in 
France’ for a volume, published in 1950, but he was “accidentally prevented from writing” his 
chapter and replaced by an annotated bibliography by André Lalande. See Philosophical Thought in 
France and the United States: Essays representing major trends in contemporary French and American 
philosophy, ed. Marvin Farber. New York: University of Buffalo Publications in Philosophy, 1950.
25. This in contrast, for instance, to the work of other epistemologists such as Emile Meyerson 
and Pierre Duhem, whose work is more fully translated, often from an early date onwards. See 
Emile Meyerson, Identity and Reality, translated by Kate Loewenberg. London: Allen & Unwin Ltd., 
1930; Pierre Duhem, The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, translated by P.P. Wiener. Princeton: 

16 · simons, rutgeerts, masschelein and cortois 
Princeton University Press, 1954.
26. There have also been some selected chapters of other books been translated, for instance a 
chapter from L’Activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine, see Phenomenology and the natural 
sciences: Essays and translations, ed. Joseph Kockelmans and Theodore Kisiel. Evanston: North-
western university press, 1970. A part of his doctoral thesis Essai sur la connaissance approchée 
is also translated in Continental philosophy of science, ed. Gary Gutting. Oxford: Blackwell, 2005. 
Similarly, many of Bachelard’s articles have never been translated, with the exception of Gaston 
Bachelard, “Noumena and Microphysics,” Angelaki 10, no. 2 (2005): 73-78.
27. See Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology.
28. Steve Fuller, Social epistemology. Bloomington: Indiana university press, 2002, 24-25.
29. Bruno Latour and Steve, Laboratory Life: the construction of scientific facts. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1986, 64.
30. Teresa Castelao-Lawless, “Phenomenotechnique in Historical Perspective: Its Origins and Im-
plications for Philosophy of Science, Philosophy of science 62, no. 1 (1995): 56.
31. The notion of phenomenotechnique indeed addresses a broader issue than mere social con-
structivism, namely that of the role of intervention and construction in science. Hans Radder even 
calls this the “Bachelardian challenge,” referring to “the question how scientific knowledge can 
be about a human-independent reality, if this reality is so thoroughly dependent on human work.” 
See Hans Radder, “Science, realization and reality: the fundamental issues,” Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science 24, no. 3 (1993): 328. Social constructivism is merely one possible reply to 
this question, namely by negating the idea that such an access to a human-independent reality is 
possible. More options are available, and the notion of phenomenotechnique precisely forces us 
to examine them.
32. Ian Hacking, Historical ontology. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard university press, 2002; Hans-Jörg 
Rheinberger, On historicizing epistemology: An essay. Stanford: Stanford university press, 2010 and 
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, An Epistemology of the Concrete: Twentieth-Century Histories of Life. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
33. Mary Tiles, “Is Historical Epistemology Part of the ‘Modernist Settlement’?” Erkenntnis 75, no. 
3 (2011): 525-543.
34. See for example Don Ihde Expanding hermeneutics: Visualism in science. Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1998, 8.
35. Gilbert Hottois, “La technoscience: De l’origine du mot à ses usages actuels,» Recherche En 
Soins Infirmiers 86 (2006) : 24-32 ; Jean-François Lyotard, The postmodern explained : Correspon-
dence 1982-1985. Minneapolis (Minn.): University of Minnesota, 1993; Bruno Latour, Science in ac-
tion: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard university 
press, 1987.
36. See Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent, “Chemistry in the French tradition of philosophy of sci-
ence: Duhem, Meyerson, Metzger and Bachelard,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 36, 
no. 4 (2005): 627-649; Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and Isabelle Stengers, A History of Chemistry. 
Cambridge, Mass./London: Harvard University Press, 1997.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 17-32
the metaphysics of dust
gaston bachelard
I 
If everyday experience did not provide us with the many and varied phenomena of 
dust, it can be assumed that atomism might not have received such a ready follow-
ing from philosophers and that it might not have enjoyed such an easily renewed 
fate. Without this special experience, atomism could only have been conceived as 
a highly speculative scholarly doctrine in which the idea’s initial venture was not 
justified by any observation. 
By contrast, based solely on the existence of dust, atomism has been able to re-
ceive, from the very beginning, an intuitive base at once permanent and rich in 
suggestions. These initial suggestions evidently serve to explain atomism’s histor-
ical as well as its pedagogical success and, here in particular, philosophy benefits 
from bringing together pedagogical and historical elements. From this straight-
forward pedagogical perspective, I will try, in a few pages, to study atomism’s 
simplest image, one that is durable precisely because it is simple and rudimentary. 
Charles Adam, for example, did not hesitate to see Descartes’s younger days as 
the source of some of his guiding intuitions. As he points out, because Descartes 
lived in the country, he was able to take note of several curious traits of nature. 
Among such natural lessons, Charles Adam specifically includes familiarity with 

18 · gaston bachelard  
phenomena like will-o’-the-wisp, dust, and whirlwinds.1 In fact, it should be noted 
that a whirlwind is a rarer occurrence than one might think and that many talk 
about it who have not had the opportunity to observe it. One must have seen the 
dust on the road, at the bottom of a ravine, caught up and lifted by a favorable 
wind to understand what is at once structured and free, light and delicate, in the 
swirls of a whirlwind. The best-made whirlwinds are the smallest ones. They stay 
within a wheel path. They can actually rotate around themselves like a humming 
top. More commonly observed river eddies give us a far cruder image than a whirl-
wind drawn by dust. Water only gives us a lightly engraved design; dust gives it in 
full three-dimensional relief. 
Whatever one may think of the importance attributed by Charles Adam to these 
first material images of Cartesianism, there is no doubt that one finds, in what is 
most often a radically materialist atomistic literature, numerous quotations per-
taining to the phenomena of dust. It therefore seems astonishing that Lasswitz 
does not include in his otherwise detailed index anything that recalls ideas of 
dust, powder, or pulverization.2 These concepts certainly deserve to be given pri-
ority over amber, mercury, and smoke—which Lasswitz did include.
II
Following these general remarks, let us attempt to appreciate the importance of 
dust for the teaching of atomism. 
We can start by presenting something of a negative proof of the intuitive value 
of such a phenomenon. All it takes is to imagine how our intuition would be af-
fected by a world of well-defined solids, a world of objects whose individuality 
would be strongly and clearly related to size, as is the case, for example, for all 
animated bodies. For greater clarity, let us complete our assumptions by setting 
up a world where these defined and individualized objects have sizes that extend 
over a rather limited range, thus containing neither very large nor very small ob-
jects. We understand right away that in such a world material division would be 
seen solely as an artificial process. Intuitively speaking, we could shatter, but we 
could not analyze. Of course, an advanced science might succeed in transferring 
the principle of individuality elsewhere, agreeing, for example to analyze a solid 
geometrically. But then geometrical analysis and the partition of the real would no 
longer be synchronous. The former, bearing the mark of ideality, would belong 
to the world of possibility pure and simple. Nothing real would correspond to it. 

the metaphysics of dust · 19 
Now let us change scientific utopias. Instead of a world of well-defined geometric 
solids, let us imagine a world of pasty objects, such as, for example, a universe 
briefly considered by Mach,3 that is a little too hot, where everything flattens out, 
where forms inhabited by essential fluidity are nothing more than moments of de-
velopment. This time, contrary to what happens in our first hypothesis, division 
is now the law. Every object dissolves, loses its shape, and is endlessly segmented. 
The ideal pattern is flowing water that divides as easily as it reassembles, thus illu-
minating a perfect reciprocity of analysis and synthesis. Faced with such a scene, 
how could we posit the idea of an indivisible element? The only way would be to 
contradict concrete experience and generally observable evidence. And here again 
our means of separating the real and the possible would be deeply perturbed. Yet 
all we did was put forth a poor, simple assumption as we constituted our scientific 
utopia, only to see that assumption modify all that is possible and, like a reagent, 
precipitate a brand-new reality! In a world of pastes and liquids, it would seem 
that the possible is, I daresay, more real than immediate reality. For the possible 
is now everything in the process of becoming, now rendered more clearly by its 
increased activity. By contrast, reality is nothing more than an ephemeral and ac-
cidental form, an individual frame in a film. By underscoring through thought the 
fluidity of solid bodies, we might have believed that we affected only a material 
quality, but we realize, in the end, that we have perturbed even the most funda-
mental categories and forms of our knowledge since we enter into an extraordi-
nary world where time finally dominates space. 
So, in a way, we can frame the real world with two hypothetical worlds that are 
equally easy to imagine: the first where solidity is everything, the second where 
solidity is nothing. But one can see right away that, in these two utopian worlds, 
atomism does not encounter the elements of its first teachings since, in one of the 
hypotheses, division of matter would be an anomaly and, in the other, a rule to be 
endlessly applied. Realistic atomism is indeed dependent on a direct intuition of 
material diversity. I have tried to show elsewhere how difficult it is for scientific 
thought to uncover categories and order within immediate diversity.4 In some 
ways this diversity must be seen as irreducible if we want to preserve atomism’s 
full value of explanation. That is why, as we have just seen, atomism immediately 
loses all meaning when a profound, hypothetical cause of uniformity is slipped 
into the real. The concept of dust, halfway between that of a solid and a liquid, 
will, by contrast, furnish a sufficiently mixed proof on which to base atomism.

20 · gaston bachelard  
Of course, as I indicated earlier, this is but a negative argument, one that tends 
to underscore atomistic philosophy’s dependence on the very general empirical 
conditions in which thought is developed. I must now begin a more positive ex-
amination and take things as they are, not only in their multiple forms but also in 
their frequent deformations.
 
III
The thesis that I will defend, at once general and complex, goes against Bergso-
nian theory in that it sets out to complete a proposition that, in its very essence, 
should not require completion.5 Indeed, Bergson undertook to assimilate our fun-
damental habits of thought to our everyday experience of solids. According to 
him, everything that is framed, categorical, and conceptual in human intelligence 
stems from the geometric aspects of a world of solids. Our experience of solids 
leads, in a way, to solidifying our actions. Objectivity as stability is thus related to 
the solidity of objects. Only what is solid is thought to hold a sufficient number 
of features strongly enough to represent and maintain the “dotted line” that out-
lines our possible action. In the face of the simple sketch of our actions thus ge-
ometrized through our experience of solidity, all other natural phenomena come 
across as irrational. 
Bergson has surely uncovered in this instance a dominant feature of understand-
ing. In particular, everything that is exchanged socially is expressed in the language 
of solidity. Similarly, a substantive noun is, in effect, defined from the outside. It 
can be placed in any sentence the way a solid is placed in any location. In its logi-
cal form, language thus corresponds to a geometry of the well-defined solid. But 
here is where Bergson’s thesis needs to be extended. If the initial orientation of 
intellectual and verbal organization really means the immediate utilization of ob-
jects of experience, how do we delete equally characteristic elements from that 
everyday experience? How do we overlook flowing water, silent oil, sticky honey, 
paste, mud, clay, powder, and dust? To be sure, all these things find their way back 
to solidity, but they also contradict certain essential characteristics of solids. Let 
us not object that solidity is the rule and that liquid or dust are exceptions. For it is 
quite remarkable that, as principles of explanation, clear and flagrant exceptions 
carry the same quotient of conviction as do general characteristics—a strange 
dialectic this, one that thrives on oppositions yet rejects from the bases of its 
explanation only those elements that are mixed and mingled! Even from a scien-
tific perspective, are the most frequent themes of an explanation not the perfect, 

the metaphysics of dust · 21 
undeformed solid and the perfect liquid without viscosity, in other words, two 
features that are frankly exceptional? One has to arrive at a very advanced physics 
to find any appeal in the study of mesomorphic states.6 But from a psychological 
point of view—the only one that interests me at the moment—these studies of 
intermediate states are analytical; they are expressed with the help of suppos-
edly simple primary states. At the same time, states taken to be primary—solids, 
liquids, paste, or dust—do not raise questions; they provide the direct answers of 
intuition. They are elements of naïve explanation. As a result, it is all of nature that 
teaches us, and understanding enters through all our senses. Thus, we must speak 
of a kinetic intelligence alongside the geometric intelligence given primacy by 
Bergson. We must even add a materialist intelligence. Ultimately, we must recog-
nize that our language is, if not by its nouns at least by its verbs, as tactile as it is 
visual. Henceforth a more objective intuition of matter will lead to what is, from 
many points of view, a broader Bergsonism.
In my view, a deformation, even when visual, is not understood as a mere loss of 
forms, for as soon as we consider how our actions are accomplished, we realize 
that the deformation we impose on things always means actively acquired infor-
mation. And so it is a question of taking shape, often with great difficulty, rather 
than losing shape. Thus, we come to experience deformation as dynamism. For 
example, the idea of penetrability acquired in the potter’s arduous manual experi-
ence proves to be fundamental.
Henceforth an impenetrable solid is seen as an outright exception. The outline of 
its shape corresponds to nothing more than our idleness, a prospect of laziness, 
and a philosophy of the immediate. If we wish to relate Homo sapiens to Homo 
faber, we must consider the latter in all manner of actions. Homo faber arranges 
and kneads; such an individual welds and grinds. For that person certain bodies 
are juxtaposed, others are mixed together, and still others are dispersed in dust 
and smoke. Solids demonstrate the great lesson of form and assembly. From liq-
uids comes the equally fruitful and clear lesson of change and mixture. From the 
phenomena of dust, powder, and smoke, Homo faber learns to meditate upon the 
delicate structure and the mysterious power of the infinitely small; along this path 
lies the knowledge of the impalpable and the invisible. 
And so the primacy of explanation via solids is compromised at the very core of 
popular knowledge, in the domain of initial intuitions. Besides, even if we were 
to assume that the problem of the intuitive origin of knowledge remained unre-

22 · gaston bachelard  
solved, we would at least have to admit that the characteristic of absolute solidity 
attributed to bodies is a characteristic to be rectified, since the best-known phenom-
ena soon display a departure from the quality of perfect solidity. In reality, our 
thinking is more in line with the deformation of a body than with the geometric 
relation between many bodies. Thus, Bergson’s thesis designates only a point of 
departure. It is unable to account for the complete evolution of objective thought.
In short, whether through utopian assumptions, or through glimpses that de-
scribe matter in the actuality of its multiple states, I believe I have restored to my 
intuition an unfocused and free character brought about by several sensory sourc-
es. It will now be easier to sever the link that is always too narrowly established 
between principles of atomism and geometric intuitions derived from observing 
solids. Following this polemical preparation, let me now move to a truly positive 
examination of my thesis. Let me attempt to demonstrate that the intuition of 
phenomena of dust truly undergirds naïve atomism.
 
IV
We should, first of all, recognize as fact what in fact exists. Now the experience 
we have of powder and dust is far from negligible. This experience is so singular 
and striking that we can speak of a powdery state exactly in the same way that 
we speak of solid, liquid, gaseous, and pasty states. In reality, in modern science 
this powdery state always poses problems of its own. For example, we see a more 
energetic chemical action in powders. This chemical potency of powder derives 
from a kind of surfacing. Zones of transition and contact will give way to special 
phenomena. Catalytic actions appear that would have no impact coming from a 
material taken as a mass. Thus, Auguste Lumière points out that exchanges and 
reactions that take place in the tissues of a human adult extend to a surface of 
two million square meters: “However minute the affinities may be of substances 
coming into contact on the periphery of granules, we can conceive that the sum 
of all these infinitesimal elementary reactions can become considerable when oc-
curring over such large surfaces.”7 We might thus say that, through granulation, 
surface takes on an authentic substantial reality. It ceases to be geometric to be-
come truly chemical.
Even from a coarser and more mechanical perspective, powders work in a special 
way; their drift and flow lead us to study carefully the shape of their containers or 
the partitions along which they must slide. But it might be objected that this too 

the metaphysics of dust · 23 
is a new and delicate technique. So let us locate the freshest intuition possible. 
Let us first consider a child’s amused attention before an hourglass. Let us con-
template, along with that child, a complex of exceptions! Powder is solid, yet it 
flows; it falls noiselessly. Overall, surfaces are at once mobile and stable. Mounds 
will grow; craters will form in which one can see uncaused movement begin. If 
now we try to reconstruct the overall phenomenon starting from the movement 
of separate particles, we are amazed to see the regularity and the measure pro-
duced by a truly insignificant and lawless body. A paradoxical water clock where 
solidity displays its fluidity, the hourglass surely provides the first measurement 
of brief time. It is the glib symbol of a useless duration. 
Powder, talcum, flour, ashes—all similarly hold the attention of alchemists and 
chemists in every period of the development of prescientific thought. It seems 
that a crushed body, in losing some of its individuality, simultaneously acquires an 
unexplained character of mystery. Powder arouses the suspicion of poison, it is an 
essence that, depending on the dose, may bring remedy or death. It is a sorcerer’s 
material.
At times, it is due to the uniformity of dust that we think we can attribute a broad 
role to matter. Thus, a late-eighteenth-century author will associate dust with 
germinating soil. Air, says Deluc, works on terrestrial matter “ceaselessly and in 
a thousand ways. By simply rubbing all bodies of matter it removes such tiny 
particles that they are unrecognizable. The dust in our dwellings may well be an 
example. Whatever the nature of its source material, it is a grayish powder that 
seems to be everywhere the same. The formation of germinating soil is probably 
related to that. All surfaces of the earth, from the hardest rocks, the most arid 
sands and gravels, even metals, suffer the gnawing action of air; and their parti-
cles, reduced, decomposed, and reconstituted in myriad ways, are likely the main 
source of germination.”8 And so this uniformity, advanced on the basis of our 
inability to discern specific characteristics, is enough to explain that dust prop-
erly encompasses the most varied vegetative needs. In other words, vegetative 
comparison is no better able to discern differences between grains of dust than 
is human sensory activity. It would seem that, as solids diminish in scale, they 
are substantially simplified and thus become elements suited to the most diverse 
constructions. These particles, adds Deluc, “extracted or fixed by procedures that 
bring them closer to their initial elements and, in our eyes, cause them to take on 
the same appearance . . . are thus suited to spread in the seeds of plants, to expand 

24 · gaston bachelard  
their tissues, to take on all the properties that characterize each species, and to 
maintain them as long as the plant exists. After the plants are destroyed, these 
same particles take on the general character of germinating soil, that is to say a 
ready-made reserve for germination.”9 Let us also note, in passing, the paradoxical 
idea that dust, the final result of all destruction, is easily posited as indestructible. 
The attribution of eternity to the atom in certain philosophical systems may have 
no other origin.
Thus, at the basis of our intuition of powder and dust are very curious judgments 
of value, since substances in this form are sometimes considered trash and, in 
others, worthy matter. We are amazed, in fact, when going from one judgment 
to the other. For example, who has not been struck to learn about new forensic 
tests? It takes all the talent of a Locard10 to convince us that a criminal investiga-
tion can be explained through microscopic analysis. We had been led, through a 
pragmatism that was as crude as it was negative, to tacitly assume that substances 
lose their individuality when reduced to dust. We are therefore quite surprised to 
learn about the material individuality of the infinitely small. Moreover, thanks to 
the effortless dialectic of amazement, we are soon led to be amazed at our sur-
prise. Thus, we don’t hesitate to exaggerate newly recovered individuality and to 
postulate a set of qualities for material particles that are more characteristic than 
aspects of matter in its massive form. And so it is, as I will show, that naïve atom-
ism assigns to elements qualities that are apparently not related to regular solids. 
In addition, we might understand the influence of pejorative judgments often as-
sociated with dust by recalling certain related conditions such as wood-rot and 
rust that keep intuition in the prescientific stages. For example, rot, in and of 
itself, serves as an explanation, and the seventeenth century does not hesitate 
to believe in the action of a special worm that attacks metallic substances—dust 
from rust is considered the same as dust from wood rot. A table of presence might 
bring the two phenomena together and provide a Baconian explanation adequate 
for knowledge limited to relating two intuitions. 
Along these lines, going on now to generalizations, we will understand that one 
of the great arguments of atomism, endlessly repeated by the various schools, has 
to do with wearing down the hardest of bodies. The temple’s bronze doors hollow 
out under the faint touch of the hands of the faithful. The atom is now a worn 
solid. After a long success of creative effort, everything returns to the chaos of 
disassociated and mixed atoms. This theme of the general wear and tear of things, 

the metaphysics of dust · 25 
of the destruction of integrated forms, and of the amorphous mixture of diverse 
substances is the basis for numerous materialist philosophies that can thus adapt 
their pessimism to a sort of aesthetic decline of the Cosmos.
The question can also be approached from another angle. If dust and powder are 
valued for their direct explanation, we will be led to value the pulverization of 
solid bodies as a truly fundamental process. We will not hesitate, at that point, 
to explain complicated physical phenomena in terms of the idea of pulverization, 
which will play the role of a simple idea. That is how Hélène Metzger quite rightly 
characterizes the psychology of a seventeenth-century chemist: “Like all dabblers 
in pharmacy (Arnaud, 1656) crushed solid bodies in a mortar. He believed that all 
chemical operations have some relationship to that one, that they may be finer 
or cruder, but that, ultimately, the chemist’s entire art boils down to the mechan-
ics of pulverization.”11 Pulverization is the clear and primitive idea, to which all 
chemical reactions must be brought back: “What is calcination? Seventeenth-cen-
tury chemists reply that it is a process which consists in pulverizing different bod-
ies by fire, either by action of the flame’s actual fire, or by action of the potential 
fire found in acids and other corrosive materials.”12 In the Encyclopedia (under 
“pulverization”)13 one can also read that “calcination, either by fire or, by the as-
sistance of niter and of sublimation into odors, is still, as to its effects, a type of 
pulverization.” We can thus readily see that, for several centuries, the pulveriza-
tion of substances was not merely a procedural means, but indeed had the impor-
tance, in the mind of the chemists, of a fundamental intellectual framework.
 
V 
Up to now, we have observed powder and dust in their rather diminished or at 
least static and inert aspect. But it is when we come to fine, light dust stirring and 
shimmering in a ray of sunlight that we really grasp the master intuition of naïve 
atomism. This is a spectacle we often contemplate in our reveries. It is capable of 
liberating our thoughts from the everyday laws that regulate active and utilitarian 
experience. In a way, it contradicts such willful experience, leading us to sever 
the link established by Bergsonian philosophy between our actions and concepts. 
Reflections born of this spectacle immediately have a speculative tone. They read-
ily take on the function of learned reflection since they explain the general by the 
singular and the special, a method used more often than one might think at first 
glance. 

26 · gaston bachelard  
The entire set of departures from usual laws, when manifested in the aerial play 
of dust, is precisely what makes its intuition so appropriate. The speck of dust, 
in particular, departs from the general law of gravity. For a truly primal intuition, 
need it be noted, it floats in a void; it follows its fancy. Of course, it responds to 
puffs, but with what freedom! It illustrates the clinamen. 
Through a profusion of colors and iridescence, the speck of dust dancing in the 
light also illustrates the multiple properties of an isolated object. Upon looking at 
it carefully we think we understand that the element, simple in its substance, can 
be composite in its attributes and modes.
But the principal explanatory value derived from the speck of dust, its true meta-
physical meaning, is surely that it brings about a synthesis of opposites. It is in-
tangible and yet visible. A strange object that affects but one sense, that presents 
itself as a kind of natural abstraction, an objective abstraction! 
But let us go further—in this experience what becomes visible is the invisible. In 
fact, as long as a reflected and diffuse light fills the room with a uniform clarity, 
the room is empty, the dust is invisible. Let a sharp, straight ray appear and im-
mediately this ray of light reveals an unknown world. This is really the first ex-
perience of atomism; this is where atomistic metaphysics touches upon the basic 
physics of the atom; this is where speculative thought finds support in an immedi-
ate intuition. From now on, in fact, we can recognize our right to postulate matter 
beyond sensation since, in a way, experience has shown us the invisible. So we 
postulate the atom of matter beyond the experience of the senses. We are ready 
to speak of the atom of smell, of sound, and of light since we have just seen, in an 
auspicious and exceptional experience, the intangible atom of touch.
Such nimble and free matter might obey the impulses of the soul; it might be 
spirit itself. As Léon Robin recalls: “Aristotle, who does not name the Pythagore-
ans when he speaks of soul-harmony, expressly attributes only two opinions to 
them: according to the one, whose relationship with atomism he does not fail to 
point out, the soul is made up of dust particles floating in the air, highlighted by 
a ray of sun, and perpetually on the move, even in the calmest moments, while 
according to the other, the soul is seen as the root of their movement.”14 In both 
cases, therefore, there is a correspondence between the elements of the soul and 
the elements of matter. The atoms of the soul, adds Émile Bréhier in interpreting 
the same intuition,15 are in equal number to those of the body and are juxtaposed 

the metaphysics of dust · 27 
to them by alternating one-on-one with them; they are constantly renewed by 
respiration. How can we not then consider that for early thought, the spirit of life 
takes shape in a puff of breath; how can we not relate the intuition of the mind to 
the observation of light animated by atoms that fill an infinite void? 
From an animistic perspective a sort of passage to the limit16 can be discerned that 
allows us to transcend matter. But in a more general and more material way, that 
is precisely where the epistemological usefulness of the observation of dust re-
sides—it prepares and legitimizes a passage to the limit. That is the way Des-
cartes makes use of this intuition in his book on meteors. In speaking of vapors 
and exhalations, he points out that specks of dust are much larger and heavier 
than the small portions that constitute vapors; nevertheless, he adds, “that does 
not keep them from pursuing their course toward the sky.”17 Here one can really 
perceive the powerful example of phenomena viewed in a ray of light. What dust 
can do, how could the atom or the fine matter of exhalation not be able to do? If 
dust manages to escape gravity, how could the atom not find its independence? If 
the experience of dust is still crude, all that is needed is to pass to the limit and 
we will attain, through thought, an atomic physics that will give the impression 
of being rational while still maintaining an experiential basis. Here then, in short, 
is the progression of arguments that carries forth the initial intuition and that 
establishes philosophical atomism as a doctrine at once rational and empirical.
 
VI 
In connection with the intuition of dust, one should also study the intuition of the 
void, for it is not difficult to show that it also is a quite positive one. In fact, upon 
reading the Greek philosophers, we become convinced that the entire polemic 
over the void amounts to either aiding or combating that intuition. But in any 
case, when we first encounter this basic intuition, the void poses problems from a 
metaphysical perspective by the very fact that it raises no problem from a psycho-
logical point of view. Such a polemical outlook is well suited to demonstrate that 
the void and dust are truly immediate and important facts of experience. 
This essentially derivative aspect of the metaphysical problem of the void is so 
clear that the problem is sometimes stated in a totally metaphorical, even unwrit-
ten way. We read in Aristotle, for example, that “if we are to believe the Pythago-
reans, the void is originally found in numbers, for the void is what gives them their 
particular and abstract nature.”18

28 · gaston bachelard  
All these arguments against the void are also interesting to my way of thinking 
in that they underscore the power of a first intuition carried into the most var-
ied domains. Thus, for Plato and Aristotle, it is a question of combating the idea 
of a void that would be an instrument of general annihilation and that would 
bring to all substance the contagion of nothingness. They argue, in fact, that in 
the void, bodies would lose their specific properties. For example, with respect 
to motion, the void would erase individual dynamic properties. Thus, Aristotle 
concludes that “all bodies in the void would have the same velocity, and that is 
not admissible”19 since the void would, in fact, take away from motion the fun-
damental Aristotelian characteristic of velocity. Besides, in a more general way, 
the properties of bodies in Aristotelian physics are, as we know, entirely relative 
to their environment. A given property is more than localized, it is truly local. The 
attributes of a substance must be forced, in a way, to remain in the natural venue 
of that substance. Otherwise, the substance could not really retain its attributes, 
which would undergo a sort of metaphysical evaporation. In the final analysis, Ar-
istotelian dialectic is led to replace the intuitive void by a space that, if not real, is 
at least necessary to assure that objects retain their real qualities. It is acceptable 
for the space to be empty of substance, but it must maintain a relationship to the 
substances it contains. It must realize the minimum necessary for the principle of 
sufficient reason to be applied. This point of view is very clearly summarized by 
Léon Robin: “With the venue deprived of all natural properties of location, what 
reason would there be, in fact, for a body to move in any particular direction? How 
to explain, as well, the accelerated motion that, to the contrary, a body displays 
when in the vicinity of its natural venue?”20 But really, in implementing rational 
necessities, all we did was fill space with reasoning, and we still have to make the 
characteristics produced by the immediate intuition of the void reappear. Thus, 
Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire underscores the dialectical character of properties at-
tributed to space and bodies by Aristotle. Matter that fills space, he says, “is not 
such that it can oppose the least obstacle to motion, and motion occurs with such 
a constant and perfect regularity that, evidently, nothing troubles or hampers it.”21 
But then, who does not see that positing metaphysical fullness amounts to at-
tributing to it all the characteristics of the intuitive void? Fullness even has as its 
only function to maintain the properties of things, to bind attributes onto atoms 
in some way. The initial intuition has been enriched rather than impoverished; it 
remains whole. Once again, metaphysics has recovered what it had willingly lost. 
After a long detour, we must come to the conclusion that space is not a physical 
environment like any other, that it neither impedes nor produces motion, that it 
leaves undetermined all the reasons it contains for forecasting phenomena. Meta-

the metaphysics of dust · 29 
physical plenty remains a physical void. 
If the reader hesitates to follow me in this affirmation of the persistent character 
of the first intuition of the void, I have in reserve an argument that will otherwise 
answer an objection that is quite natural. 
Surely, no one has failed to object that, in fact, the experience of the void for the 
ancients as well as for common knowledge is obviously erroneous since all the 
early physical experiments are carried out in air, with an almost total ignorance 
of phenomena peculiar to the gaseous state. We should then concede that the 
direct intuition of the void corresponds in reality to the experience of a physical 
state that, in itself, is well determined although poorly known. But an error of 
thought or expression has nothing to do with the truth of an intuition. What must 
be called the tangible perception of the void is closely linked to a quite positive 
observation.
Let us try to specify the experimental characteristics of this intuition. Air for the 
ancients was always the wind. In ordinary experience, if air is immobile, it some-
how loses its existence. Wind is always a power of coordination. That is why the 
disorderly movements of dust in a ray of sun are not attributed to the wind. Here 
again, these movements represent an exceptional state, and, through a sort of 
dialectic, they display an ambient void as still another exceptional state. Immobile 
air is decidedly the intuitive void. It has no action, and it is the indicator of noth-
ing, the evident cause of nothing. Accordingly, by taking the experience of aerial 
environment such as it appears initially in its general and simple aspect, it has to 
be recognized that this experience is well suited to providing a proper substitute 
for the void. In the final analysis it cannot be argued that the scientific error of an 
intuition destroys the power and clarity of that intuition. 
This immediate and enduring clarity explains the difficulty brought on by the first 
scientific experiments following the invention of the air pump. By following these 
experiments over the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, we per-
ceive the transition of an absolute and clear idea to a relative and confusing one. 
This transition was psychologically difficult and the idea of a relative void, so fa-
miliar to us now, was long a difficult idea to analyze. 
Initially this relative void was taken to be essentially artificial. For a very long 
time, it was called Boyle’s void, after the English physicist who multiplied the 

30 · gaston bachelard  
experiments. It was a technical state whose properties seemed as new as radium 
must have seemed at the beginning of the twentieth century. Considered to be a 
paradoxical state, it drew astonishing, extraordinary, and legendary observations. 
To give just one characteristic example, let us cite the claim of distinguishing 
between properties of the void when air is removed from a cubic vial or from a 
spherical one. With the action of the air pump, the first would shatter, the second 
would resist.22
Finally, more learned intuitions, based on the image of rarefaction developed 
through statistical analysis, very slowly began to help follow experiments in their 
particulars. These intuitions have profoundly permeated the culture of our time. 
We must forget them in order to appreciate the play of detail from the earliest 
intuitions. 
To sum up, atomism is, first of all, a visually inspired doctrine. To ambient air 
corresponds a void of optic sensation. The material characteristics of gasses can 
only be understood through a scientific experiment, with technical means that are 
difficult to apply. Optical characteristics thus conserve a sort of natural explana-
tory value. Dust and void apprehended in the same glance truly illustrate the first 
lesson of atomism.

the metaphysics of dust · 31 
NOTES
1. See Descartes, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Adam-Tannery, vol. 12 [(Paris: Léopold Cerf, 1903)] Vie de 
Descartes, 17, note. [Hereafter cited as Oeuvres complètes.]
2. [Lasswitz, Atomistik und Kriticismus.]
3. [Ernst Mach, 1838–1916, Austrian physicist and philosopher after whom is named the number 
that identifies the ratio of a given speed to sound.]
4. See [Gaston Bachelard,] Le pluralisme cohérent de la chimie moderne (Paris: Vrin, 1932). [Hereafter 
cited as Le pluralisme cohérent. For further discussion, see also Roch C. Smith, Gaston Bachelard: 
Philosopher of Science and Imagination (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2016), 19–21. 
Hereafter cited as Philosopher of Science and Imagination.]
5. [Bachelard frequently challenges the ideas of French philosopher Henri Bergson (1859–1941). 
See Jean-François Perraudin, “Bachelard’s ‘Non-Bergsonism,’” in Adventures in Phenomenology: 
Gaston Bachelard, ed. Eileen Rizo-Patron, Edward S. Casey, and Jason Wirth (Albany: State Univer-
sity of New York Press, 2017), 29–47.]
6. [A mesomorphic state (“état mésomorphe”) is defined as a state of matter whose symmetry is 
intermediate between a solid and a liquid and that is found especially in certain elongated organic 
molecules (liquid crystal) “état de la matière dont la symétrie est intermédiaire entre celle d’un 
solide et celle d’un liquide et qui se rencontre surtout avec certaines molécules organiques allon-
gées (cristal liquide).” http://www.larousse. fr/dictionnaires/français.]
7. A[uguste] Lumière, Théorie colloidale de la biologie et de la pathologie (Paris: Étienne Chiron, 
1922), 69.
8. J[ean]-A[ndré] Deluc, Lettres physiques et morales sur l’histoire de la terre et de l’homme, vol. 2 
(Paris: V. Duchesne, 1780), 29.
9. Ibid., 30;
10. [Dr. Edmond Locard, Bachelard’s contemporary, established the basic principle of forensic 
science that “every contact leaves a trace,” known as Locard’s exchange principle. https://sites.
google.com/site/apchemprojectforensicchemistry/experts-in- the-field.]
11. H[élène] Metzger, Les doctrine schimiques en France du début du XVIIe à la fin du XVIIIe siècle 
(Paris: P[resses] U[niversitaires de] F[rance], 1923), 61. [The “dabbler in pharmacy” mentioned 
by Metzger is E. R. Arnaud, a Doctor of Medicine who published an Introduction à la chymie ou à 
la vraye physique in 1656, where he sought to improve medicine by “having the physician enter the 
pharmacist’s laboratory to discover . . . that the sciences, far from combatting each other, must 
strive for mutual enlightenment” (“faire pénétrer le médecin dans le laboratoire du pharmacien, 
lui montrer . . . que les sciences, loin de se combattre, doivent essayer de s’éclairer mutuel- le-
ment”) (Metzger, 59–60). Hereafter cited as Les doctrines chimiques en France.]
12. Ibid., 372.
13. [The reference here is to the famed work of the French Enlightenment, the eighteenth century 
Encyclopédie, edited by Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d’Alembert.]
14. L[éon] Robin, La pensée grecque et les origines de l’esprit scientifique (Paris: Albin Michel, 1923), 
82. See also 145. [Hereafter cited as La pensée grecque.] 
15. Bréhier, Histoire de la philosophie, 1:80. Bréhier refers to Lucrèce, I, 370. 

32 · gaston bachelard  
16. [With this “sort of passage to the limit” Bachelard seems to be anticipating the calculation to 
the limit that will be used in calculus to measure the infinitesimal.] 
17. Descartes, Oeuvres complètes, 6: 240.
18. Aristotle, Physique, bk.4, chap. 8, §9, French trans. B[arthélemy]-Saint-Hilaire, 191; [Paris: Vrin, 
French trans. A. Stevens, 2012 (Editor’s note)]. [For English trans., see Aristotle, Physics, bk. 4, 
chap. 6 (213b, 23–27).]
19. Ibid.,bk. 4, chap. 9, §18. [English trans., bk.4, chap.8 (216a,20).]
20. Robin, Lapensée grecque, 337. [The 2015 printing of Les intuitions atomistiques, on which this 
translation is based, mistakenly attributes this citation to Aristotle. The quotation, as indicated in 
the original 1933 edition, and as noted here, is from Robin.]
21. B[arthélemy]-Saint-Hilaire, preface to Aristotle’s Physique, xiv.
22. This observation continues to be related in Diderot and d’Alembert’s Ency- clopédie, s.v. 
“Vuide,” last column.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 33-47
reformation and the seven 
sins
michel serres, translated by matthew 
devine and paul cortois
Here comes a great new book on stupidity: La formation de l’esprit scientifique. We 
recognize the genius by this sign: that he is not satisfied to just designate that 
which cannot think, but that he arouses it and makes it alive. In the sciences, ev-
erything changes: it is the intelligent books that are difficult to write; we are not 
intelligent in the sciences at little cost, at the cost of literature or philosophy, at 
the cost of words. Because words take revenge.
P
An essay on dormant physics written by an alert physicist, this book is paradoxical 
from the point of view of physics: an instrument of precision cut with an axe. Able 
to move scientific concepts by an ångström, it moves philosophical notions in a 
centimetric area.1 It assumes a repertoire of science that is exact, precise, carved 
out. It sends it back without, or almost without, touching it, speaking while de-
parting from it, without it. At the same time, it speaks the language of pre-science: 
alchemy, astrology, amusing electricity… before which recedes the first, that of 
positivity. Leakage and backflow, which permit one to judge, by recurrence, that 
these two lexicons, the present and the absent, turn their back on one another, 
without correspondence. And since one speaks of the things themselves and of 
closed systems, the other does not speak about it: it speaks therefore of man him-

34 · michel serres  
self and of his relation to the world.2 Pre-science speaks of being in the world, of 
self-awareness or awareness of others. Physics, the science of the world, upon 
reaching maturity (its formation completed), leaves an archaic matrix. Physics 
kills this matrix. And this is something like a human science, an archaic discourse 
of man. A philosophy. In passing: how many obstacles or repudiated notions here 
belong to philosophy? How many times does it pass for pre-science? Or pre-sci-
ence for philosophy? Let’s try to speak of this old discourse. Thus emerges an-
other language, another human science, archaic or new. To specify, it is not the 
new scientific mind speaking of the archaic; it is the new (?) human science (?) 
that speaks of the old.  Positivity stays between parentheses for this subjective 
synthesis. 
Hence come a few floating words. Three examples. At the zero degree, if I dare 
to say, Bachelard uses ‘phenomenology,’ which is in its proper place, given the 
above, even ‘phénoménotechinque.’ These words signify nothing other than the dis-
course on the phenomenon, or again, the discourse held on or by the laboratory 
tools. Note that this is the literal or etymological sense. In the bent degree, ‘psy-
choanalysis,’ which hardly refers to Freud, and even then only from the outside, 
is used more like an “analysis of the psyche” in question: once again, the literal or 
etymological sense. This soul is religious, ethical, intellectual: the classical soul 
of the moralist, perhaps that of the confessor, probably that of the psychagogical 
professor-guide. We’ll have to come back to the crucial degree of this bending. 
And finally, in a normal degree, ‘formation.’  
Formation is a good word for the epistemologist. Spirit (esprit) is a rather bad 
one, to be honest. Religious, when it is saintly or diabolical, a bit alchemical if it is 
drawn from wine or salt, medical of classic times when, in the plural, it attaches 
to animals, the positive or scientific spirit smells its alembic, or heresy. Without 
irony, the tradition brings it from far off: since the birth of the history of science 
and until recently, this discipline has been constantly perceived as the adventure 
of the human mind. The word is to be found everywhere, in Montucla, Fontenelle, 
Condorcet…Bachelard.3 Formation, on the other hand, at once cuts through the 
whole classification of science and is everywhere pregnant with positivity. Hence 
the importance that Comte gives to the term.  It stems from grammar, syntax and 
morphology: case formation, verbs, prepositions…It stems from logic, where the 
rules are laid down to filter well-formed expressions. From biology, where Comte 
drew from: puberty, passage toward and establishing of the physiological state of 
the adult. From embryology in particular. From geology: ground layer of such an 

reformation and the seven sins · 35 
origin, of such a nature. The psychology of form. The constellation of socio-polit-
ical or socio-cultural functions: tactics, military or militant, combat group, divi-
sions, unions, classes, parties…in the sense of superstructures, liberal arts, insti-
tutions and laws. Finally, the educational meaning of the institution of children. 
The term is omnidisciplinary. All things considered, it refers to a construction, an 
architecture and a genesis.  Either a spatial drawing, a plan, in the sense that we 
want, and a lapse of time. Hence the diligence of epistemologists and historians 
of science, whose major problem is to confront a system and a history, struc-
tures and a future, who have in mind a block universe of space-time. Who should 
therefore be relativists, but who support above all the biological nuance, since the 
introduction of the term formation by Comte. Its normative connotation, which 
gives the standard reading in a recurring fashion, contributes again to its elec-
tion. That said, the great works are settled on it, and explore the formation of set 
theory, the concept of reflex, the scientific mind, etc…4 Thus, the importance of 
this transversal definition resides in the fact that it can index the references of 
the philosopher speaking of science. Let the word be fixed on the scale, taken in 
a unidisciplinary sense, and all the discourse will be lateralized.5 The Husserlian 
tradition of the Krisis privileges the geological layer, Piaget the institution of chil-
dren, others social training. And Bachelard? 
He uses the term to the normal degree. This means, for a change, in the complete 
semantic range. Normal, that is to say without lateralization. Thus, the book is ob-
scurely guided by the said encyclopedic or interdisciplinary circulation. It begins, 
or almost does, with general knowledge and verbal obstacles: the pre-scientific 
language is poorly formed. We shall respond to the question of how it is formed. 
And it finishes precisely with a long chapter on the institution of children, on 
the failures of training at school: teaching produces the poorly formed.  Between 
these two limits, we mark fairly well the biological heritage of Comte: beyond the 
three laws6 of the three states, history, spirit, and soul of which one is, precisely, 
puerile, we get the idea that maturity is positive, that the positive age is the mature 
one; we cannot go back upstream of the established norm, where the unformed 
is unreadable by the formed norm (hence the change of language in order to be 
able to speak); one no longer needs one’s parents: mature knowledge rejects the-
ology and metaphysics, the gods and notions, Mercury and phlogiston, but above 
all man who is the occupation solely of pre-science. And since there exists, for 
Bachelard, a point of non-return, no one could see how to avoid something like an 
epigenesis in the history of science.  How can esprit come to the young sciences?

36 · michel serres  
We noted that there is a lacuna in the encyclopedic range with the term formation: 
it makes little sense in physics. A good word for the epistemologist, a rather bad 
one for a physicalist. Second reason for changing the language, when it comes to 
interpreting the prephysics, to speak grammar, logic, biology, the analysis of the 
psyche. Preformed physics has no physical meaning, it is unformed. It speaks about 
language, reason, life, the soul, society, the world and nature, but never of the only 
object of physics, namely a closed system. Yet, of closed systems in general, taken 
directly as object, will be born the theory of information for which all forma-
tion remains a thermal scandal, an epistemological paradox. Formation makes no 
sense in physics because physics shows us that it is physical non-sense. It is thus 
impossible to speak in a physical sense about formation in the physical sciences. 
Bachelard will therefore talk about pre-science in all the other languages. These 
other languages develop from this lacuna: it is the first secret of the book, that for 
which the language of his own science recedes. In this, and perhaps unknown by 
him, Bachelard is consistent. A closed system is not something that is formed, it 
is something that is reduced. History, when it introduces a closed system, shows 
less of a break (une coupure)7 than a carving (une découpe). The invading forma-
tions of language and thought must stop. 
Bachelard himself fills in this lacuna elsewhere in overabundance. But his suc-
cessors, in that they do not speak from this known and assumed blind-spot, will 
take his language for granted and will leave the place for physics gaping. As of yet 
there are left, at least in France, only philosophers of the logico-mathematical sci-
ences on one side, and of the biological and socio-political sciences on the other. 
It is enough, once again, to take a word very frequently employed by the episte-
mologists in its widest interdisciplinary range: the word class,8 which is logico-
grammatical, mathematical, biological, socio-political, and pedagogical, to watch 
unfold, newly gaping, the same void. The concrete object removed, idealism re-
mains, well hidden, moreover, by a long discourse on the real. Our philosophical 
times are marked by the disappearance of the object. 
P
We have varied on the term formation. Its semantic range is far from being ex-
hausted when we followed a scale of the sciences. On the side of the institution 
of children, there remains, in the region of norms, the moral meaning. Reform. Is 
the famous epistemological break the outcome of another protest, or the same, if 
we think that Galileo was condemned by a counter-reform? The importance given 

reformation and the seven sins · 37 
to the polemical turn commits us to this path. It is by the bending of the word 
psychoanalysis that the entire ethical heritage will impose itself. Quite frankly, 
there is not a word of psychoanalysis in La Formation. Just listen to the language 
it mobilizes: it connotes a morality. The content analysis is overwhelming: it is a 
Treatise of the Reform. Of the mind, heart, soul, body, academic world. Formation 
of the scientific mind, I am afraid that this means, in truth, reform of the soul des-
perate to reach the quintessential. Read carefully the advice of alchemic practice 
to the alchemists (Formation, transl. p. 57-58) and see whether the epistemolo-
gist’s advice to physicists and chemists is not, perchance, the same?
Proof, on the spur of the moment. Bachelard announces, from the first chapter, 
that he is working toward the moralization of science (p. 32), through a catharsis 
of the impure (p. 29 and everywhere). The rectification, the well-known road to 
success, is at first only a correction, thought of in a provisional morality (p. 25). 
Hence the revelation of the diagnosis itself: the mind forms itself through reforming 
itself (p. 33), the first theorem of a book, where the last could very well be: objec-
tive control is a reform (p. 238). The ethics towards which the professor leans is 
of a high austerity: it reproves the world and the socialites, as understood by the 
monasteries and Port-Royal; the salons and the marquises, who faint before the 
thunder, have hot flashes in front of the electric machine, and who put their virtue 
at risk. It shuns frivolousness, it declares that amusing electricity exhibits cannot 
be but false, and it asks its disciples to enter into the cloister of the school or the 
laboratory (p. 41, 43). Be boring, like Coulomb (p. 38), and you’ll be taken serious-
ly among your peers who control you. Come, be sad and you will be philosophers 
(p. 146). Prepare for intellectual asceticism (p. 241), even heroism (p. 141). Beware 
of dangers, a sagitta volante in die, a negotio perambulante in tenebris, ab incurs et 
daemonio meridiano. Here they are, all at once: the instincts are the obstacles (p. 
25), intellectual joy is sometimes dangerous (p. 64), like intimate satisfaction (p. 
238, 242). No ecstatic states of the soul (p. 238). Hence the rule: the mind does not 
want to enjoy quietly (p. 245). I spoke of the demon, one must exorcise it (p. 49). 
I spoke of the night, here are the shadows of knowledge (p. 24). I will speak later 
of trade and of the arrow of Eros. Having begun with exorcism, the text ends with 
a manual for fraternal confession. The last chapter is impressive. Do not remain, 
without surveillance, in solitude (p. 239); let us admit to our intellectual faults, let 
us confess (p. 240), break up with pride and greed, murmur: “error, you are not an 
evil,” since our intellectual mistakes are forgivable (p. 241), erring compromises 
(p. 238); we tolerated impurities (p. 247), we renounce (p. 246), we ask that our 
impurities be amended by a reprimand (p. 238); let us return to the beginning; 

38 · michel serres  
after incrimination (p. 24), here finally there is repentance (p. 24). The confessor 
will say: the more recent the fault, the more serious the sin (p. 160). The book is 
framed by the act of penance, structured, one could say, like the sacrament. For 
confirmation: the last page speaks about changing the heart of man (p. 247) and 
the first takes the Pauline accents of the texts on the shedding of the old man: in 
front of the mystery of the real, the soul has difficulties making itself ingenuous, 
the mind is very old, science makes it younger (p. 25). Needless to say, these au-
thentic citations are drawn from a background of exceptional abundance. 
To rejuvenate (rajeunir), as far as I know, is the opposite of formation, in the 
physiological sense. Hence reform, in the moral sense, as a return or recurrence 
to a pure form. But let’s extend the biological metaphor for a moment, to see that 
it is indeed a metamorphosis, as when the old man casts off his skin. Training 
then is transformation. To rejuvenate, the text goes on, is to accept a sudden mu-
tation that must contradict a past (p. 25). The well-made head must be remade. It 
changes species… By spiritual revolutions…man becomes a mutant species, a species 
that needs to mutate, that suffers from not changing (p. 26). Hence Bachelard’s 
fascination with the Kafkaesque theme of coagulation, announced by a theory of 
the deformation of concepts (p. 69); hence the inverted themes of the variables 
being joined together, the mathematical coordination (p. 73), the cohesion and 
cement (p. 76), the semantic circle where language clots, hardens, seizes (p. 75-
77).9 There is metamorphosis, transubstantiation in the right direction toward a 
good form, that is, mutation toward coordination; and there is  transubstantia-
tion in the wrong direction, toward a bad form, if the speech coagulates. On the 
one hand, psychagogy, reform: the object instructs me, modifies me (p. 246), it 
properly arouses new organic functions (p. 247). Right in the middle of the page, 
Bachelard skims along the sacramental word,10 and approximates it with consub-
stantiation. On the other hand, the announced picture, the expected beast, which 
slowly hardens near the stove, in its crab shell, the dunce, the unscientific species, 
the subjectivist species, whose immobility instructs eminently (p. 242). We did 
not miss the bestiary, of which our pre-science is abundant.
P
Reform (moral), mutation, metamorphosis or change in species (biological), the 
term break (coupure) is the mathema of discontinuity or of distinction. It happens, 
in fact, that we may spot, here and there, certain “dates” when the scientific lan-
guage undergoes a sudden translation, of the sort after which no one speaks as be-

reformation and the seven sins · 39 
fore. Entire texts, by groups or sets, are thus composed in a dead language, whose 
deciphering is, downstream, a prehistoric, paleontological undertaking: the logic 
of Lullian art, for example, after arithmetical combinatorics, alchemy itself after 
Lavoisier. Then again, the gap can only be identified from a distance. Looked at 
closely, it is never so simple: Copernicus and Galileo aristotelize with ardour, as 
do thousands after them, within the realm of science proper, like Leibniz; and 
Jacques Cassini (the son), in the middle of the 18th century, long after Newton’s 
victory, continues to produce vortex models. And I say nothing of the crucial ex-
ample of revivals: look at the question of matter, atoms, and fire. Sure, the theo-
ry of the break is compatible with a normalized, that is to say idealized, history, 
which explains its mathematical reference. But I would rather that the theory 
were compatible with all histories. For the moment, let’s leave history as well as 
science. What is at stake?  Here we are dealing with the basic language that the 
scholar, the historian, the erudite can lean on, and by which they are most often 
possessed. Bachelard, we are showing, relies, perhaps unwittingly, on an ethics, 
roughly the ethics of the founders of the university, in which we find a blind jum-
ble of positivist themes, Christian themes, and even more archaic themes based 
on doctrines of initiation, asceticism and austerity. What is at stake is the change 
in this basic discourse, not what it is talking about, but the very discourse. It is 
a question of substituting the moral (and, thus, political) vocabulary of the con-
tinual progress of the mind with the political lexicon of the combat won at once, 
at a predicted or just at a given moment, against an adversary to be destroyed; of 
substituting for the vocabulary of reform, that of revolution. This is the real issue 
of the discussion of the continuous and the discontinuous. The battle takes place 
behind history and behind science: what is at stake, is to decide who will finally be 
the master of knowledge or the owner of history. The adversary is no longer the 
demon of confusion, the gnoseological demon of affects or prejudices, it is the 
demon of empire and of appropriation. In the face of this fundamental struggle, 
at the forefront of the scene, science and history have nothing but the status of 
elective objects that are there to be seized, and which are worthy of being seized. 
They were, in fact, in someone’s hands; the battle plays out for the change, or not, 
of hands. And so, neither history nor science can settle the debate. It is undecid-
able from within science or from within the history of science; it is never, as far as 
I can see, the stakes that decide the winner of a competition. Assuming that it is 
possible to analyze these ‘objects’11 directly, which is far from clear, one can bet a 
thousand to one that the result will remain silent about the alternative of continu-
ity versus discontinuity. Working from dawn till dusk, one can rejoice in contrary 
and equivalent arguments. And finally, considering the fundamental clash, are we 

40 · michel serres  
really facing an alternative in its proper domain here? One is never careful enough 
when employing a sectorial or dichotomous lexicon: it is often less revolutionary 
than it might seem. There have been many breaks, between Greeks and barbar-
ians, heretics and Orthodox, whites and blacks, elites and common folk…that, be-
fore doing it again, before operating the cleaver, one had better be wary that those 
speaking dead languages (or languages declared dead) are once again excluded by 
some elite. Look at how, even in Bachelard himself, vocabularies of moral reform 
and of scientific revolution coexist, of biological transformation and of genetic 
mutation; look at how, backed by a traditional ethical discourse, he will consider 
curious ‘breaks’: the casting off of the old man,12 passage from species to species, 
solutions and absolutions, mutations, scholarly utopias. There are, yes indeed, 
languages that remain foreign to one another; there are also dictionaries. 
P
But back to basic language. There was a time when the confessor and the penitent 
had manuals to read into the soul. Among them, we find some very ingenious 
ones, in the 17th century for example, compared to which our classical treaties of 
the passions are lacking in finesse and penetration. The less good ones offered 
tables with a view to this decipherment. The simplest and best known is the ru-
bric of the deadly sins. If it is then true that the moral lexicon of fault and sin 
dominates, La formation, as a treatise on the reform of the soul, as a manual of 
scientific ethics well-suited for fraternal correction, must contain a similar list. 
Non-science is the place of the cardinal sins, it can be mapped through pride, 
avarice, lust, gluttony, and sloth. The evidence is once again overwhelming; so 
strong that the demonstration risks repeating the text, unnecessarily. The reader 
will complete it for himself. 
Three special chapters are devoted to three of the five major vices. The psycho-
analysis of the realist (VII) reprimands the miser, the myth of digestion (VIII) sur-
prises the glutton in his sweet apathy, the libido (X) rummages the lustful. You 
will say: this corresponds to the three stages of psychoanalysis in a somewhat 
deranged order, anal, oral, genital, and these texts are induced by the teachings 
of Freud, not by conventional morality. The argument would be convincing if the 
sanction of pride and of sloth and the praise of wrath and of envy were not found 
dispersed all over a book dedicated to work and humility, without anything more 
than a circumstantial relation to the new psychology. Let us make this clear. Be-
tween the language of alchemists and salon physicians who claim to signify the 

reformation and the seven sins · 41 
object, but who speak only of the affective subject, and the language of science 
reaching maturity, which signifies the object but owes this performance to a psy-
chagogy, to a catharsis of understanding, to a gnoseology of the subject in the 
first person plural, between these two languages which are foreign to each other, 
Bachelard suggests a dictionary; this dictionary cannot catalogue the translation 
of the objects themselves: the question how one says phlogistic in chemistry has 
no meaning, and electricity has completely forgotten its yellow amber origin, just 
like nitrogen (l’azote) has forgotten the first and last letters of known alphabets. 
There remains the possibility of translating the subjective states, of saying how 
the scientific mind is formed as such. The dictionary then builds itself on the hu-
man sciences, and Bachelard chooses psychoanalysis, which shows his insightful-
ness at the time. Hence the venture: the dictionary, in turn, establishes itself on 
an archaic terrain with respect to the human sciences that have not yet reached 
maturity, on a pre-scientific soil in the region of the operating subject. Hence, it 
models itself on the old discourse of man, the old morality culture is impregnated 
with from one end to the other. Mutatis mutandis, Bachelard is confronted with 
the same adventure as the alchemists in the chemistry of the object: his lexicon 
is seized by the dominant language, his psychoanalysis returns to the state of 
alchemy, it veers toward moralizing initiation. It no longer translates anything, 
because the libido remains lust, sadism wrath, and anality avarice. This venture is 
ordinary: just as the soil has remained the same, the puritan ethics is always well 
suited to the psychoanalytic project and its practitioner is seen as a confessor. In-
stead of devoting himself to a psychoanalysis of the pre-sciences, Bachelard ends 
up treating the former as a one of them. The turn, moreover, is so general that it 
is significant: maybe in this case we stumbled on a truth. That said, here the dic-
tionary is no longer a tool of passage between two foreign languages, the two ba-
sic languages being identical. It turns out that no gap whatsoever exists between 
Bachelard’s psychoanalysis and pre-scientific morality. And the initiation to the 
scientific mind is indeed the same catharsis as the initiation of the alchemist: quod 
erat demonstrandum. The underlying semantic network, as elsewhere, coagulates, 
hardens, and seizes. 
Quick checks: five variations, on the spur of the moment. Here is the realism 
and the joy of owning, a miserly joy and Harpagon complex (p. 136-137). Its fun-
damental axiom: nothing is lost, nothing is created, saying of the miser (p. 137). 
The dust of pearls attracts the miserly member of the middle class more than the 
prodigal prince (p. 142): by the way, who is the father, who is the son, a question 
of psychoanalysis or of politics? Precious stones, objects of diligence in archaic 

42 · michel serres  
knowledge, are concentrations of fortune, maximum value for minimum space: 
it is intelligent avarism (p. 142-143). It is necessary to have in order to give, but 
to give remains more difficult than to receive, postulate of the petty (p. 146). Let 
us finally break with these greedy states of the soul (p. 238, 241). The reader can 
glean even more: let a few ears (of corn) drop on purpose, he said.13
Second harvest in the fields of sin. The emerald is chaste (p. 140-141), a figure 
of purity omnipresent and often virginal. The lover is patient like a scholar (p. 
185), hence the libido, insidious, ends up surfacing even in this heart of stone 
completely occupied with the aridities of the intellect (p. 186). Alchemy indulges, 
blindly, by proxy, in all fantastic manners, onanism (p. 188), incest (p. 189)…even 
jealousy, when its partisans beat their wives (p. 190). What turpitude! (ibid.). Nev-
er did a scientific treatise write such things. Thus, the whole chapter describes the 
exercise of lust, including the tired attempts of the old man to regenerate himself, 
this old man of whom we do not know whether he is Booz, David, or Saint Paul 
himself. Hence the conclusion: objective knowledge must be a tranquil knowl-
edge; confused youth or Faustian old age are obstacles: vade retro. Alas, educators 
do not work to provide this tranquility! (p. 209).
Where to pick becomes where to peck, and then to devour. With the reign of sci-
ence, gluttony has disappeared from the University: to be convinced, go seek a 
cookbook at the library of Dijon (p. 37); from you to me, we must find there even 
fewer arts of love. Do you want some recipes? They abound in non-science: take 
and mix some bread, mutton, lemon, spinach, watercress, honey, brandy (p. 74), 
you get a kind of gruel; soaking in a garlic juice, seasoning (p. 178) (by the way, 
the article of the Encyclopedia was not from the hand of Diderot). Taste and smell 
(p. 74)14, the electric current, for example, and decide if it is acrid, tangy, sweet, 
spicy…(p. 110-111). Digest with the ninth chapter: stomach and retort (how I did 
not know that the still has a cucurbit!), guts and excrement, we return to some-
thing like the realism of the greedy. Conclusion: it is necessary that the uncon-
scious be disturbed to advise such uses, such follies (vésanies) (p. 183). How can 
the idea come about? See psychoanalysis turn to scandal. In Freud, coprophagia is 
explained, here it is incredible (p. 183). All of our meals are deodorized (p. 239), in 
the austere scientific banquet, where our peers banish inebriation: the enormous 
subjective success that is an inebriation would be the most unrectifiable of errors 
(p. 238). To dream of lost Greekness. 

reformation and the seven sins · 43 
Let us together abandon pride (p. 240), the will of repressed power, anarchic and 
satanic tendencies, the need to be master of things in order to oppress people (p. 
48); I have cited exorcism and conjuration, here is the Luciferian sin. The worst, 
because the temptation remains: to provoke the philosophers, to win over people 
by people in talkative reasoning, is a sweet success for the will of power, but to 
be right, to have reason on one’s side by things putting us in the right, that is the 
immense success where the luminous will of reason triumphs (p. 244). Perhaps the 
worst15 is committed to satisfy the narcissism too frequently induced by a liter-
ary culture (p. 26) that loves parades (p. 92-93). General knowledge, universality 
acquired too quickly, is the sign of a thought in a hurry to admire itself (p. 71). 
No sooner has it advanced one of these grandiose unification hypotheses than it 
makes a show of intellectual humility. But this humility, talkative and tardy, is a 
poor disguise for a primitive immodesty. The basis of a knowledge that is general-
ized beyond the possible contradiction by objects is pride (p. 95). 
Science requires humble people, certainly, but most of all workers. It has no use 
for inert (p. 66), indolent (p. 245), lazy people (p. 73). The last chapter, where the 
ethical vocabulary increases to a maximum density, forms a hymn to work, but 
the whole book is practically this anyway. Hence some celebrations: of constant 
and sustained effort (p. 242, 245-247), stimulation (p. 238), fatigue (p. 239-241), 
activity (p. 242), difficulty (p. 243, 249), construction (p. 238) and will (p. 248). 
Non-science is a collection of lazy sophisms, science a coordination of worked 
out truths, rectified. Formation and reform: the more difficult a work is, the more 
educational it is. Come on, back to work, suffer, fight and die without murmuring, 
you will be a man (p. 249). Get rid of the body (p. 154); life spread everywhere is an 
obstacle (chapter VIII). Final stage: Kipling, or Vigny, or the Stoa poikilè, in short 
austerity. To dream of midday dances.
The list is finished. But it is summarized twice in the text itself. Moral initiation, 
or reform: one must purify one’s soul, despise money and gold, practice austerity, 
self-denial, be patient, be at work in a relentless (de manière acharnée), disembodied 
(décharnée) way. Heretical and perverse, Faust calls the devil to satisfy his pas-
sions. This is the ethical program of alchemy (p. 57-58). Compare it now either 
to content analysis or the terminal program (p. 240-242), and the book closes on 
itself, in perfect coherence. At this point of fusion, where the scientist is the same 
as his ancestor, most likely lies the secret crucible of the oeuvre that was about to 
come: for the one who was both the physicist of the complexity worked, rectified, 
formed, transformed, formalized, and properly became an alchemist of the form-

44 · michel serres  
less material imagination.  
P
La Formation is a prehistory and, as such, something like a psychagogy. But the 
archeological journey is organized by a purgative ethic of knowledge. Bachelard 
announces a floating plan(e), whereas the book is fairly well organized, according 
to the old list of deadly sins. The learned soul, in its third state,16 initiated to the 
longing for abstraction, rejuvenated (p. 25) by shedding the old man,17 is a pure 
soul: humble, insensitive to money and precious stones, modest, sober and labori-
ous. It has pronounced the three vows of the university clergy: poverty, chastity, 
obedience. Alone in front of its object, the learned soul is a beautiful soul. A little 
boring, to be honest, like Coulomb’s science (p. 38). 
You say, Bachelard did not go to the end of the list, which demonstrates a poor 
reading, a partial key. There remains envy and wrath. Response: the practice of 
positive science preciously preserved these residual vices as virtues, as its own 
virtues. The new priests still thunder like Jupiter at the top of the hierarchy; they 
delight in terror, are obsessed with degrees, and color their competition with the 
greenish yellow of jealousy. Bachelard’s catharsis is incomplete: beautiful souls 
and wicked city. The scientific utopia has still not built its Thélème.18 It does not 
seem like it even wants to. Why not?
The relation of the subject to the object that was, for centuries, the basis upon 
which science and theory of knowledge constructed their empire, was formed, not 
by nature, but by civilization, in a brutal mode.  The original sin of destruction is 
at the origin and foundation of our knowledge. To take, to grasp—Western man 
is an intellectual predator. To know is to hunt, violate, have power over, destroy. 
Listen to the great commandments of this dawn of science. We only command na-
ture by obeying it, make yourself its masters and possessors, the object is nothing 
but an obstacle, progress follows polemics, conflicts, problems are to be solved, 
dissolved, volatilized... Ongoing speech of the killing, that of analysis, in the literal 
sense. Wickedness at the root of knowledge, wrath, envy, as desired norms, as 
cardinal virtues. Listen to Bachelard himself, here and everywhere else. We know 
against previous knowledge, by destroying, overcoming the obstacle (p. 24-25), 
thoughts are aggressive, polemical, we think our phenomenon through criticizing 
the phenomenon of others, we keep toiling away (p. 30), the scientific spirit must 
be formed against nature (p. 33). This is what we hear, at the very beginning; the 

reformation and the seven sins · 45 
same thing, as an echo, at the end. Following the confession of the sins of the plea-
sures, school utopia exasperates envy by accentuating the hierarchy. We reward 
the head of the class by giving him the joy of teaching the second, the second is the 
monitor of the third, etc... (p. 242); when we know that the teacher is a sadist and 
the student a masochist, that pedagogy is the relation of the weak to the strong 
and the field of revenge (p. 245, 246), we know that we have been living for a long 
time in Utopia, in this one at least. In short, you have to be right against someone 
(p. 242). Envy, wrath, the capital virtues of the reactive researcher. Knowledge is 
against: against nature, against its own knowledge, against the self and the past, 
against others one by one or collectively. 
Our rigorous science teaches us this, without saying it, with words that we do 
not listen to. Everyone is shocked that knowledge is no longer wisdom: it never 
has been since its first formation, since the criminal act was its act of birth, in the 
shade of Jupiter’s flamines and of the legionaries of Mars. Knowledge is allied with 
power, it is power in its very essence, not only since empires have recognized and 
stolen its might, but since it has established itself as knowledge at the loci of strat-
egy, of conquest and of the empire. And now, under penalty of death, we are forced to 
outline a more archaic prehistory than that of Bachelard, to purify the sources of science 
poisoned, from the beginning, by terror. It is no longer a question of the fine list of 
capital sins, but of our collective survival in the face of capital punishment. The 
purity of the soul is child’s play in face of this risk.
We dream of a Quirinus who would return, in part, the painting.19 What would 
happen if the modest workers of proof, still and evermore reactive, and reactive 
by the nature of tests and proofs (épreuves et preuves), discovered all of a sudden 
the truth, incredible and naked: that the intimate motivation of research, that the 
key to discovery, that the possible disclosure of the true intuition, resided neither 
in competition, nor in the desire to dominate, but in rejoicing? 

46 · michel serres  
NOTES
1. [Editorial note: an allusion to a passage close to the end of Formation (transl. Mary McAllester 
Jones, p. 239): “Landry said that it is an easy matter to move an object lying on a table by a centi-
metre; moving it by a millimetre requires the complex interplay of antagonist muscles and is much 
more tiring (…) However, moving an object (…) by a millimetre is not yet a scientific operation. 
Scientific operations start at the next decimal point. To move an object by a tenth of a millimetre 
you need a piece of apparatus….”]
2. Positivism is a physicalism. It judges science and pre-science in the court of the physical meth-
od. Hence the elimination of ideology or psychology, condemned or suppressed. Then physics 
changes, and its method reintroduces the observer. Immediately the positivist gap is filled. To 
see the theological and metaphysical eras from this restitution, the new physicist mind reads 
pre-science from the vantage point of psychology. But physicalism is invariant, and its lexicon 
(formation, mind…) is Comte’s terminology. We have changed all of that: nowadays, we think we 
are turning our backs on Comte, but we only turn our backs on physics, by privileging the logico-
mathematical and socio-political spheres. The object is lost: this rigorously defines the new ideal-
ism. [Note by the author in the version of Hermès II. L’interférence, p. 204.]
3. The mind is the subject of science as well as its object. Thus the mind informs its own history, as 
it is informed by the latter. This finishes with Hegel. Positivism: the mind is the subject of science 
and the object its object. This finishes with Bachelard, and with his bipolar epistemology, rational-
ism and realism. Henceforth: the subject-object opposition disappears, to make room for the idea 
that intersubjectivity is the control of science,  upstream control of its production, downstream 
of its achievements. Control or regulation. [Note by the author in the version of Hermès II. L’in-
terférence, p. 205.]
4. [Editorial note: Serres is referring to respectively Jean Cavaillès, Remarques sur la formation de 
la théorie abstraite des ensembles. Paris: Hermann, 1938 and Georges Canguilhem, La formation du 
concept de réflexe aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles. Paris: PUF, 1955.]
5. This could be called the spontaneous science of the philosopher. [Note by the author in the 
version of Hermès II. L’interférence, p. 206.] [Editorial note: This is a reversal of a concept by Louis 
Althusser, namely what the latter called the spontaneous philosophy of the scientists. See Louis 
Althusser, Philosophy and the Spontaneous Philosophy of the Scientists & Other Essays. London/New 
York: Verso, 1990.]
6. [Editorial note : Here Serres refers to a triple tripartition Bachelard makes in the “Discours pré-
liminaire” (Foreword): a partition of stages as periods in the history of thought, one of stages in 
terms of degrees of abstraction, and a partition between three types of ‘soul’ (âme) corresponding 
to those stages. Cf. Formation of the scientific Mind, p. 18-21).]
7. [Editorial note: It is a remarkable fact that, throughout the text, Serres uses several times the 
althusserian term coupure rather than the expected bachelardian rupture. Whether or not this is 
done intentionally, the shift is not without significance, since it reflects the temporary re-launch 
of Bachelard’s endeavour by Althusser in the late sixties, followed by its premature burial. Since, 
moreover, ‘épistémologie’ had, by the same token, come to mean the very thing althusserians were 
practising, along with others like Canguilhem, this shift is in part symptomatic of the sceptical 
stance Serres has come to adopt towards epistemology.]
8. [Editorial note: Here, of course, Serres refers to Althusser and the althusserians.]
9. Claude Moussy, Recherches sur Trephô et les verbes grecs signifiant nourrir. Paris, Klincksiek, 1969. 

reformation and the seven sins · 47 
[Note by the author.]
10. [Editorial note: viz., transubstantiation. In fact, the word ‘transubstantiation’ occurs just once 
in the whole book: p. 123 of the translation.]
11. [Editorial note: viz., science and history of science.]
12. [Editorial note: St. Paul, Letter to the Colossians, 3:9]
13. [Editorial note: This is reference to a passage from the Bible, namely in the book of Ruth, chap-
ter II.]
14. [Editorial note: rather than p. 69 = p.76 of the translation, as indicated in Serres’ text.]
15. [Editorial note: “il” in Serres’ text (« Peut-être il est commis pour assuouvir le narcissisme… ») 
can, by virtue of the pejorative meaning in the context, only refer to “le pire,” “the worst,” in the 
previous sentence.]
16. [Editorial note: this refers to the third stage of the third partition referred to in note 6, i.e., to 
the third type of ‘soul.’] 
17. [Editorial note: see note 12.]
18. [Editorial note: a fictitious esoteric order and abbey, invented by Rabelais in Gargantua, carry-
ing the motto “Fais ce que vouldras”: “Do as you please.”]
19. [Editorial note: Quirinus is the Roman god, who forms a triad with Mars and Jupiter, that em-
bodies sovereignty,  struggle and production. Throughout his work, Serres regularly refers to this 
triad, when it comes to his critique of the objectionable face of science and, more generally, of 
practices of dominance and violence.]

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 48-59
gaston bachelard looks at 
albert flocon's 'castles in 
spain' 
hans-jörg rheinberger
In this contribution, I would like to elaborate on some aspects of the work that 
resulted from the encounter of the copper engraver Albert Flocon with the phi-
losopher of science Gaston Bachelard. The two met each other in the art circles of 
Paris they both frequented after World War II. In the decade that followed, they 
collaborated in the production of a number of artistic books, to which Flocon 
contributed the engravings which Bachelard accompanied or introduced by short-
er or longer texts. The present text revolves around a single copper engraving. 
The engraving opens a cycle comprising fifteen large-format coppers engraved 
by Flocon complemented by “stories” by Bachelard.1 The cassette was printed in 
two hundred copies in 1957 under the title Châteaux en Espagne and distributed 
among the members of the Cercle Grolier, a group of “friends of the book.” Bach-
elard understood his texts as stories of a particular kind. His remarks, as well as 
Flocon’s engravings, can be regarded as experiments in imagination. And as such, 
they share a characteristic feature of experimentation: a fundamental dialectic 
between abstraction and concretion. This motif is the topic and leitmotif that 
runs through the present paper.
“THE SPACE-TIME OF THE PROJECT”
Bachelard has the following to say on the time of the gestation of this book: “How 
many stories did I tell to myself during this long winter, when Albert Flocon 

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 49 
brought to me, week after week, the loose sheets of this album!”2 As testified by 
the signature dates of many of these coppers, Flocon had engraved them in the 
course of the years between 1952 and 1956. Now he put his cloud-castles together, 
presented them to Bachelard one after the other, who provided them with a brief 
or more extensive text, and the printed book was finally delivered to its subscrib-
ers early in 1958. As already on the occasion of the publication of Paysages,3 their 
first big common artistic publication endeavor dating from 1950, Bachelard again 
refers to a peculiar space of resonance in which the philosopher and the artist 
did not seek a common understanding discursively, but rather indulged in each 
other’s images and texts in a sort of tacit complicity. Indeed, according to Bach-
elard “Flocon never explained to me what he wanted to make. From him to me, 
there was no discourse.”4 The stories mentioned in the quote above were the ones 
Bachelard had told himself in front of the images. In turn, Flocon had created his 
castles in the air stimulated by the rêveries that Bachelard published on the “ele-
ments” of fire, air, earth and water in a series of books between the late 1930s and 
the late 1940s,5 which had prompted the artist to get in touch with the philoso-
pher. 
From the very beginning of his introduction to the volume, Bachelard spells out 
what fascinates him with these images: “I love the engraving for the engraving’s 
sake, the autonomous engraving, the engraving that originally illustrates nothing 
and which I, in my philosophical musings, call the auto-eidetic engraving. For me, 
it is the ideal of a story without words, narrative in condensed form.”6 It is clear 
that the engravings neither refer to a beyond to which they might give shape, nor 
do they tell a story in the sense of a report of something they refer to. They have 
their narrative capacity in themselves, in the multiple options to relate their ele-
ments to each other. “All ‘castles’ of Flocon glow,” Bachelard states.7 They shine 
from within. They are suggestive of their own possible continuations.
Along the same lines, Flocon once confessed: “I had always a predilection for 
construction sites that show buildings in the making; throughout my life […] I 
have built air-castles.”8 In this way, the movement of production in its own right, 
in its capriciousness, and in its autopoietic reflexivity, is foregrounded and ex-
perimentality becomes the central concern of the imagery. Bachelard summarizes 
the basic idea of the series as follows: “Flocon calls his collection: Châteaux en 
Espagne. He thus invites us to measure the distance between what one sees and 
what one dreams, to traverse what could be called the project-space, to live in the 
space-time of the project. With this formula, the inveterate philosopher that I am, 

50 · hans-jörg rheinberger  
resumes Flocon’s vision: Flocon is the engraver of the space-time of the project.”9 
Projecting, in the strong sense of the term—not in its degenerated usage in to-
day’s prose of scientific project application—is a form of giving way in which the 
path itself becomes thematic and with that, problematic. Bachelard again: “He 
[Flocon] loves it to catch that moment of the construction in which the construc-
tion is just about to engage with the project.”10
For those familiar with the epistemological oeuvre of Bachelard, a comparison 
suggests itself here. In his Nouvel esprit scientifique, the book conceived as the man-
ifesto of a non-Cartesian epistemology in the early 1930s, we can read the follow-
ing sentences: “Above the subject and beyond the object, modern science is based 
on the project. In scientific thought the subject’s meditation upon the object al-
ways takes the form of a project.”11 The project thus defines a space in-between, a 
space populated by instruments through which the subject’s meditation becomes 
a veritable mediation. The point is elaborated a couple of pages further on: “A 
truly scientific phenomenology is therefore essentially a phenomeno-technology 
[phénoménotechnique]. Its purpose is to amplify what is revealed beyond appear-
ance. It takes its instruction from construction.”12 In other words, technique and 
phenomenon are mutually shaping each other in the process. According to Bach-
elard, the project also characterizes the very gesture of the modern experimental 
sciences. Likewise, the tentative, the reaching out by groping, as Sandra Pravica 
has beautifully put it, is also the founding gesture of Bachelard’s own philosophy 
of science.13 It is this very gesture that opens a new space for the game of abstrac-
tion and concretion and with that, throws light on the scientific as well as the ar-
tistic production process. Last but not least, it elucidates a philosophy of science 
conceived of as a non-Cartesian epistemology. The phenomenological here has 
to be taken in its own exposition, neither as a symptom of, nor as a veiling of an 
essence. The point is no longer to seek behind the appearances for hidden depths. 
Everything depends on what lies in plain sight and in between, not what is hidden 
beneath. Thus Bachelard comments on Flocon’s engravings: “The secret of the 
richness of the narrative that is enclosed in each of these plates lies in the fact that 
our engraver is a master of simplicity. If behind a bustle of contours and shades 
one would have to search for a hidden value, if one would have to dig in order to 
find, then one could take this as an explanation for the possibility of different and 
changing interpretations. One could be proud to detect some hidden meaning.”14 
But this is not the point here. The possibility space of these engravings is not 
vertically, but horizontally organized. Consequently, Bachelard continues: “Here, 
everything is simple, everything is plain, everything is engraved. Flocon instinc-

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 51 
tively commands the fantastic plurality of the simple.”15
LA BOUTEILLE: THE FIGURATIVE AND THE NON-FIGURATIVE
It is now time to have a closer look at one of these copper engravings. Let us con-
centrate on the first, page-filling Spanish castle of the collection. The index lists it 
under the title of La bouteille, and Bachelard characterizes his remarks as a “philo-
sophical narrative of the bottle”.16 Further on in the text that accompanies this gra-
vure, he addresses it as a “cosmic bottle,”17 and indeed, something solemn, if not 
sublime, appears to surround this vessel. However, to read the picture in a simple 
symbolical fashion, for example, the church as the figment of an imagination led 
astray by obscuring powers—would carry us completely on the wrong track. A flat 
reading is required, not one leading into symbolical depths.
Geometrically, the image is dominated by the austerity of the vertical and the 
horizontal. Before a low horizon, the curling waves of a moving sea spread out. 
On the shore in the foreground to the right, a structure strains upwards that is 
wrapped in the contours of a bottle and appears to soak up the sand that the 
waters have washed up on the beach. In the foreground of the picture to the left, 
this upward movement is taken up once more and transposed in a more abstract 
form. A further leftover of the sea deposited on the shore, a seashell, serves as an 
ashtray for a cigarette that glows away next to an extinct match and a stubbed-
out butt, and whose thin smoke trail moves in parallel to the bottle, straight up, 
where it finally tilts, separates into different strands, mixes with the clouds, and 
disappears behind the bottleneck. A drinking vessel finds its place between the 
seashell and the bottle. On the image, however, no smoker and no drinker are to 
be seen. The engraver has simultaneously put himself into the picture and erased 
himself from it via these props of meditativeness. The cloud-castle thus appears 
fully present as the product of the engraver’s working table and yet as evanescent 
as the gracefully rising swath of smoke, as haphazard as a bottle post.
Bachelard muses: “Such engravings can perfectly invoke the polemic between the 
figurative and the non-figurative. If I were allowed to continue in my philosophi-
cal language: I would designate such an engraving as abstract-concrete. I connect 
it to all that I love of the world, the abstract thinking that guides the concrete 
creation. Let us try to capture in it that unity of the abstract and the concrete at 
work, that embodiment of the thinking human in a resilient nature, that synthesis 
of the figurative and the non-figurative.”18 And he goes on: “Flocon’s prints do not 

52 · hans-jörg rheinberger  
copy anything; they do not accept the slavery of a figurative art. But conversely, 
and without contenting himself with a non-figurative art, Flocon visualizes all the 
irrealities that transcend the real.”19
This bottle thus packs a punch. Let us first have a closer look at its contours. Its 
two halves form a strong contrast that takes up the game of horizontality and ver-
ticality and reinforces it with the opposition between bright and dark, of day and 
night, of light and shadow. Surprisingly, the somber part is directed toward the 
sea, the blazing one toward land. Again and again in this image, we find such un-
familiar and dazzling reversals of conventions. Towards the spectator, the bottle 
opens and articulates its interior as a lofty gothic cathedral. Its needle-pointed 
middle tower juts out of the bottleneck, breaking through the image margin. A 
host of roof workers appears to drive it into the sky. The choir is filled with a ra-
diating statue of a madonna that rises out of a slipstream of little human figures 
worshipping her and forming her socle at the same time. As soon as the spectator 
concentrates on the cathedral that delineates itself in the contours of the bottle, 
the latter appears as “slit open,” as a “provisional scaffold,”20 that is in the process 
of becoming superfluous and of detaching itself like a skin from the building—the 
frame of a construction site. Its label as well appears to peel from the glass, as if 
it had lost its readability and with that, its function, in the shining rays cast by the 
sun on the bottleneck, from where they reflect in all directions. To quote Bache-
lard on Flocon’s airy castle once again: “Right from the first engraving—the bottle 
in front of the sea—one experiences these transactions between the function of 
the real and the irreal, transactions that make up the life of the imagination. As 
soon as the artist has entered this zone of transaction in which the irreal unsettles 
the real and the real beguiles the fantastic, it appears as if one could assign the 
task of creating images to the objects themselves, trusting that the images, in the 
mode of a rêverie, take possession of the objects, play around the things.”21
With that description, Bachelard captures a basic dimension of Flocon’s work in 
a precise and pointed manner: It is a sort of leftover of the objects. And although 
Flocon barely leaves the frame of the figurative, he treats things in such a trans-
figuring manner that, in the end, it is the power of imagination itself that comes 
into its own exactly through that excessive precision of the elements that almost 
invites touching them. There is no representation here, but manifestation, a pro-
jection of worlds, and with that, the process of projecting reflexively manifests 
itself at the same time. And yet, the way in which such heightened awareness is 
provoked is in itself utterly rare. “Yes, indeed, engraving, and in particular copper 

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 53 
engraving, is an extremely abstract technique,” Flocon once remarked in a con-
versation with the French writer Gil Jouanard, and he carried the argument to ex-
tremes in claiming that the only thing the engraver could have recourse to finally 
was abstraction.22 Thus, these coppers contradict the function of the technique of 
copper engraving in the pre-photographic and pre-lithographic age, when it was 
primarily used for reproduction.
LE RATIONALISME APPLIQUÉ: THE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
Flocon also called Bachelard “the man of the abstract-concrete,”23 capturing an 
essential point in Bachelard’s thought, in particular his vision of the contempo-
rary sciences: In his epistemological oeuvre, Bachelard emphasizes the un-eidetic, 
mathematical apparatus of modern physics, and at the same time its connection 
with very concrete phenomeno-technical contraptions. As a consequence, it does 
not come as a surprise when Bachelard, in Le Rationalisme appliqué, one of his epis-
temological books he was writing at the time of his encounter with Flocon, explic-
itely characterizes the physics of his time as an “abstract-concrete mentality” that 
realizes itself in a permanent “reciprocal action of abstraction and concretion.”24 
These attributions are not meant to be states of mind or states of the matter. 
Rather, they must be understood as process categories that characterize the ac-
tivities within a “field of thought” [champ de pensée] that emerged, as Bachelard 
put it, from the “conjunction” of mathematics and experiment25: “No empty ratio-
nality, no incoherent empirism—these two philosophical promises are at the bot-
tom of the tight and precise synthesis of theory and experience in contemporary 
physics.”26 And Bachelard returns to his earlier remarks on the relation between 
subject and object in his New Scientific Spirit of 1934 when he now states: “It is 
no longer a question of confronting a lonely spirit with an indifferent universe. 
From now on, one must act out of that center in which the knowing mind is deter-
mined by the respective object of his knowledge, and from where the former in re-
turn directs experimentation with even greater precision.”27 Bachelard’s German 
contemporary Ernst Cassirer once quoted Werner Heisenberg to make the same 
point about this intimate connection in modern physics. “The modern theories,” 
according to Heisenberg, “did not issue from revolutionary ideas that would have 
been brought into the exact natural sciences from the outside. […] The change 
in the foundations of exact natural science as it happened in modern physics has 
been compelled step by step through experimental investigations.”28

54 · hans-jörg rheinberger  
What Bachelard chiastically calls “applied rationalism” and “instructed material-
ism” form the two inseparable sides of the same coin.29 “We thus see that we can 
best assure ourselves of the rational properties of a technical materialism, and 
reciprocally, the real properties of an applied rationalism, if we bring reason and 
scientific object systematically into a dialectical relation with each other.”30 For 
the scientist this means: “When it comes to assure oneself of an object of scien-
tific knowledge, one can no longer entrust oneself to the immediacy of a non-ego 
opposing an ego. […] The rationalist cogito […] has to function like an emergence 
out of a more or less empirically corroborated existence.”31
According to Bachelard, an epistemological reflection on the dynamics of the sci-
ences must not eschew that dialectic; on the contrary, it must endorse it. Con-
sequently, Bachelard sees his own philosophy of science as a “philosophy at 
work” [une philosophie au travail], and he contrasts it with what he criticizes as 
the “philosophies of summary” [philosophies de résumé] of his predecessors and 
contemporaries in philosophy of science.32 And he does not exempt the historians 
of science from this critique, reproaching them to shy away all too often from a 
reconstruction of the obscure situations in the course of knowledge acquisition, 
those situations in which the abstract and the concrete, concept and object have 
not yet found—or have momentarily lost—their recursive connection. In con-
trast, Bachelard claims to proceed as process-oriented and tentative at the level of 
epistemology, as he perceives the sciences to do in their own work. In his view, this 
is what any epistemology should take as its starting point. From here, his episte-
mology takes its peculiar historical shade. “Epistemology has thus to be as mobile 
as science itself.”33 If, for the physical sciences this means that “each new experi-
ment exposes […] the very method of experimentation to experience”34—that is, 
to testing -, then it means for the epistemologist that he, “in order to understand, 
must participate in an emergence.”35 In other words, no prima philosophia , no 
“philosophy of the beginning”, but rather a “philosophy of continuation.”36 Like 
the scientist, the epistemologist has to immerse himself into a recursive process; 
his epistemology can no longer rest on Cartesian principles.
EXPERIMENTATION: A DIALECTICS OF NATURE AND COUNTER-NA-
TURE
Let us go back to Flocon. We can assume that Bachelard saw Flocon’s craft of 
copper engraving as immersed into a phenomeno-technical process, that in some 
respects resonates with the scientific process of knowledge acquisition. Just as 

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 55 
modern physics is “no longer a science of facts, but a technology of effects,” a sci-
ence that no longer summarizes itself in “description of phenomena, but rather 
in a production of phenomena”,37 the work of the engraver inscribes itself into 
a comparable space, the space of a “dialectics of nature and counter-nature,”38 
of the figurative and the non-figurative, the real and the unreal, to refer back to 
Bachelard’s story about the bottle. This space corresponds to what Bachelard calls 
an “intermediary time,” a “time of the in-between.”39 Each of these castles invites 
us, as he puts it, to “live in the space-time of the project.”40
Repeatedly, Bachelard comes back to this aspect of intermittency, a time discon-
nected from a beginning and an end, as one could put it. And it is exactly this 
limbo that creates the possibility of what he calls, at the level of narration, a “con-
tingency of contemplation.”41 “I tell myself a different story from the one I told 
myself yesterday. Sincere contemplation is a capricious thing—pure caprice, in 
fact.”42 And to reverse once more the register of the crafts in the other direc-
tion, Bachelard sees the scientist in a comparable situation when faced with a 
complex reality. In the sciences as well, an object can “command several types of 
objectification, several perspectives of specification, and it can be part of different 
issues.”43
“I loved it to push rationality to its limits,” Flocon once confessed, and he added: 
“Beyond that, there is still enough of a mystery.”44 The gesture of the experiment-
er cannot be better expressed than with these words. The experimenter sharpens 
and configures the available knowledge in such a way that it becomes possible to 
push beyond it. Flocon understood copper engraving as a form of experimenting. 
That is not to be understood just in the sense of probing, of trying out. For sure, 
he also played with the printing techniques and materials, and in particular has 
transferred worn copper plates into new contexts of printing.45 But here, some-
thing else is at work and at stake. What we are facing is the fundamental gesture of 
creating a surplus by omission, in other words, of concretion by abstraction. From 
the constraints of the technique, things hitherto unheard and unseen emerge. The 
technique does not exhaust itself in the reproduction of something given, rather 
it provokes potentials intrinsic to the objects with which it interacts, thus leading 
to something like an immanent transcendence. The experimental structure is that 
of a project. It is this gesture of pointing beyond, not in the sense of an overarch-
ing classifiatory subsumption or generalization, not in the sense of a replacement 
by a mere other, but rather in the sense of a transgression through restriction, 
that constitutes the decisive aspect of experimentation. Here, the experiment ap-

56 · hans-jörg rheinberger  
proximates with what it means to be exemplary. An experiment is always exem-
plary in character. The experiment presents a peculiar kind of vicariousness. It 
does not just stand in for something. It points beyond itself in that it points to its 
own specificity. It is a hypostasis. It exposes.
Fig. 1: “La bouteille”. Copper engraving from: Gaston Bachelard and 
Albert Flocon, Châteaux en Espagne. Cercle Grolier, Les Amis du livre 
moderne, Paris 1957, plate on p. 19.

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 57 
Experimenting is the craft and the art of the abstract-concrete. From this vantage 
point, Bachelard saw Flocon’s engravings as a relentless effort to abstract from 
the concrete and at the same time to concretize the abstract. Consequently, he ad-
dressed Flocon’s airy castles as “abstract-concrete plates”.  Like he was interested 
in the “real” of the sciences [le réel scientifique]  rather than in the representations 
that they offer, in the “real” of literature rather than in the tales that it tells, so he 
was interested in the “real” of Flocon’s engravings, not in their possible represen-
tations. What fascinated him was their auto-eidetic potential of iteration.

58 · hans-jörg rheinberger  
NOTES
1. Gaston Bachelard and Albert Flocon, Châteaux en Espagne. Cercle Grolier, Les amis du livre 
moderne, Paris 1957. The text part of this volume is reprinted in: Gaston Bachelard, Le droit de 
rêver. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris 1970, pp. 99-121, on p. 9.
2. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 9.
3. Albert Flocon and Gaston Bachelard, Paysages. Eynard, Rolle (VD) 1950.
4. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 10.
5. Gaston Bachelard, La psychanalyse du feu. Librairie Gallimard, Paris 1938; and Gaston Bache-
lard, L’eau et les rêves; L’air et les songes; La terre et les rêveries de la volonté; La terre et les rêveries du 
repos. Librairie José Corti, Paris 1942, 1943, 1948, 1948.
6. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 9.
7. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 13.
8. Albert Flocon, Une poétique de la vision. Du Bauhaus à la persepctive curviligne/Eine Poetik des 
Sehens. Vom Bauhaus zur kurvenlinearen Perspektive. Ecole des Beaux-Arts de Metz, 1992, p. 90.
9. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 12.
10. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 15.
11. Gaston Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit (1934). Beacon Press, Boston 1984, pp. 11–12.
12. Bachelard 1984, p. 13.
13. Sandra Pravica, Bachelards tentative Wissenschaftsphilosophie. Passagen Verlag, Wien 2015.
14. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, pp. 10-11.
15. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 11.
16. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 17.
17. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 18.
18. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 13.
19. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 13.
20. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 20.
21. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 14.
22. Albert Flocon, Main ouvrière et main rêveuse (Entretien avec Gil Jouanard), in: Bachelard ou le 
droit de rêver. Solaire 10 (special issue), 1983, pp. 57-65, on p. 63.
23. Albert Flocon, Le philosophe et le graveur. In: Bachelard. Colloque de Cerisy, Paris 1974, pp. 271-
278, on p. 271.
24. Gaston Bachelard, Le Rationalisme appliqué. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris 1949, p. 1.
25. Bachelard 1949, p. 1.
26. Bachelard 1949, p. 3.
27. Bachelard 1949, p. 4.
28. Werner Heisenberg, Wandlungen der Grundlagen der exakten Naturwissenschaft in jüngerer Zeit. 
In: Wandlungen in den Grundlagen der Naturwissenshaft. Zwei Vorträge. Leipzig 1935, pp. 5-26, on 
pp. 7 and 16-17. Quoted in: Ernst Cassirer, Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissen-
schaft der neueren Zeit. Vierter Band. Von Hegels Tod bis zur Gegenwart (1832-1932). Gesammelte 
Werke Hamburger Ausgabe Band 5. Meiner Verlag, Hamburg 2000, p. 95. 
29. Bachelard 1949, p. 4.
30. Bachelard 1949, p. 9.
31. Bachelard 1949, pp. 50-51.
32. Bachelard 1949, p. 9.

gaston bachelard looks at albert flocon's 'castles in spain' · 59 
33. Bachelard 1949, p. 10.
34. Bachelard 1949, p. 43.
35. Bachelard 1949, p. 11.
36. Bachelard 1949, p. 54.
37. Gaston Bachelard, Noumène et microphysique (1931-32). In: Gaston Bachelard, Etudes. Présenta-
tion de Georges Canguilhem. Vrin, Paris 1970, pp. 11-24, on p. 24.
38. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 13.
39. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 13.
40. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 12.
41. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 9.
42. Bachelard and Flocon, p. 9.
43. Bachelard 1949, p. 53.
44. Flocon 1983, p. 64.
45. Compare Albert Flocon, Suites expérimentales. Medusa Verlagsgesellschaft and Bauhaus-Ar-
chiv, Berlin 1983.
46. Bachelard and Flocon 1957, p. 26.
47. Bachelard 1984, Introduction.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 60-84
surrationalism after 
bachelard: michel serres 
and le nouveau nouvel esprit 
scientifique
massimiliano simons
1. INTRODUCTION
The work of Michel Serres, if considered at all, is often presented as a radical 
break with or criticism of the work of Gaston Bachelard. This is sometimes also 
endorsed by Serres himself, who in an interview stated:
Yes, I wrote my thesis under Bachelard, but l thought privately that the 
“new scientific spirit” coming into fashion at that time lagged way behind 
the sciences. ... The model it offered of the sciences could not, for me, 
pass as contemporary. This new spirit seemed to me quite old. And so, this 
milieu was not mine.1
Bruno Latour, in a similar vein, has described Serres as the anti-Bachelard.2 Within 
this context the project of Bachelard is described as a naive belief in the rational-
ity of science or as a misguided project to purify science from all non-scientific el-
ements. For instance, in his own work, Latour, inspired by Serres, uses Bachelard 
as the perfect illustration of the paradox of modernity he is attacking: 
Gaston Bachelard’s dual enterprise—which […] exaggerates the objectiv-
ity of the sciences by dint of breaking with common sense, and symmetri-

surrationalism after bachelard · 61 
cally exaggerates the objectless power of the imaginary by dint of episte-
mological breaks—offers the perfect symbol for this impossible crisis, this 
drawing and quartering.3
This image, however, is too simplistic and in fact makes us unable to really appre-
ciate what we can learn from the work of Bachelard today. As Christiane Frémont 
correctly notes, “from a genuine post-bachelardian one has too hastily made Mi-
chel Serres into an anti-bachelardian.”4 A more interesting picture comes forward 
if one goes beyond such a simple but radical opposition between Bachelard and 
Serres. Instead one could focus on a few, but essential continuities between both 
authors. 
Precisely by focusing on Serres’s interaction with Bachelard in his early work, a 
core element of the Bachelardian project that is still at work in Serres’s philoso-
phy and remains relevant for contemporary discussions will be highlighted. This 
does not mean that Bachelard and Serres fundamentally agree on many let alone 
all topics. On the contrary, clear differences must be recognized, for instance how 
Serres has developed a radically different ontology focused on the role of objects. 
This paper thus deals most of all with the early Serres, without discussing his 
more recent positions and his general ontology of quasi-objects in detail. The aim 
is rather to understand how Serres’s break with Bachelard and French epistemol-
ogy in general was produced by an intimate dialogue with this tradition.5 
In this paper, the claim is precisely that clear disagreements concerning topics 
such as rationalism or the role of objects do not contradict a certain methodologi-
cal continuity between both authors. It is this methodological aspect of Bachelard 
that, by still being at work in Serres’s philosophy, remains relevant today. In the 
first part, I will discuss the case of Gaston Bachelard, especially his surrationalism 
and his philosophie du non. Secondly, I will use this reading of Bachelard to shed 
a new light on the specific criticisms Serres raised against him. The claim is that, 
instead of abandoning Bachelard’s perspective, Serres’s criticisms, even when one 
acknowledges clear discontinuities in content, can be understood as a radicaliza-
tion of certain methodological elements at work in Bachelard.
2 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE OF GASTON BACHELARD
There are many different possible attitudes in the philosophy of science. To grasp 
what is specific to Bachelard’s, it is useful to contrast it in a rather schematic way 

62 · massimiliano simons 
to how philosophy of science is traditionally understood. If one refers to histori-
cal examples such as Logical Positivism and its attempts to promote verification-
ism or confirmation theory, philosophy of science seems to be about formulating 
criteria for how science is a rational process. Bachelard’s project is, however, dif-
ferent in several respects. First of all, projects such as Logical Positivism aim to 
conceptualize a timeless model of science, i.e. a model that would work for any 
specific moment in science whatsoever. Secondly, their aim is to propose norms 
for how science should behave rather than how it factually behaves. In this sense 
the philosopher has the task of dictating to the scientist how to do science. 
2.1 Surrationalism and the primacy of science
The program that we can find in Bachelard is rather different. Its aim is similar 
in the sense that it wants to understand scientific practices, but it must be seen 
as part of a bigger project, namely trying to understand how human rationality 
works by ‘writing the history of the mind.’6 In fact, in twentieth-century France 
there was hardly a distinction between philosophy and history of science in the 
first place. Rather, they have always been intimately related to one another.7 Cen-
tral to philosophy of science in France is the idea that to understand the rational-
ity of science and the functioning of the human mind, one cannot start from the 
traditional a priori way. One always has to look at the history of the sciences to see 
the rational movement of thought. 
An important reason why such authors as Bachelard follow this approach, must be 
linked to the foundational crisis in mathematics and the scientific revolutions in 
physics at the beginning of the 20th century.8 For many philosophers these crises 
showed that the traditional assumption of an atemporal and ultimate foundation 
for knowledge and rationality was not so self-evident. How can we still be sure 
that our beliefs are rational if there can be such historical breaks and revolutions 
even in mathematics or physics? Projects such as Frege’s or Russell’s Logicism or 
Husserlian phenomenology can be understood as responses to these crises and 
attempts to find new firm foundations for all rational beliefs.9 
Following Castelli Gattinara, one could state that in France a different approach 
was taken. Rather than trying to look for a firm foundation underneath the dust 
of scientific revolutions, authors such as Bachelard claimed that rationality was to 
be found within the revolutionary act itself. Instead of seeing historicity as a problem 
for rationality, it was seen as the ground for rationality itself: science was rational 

surrationalism after bachelard · 63 
not despite its historical shifts, but because of the historical shifts, which were 
deemed to be rational stages of scientific thinking.10 Exactly, the dialectics of the 
history of science proved the sciences to be rational.
Now, in the case of Bachelard this is argued for in the name of an ‘open rational-
ism’ (rationalisme ouvert) or what he calls a surrationalism.11 For Bachelard ratio-
nalism does not imply that one should start from a number of fixed cognitive 
categories. The latter he calls a ‘closed rationalism,’ where the forms thought can 
take are fixed for eternity and in fact limit the way we can think and do science. 
One could think of a simple Kantian scheme, where rationality is defined by time-
less categories of understanding. An open rationalism, on the other hand, starts 
from the idea that the act of rationality lies within the overcoming of the catego-
ries of thought by creating novel ones, if deemed necessary by the developments 
of science. Bachelard argues to
place reason inside the crisis, to prove that the function of reason is to pro-
voke crises and that the polemic reason, to which Kant had only attributed 
a subalternate role, cannot leave the architectonic reason with its contem-
plations. We should thus gain access to an open Kantianism, a functional 
Kantianism, a non-Kantianism, in the same way as one speaks of a non-
Euclidian geometry.12
In this sense, similar to the subversive nature of surrealism, surrationalism aims 
to break with conservative tendencies to stick with old categories of thinking. 
Surrationalism precisely creates the room for scientific practices to redefine our 
cognitive categories. For Bachelard “science instructs reason. Reason has to obey 
science, a more evolved science, an evolving science.”13 Thus we find in Bachelard 
the distinctive idea of the primacy of science over philosophy: philosophy should 
not dictate or supervise a normativity of science, but rather learn from the norms 
internal to the sciences themselves.14
Against the closed rationalism of the philosophers, Bachelard aims to mobilize an 
open rationalism. This openness, however, is not found within traditional philo-
sophical activity, but within the scientific practices. As a consequence, there ex-
ists a broader tension between philosophy and science within Bachelard’s oeuvre. 
For him, scientists continually revise their own categories, while philosophers 
tend to be conservative about them.15 Philosophers wrongly try “to apply neces-
sarily finalist and closed philosophy to open scientific thought.”16 For Bachelard, 

64 · massimiliano simons 
the sciences never follow the clear-cut and given philosophical categories. Rather 
they create their own novel categories because “science ordains philosophy by 
itself.”17 Or as he states, “[e]very philosophical mind who puts himself in study-
ing science would see how much of contemporary science is philosophical in its 
core.”18 Given philosophical categories are in fact never a solution, but always a 
problem. This is related to Bachelard’s idea that the formation of the scientific 
mind consists in an epistemological rupture with everyday experience:
We believe, in fact, that scientific progress always shows itself in a rupture, 
in continuous ruptures, between ordinary knowledge and scientific knowl-
edge, as soon as one is faced with an evolved science, a science which, due 
to the these ruptures themselves, carries the mark of modernity.19
This break implies a break with psychologically tempting images about the sci-
entific object, but also with spontaneous philosophical theories about science. 
“The scientific mind consists precisely in the bracketing of the first philosophy 
[la philosophie première]. Just as the experimental activity, the philosophy linked 
to the scientific activity must be nuanced and, as a consequence, be mobile.”20 But 
traditional philosophy of science does not do this, and therefore “science does 
not have the philosophy it deserves.”21 And this is precisely what Bachelard aims 
to create in his own work, a surrationalism respecting the openness that is active 
within scientific practices. In this sense, “epistemology must thus be as flexible 
as science.”22 The implication is that to really grasp what is going on in scientific 
practices, looking at the history and development of these sciences becomes a 
necessity.
In this section we have seen that for Bachelard the relation between philosophy 
and science is mainly described in a negative way: one should follow the sciences 
and rather than starting from some given philosophical assumptions, but search 
for the currently adequate philosophical categories within the sciences them-
selves. The results depend on the specific scientific field under consideration. 
Which philosophical categories the philosopher ends up with, depends on the 
field or even the concept in question. 
In this sense, the lesson to be drawnis methodological: the concepts must be the 
product of the historical data, rather than the other way around. In this way it is 
a plea for a genuine conceptual flexibility in philosophical categories. Moreover, 
in order to do this the philosopher can rely on the philosophical activity at work 

surrationalism after bachelard · 65 
within the sciences themselves. Not only will this allow the philosopher to bet-
ter understand the historical case studies he or she is examining, but “we believe 
rather that it is at the level of particular examples that philosophy of science can 
give us general lessons.”23
2.2 Scientific practice and philosophie du non
At the same time, however, there is a clear normative idea of scientific progress at 
work in Bachelard’s work. One of his central starting points is that within history 
of science it is always inevitable to make normative judgments from the present 
perspective. In this respect, Bachelard contrasts the work of the epistemologist 
with that of the common historian. The historian looks for facts, and accumulates 
them in his study without making any normative judgment. This model, however, 
does not work for the history of science, because “it does not take into account 
the fact that every historian of science is necessarily a historiographer of Truth 
[de la Vérité]. The events of science are connected in an ever-increasing truth.”24 
According to Bachelard, such normativity is necessary and meaningful. He ac-
knowledges that reading the history of science as a teleological process, where 
historical episodes must be seen as necessary steps or obstacles with the present 
as their goal, is problematic. But he distinguishes this from the claim that if one 
wants to do proper historiography of science it is unavoidable to rewrite the his-
tory of science from what is presently seen as scientific and what is not.25 
At the same time, however, there is a clear notion of historical discontinuity about 
science in Bachelard’s oeuvre. This is the famous epistemological rupture men-
tioned above. This rupture not only implies a break between spontaneous and 
scientific concepts, but also historical breaks within the sciences themselves. 
Claiming that the scientific revolutions at the beginning of the 20th century imply 
a ‘new scientific spirit,’ Bachelard argues that there exists a radical discontinuity 
between Newton and Einstein. “One thus cannot correctly say that the Newto-
nian world prefigures in its main lines the Einsteinian world.”26
At first sight the combination of such a normative framework and historical dis-
continuities seems problematic. How can contemporary scientific categories be 
relevant to a past with which scientific practices have broken? Both elements, 
however are not irreconcilable for Bachelard, but precisely imply each other if one 
understands what scientific progress is all about. In his book Philosophie du non 

66 · massimiliano simons 
(1940) Bachelard argues that historical progress in science is not made in a con-
tinuous manner, but rather through breaks. As stated above, it is precisely in these 
historical shifts that the scientific mind shows its rationality. But the products 
of these shifts as well have a specific character, that Bachelard tries to capture 
through his ‘philosophie du non.’
For Bachelard, the sciences progress through a model of incorporation: there is a 
radical shift in scientific revolutions, but one where the previous theories are not 
completely abandoned, but rather reappraised and translated into particular and 
approximate cases of the new theories. “The philosophie du non will therefore be 
not an attitude of refusal, but an attitude of conciliation.”27 The example he uses 
is that of non-Euclidean geometry, which never disproved classical Euclidean ge-
ometry, but reappraised it as a specific case of a broader framework. “The gener-
alization by the no must include what it denies. In fact, the whole rise of scientific 
thought in the last century has come from such dialectical generalizations result-
ing in the incorporation of what one denies.”28 It is in this manner that he speaks 
of quantum mechanics as a non-Newtonian physics and of his own epistemology 
as a non-Cartesian epistemology.29
The history of science, thus, follows a progressive dialectical movement, which is 
fundamentally open-ended. The epistemologist must follow and grasp this move-
ment. “The progress is the dynamics itself of scientific culture, and it is this dy-
namics that the history of science must describe.”30 For Bachelard this results in a 
distinction between lapsed history (histoire périmée) and sanctioned history (his-
toire sanctionnée). Since the history of science is not continuous, but cumulative, 
this implies also the dismissal of certain parts of science. The former is therefore 
used as a term for these parts of science that, from the contemporary perspective, 
are excluded as non-science, while the latter refers to those elements that are 
preserved.
Bachelard thus endorses a specific form of ‘presentism.’31 Such a normative pre-
sentism is quite problematic for many contemporary historians of science and 
will also be heavily criticized by Serres. However, I want to argue that in the light 
of Bachelard’s surrationalism, Serres’s critique should not be understood as a 
radical break with Bachelard, but rather as an internal dispute about this method-
ological principle: is Bachelard’s presentism not in conflict with the very idea of 
the openness of surrationalism?

surrationalism after bachelard · 67 
But to see why Bachelard endorses this presentism, one must situate it in the 
light of the other goals of his philosophy. First of all, as stated above, the goal of 
French epistemologists such as Bachelard is broader than history of science, but 
implies the writing of a history of the rational mind. The main objective is not just 
to grasp specific historical facts, but rather the above mentioned surrationalism 
and the flexibility of the mind. Secondly, for Bachelard there is also a clear peda-
gogical task present in its philosophy of science.32 Describing the struggle of past 
science with certain epistemological obstacles, such as ordinary experience and 
naive philosophical theories, is necessary in order to prevent new students of sci-
ence from possible missteps, confusions and false theories. History of science, for 
Bachelard, therefore is not only valuable per se, but serves the “formation of the 
scientific mind.”33 It is therefore also insufficient to write a so-called ‘Whiggish’ 
history of science, where the past works teleologically towards the present (let 
alone see Bachelard’s own project as an example of this). Such an approach fails 
to appreciate how contemporary scientific theories are not self-evident, but imply 
certain breaks with ordinary experience and spontaneous philosophy.
3. MICHEL SERRES’S CRITIQUE OF BACHELARD
In the previous sections we saw how Bachelard conceives of the relationship be-
tween science and philosophy. Now that Bachelard’s approach has been made 
clear, we can reexamine the case of Michel Serres and see that the picture of 
Serres as an anti-Bachelardian has its limits. On the contrary, this reexamination 
will allow us to stress some interesting continuities at work between the two, hid-
den beneath the more visible disagreements.
Although relating both authors is not self-evident, there are in fact several simi-
larities to pinpoint. But before going into that, first the question must be raised 
what precisely is meant with the claim that Bachelard has influenced Serres. This 
claim might first of all mean that Serres’s early philosophy has been greatly shaped 
by the way philosophy of science was taught in the 1950s. The way philosophy of 
science was conceived in France at that time was indeed strongly defined by the 
work of Bachelard. The typical combination of philosophy and history of science, 
for example, is found in both authors. But also a clearly constructivist perspective 
can be found in Bachelard as well as in Serres, focusing not on how the scientist 
passively studies nature, but rather on how (s)he actively intervenes in nature and 
‘constructs’ the phenomena.

68 · massimiliano simons 
Serres might thus be Bachelardian in a rather indirect way, namely through the 
intellectual climate or through other French historical epistemologists such as 
Georges Canguilhem, or even through the work of Louis Althusser and Michel 
Foucault.34 But Bachelard himself in particular played a more prominent role, be-
sides being the reference point within discussions about philosophy of science 
in France. Serres himself was (a) first of all a direct pupil of him, since Serres 
“wrote [his] thesis under the direction of Bachelard, on the difference between 
the Bourbaki algebraic method and that of the classical mathematicians who had 
gone before.” 35 Moreover, (b) Serres discusses Bachelard extensively in his early 
work, and even in later interviews concerning his philosophical influences. The 
result is then also that (c) several key concepts were developed in direct dialogue 
with Bachelard himself. It is for these reasons that it seems warranted to speak of 
the Bachelardism of Serres.
Besides such simple continuities there are, however, more substantial links in 
methodology to highlight. For instance, following new developments within phys-
ics, Serres develops a non-determinist physics, where the starting point is not 
order but disorder.36 Clearly, this is in fundamental disagreement with how Bach-
elard understood physics. However, at the same time this can be seen as a next 
step in the Bachelardian conception of the development of science, namely that 
of the above philosophie du non. Similar to how Euclidean mathematics became a 
borderline case of non-Euclidean mathematics, Serres develops a perspective in 
which the old physics is an exceptional case in a broader framework where disor-
der is the rule. “Order is not the norm, but is the exception.”37 Or as Ilya Prigogine 
and Isabelle Stengers comment on Serres’s philosophy: “There are the rare ones 
in which determinism exists as a limit-state, costly but conceivable, in which ex-
trapolation is possible between the approximate description of any observer and 
the infinitely precise one of which Leibniz’s God is capable.”38 The philosophie 
du non can thus be found in Serres’s reading of contemporary history of science 
as well. Even though Bachelard and Serres clearly disagree on the content, on a 
methodological level Serres’s distinct view on physics can be seen as loyal to the 
Bachelardian framework.
Even more telling, however, is that not only the philosophie du non, but also Bach-
elard’s surrationalism is recognizable in Serres. To dig up this similarity, let’s take 
a closer look at what Serres is criticizing Bachelard for:

surrationalism after bachelard · 69 
Yes, l wrote my thesis under Bachelard, but l thought privately that the 
“new scientific spirit” coming into fashion at that time lagged way behind 
the sciences. Behind mathematics, because, instead of speaking of algebra, 
topology, and the theory of sets, it referred to non-Euclidean geometries, 
not all that new. Likewise, it lagged behind physics, since it never said a 
word about information theory nor, later, heard the sound of Hiroshima. 
It also lagged behind logic, and so on. The model it offered of the sciences 
could not, for me, pass as contemporary. This new spirit seemed to me 
quite old. And so, this milieu was not mine.39 
At first sight, it seems that, according to Serres, the whole idea of Bachelard, that 
in contemporary physics there is a new scientific spirit at work which calls for 
revisions in philosophy is problematic. Talking about such an epistemological 
break, as Bachelard tends to do, is not the right approach. But if one looks closely, 
Serres is not claiming that there have been no shifts at all that call for our philo-
sophical attention. Rather, he seems to claim that Bachelard is lagging behind the 
newest developments, since in mathematics for instance, “instead of speaking of 
algebra, topology, and the theory of sets, it referred to non-Euclidean geometries, 
not all that new.” The problem is not that Bachelard claimed that there was an 
epistemological break, but that he did not see all the breaks, or the newest ones. 
In a way then, we could say, Serres accuses Bachelard of not being bachelardian 
enough, of not being loyal enough to his surrationalism. 
Taking this surrationalism of Bachelard as a starting point, the three main criti-
cisms of Serres to Bachelard can be reexamined. The first criticism is already hint-
ed at above, namely that Bachelard did not live up to his own standards, because 
he had not followed the most recent scientific developments that Serres himself 
witnessed. “I had the chance to witness, in real time, three or four big scientific 
revolutions: modern mathematics, biochemistry, information theory and, later 
on, in Silicon Valley, the digital one.”40 Not only does Serres want to open up 
this epistemological project even further, but he also aims to write about a new 
new scientific spirit [nouveau nouvel esprit scientifique].41 Serres claims to follow the 
sciences even more closely, radicalising a flexibility that even Bachelard lacked. 
Secondly, these new developments in the sciences result in a shifting role for the 
philosopher, since the new sciences produce their own internal epistemology. Fi-
nally, the problem is not only that the philosopher cannot be an epistemologist 
anymore, but also that by trying to be merely an epistemologist, he or she misses 
the whole political dimension of science. Epistemologists such as Bachelard failed 

70 · massimiliano simons 
to hear “the sound of Hiroshima” and Serres tries to correct this. Although these 
three criticisms seem quite radical, they can, however, all be seen in the light of 
a surrationalist move. In this sense, the claim can be defended that precisely in 
criticizing the content of Bachelard’s project, Serres remains loyal to its method-
ology.
3.1 A new new scientific spirit
As was clear from Serres’s description, Bachelard’s epistemology is not yet open 
enough and in the end reduces science to practices that have to wait for an epis-
temology to speak out their truth. In that sense, Serres’s early work consists in 
a correction of this element within the Bachelardian project. Serres considers 
himself well-placed and even obliged to describe this new new scientific spirit 
because his own training came not from philosophers, but “consisted in witness-
ing—almost participating in—a profound change in this fundamental science” 
while “the epistemologists didn’t follow.”42 
This new new scientific spirit is mainly inspired by information theory, topology 
and mathematical structuralism. According to Serres it consists in an ontological 
shift, resulting in a new ontology that will also prove to be fundamental to his 
later philosophy.43 It leads to a worldview where not only humans possess and 
transmit information, but where this can be generalized to all possible relations 
and objects:
There is a constant and continuous dialogue between things which form the his-
torical fabric of events and laws, among whom my intervention is exceptional […] 
The general informational language is the fundamental and continuous relation 
between objects. Even before their deciphering, the certainty that it exists in-
duces the certainty that the external world exists, in the mode of a communicat-
ing network, of which all the networks I know and could constitute are singular, 
exceptional cases, approximating to imitate the real world.44 
Secondly, following the generalization of this ontological claim, Serres also prob-
lematizes Bachelard’s profound distinction between science and culture, the ra-
tional and the imaginary. Inspired by the promises of structuralism, Serres seems 
to ask: a new method is made possible, one that “excludes nothing; better yet, it 
attempts to include everything […] So why would I exclude literature?”45 Only an 
a priori distinction can prevent us from making this move, a criterion imposed by 

surrationalism after bachelard · 71 
philosophers from the outside. Again, however, it is by simultaneously dismiss-
ing the content of Bachelard’s point of view, but radicalizing his methodological 
principle that we get there.
At several moments, Serres portrays himself as the next step in completing Bach-
elard’s work. In the first book in his Hermes series, Serres labels Bachelard as the 
last of the classical projects in literary criticism and the first of the structuralist 
ones: “the contemporary idea of critique defines itself relatively easily as a pas-
sage to the limit of the Bachelardian incompleteness.”46 Starting as it does from 
the opposition between symbolic analyses of images and rationalist studies of 
truth, Bachelard’s double oeuvre is portrayed as the radicalization of this distinc-
tion to the moment where it implodes: the symbolic analyses of the most ab-
stracts myths, namely the archetypes of nature (fire, water, earth, air). The study 
of the imaginary then implies a natural history and the study of science a psycho-
analysis of images. “To a false (and original) alchemy correspond true dreams, to 
a true (and actual) chemistry correspond false images.”47 Bachelard is the first to 
combine both projects in one philosophy, but they remain irreconcilable.
Very similarly, in his second Hermes book, Serres describes a three stage process: 
from the subjective-subjective stage of Descartes, through the subjective-objec-
tive stage of Bachelard to the objective-objective stage of the new new scientific 
spirit.48 Serres starts from the ‘wax’ example of Descartes, which is subjective-
subjective for him since both the sender (the wax) and the receiver of informa-
tion (the cogito) possess no fixed and objective information, but rather infor-
mation that is unreliable and ever changing for Descartes. For Bachelard, on the 
other hand, the world is an undetermined realm of complexity and it is the subject 
that aided by concepts plus a phénoménotechnique imposes a certain rigor and thus 
reliable information on the object. By purifying it from the subjective images re-
lated to color or smell, one makes objectivity possible. However, in the light of 
the above mentioned ontological shift, the new new scientific spirit goes one step 
further and is objective-objective, since both the one who studies and that what 
is being studied can possess, transmit and receive real and reliable information. 
“The third stage, one must call objective-objective, since it tends to decipher the 
language that objects apply to objects, by reconstituting, when it is possible, the 
objective language.”49 This real information is not limited to the rational side, 
purified from subjective experiences, but rather consists of both primary and sec-
ondary qualities in the object as well as in the subject. One returns to the things 
themselves; a stage where history and physics, culture and science become one. 50

72 · massimiliano simons 
The new new scientific spirit thus results in one method to study science and 
culture rather than in two separated methods. This leads to the typical Serresian 
readings of authors such as Jules Verne or Émile Zola, in whose work Serres finds 
the genesis of contemporary scientific theories such as thermodynamics. It is also 
in this context that one should understand Serres’s suggestion that “the most sci-
entific works, most instructed works of Bachelard, would they be concerned with 
the poetic elements? Would we find here written, through a method of negation 
and denial, the prophecies of the new new scientific spirit?”51 According to Serres, 
hidden within the books concerned with the imaginary, Bachelard opens up a per-
spective that articulates how the material things can impose their information 
on our minds. Our imagination must therefore not be seen as independent of the 
world, but rather as part of and in relation to the networks of the world.
However, it is important to note that the claim is not that Zola, for instance, was 
equally or even better aware of scientific developments than the scientists. Rath-
er, the idea seems to be that one cannot start from a clear distinction between 
science and culture, but should be as flexible as the texts themselves. Scientific 
theories and ideas can be developed within literary texts as well. Not because 
there is a hidden layer of scientificity in these texts, but rather because both are 
part of one network, that is not fundamentally broken in two.52
Neither does this imply some form of radical relativism, where a scientific prac-
tice, theory or text is completely similar to mythical, political or cultural texts. 
This is definitely not Serres’s. He would certainly stress the difference between a 
scientific practice and other practices, but never in a radical, ontological and a pri-
ori way. Claiming that science distinguishes itself by a form of rationalism, even an 
open one, is already imposing a certain philosophical category on science, namely 
that of rationality. Instead, Serres wants to separate the question of the rational-
ity of the sciences (which is actually rather an answer than a question) from the 
underlying question of what one could, following Stengers, call the singularity of 
the sciences: what is the specificity of scientific practices that distinguishes them 
from other types of practices?53 Referring to the rationality of these practices is a 
possible answer to this question, but one that cannot be given a priori. Instead, 
one should follow the sciences, even through myths and literary texts, rather than 
delineating from beforehand what the limits of the sciences are.54 In this sense 
there is a clear discontinuity with Bachelard, namely by abandoning the whole 
notion of rationality. Of the surrationalism, it is the sur-, the open movement that 
remains at work in Serres, while he abandons the rationalism.

surrationalism after bachelard · 73 
It is in this light that one, thirdly, has to understand the radical shift in how to read 
the history of science. Serres disagrees with the picture sketched above by Bach-
elard, that there are clear epistemological ruptures that break with the imaginary 
part of our thinking and that there is a meaningful distinction to make between 
lapsed history and sanctioned history. Such an a priori imposing a philosophical 
dichotomy precludes us from following the sciences in their totality. It prevents 
us, for example, to see ‘contemporary’ science at work in the work of authors such 
as Lucretius. In his book on Lucretius, Serres tries exactly to show how his work, 
often seen as part of lapsed history, has reemerged as relevant for contemporary 
fluid mechanics. “Scientific modernity does not enter history by a fault or a break, 
but by the revival of a philosophy of nature that has been spreading ever since 
Antiquity. The so-called break is an artefact of the university.”55
The new new scientific spirit thus results in an alternative epistemology of sci-
ence, which could be called the model of proliferation. Although we will not go into 
details, the central idea is that the objectivity and rationality of science is strength-
ened if it is linked to more elements and connections. Elements of literature and 
imagination can thus play a positive role in the production of knowledge. This is 
opposed to the model of purification, ascribed to Bachelard, where science becomes 
more objective if it is purified from imagination and epistemological obstacles. 
But there is an ambiguity here, in the case of Serres. He characterizes science 
which follows the model of purification as repressive of an original multiplicity. 
“Let this scientific knowledge get rid of its arrogance, its masterly, its ecclesial 
dispensation, let it abandon its martial aggressiveness, the hateful pretension of 
always being right, so that it speaks truth, that it descends, pacified, towards com-
mon knowledge.”56
At the same time, Serres claims that this multiplicity can be adequately articu-
lated in his own model of proliferation. In his book on Lucretius, for instance, 
Serres claims that modern physics is closed off in laboratories, while the fluid 
mechanics found in Lucretius works also outside, capable to grasp the multiplic-
ity of the world itself.57 His book has indeed been read as “a story in which physics 
neither represses (through experimentation) nor manipulates nature.”58 Serres, 
thus, paradoxically, believes to have found a model that is no model, a model that 
contrary to all other models does not reduce, repress, push into categories the 
original multiplicity found in nature.

74 · massimiliano simons 
But such a belief in a ‘model without a model’ seems unwarranted. A more plau-
sible view is to acknowledge that all models imply some form of violence towards 
their objects, but not all in the same way. The model of purification, thus, can be 
criticized for implying a repression of the purified phenomena, but the model of 
proliferation is itself not free from this violence. It (hopefully) implies less vio-
lence or violence of a more acceptable sort. But again, to evaluate this, it is prob-
ably necessary to relate the issue to the specific phenomena one is talking about. 
Serres speaks about whirlpools or climate models. For these phenomena a model 
of purification seems problematic, indeed. But perhaps Bachelard’s model of pu-
rification can still be applied to a number of cases, such as quantum mechanics or 
the theory of relativity. Again, one might mobilize Bachelard’s philosophie du non: 
we can interpret the model of proliferation not as complete dismissal of that of 
purification, but instead as a model of non-purification, where classical purifica-
tion remains a limiting case in the broader framework.59
3.2 A new image of the philosopher
The second crucial element is that the new new scientific spirit also forces Serres 
to accept a new role of the philosopher. First of all, Serres introduces a new term 
to describe the philosopher. The model that Serres prefers is that of the encyclope-
dist, collecting different sciences and types of knowledge, without reducing them 
or forcing them in a strict hierarchy. Rather they are situated next to one another, 
with the everlasting possibility of cross-references.60 “Science is, on and for itself, 
a collection of dictionaries: The Encyclopedia.”61 In this sense, we should correct 
our claim that Serres follows the model of the philosophie du non. The model of 
the encyclopedia is a different, yet radicalized version of the philosophie du non. 
First of all, in the sense that, although regional rationalisms are clearly also pres-
ent in Bachelard, in the case of Serres these regional criteria for knowledge and 
truth are also internally developed by the sciences rather than conceptualized by 
epistemology (see below).62 Secondly, the model of the Encyclopedia starts from 
a different image than that of conciliation and dialectics. “The new spirit focused 
itself in a philosophy of no; the new new spirit develops itself in a philosophy of 
transport: intersection, intervention, interception.”63 Again information theory is 
the paradigm here, for instance in the case of molecular biology. What molecular 
biologists show is that in genetics one should not search for the ‘noumena’ under-
lying our biological beings, the invisible behind the visible, but rather the univer-
sality of the genetic code.64 Notions from information theory are thus translated, 
and at the same time transformed, when applied to a different scientific region, 

surrationalism after bachelard · 75 
in this case biology. 
The encyclopedist, moreover, is not just the Bachelardian epistemologist updated 
by insights from the contemporary sciences. There is a second and more impor-
tant revision at work, namely that the newest developments within the sciences 
have also resulted in a qualitative shift in the sciences themselves, problematizing 
this traditional image of the epistemologist. Serres radicalizes Bachelard’s claim 
that the sciences themselves produce philosophical categories, by claiming that 
they now also produce their own epistemology. Serres characterizes these new 
mature sciences as autoregulative or “autonormée[s].”65 Serres makes this claim 
first of all for mathematics:
At all moments of grand systematic reconstruction, the mathematicians 
become the epistemologists of their own knowledge. This transformation 
is a mutation that is carried out from the inside out. Everything happens 
as if, at the moment of promoting itself into a new system, mathematics 
suddenly needed to import the totality of epistemological questions.66 
In other passages he makes similar remarks about contemporary physics, for in-
stance about the work of Léon Brillouin, Science and information theory (1956). 
“The philosophers do not have to search nor write a manual where one would find 
the epistemology of the experimental knowledge. It is there.”67 This has crucial 
consequences for the task of the philosopher. The idea is that, even if the tradi-
tional epistemological project succeeds and one is able to describe the scientific 
practice in a genuine way, one would only be repeating the sciences themselves. 
If so, in what sense, then, does the “philosopher’s work differ from that of a jour-
nalistic chronicler, who announces and comments on the news?”68 Or more pre-
cisely, the philosopher is confronted with a fundamental choice, which Serres at 
one moment compares to literary criticism. The literary critic either can choose 
to describe the text as loyally as possible, but he will end up in a philological exer-
cise that will not really add anything significant; or else he tries to be more specu-
lative, but he loses himself in an uncertain art of describing, linked to a certain 
normative framework. So either the epistemologist merely repeats the sciences or 
he becomes speculative, in that case implying a tension with the original idea of 
the primacy of science.69 Here already it is clear that it is precisely by pushing the 
traditional Bachelardian project to its boundaries that Serres arrives at one of his 
fundamental differences with Bachelard: if one would really take the surrational-
ism of Bachelard seriously, than one can no longer unproblematically write the 

76 · massimiliano simons 
books Bachelard wrote.
3.3 From an epistemology to a political philosophy
However, Serres does not chooses to give up all speculative ambition, but rather 
the opposite. One can never escape the speculative element, and it is therefore 
necessary to be explicit about it. For Serres, this means opening up for the po-
litical side of science as well. An encyclopedist would only add something to the 
internal epistemology of the sciences if he or she would speak of more than mere 
epistemology. “To speak the truth, my interest in the relations between science 
and society marked at the same time my difficulties with philosophy, and, most 
of all, with Canguilhem and Bachelard. They were out of their time. How could 
one teach epistemology of physics while omitting deontology?”70 Serres thus goes 
further than a mere epistemology in the traditional sense, switching to a political 
project, which aims to correct Bachelard’s project by articulating the political vio-
lence of the sciences as well. But even this break can be read as playing out Bach-
elard’s own cards against himself: if you really want to pursue an open philosophy, 
then you must also make room for the political and violent dimensions of science. 
It is, however, incorrect if one would interpret this claim as saying that a political 
project is completely absent in the case of Bachelard, but present in that of Serres. 
To the contrary, in a famous essay “The Reformation and the Seven Sins” (see 
this issue) Serres argues that in Bachelard’s oeuvre there was always something 
like a political project. This project is exactly his presentism, the fact of looking 
for epistemological obstacles and epistemological breaks. For Serres, the model 
of purification is not only crippled epistemology but a crypto-normative project 
as well. It is a normative ideal where true science is seen as that which purifies 
itself from all the obstacles, from imagination, from myth. The Formation of the 
scientific mind (1938) of Bachelard is not (only) a description of scientific practice, 
but a political project of how the scientific city should be arranged, namely one 
with clear and strong walls against imagination, in favor of a spiritual purification 
of the scientist. Against this Serres states that “a totally purified reason is a myth” 
and that in fact “there is no purer myth than the idea of a science purified from all 
myth.”71 Exactly at this point, and once again, the model of proliferation will have 
to be introduced: it is through the creation of relations, not their destruction, that 
science comes about.

surrationalism after bachelard · 77 
Does this mean that philosophers should give up normative ambitions completely 
according to Serres? Although it might seem so, this is not a necessary conse-
quence. Indeed, refraining from giving a distorted reading of his epistemological 
project, Bachelard himself is not saying that one should use abstract philosophi-
cal distinctions to judge the history of science. Not at all, in fact he is claiming 
that the norms he uses originate in the scientific practices themselves, namely 
those imposed by the present sciences. Serres’s claim is not that one should stop 
using norms, but rather that one should be wary in what way one bases oneself 
on certain norms. The problem with Bachelard is not that he judges, but that by 
judging in his sense, he also endorses a certain political project embodied in the 
sciences, namely one that makes a distinction between a science that knows and 
a non-science that does not. It implies a reaffirmation of the political power of 
the sciences, of Modernity over non-modern elements (suspicions, non-western 
peoples, religion, etc.). One should—at least analytically—separate within surra-
tionalism the epistemological project (the sur-) from the political one (the ratio-
nalism). One should be aware that one is doing both at the same time. 
It is this double project Serres has in mind when he adds that the new scientific 
spirit of Bachelard not only ignored the scientific developments but also had not 
“heard the sound of Hiroshima.”72 Serres is puzzled by the paradox that something 
as rational as science can lead to something as irrational as the atomic bomb. In 
this context he makes some very strong claims, such as that “humanity is col-
lectively suicidal” and that we live in a thanatocracy, a government of death.73 By 
these scientific developments, the whole world is in danger, because we are faced 
with what Serres calls world-objects, objects that span a whole dimension of the 
world (e.g. ballistic missiles span space; satellites span Earth’s rotation; nuclear 
waste spans time, etc.).74
In the second place, the development of science is also reflected in a trend to-
wards codification and secrecy, resulting in a science where “the foundation of 
scientific rationality is being destroyed.”75 Since scientific practices are auto-nor-
mative, they must be able to control themselves through critical inquiry. By lock-
ing up science in secrecy and national interests, one destroys this practice. Or as 
Serres states:
There is knowledge, but the open possibility of feedback control has de-
creased sharply, almost towards its final dissolution. However, from the 
moment there is no longer any control, counter-role, there is no longer any 

78 · massimiliano simons 
rationality. The total of the network of scientific interferences does not 
have the possibility to control itself; although, that was its proper reason.76
In Serres’s later work this critique gets further extended to other issues, mainly 
in two ways. First of all, Serres notices that the nuclear winter is not our only 
worry, or not even our greatest one. Since Le contrat naturel (1990) the problem 
of climate change, and in more recent work the one of the Anthropocene have 
come to the foreground. Much inspired by his ontology and epistemology, he un-
derstands these problems as a resistance of objects against our current networks, 
our current political collective. The social contract has to be replaced by a natural 
contract:
We so-called developed nations are no longer fighting among ourselves; together 
we are all turning against the world. Literally a world war, and doubly so, since the 
whole world, meaning all men, imposes losses on the world, meaning things. We 
shall thus seek to conclude a peace treaty.77
This ecological problem is fundamentally linked with another of Serres’s con-
cerns, namely the idea that our current way of doing and describing science is 
problematic, since it does not acknowledge the role objects play in science and 
society. The ecological crisis is just the clearest example of how by dividing sci-
ence and culture, we are unable to account for the political consequences of sci-
ence. In Statues Serres uses the example of the Challenger accident, the spaceship 
that exploded and killed all seven passengers.78 One could argue that this was a 
mere accident, but in fact, Serres claims it is no accident, but an essential element 
of science itself. We could have statistically predicted that such accidents would 
occur, similar to how we know that driving cars will imply traffic accidents. We ac-
cept these sacrifices, and find them necessary in order for our society to function, 
similar to how in mythical societies we have found it necessary to sacrifice per-
sons for the gods, or select a scapegoat to restore social order. Choosing for our 
current way of doing science, means accepting these sacrifices. Worse even, we 
deem them necessary, otherwise our society would fall apart. To do epistemology, 
philosophy of science, one should also be concerned with this kind of violence in 
science and seek for a less lethal alternative. What Serres has in mind, then, is a 
political project: how to respect this open element of Bachelard, but at the same 
time conceptualize a new politics of science, free from the burden of a conception 
such as rationalism? Serres believes that this can be done by following the model 
of proliferation. In this sense, his epistemological model is a political model as 

surrationalism after bachelard · 79 
well, but a more explicit one. 
CONCLUSION
This paper has tried to show how the work of Michel Serres must be seen not as 
an ‘epistemological break’ with Bachelard, but rather as a specific and critical con-
tinuation of certain of its methodological elements. Once again, the claim is not 
that there are no serious disagreements between both authors. They clearly have 
a different ontology and notions such as rationalism are differently evaluated. But 
at the same time Serres’s work can be read in line with some of Bachelardian no-
tions such as philosophie du non and surrationalism. To do so, one has to look at 
Serres’s early work, where he tries to develop a new new scientific spirit, updating 
Bachelard’s new scientific spirit. But besides mere epistemological corrections, this 
also implied a shift in the role of the philosopher, who has to open him- or herself 
to political issues following from science. These shifts have been quite radical, so 
much so that Serres’s recent work is often quite distinct from what one should 
associate with Bachelard and the tradition of French historical epistemology. But 
the claim is that this shift itself was, at least partly, brought about (wittingly or 
unwittingly) by a certain loyalty to Bachelard’s surrationalism. It was precisely 
due to the insights Serres found in the new new scientific spirit, which opened up 
room for imagination and culture in science, that he saw the need for a political 
dimension of philosophy of science.
It is possible to argue that a similar move is also at work in the oeuvre of Latour 
and Stengers. They agree that it is the scientific field that should decide which 
distinctions are relevant and which are not, and philosophers “should be as unde-
cided as the various actors we follow as to what technoscience is made of; to do 
so, every time an inside/outside division is built, we should follow the two sides 
simultaneously, making up a list, no matter how long and heterogeneous, of all 
those who do the work.”79 This is Latour’s famous dictum of ‘follow the actors,’ 
which can be interpreted acroding to the lines of Bachelard’s surrationalism. A 
similar rule can be found in the work of Isabelle Stengers, whe she aims at giving 
a description of the scientific practices that does not insult the scientists them-
selves.80 Both authors, however, follow Serres in stressing the importance of the 
political aspect, which remains underdeveloped in Bachelard’s work. To explore 
these aspects, however, a new paper would be required.81 Here, simply the possi-
bility of this rereading of their work can be noted. Again, one should not be misled 
by their claims that they fully break with Bachelard. Rather—through their con-

80 · massimiliano simons 
nection via Serres—one can see their work as loyal to his legacy.

surrationalism after bachelard · 81 
NOTES
1. Michel Serres and Bruno Latour, Conversations on science, culture and time. Ann Arbor: Michigan 
university press, 1995, 11.
2. Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press, 1993, 
93.
3. Latour, Never Modern, 58-59.
4. Christiane Frémont, « Bachelard et Michel Serres : deux tiers-instruits ? ,” Cahiers Gaston 
Bachelard, no. 10 (2008) : 79. French citations are translated by the author, unless existing trans-
lations have been used.
5. The ontological and even political project at work in Serres’s philosophy that he develops 
more extensively in later work has been discussed in a different article, see Massimiliano 
Simons, “The Parliament of Things and the Anthropocene: How to Listen to ‘Quasi-Objects,’” 
Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology 21, no. 2-3 (2017): 150-174.
6. See Cristina Chimisso, Writing the history of the mind: Philosophy and science in France, 1900 to 
1960s. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.
7. This has to do with the institutional background of philosophy of science in France, as well as 
with particularities of the philosophy of Auguste Comte, who stressed the necessity of the his-
tory of science to understand the functioning of the rational mind. See Cristina Chimisso, Gaston 
Bachelard : Critic of science and the imagination. London: Routledge, 2001; Chimisso, history of the 
mind ; and Anastasios Brenner, “Is There a Cultural Barrier Between Historical Epistemology and 
Analytic Philosophy of Science?” International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 29, no. 2 (2015): 
201-14.
8. See Enrico Castelli Gattinara, Les inquiétudes de la raison : épistémologie et histoire en France dans 
l’entre-deux-guerres. Paris: Vrin, 1998.
9. In fact, even logical positivism can be read in this manner, for instance by rereading the phi-
losophy of science of authors like Rudolf Carnap through a Kantian lens. See Michael Friedman, 
Reconsidering logical positivism. Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 1999.
10. See Léon Brunschvicg, Les étapes de la philosophie mathématique. Paris: Alcan, 1912.
11. Gaston Bachelard, Le nouvel esprit scientifique, Paris : Alcan, 1934, 175 ; Gaston Bachelard, L’en-
gagement rationaliste. Paris: PUF, 1972.
12. Bachelard, L’engagement, 27-28.
13. Gaston Bachelard, La philosophie du non : Essai d’une philosophie du nouvel esprit scientifique. 
Paris: PUF, 1940, 144.
14. Massimiliano Simons, “ Obligation to Judge or Judging Obligations: The Integration of Phi-
losophy and Science in Francophone Philosophy of Science,” in The Past, Present, and Future of 
Integrated History of Philosophy of Science. Eds. Emily Herring, Kevin Jones, Konstantin Kiprijanov 
and Laura Sellers. Routledge: London, 2018, forthcoming.
15. Gaston Bachelard, Le rationalisme appliqué. Paris: PUF, 1949, 43.
16. Bachelard, philosophie du non, 2.
17. Bachelard, philosophie du non, 22.
18. Gaston Bachelard, Le matérialisme rationnel. Paris: PUF, 1953, 180.
19. Bachelard, matérialisme rationnel, 207.
20. Gaston Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine. Paris: PUF, 17.
21. Bachelard, matérialisme rationnel, 20.
22. Bachelard, rationalisme appliqué, 10.

82 · massimiliano simons 
23. Bachelard, matérialisme rationnel, 223.
24. Bachelard, matérialisme rationnel, 86.
25. Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste.
26. Bachelard, nouvel esprit, 46.
27. Bachelard, philosophie du non, 15-16.
28. Bachelard, philosophie du non, 137.
29. See Bachelard, nouvel esprit.
30. Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste, 25.
31. See Laurent Loison, “Forms of Presentism in the History of Science. Rethinking the Project of 
Historical Epistemology.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 60 (2016): 29-37.
32. See Chimisso, Bachelard.
33. Gaston Bachelard, La formation de l’esprit scientifique: Contribution à une psychanalyse de la 
connaissance objective. Paris: Vrin, 1938.
34. For instance, both Canguilhem and Foucault discuss the early work of Serres and vice versa 
Serres was quite aware of their work. See Georges Canguilhem, Ideology and rationality in the his-
tory of the life sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT press, 1988, 18; Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowl-
edge and The Discourse on Language. Pantheon Books: New York, 1972, 5, 190. Canguilhem was in 
fact one of his supervisors of his doctoral thesis, but Serres claims that the day of his defense 
was also the day both authors broke with one another. See Michel Serres, Pantopie ou le monde 
de Michel Serres, de Hermès à Petite Poucette. Paris : Le Pommier, 2016, 49. In the case of Foucault, 
Serres describes himself as “pupil and colleague.” See Serres and Latour, Conversations, 38.
35. Serres and Latour, Conversations, 10.
36. See Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Isabelle. Order out of Chaos : Man’s New Dialogue with 
Nature. London: Fontana Paperbacks, 1984.
37. Michel Serres, Hermès III. La traduction. Paris : Éditions de Minuit, 1974, 49.
38. Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Dynamics from Leibniz to Lucretius. In Hermes: Litera-
ture, Science, Philosophy, edited by Josué V. Harari & David F. Bell. The Johns Hopkins University 
Press, Baltimore/London, 1982, 150.
39. Serres and Latour, Conversations, 11.
40. Serres, Pantopie, 50.
41. See Michel Serres, Hermès I, La communication. Paris : Éditions de Minuit, 1969 ; Michel 
Serres, Hermès II, L’interférence. Paris : Éditions de Minuit, 1972 ; Serres, La traduction.
42. Serres and Latour, Conversations, 11.
43. See Simons, Parliament of Things.
44. Serres, L’interférence, 110.
45. Michel Serres, «Chapter III: Michel Serres,» in: Raoul Mortley. French Philosophers in conversa-
tion: Levinas, Schneider, Serres, Irigaray, Le Doeuff, Derrida, ed. Raoul Mortley (London: Routledge, 
1991),52.
46. Serres, La communication, 21-22.
47. Serres, La communication, 25n5.
48. Serres, L’interférence, 13.
49. Serres, L’interférence, 94-95.
50. This idea already echoes Serres’s later thought where he focuses on the role of ‘quasi-ob-
jects.’ See Simons, Parliament of Things. However, in the Hermes-series this remains embedded 
in structuralism, which will disappear from the end of the 1970s. From then on Serres is sceptical 
of the possibility of general metanarratives. In this later work he focuses more on the multiplic-

surrationalism after bachelard · 83 
ity of relationships without clear boundaries, focusing on the role of myths and art. See Michel 
Serres, Genèse. Paris: Grasset, 1982 and Bruno Latour, “The Enlightenment without the Critique: 
A Word on Michel Serres’ Philosophy,” Royal Institute of Philosophy Lecture Series 21 (1987): 83-
97.. Like other poststructuralists, however, he remains fundamentally influenced by many of 
its themes. Since, however, his structuralism was not of the linguistic, but of the mathematical 
side (related to Bourbarki, among others), his position can best be described as a ‘mathematical 
poststructuralism.’
51. Serres, L’interférence, 78.
52. An open question is, even though there is no natural distinction between scientific and other 
practices, whether such a distinction cannot be a particular societal product. Some societies, 
perhaps our contemporary one, might be based on such a purifying construction that con-
structs a certain distinction between science and culture. Such an argument is, in fact, at work 
in the philosophy of Bruno Latour and Isabelle Stengers. See Latour, Never Modern and Isabelle 
Stengers, The invention of modern science. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota press, 2000.
53. See Stengers, invention of modern science.
54. Again, an open question here is whether science consists of certain theories, ideas, perspec-
tives or rather certain practices, relations or material settings. The first option seems to be 
present in the work of Serres, the second in the work of Latour and Stengers. This might have 
something to do with the starting points of the authors, either in (bio)chemistry focusing on the 
material practices or in mathematics, starting from a more abstract approach.
55. Michel Serres, The Birth of Physics. Trans. Jack Hawkes. Manchester: Clinamen Press, 2000, 41.
56. Serres, Genèse, 20.
57. Serres, Birth of Physics, 68.
58. Josué Harari and David Bell, “Introduction: Journal à plusieurs voies,» in: Hermes: Literature, 
Science, Philosophy, ed. Josué Harari and David Bell. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Balti-
more/London, 1982, xvi.
59. This perspective is, for example, present in the work of Latour. His “explanatory model 
allows us instead to integrate the work of purification as a particular case of mediation [i.e. 
proliferation]. The only difference between the modern and nonmodern conception is therefore 
breached, since purification is considered as a useful work requiring instruments, institutions 
and know-how.” Latour, Never Modern, 78.
60. Serres, La communication, 70.
61. Serres, L’interférence, 38.
62. Bachelard, rationalisme appliqué, Chapter 7.
63. Serres, L’interférence, 10.
64. Serres, La traduction, 21.
65. Serres, La communication, 71, 189n2.
66. Serres, La communication, 68.
67. Serres, La traduction, 45.
68. Serres and Latour, Conversations, 15.
69. Serres, La communication, 62.
70. Serres, Pantopie, 160-161.
71. Serres, L’interférence, 210; Serres, La traduction, 259.
72. Serres and Latour, Conversations, 11.
73. Serres, La traduction, 78.
74. Serres, La traduction, 101.

84 · massimiliano simons 
75. Serres, La traduction, 88.
76. Serres, La traduction, 88. A similar worry is expressed by Stengers. In her case, the problem is 
how the knowledge economy is locking biomedical knowledge up behind pay walls and bio-in-
dustry, thus creating a scientist that is dependent on patents and not on this autonormativity. As 
a consequence “this quite specific social fabric will be destroyed when scientists as practitioners 
do not depend upon each other any longer, but are tied instead to competing industrial interests. 
It becomes then a matter of survival to confirm the kind of promises that attracted the appetites 
of investors, and to produce patentable results.” Isabelle Stengers, “Wondering About Material-
ism,” in The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and Realism. Eds Levi Bryant, Graham Har-
man and Nick Srnicek, Melbourne: re.press, 2011, 377.
77. Michel Serres, The natural contract. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan press, 1995, 32. This 
ecological concern has also been taken up by Bruno Latour. See Bruno Latour, Politics of nature: 
How to bring the sciences into democracy. Cambridge: Harvard university press, 2004 and Bruno 
Latour, Facing Gaia: Eight lectures on the new climatic regime. Cambridge: Polity, 2017. The ecologi-
cal crisis is what Latour calls the “generalized revolts of the means: no entity—whale, river, climate, 
earthworm, tree, calf, cow, pig, brood—agrees any longer to be treated ‘simply as a means’ but 
insists on being treated ‘always also as an end.’” Latour, Politics of nature, 155-156.
78. See Michel Serres, Statues: The Second Book of Foundations. Trans. Randolph Burks. Blooms-
bury Academic: London, 2014.
79. Bruno Latour, Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge 
(Mass.): Harvard university press, 1987, 176.
80. Isabelle Stengers, La vierge et le neutrino : les scientifiques dans la tourmente. Paris : Seuil, 2006.
81. But see Simons, Parliament of Things.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 85-102
revisiting rhythmanalysis: 
how rhythm operates in the 
work of gaston bachelard 
and henri bergson
jonas rutgeerts
INTRODUCTION
In recent years scholars from diﬀerent ﬁelds have taken up the notion of rhythm 
to analyse diﬀerent temporal and spatial phenomena.1 Despite this turn towards 
rhythm, however, the term has remained enigmatic. We experience rhythm in ev-
erything, but we don’t seem to be able to generate a clear understanding of how 
rhythm operates. As Jacques Derrida mentioned “rhythm has always haunted our 
tradition, without ever reaching the centre of its concerns.”2 In his article I aim to 
explore the operational capacity of rhythm, by analysing the work of two philoso-
phers who devoted a great deal of attention to the concept: Gaston Bachelard and 
Henri Bergson. Both agree that rhythm plays a crucial role in the constitution of 
singular temporal existence: for Bergson it emerges when the omnipresent force 
of duration expresses itself in and through a distinct phenomenon, for Bachelard, 
by contrast, rhythm should be considered as the temporal architecture that is 
constitutive for the durational existence of singular entities. Exploring both theo-
ries of rhythm will allow me to come to a better understanding of how rhythm 
operates and how it relates to our experience of time.
For most of the English-speaking world the concept of rhythm and the method of 
rhythmanalysis is inherently connected to the theoretical oeuvre of French phi-

86 · jonas rutgeerts 
losopher and social theorist Henri Lefebvre. The translation of his book Rhyth-
manalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life in 2012 seems to herald rhythm’s appear-
ance on the theoretical stage.3 The rhythmanalytical project, however, does not 
begin with Lefebvre’s book, but can be traced back to the work of Gaston Ba-
chelard and, more speciﬁc, to his book La dialectique de la durée (1936).4 In the 
last chapter of this book, which bears the title ‘Rhythmanalysis,’ Bachelard argues 
that one should never lose sight of the fact that “all exchanges take place through 
rhythms.”5 Building on the work of Portuguese philosopher Lúcio Alberto Pin-
heiro dos Santos, from whom Bachelard borrows the term rhythmanalysis, the 
philosopher here advocates for an active rhythmanalytical theory that never loses 
sight of the fact that rhythm constitutes “the basis of the dynamics of both life 
and the psyche” (DD 128).6
Bachelard’s conceptualization of rhythm ﬁts in with a broader philosophy of time 
that the French philosopher was developing during his teaching period in Dijon 
between 1930 and 1940. This philosophical work resulted in two books, L’intuition 
de l’instant (1932) and La dialectic de la durée (1936), and two articles, “Instant Poé-
tique et instant Métaphisique” (1931) and “La continuité et la multiplicité tem-
porelles” (1937).7 Bachelard framed this entire philosophy of time as a critique 
against Bergsonism and the Bergsonians, which he explicitly characterises as his 
“adversaries” (DD 11).8 Although Bachelard is sympathetic to Bergson’s attempt 
to develop a theory of time that does not understand temporality as abstract clock 
time, he profoundly disagrees with the Bergsonian idea of duration. For Bachelard 
time should not be understood as a continuous ﬂow, in which the past is pro-
longed into the present, but as fractured and constantly riven, the present con-
stantly breaking away from its past. The conceptualization of rhythm ﬁts in this 
argument against Bergsonian duration. By advancing rhythm as a “fundamental 
temporal notion” (DD ix), Bachelard aims to replace Bergson’s conceptualization 
of time as duration with a reading of time in which continuity is the result of a 
rhythmic interplay.
In recent years Bachelard’s philosophy of time and the accompanying polemic 
with Bergson have received new attention in diﬀerent books and edited volumes.9 
In spite of Bachelard’s explicit critique, these works refuse to frame the discus-
sion between Bergson and Bachelard in terms of a simple opposition. The idea 
behind this is that in his attempt to pick a ﬁght with his contemporary, Bachelard 
not only failed to give an accurate account of the subtlety and complexity of the 
Bergsonian project, but also caricaturised his own philosophy.10 Indeed, a close 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 87 
reading of both theoretical oeuvres shows more points of convergence than Ba-
chelard seems willing to acknowledge. While I agree that it is important to look 
for the diﬀerent aﬃnities underlying the apparent diﬀerence between both phi-
losophers, I would however also like to stress the fundamental diﬀerence between 
both philosophers. Although Bachelard takes up and re-reads a lot of concepts 
that were developed by Bergson, in the end his vision on time is radically diﬀerent 
from that of Bergson. As Jean François Perraudin argues, this diﬀerence appears 
most clearly when we look at the “practical and therapeutic perspectives” of the 
theory, which indicates fundamentally diﬀerent perspectives on how to relate to 
time.11 By exploring how both philosophers develop the concept of rhythm in and 
through their oeuvre, I want to show the many micro-relations that emerge in-be-
tween Bergson’s and Bachelard’s analysis of time, while drawing attention to the 
profound diﬀerences in their attitude towards it. 
BERGSON AND BACHELARD: CONTINUITY, DISCONTINUITY AND 
RHYTHM
A reader of Bachelard does not even need to reach the ﬁrst chapters of L’intuition 
de L’instant and La dialectique de la durée to realize the polemic character of both 
books. The titles already indicate Bachelard’s aim to radically rethink key con-
cepts of the Bergsonian philosophy.12 In L’intuition de l’instant Bachelard connects 
intuition, described by Bergson as the “direct vision” via which we “experience 
the uninterrupted prolongation of the past in the present encroaching towards 
the future,”13 to the discontinuous instant. In doing so he not only brings together 
two concepts that are opposed in Bergson’s philosophical system, but also blurs 
the Bergsonian distinction between the intellect, which deals with the instanta-
neous, and philosophical/artistic intuition, which deals with duration. In a similar 
fashion La dialectique de la durée provokes the Bergsonian system, as it transforms 
duration, which Bergson describes as an immediate given of consciousness, into a 
dialectical movement. Duration is here no longer the ontological primary source 
of life, but rather the product of a discontinuous alternation of something and 
nothing.14 
Bachelard’s critique of the Bergsonian project is primarily directed against Berg-
son’s concept of continuity. Bachelard wishes to develop a “discontinuous Berg-
sonism” (DD 8), ironically stating that “of Bergsonism we accept everything but 
continuity” (DD 7). However, in spite of Bachelard’s attempts to break the Berg-
sonian continuity, the discussion between the two philosophers cannot be re-
duced to a rigid polemic between homogenous continuity, illustrated by Bergson, 

88 · jonas rutgeerts 
and absolute discontinuity, illustrated by Bachelard, for two main reasons. Firstly, 
Bachelard’s theory cannot simply be reduced to a plea for discontinuity, rather 
one of Bachelard’s main goals in both L’intuition de l’instant and La dialectique de la 
durée is to understand how duration works. While in the beginning of L’intuition 
de l’instant, he ﬁrmly states that “time presents itself as solitary instant,”15 he later 
on wonders how this solitary instant can be related to “the becoming of being” 
(II 60), thus trying to understand the “continuity of the discontinuous” (II 68).16 
Secondly, Bachelard’s characterisation—or caricaturisation—of Bergson’s dura-
tion as homogeneous continuity, fails to appreciate the fact that Bergson himself 
continuously critiques the idea of one all-encompassing duration. Already in his 
ﬁrst major book Bergson describes duration in terms of “qualitative multiplici-
ty” and “absolute heterogeneity,” stating that a conceptualization of duration as 
something homogenous would make freedom incomprehensible.17 In the books 
that follow Bergson consistently talks about “durations with diﬀerent elasticity,”18 
or about a “continuity of durations.”19 
Rather than understanding the distinction between continuity and discontinuity 
as the end point of the discussion, and choosing one or the other, this distinc-
tion can serve as the point of departure for a discussion. For both Bachelard and 
Bergson concrete duration can only be understood as the outcome of a relation 
between continuity and discontinuity, or between a “dynamic force” and a “force 
of resistance.”20 To understand this relation, both Bergson and Bachelard seek re-
course to the mechanisms of rhythm.21 Connected to both ﬂow and form, to free-
ﬂowing movement and the organization of movement according to a beat, rhythm 
is an apt tool to understand the interaction between the forces of continuity and 
those of discontinuity. Consequently, both philosophers use it to conceptualize 
the concrete temporal existence and to analyze the diﬀerence between singular 
temporalities. Advocating neither absolute discontinuity nor homogeneous con-
tinuity, both philosophers try to understand the diﬀerent temporalities that we 
experience as a complex rhythmic interplay between break and ﬂow. According to 
Bergson, there is “no unique rhythm of duration,” but a multiplicity of “diﬀerent 
rhythms,” which are each marked by a speciﬁc degree of tension, or relaxation 
that “ﬁxes their respective places in the series of being” (MM 232). For Bachelard, 
on the other hand, it is “impossible not to recognize the need to base complex life 
on “a plurality of durations that have neither the same rhythm nor the same solid-
ity in heir sequence, nor the same power of continuity” (DD viii). 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 89 
These similarities, however, cannot lead to a simple equation of both theories, or 
to an understanding of Bachelard’s project as a mere rearticulation of Bergson. 
Both philosophers coin rhythm as a key concept, but they conceptualize rhythm 
radically diﬀerent. To understand this, I will have to take a closer look at the con-
ceptualization of rhythm in the work of Bergson and Bachelard. 
RHYTHM IN BERGSON: MELODIES AND VIBRATIONS
Although Bachelard suggests otherwise, Bergson devotes a lot of attention to the 
idea of rhythm. It is a key concept in Matiere et mémoire (1896) and already plays 
an important role in his ﬁrst major work Essai sur les données immédiates de la con-
science (1889). As is well known, the basic claim of Essai is that our inner experi-
ence of time is corrupted by space. Both common sense, science and philosophy 
have the tendency to reduce our inner experience of temporality to a sequence 
of now-moments, thus reducing time to a “homogeneous medium in which our 
conscious states are ranged alongside one another as in space, so as to form dis-
crete multiplicity” (E 67). However, “when our ego lets itself live, when it refrains 
from separating, its present states form its former states” (E 75). This leads to a 
completely diﬀerent experience of time, not as the repetition of instants, but as 
duration. That is, as “nothing but a succession of qualitative changes, which melt 
into and permeate one another, without precise outlines, without any tendency 
to externalise themselves in relation to one another, without any aﬃliation with 
number” (E 77). To illustrate this experience of duration Bergson refers to the 
metaphor of melody, where the diﬀerent notes interpenetrate each other to form 
one heterogeneous unity, an organic and dynamic whole “comparable to a living 
being” (E 75). Similar to duration, we cannot understand a melody by breaking 
it down into discrete unit or notes. In order to understand it we should immerse 
ourselves into the movement of the music and let ourselves get carried away by 
its ﬂow. 
With the development of melody as one of the dominant metaphors for duration, 
rhythm also appears in Bergson’s discourse. Bergson sees a close relation between 
rhythm and melody, as both phenomena relate to a durational understanding of 
time. Take for example Bergson’s famous passage of the sounds of the bell: 
The sounds of the bell certainly reach me one after the other; but one of 
two alternatives must be true. Either I retain each of these successive sen-
sations in order to combine it with the others and form a group which re-

90 · jonas rutgeerts 
minds me of an air or rhythm which I know: in that case I do not count the 
sounds, I limit myself to gathering, so to speak, the qualitative impression 
produced by the whole series. Or else I intend explicitly to count them, 
and then I shall have to separate them, and this separation must take place 
within some homogeneous medium in which the sounds, stripped of their 
qualities, and in a manner emptied, leave traces of their presence, which 
are absolutely alike. (E 64-65; my emphasis)
In this passage, Bergson explicitly links rhythm to melody and, consequently, to 
duration. When we “limit” ourselves to the qualitative impression produced by 
the whole series, we experience it as rhythmic. Despite this link, however, rhythm 
should not simply be equated with melody, or with duration. As we will see, rhythm 
merely suggests or points to melodic duration, but does not coincide with it. 
Unlike many of his contemporaries, Bergson does not make a distinction between 
rhythm and measure. In the ﬁrst half of twentieth century, it was common to 
distinguish artiﬁcial measure or meter, which was found in the stomping repeti-
tions of the new mechanic labour, from natural rhythms, connected to the organic 
pulsation of the heart or the waves of the sea.22 In Essai, however, Bergson deﬁnes 
rhythm as an aesthetic tool, refusing to connect it to nature: “Nature, like art, 
proceeds by suggestion, but does not command the resources of rhythm” (E 12). 
Moreover, contrary to what we might expect from a philosopher with a clear pre-
dilection for gracious organic movement, Bergson states that the aesthetic power 
of rhythm resides exactly in its repetitive and predictable character. The “regular-
ity of the rhythm” takes “complete possession of our thought and will” and gives 
us the feeling that we participate in the movement of the work of art (E 9-10). 
Referring to poetry, Bergson describes this quality as follows:
The poet is he with whom feelings develop into images, and the images 
themselves into words, which translate them while obeying the laws of 
rhythm. In seeing these images pass before our eyes we in our turn experi-
ence the feeling which was, so to speak their emotional equivalent: but we 
should never realize these images so strongly without the regular movement of 
the rhythm by which our soul is lulled into self-forgetfulness, and, as in a dream 
thinks and sees with the poet. (E 11; my emphasis) 23
Through its regular movement rhythm makes us forget ourselves. In turn, this 
forgetting of the self allows us to immerse ourselves into the movement that is 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 91 
suggested by the phrase and to get carried away by its momentum. This can be 
connected to the previous example of the bell. It is no coincidence that Bergson 
uses an example that is markedly amelodic. 24 The monotone and staccato repeti-
tion of the strokes serves as the condition for a state of self-forgetfulness, which 
in turn allows for the experience of real duration. Rhythm thus functions as “in-
strument of suggestion,” or “vector of hypnosis”25. Its repetition, which in itself is 
quantitative, makes the listener forget her-/himself and lulls her in a state where 
she experiences the diﬀerent strokes as one continuous melody. Rhythm, argues 
Bergson, functions as tool to evoke duration, it is “the quality of quantity” (E 92)
In Matière et mémoire Bergson at the same time takes up this conceptualization of 
rhythm and changes it drastically. As in Essai, rhythm takes up an ambiguous po-
sition, being that in extensive reality that points to intensive duration. Contrary 
to Essai, however, this ‘pointing to’ should no longer be understood in terms of 
suggestion, but in terms of expression. In Matière et mémoire rhythm is no longer 
reduced to an aesthetic tool. Rather, it becomes an ontological operation through 
which duration expresses itself in concrete entities. Bergson here trades the rigid 
bifurcation, where inextensive time and extensive space are radically separated 
categories, for a view in which time and space are extremes on a continuum, or 
opposite forces that are always co-present. As such, every real phenomenon is 
“something intermediate between divided extension [pure space] and pure inex-
tension [or duration]” (MM 276). In this context, rhythm gets a new function. 
It no longer suggests pure duration, but expresses concrete duration. Rhythm 
is here conceived as the speciﬁc outcome of the concrete interplay between the 
forces of extension and inextension that takes place in each phenomenon and char-
acterises it. 
In Matière et mémoire, rhythm is the deﬁning feature of the phenomena: not only 
does everything have its own rhythm, rather, each entity is its rhythm. To under-
stand this, we need to take into account Bergson’s understanding of durational 
movement as vibrational. As we have seen, duration is no longer a speciﬁc quality 
of our inner experience of time, but a force that permeates everything and makes 
everything move or “vibrate.” What appears stable and solid on the macro-level, 
“resolves itself into numberless vibration” on the micro-level (MM 234). In other 
words, everything consists out of vibration. What makes something singular is 
simply its rate of vibration, or rhythm. Elements that testify to a more power-
ful presence of the force of inextension, like the mind, have a higher more ﬂuid 
rhythm. Elements in which the extensive forces are more present, like material 

92 · jonas rutgeerts 
objects, have a slower, more solid, rhythm. By introducing these diﬀerences in 
rhythm, or rate of vibration, Bergson not only explains the diﬀerence between 
elements, but he also reveals the reason why we experience stability. According to 
Bergson, the rhythm of our consciousness is so high that it fails to experience the 
slow rhythm of material things. To illustrate this Bergson refers to the perception 
of colours.
May we not conceive, for instance, that the irreducibility of two perceived 
colours is due mainly to the narrow duration into which are contracted 
the billions of vibrations, which they execute in one of our moments? If we 
could stretch out this duration, that is to say, live at a slower rhythm, should 
we not, as the rhythm slowed down, see these colours pale and lengthen 
into successive impressions, still coloured, no doubt, but nearer and near-
er to coincidence with pure vibrations? In cases where the rhythm of the 
movement is slow enough to tally with the habits of our consciousness - as 
in the case of the deep notes of the musical scale, for instance - do we not 
feel that the quality perceived analyses itself into repeated and successive 
vibrations, bound together by an inner continuity?  (MM 127-128; my em-
phasis)
The fact that we perceive a colour as a stable quality can be explained by the diﬀer-
ence in rhythm between vibrations of the colour and of our consciousness. Take 
for example the perception of red light. According to Bergson, our psychological 
perception of one second of red light corresponds with 400 billion physical vibra-
tions of waves. Through our perception we habitually contract these vibrations of 
the “inﬁnitely diluted existence” of the colour into a few moments of our “more 
intense life,” thus perceiving these waves as one stable quality. 
Bergson thus paints a picture of a world where everything vibrates and where the 
diﬀerence between phenomena is reduced to diﬀerences in rhythm. The only rea-
son why we experience stability is because we impose our intense rhythm of dura-
tion onto the slower rhythms, thus condensing a dynamic sequence of vibrations 
into one stable image. In short, “to perceive means to immobilize” (MM 233). In 
itself, Bergson does not perceive this stabilizing process as problematic. Quite 
the contrary, in order to analyse our environment and to act upon it we need to 
create stability, which means that we have to impose our rhythm on the things 
that surrounds us. However, although this imposition is important for utilitarian 
ends, we simply need to immobilize the phenomena that surround us in order to 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 93 
survive, it is also a reduction of reality. By forcing the rich polyrhythmic reality to 
follow one dominant rhythm, we “turn our back upon true knowledge” (MM 222). 
If we really want to comprehend life, we need to reverse this movement. Rather 
than imposing our rhythm on the external reality we need to dissolve, or dilate, 
our rhythm and enter into the rhythms of the durational reality that surrounds us. 
Bergson deﬁnes this method as intuition. In opposition to intelligence, which fol-
lows the above-described procedure, intuition allows us to relax our own rhythm 
and to experience the other rhythms of durance. Here we are “thinking back-
wards,” so that we can “expand our scope of perception.”26 According to Bergson 
this method is native to the artist and the philosopher. Contrary to the scientist 
who imposes his rhythm on the material, the philosopher/artist tries to penetrate 
into the inner rhythms of the material that she is dealing with. As such, she is able 
to express life in all its durational, or vibrational complexity. In Evolution Créatrice 
(1941) Bergson elaborates this idea, as he describes the higher eﬀort of intuition 
as a way to coincide with matter “adopting the same rhythm and the same move-
ment.”27 This eﬀort helps the philosopher/artist to go against “the natural inclina-
tion of intelligence,” and to grasp reality from within.28 Or, as Le Roy states in Une 
philosophie nouvelle—Henri Bergson (1912) the “absolute revelation is only given 
to the man who passes into the object, ﬂings himself upon the stream, and lives 
within its rhythm.”29
BACHELARD AND RHYTHM: HABITS AND DIALECTICS
Already in the ﬁrst sentence of L’intuition de l’instant Bachelard clariﬁes the stakes 
of his book, as he argues that: Time has but one reality, the reality of the instant (II 
13).30 Throughout the book Bachelard comes back to the idea that time can only 
exist as solitary instant, thus depriving past and future from any ontological re-
ality. This ontological preference for the instant, however, confronts Bachelard 
with the challenge to understand why we experience time as something that is 
continuously unfolding. How can we have the impression of duration, when time 
should, both ontologically and intuitively, be understood as “a reality grafted on 
the instant and suspended between two nothingnesses” (II 13). Bachelard’s an-
swer to this question is rhythm. According to Bachelard, the feeling of continuity 
between past, present and future is created by rhythms, which transform inde-
pendent moments into “groupings of instants” or patterns (II 90). This continu-
ity, however, is not grounded in reality. Past and future are merely dimensions 
of the present, which is the only reality of time. The past is thus reduced to the 
retention or echo of what was, and the future to the anticipation of, or intent to-

94 · jonas rutgeerts 
wards what is about to come. Or, as Bachelard states, “the past is as empty as the 
future” and “the future is as dead as the past” (II 48).
Durational continuity is thus not a “direct force,” but the product of rhythms 
that establish themselves—and always have to re-establish themselves—in the 
present. Bachelard stresses that these rhythms are not predicated on a “pre-es-
tablished harmony,” but that they are habitual: “past and future are essentially no 
more than habits” (II 51). The philosopher’s conceptualization of habit, however, 
diﬀers from our common sense understanding of the term. Traditionally we un-
derstand habits as patterns that we establish throughout repetition. We have the 
habit to say ‘sorry’ when we bump into somebody in the streets, or to stop when 
the traﬃc light turns red. Habits are here understood as actions that we do. For 
Bachelard, however, habits are “fundamental” (II 70). We don’t perform them, 
but they constitute us. Habitual rhythms construct durational continuity, thus 
creating a sense of self or an identity.31 Or, more prosaically phrased: 
Global identity is thus composed of more or less accurate repetitions [red-
ites], more or less detailed reﬂections. The individual will no doubt make 
an eﬀort to trace its today upon its yesterday, and this copy will be aided 
by the dynamic of rhythms. […] Life carries our image from mirror to mirror. 
(II 71; my emphasis)
Our individual existence and identity are nothing but a habitual rhythm that 
needs to be re-actualized in every moment: “We should neither speak of the unity 
of the self nor of the identity of the self beyond synthesis of the instant” (II 71). 
The individual self, in so far as it persists through time, is nothing but “the inte-
gral sum of rhythms.” 
In other words, we don’t constitute habitual rhythms, but habitual rhythms con-
stitute us. In condensing diﬀerent instants into a continuous temporal pattern, 
they also tie together the individual identity and make that identity persist in and 
through time. This persistence, moreover, should not be understood as a simple 
repetition, but as a progression. This leads to a second fundamental diﬀerence 
between our common sense understanding of rhythm and Bachelard’s concep-
tualization of the term. According to Bachelard habit should not be understood 
in terms of a status quo, something that does not develop through time, but as 
something that constantly renews itself and changes. Bachelard gives the example 
of playing the piano. If we want to develop our piano playing, we have to practice 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 95 
every day, incorporating new elements in our technique. A habitual rhythm is thus 
always a “synthesis of novelty and routine” (II 65). In order to be efficient, a habit 
has to learn. It has to deal with novelty or diﬀerence, and to adapt its rhythm in 
order to incorporate this new element. If it isn’t able to do this, the rhythm will no 
longer be useful and, consequently, no longer be reiterated in the instant. In other 
words, “what persist is always what regenerates itself” (II 83). The past only stays 
when it is re-actualised in the present and it is only re-articulated in the present 
when it serves the progression of this present. Paraphrasing Nietzsche, Bachelard 
here talks about an “eternal reprise,” rather than an “eternal return” (II 81-82).32
In La dialectique de la durée Bachelard returns to the idea that durational continuity 
is “constructed with rhythms” rather than being based on pre-established “tem-
poral base” (DD ix). He picks up Bergson’s metaphor of the melody to underscore 
this idea. According to Bachelard “[w]e must in fact learn the continuity of a melody” 
(DD 114). Melodic continuity is thus never experienced instantly. Instead, it is “the 
recognition of a theme that makes us aware of the melodic continuity.” We have to learn 
the continuity of a melody. We have to repeat and memorise its theme, before 
we can experience it as a durational continuity. In line with what we said before, 
this learning, however, cannot simply be equated with active learning, rather it 
resembles the way in which our perception is always conditioned by the patterns 
that we—consciously or unconsciously—inhabit. We don’t have to study each in-
dividual tune in order to like it, but for us to acknowledge it as a melody, it has to 
be part of our habit. In other words, if we would have been born in a diﬀerent time 
or place, we would not recognize its melodic continuity. In other words, melodic 
durations are always established belatedly (après coup) when we have trained the 
ear to recognize certain patterns. 
In La dialectique de la durée Bachelard not only takes up his earlier conceptualiza-
tion of rhythm, he also develops it. In this book Bachelard relates rhythm to the 
idea of dialectics. Rhythm is no longer simply sequential, connecting diﬀerent 
moments into a continuous refrain, but develops itself dialectically.33 This dialec-
tics operate in a double fashion. Firstly, dialectics refers to a “fundamental heter-
ogeneity that lies at the very heart of lived, active, creative duration” (DD 8). Ac-
cording to Bachelard, duration is constituted by the dual operation of two states: 
creation and destruction, work and repose, aﬃrmation and negation. This duality 
is crucial if we want to understand the possibility of change or the introduction 
of newness in time. For something to appear as new it should always break away 
from what came before. As such, every change is preceded by a moment of nega-

96 · jonas rutgeerts 
tion. Rather than being a concatenation of instants, rhythm thus appears as the 
alternation of—or interaction between—two opposite possibilities: “either in this 
instant nothing is happening, or else in the instant, something is happening.34 Sec-
ondly, dialectics also refers to the fact that every rhythm is dialectally conditioned 
by other rhythms. Rhythms are always “relative.” They interrupt, build on, take 
their cues from or syncopate one another. Rhythms are thus always “overlaid and 
interdependendant” (DD 123). They constantly interlock and superimpose so as to 
create a larger harmony of time. 
This multiplicity, or density, also explains why we experience time as continuous 
and things as stable through time. Continuity cannot be found on the level of the 
individual rhythms, which are always the result of a dialectics between something 
and nothing, but is experienced at the higher level, where the diﬀerent discontin-
uous rhythms are superimposed, and the diﬀerent states have neutralized each 
other. Bachelard here refers to another musical metaphor: the orchestra. Accord-
ing to Bachelard the durational continuity of the music is not experienced at the 
level of the individual musicians, as these musicians are not continuously playing. 
Rather, it is experienced at the level of the orchestra, where the diﬀerent instru-
ments, which each play their own discontinuous line, come together to perform 
an overall harmony. In sum, the overall continuity of time is not connected to 
“one fundamental rhythm to which all the instruments refer,” but rather to the 
summation of the diﬀerent rhythms of the diﬀerent instruments that “support 
each other and carry each other along” (DD 123). There is not one fundamental 
rhythm to which the instruments obey, but rather diﬀerent independent rhythms 
that have to be brought together to form a continuous harmony.35 Time should 
thus not be understood as a single thread, but as a tapestry, in which diﬀerent 
threads are woven together to form a rich temporal texture. 
CONCLUSION: BACHELARD AND THE CREATION OF NEW RHYTHMIC 
TEXTURES
Despite the fact that Bachelard throws down the gauntlet to Bergson, there are 
still clear resemblances between the conceptualization of rhythm in both philo-
sophical systems. Both Bachelard and Bergson coin rhythm as a crucial instru-
ment to understand concrete duration. Rhythm is the pacemaker of our temporal 
existence. As such, rhythm is not only constitutive for the self, as it creates the 
temporality in which this self can live and persist through time, but also it is the 
tool via which we impose our time on the world that surround us and make it our 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 97 
home. In Bergson’s case this happens because through our perception, we impose 
the fast rhythm of our thinking onto the slow rhythm of material things, thus 
immobilizing them and making it possible for us to use them. In the case of Ba-
chelard it is through our habits that we create a sustainable habitus for ourselves 
and ﬁnd our place in the symphony of life. 
Nevertheless, both philosophers have a fundamentally diﬀerent vision on how 
we should relate to these rhythms. For Bergson, rhythm is an expression of the 
durational force that permeates everything and gives everything a speciﬁc (im)
pulse. Consequently, rhythm is not only a tool via which we impose our will on 
our surrounding world, but also a way to connect to gain ‘true knowledge’ about 
that world, experiencing it “from within” (MM 72). When we disengage ourselves 
from the particular rhythm of our consciousness and tune into the rhythms of du-
ration we will manage to come into contact with the primary forces of life that are 
lurking underneath the superﬁcial temporality of everyday life. For Bachelard, on 
the other hand, rhythms should not be understood as the expression of duration, 
but as that what produces duration. As such, the rhythms of becoming do not 
express anything natural or immediate. Quite the contrary, rhythms are always 
constructed. They are habits that, although primary to and constitutive for the 
individual self, fail to express any deeper truth about that self or the reality it re-
lates to. For this reason, Bachelard is not interested in the search for the originary 
or primal rhythms of duration, but in the creation of radically new rhythmic con-
stellations. Bachelard is fascinated by the moments of abrupt irruptions, when old 
rhythms are negated and new temporal structures are created: “Flat horizontality 
suddenly vanishes. Time no longer ﬂows. It spouts [jaillit].” (II 106)
Bachelard ﬁnds this attempt to construct new rhythmic constellations in two ﬁg-
ures that he holds in the highest esteem: the scientist and the poet.36 The scientist 
is the one who says no to tradition, as he abandons the values and interests that 
guide our practical life. She “must ﬁrst destroy in order to make room for her 
constructions” (DD 14). As Bachelard states in Rationalisme Applique (1966), her 
method—the “antithesis of the habit”—imposes a “chronotechnique” that “ex-
pels lived duration,” thus producing a “suspended time” in which new “signiﬁcant 
events” or new rhythmic constellations can emerge.37 Similarly, the poet has the 
task to shatter the “simple continuity of shackled time” in order to make new 
temporalities arise (II 58). “Being a poet means multiplying the temporal dialectic 
and refusing the easy continuity of sensation and deduction” (DD 124). Contrary 
to Bergson, for whom poetry should create a regular meter that lulls the listen-

98 · jonas rutgeerts 
er/reader into a state self-forgetfulness, Bachelard’s argues that “the rhythmics 
of poetry gradually breaks away from ideas of measurement and is arithmetised 
by grouping together notable instants rather than by measuring uniform dura-
tions” (Bergson 1950, 124). Here the reader/listener does not regain contact with 
the original rhythms of durance, but is confronted with the possibilities of new 
rhythms, new temporalities that emerge out of the poetic experimentation.38 As 
Bachelard mentions in Poetics of Space, the poem here gives us a “veritable cure of 
rhythmanalysis”: “to charm or to disturb—always to awaken—the sleeping being 
lost in its automatisms.”39 
Contrary to Bergson, Bachelard is not interested in the actual time in which we 
live, but in the possible times that we can think of, or imagine. Rhythms should 
not be traced back to their temporal origins. Rather, they should be broken up 
and deconstructed so that new signiﬁcant rhythms can emerge. Or, as Bachelard 
argues in the article Surrationalism, which was published in the same year as Di-
alectique de la durée, we should advocate a new model of thinking: “To turn the 
rationalism from the past towards the future, from recollection towards the ten-
tative, from the elementary towards the complex, from the logic towards the sur-
logic these are the indispensible tasks of a spiritual revolution.”40 It is within this 
context that we can best understand Bachelard’s rhythmanalytical project: not 
so much as an analytical method, than as a pedagogical project.41 Understanding 
how life operates rhythmically will allow us to “regain mastery of the dialectics 
of duration” and to create new temporal structures (DD 154). Consequently, the 
ongoing task of rhythmanalysis is to “look anywhere and everywhere in order to 
discover new opportunities for creating rhythms” (DD 148). 

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 99 
NOTES
1. See a.o. Michel Alhadeﬀ-Jones, Time and the Rhythms of Emancipatory Education: Rethinking 
the temporal complexity of self and society. London & New York: Routledge, 2017; Tim Edensor, 
Geographies of Rhythm: Nature, Place, Mobilities and Bodies. London & New York: Routledge, 2010; 
Steve Goodman, Sonic Warfare: Sound, Aﬀect, and the Ecology of Fear. Cambridge & London: The 
MIT Press, 2010; Julian Henrique, Milla Tiainen and Väliaho Pasi, “Rhythm Returns: Movement 
and Cultural Theory.” Body&Society, no. 20 (2014): 3-29.
2. Jacques Derrida, “Introduction.” Typography: Mimesis, Philosophy, Politics. Philippe Lacoue-
Labarthe, Christopher Fynsk, Jacques Derrida. London: Harvard Univeristy Press, 1989, p. 33
3. See: Paola Crespi, “Rhythmanalysis in Gymnastics and Dance: Rudolf Bode and Rudolf Laban.” 
Body & Society, no. 20 (2014): 30-50.
4. Lefebvre explicitly acknowledges his indebtedness to Bachelard when he traced the emergence 
of the rhythmanalytical project. Remarkably, he refers to Psychoanalysis of ﬁre (1938) rather than 
to Dialectique de la Durée, published two years earlier, in which the idea of rhythmanalysis is 
developed in a more profound and extensive way (see: Henri Lefebvre, Éléments de rythmanalyse. 
Paris: Éditions Syllepse, 1992, 9).
5. Gaston Bachelard, La Dialectique de la duree. Paris: Presses Universitaire de France, 1950, 137. We 
will continue to refer to this book within the text as DD. 
6. The Portuguese professor in literature and psychology Lúcio Alberto Pinheiro dos Santos 
allegedly coined the term rhythmanalysis in 1931, when he wrote La Rythmanalyse. However, up 
until today the theoretical relevance of this work remains unclear, as the book was never published 
and the original manuscript is lost. The only in-depth reference to the text can be found in Gaston 
Bachelard Dialectics of Duration. Moreover, as Bachelard neither intends “to give an over-all view of 
these nor to describe all the many lines of development,” it is virtually impossible to make claims 
about dos Santos’s own theory. 
7. Bachelard’s work on temporality took up a special position in his thinking. As is well known, 
Bachelard advocates a separation between scientiﬁc rationality (the diurnal, the animus) and 
poetic reverie (the nocturnal, the anima). This plea resulted in an oeuvre that is divided between 
works on epistemology and science, on the one hand, and works on aesthetics and poetical 
imagination, on the other hand. His writings on time, however, do not adhere to this strict division. 
They are neither epistemological, nor aesthetical, but venture into ontological domains. Drawing 
on both scientiﬁc ﬁndings (relativity theory, set theory, quantum physics) and aesthetic sources 
(literature, poetry, musical theory) Bachelard here tries to grasp the reality of time. As Gaspare 
Polizzi argues, however, this “absence of a dichotomy between rationality and reverie” should 
not be understood as a limitation, but as a “node of potential problems for the future expression 
of Bachelard’s thinking” (See: Caspare Polizzi, “Rythme et Durée: la philosophy du temps chez 
Bergson et Bachelard.” In Bachelard & Bergson: Continuité et discontinuité, by Frédéric Worms and 
Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, 53-72. Paris: Presses Universitaire de France, p. 71)
8. Bachelard has a habit of developing his philosophy in and through a polemical debate with 
other philosopher. In Formation of the Scientiﬁc Mind (1967) he even advocates to replace Kant’s 
“architectonic reason” with a “polemical reason” (10). A few years earlier Bachelard fostered a 
comparable polemic with philosopher and chemist Émile Meyerson in La valeur inductive de la 
relativité (1929). Using a similar rhetorical strategy as in his books on Bergson, Bachelard’s here 
inverts the title of Meyerson’s book La Déduction relativiste, which was published 1925 (cf. infra).

100 · jonas rutgeerts 
9. See a.o. Eileen Rizo-Patron, Adventures in Phenomenology: Gaston Bachelard. New York: Suny, 2017; 
Frédéric Worms and Jaen-Jacques Wunenburger. Bachelard et Bergson: continuité et discontinuité. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2008; Roch C. Smith, Gaston Bachelard: Philosopher of 
Science and Imagniation. Albany: Suny Press, 2016.
10. This misrepresentation of the Bergsonian framework should not be understood as negligence, 
but as a rhetorical tool that Bachelard uses to make his own theory more clear. Several passages 
suggest that Bachelard has read Bergson carefully. As Gouhier mentions, rather than a lack of 
understanding, “Bachelard needs to alter Bergson in order to be Bachelard” (Herni Gouhier, 
“Discussion.” In Bachelard: Colloque de Cerisy (1970). Paris: Hermann Éditeurs, 1974, 359).
11. Jean François Perraudin, “A non-Bergsonian Bachelard.” Continental Philosophy Review, no. 41 
(2008): 465.
12.Cristina Chimisso, “Introduction.” In Dialectics of Duration, by Gaston Bachelard, Manchester: 
Clinamen Press, 2000, 1.
13. Henri Bergson, La Pensée et le mouvant: Essais et conférences. Paris: Libraire Félix Alcan, 1934, 35.
14. However, these titles also how Bachelard was not simply rejecting the Bergsonian project 
but rather rethinks it. As Frédéric Worms points out, Dialectique de la Durée and L’intuition de 
L’instant establish a relation with the Bergsonian project based on a chiasm rather then on a simple 
opposition. This entails that Bachelard preserves the “principle stakes”: “there is still intuition, 
there is still duration, one does not get rid of the categories, nor of the questions” (Frédéric 
Worms, “La rupture de Bachelard avec Bergson comme point d’unité de la philosophie du xxe 
siècle en France .” In Bachelard et Bergson: Continuité et discontinuité ?, by Frédéric Worms and Jean-
Jacques Wunenburger. Paris: Cairn, 2008, 40). 
15. Bachelard Gaston, L’intuition de L’instant:. Paris: Livre de Poche, 1932, 13. We will continue to 
refer to this book within the text as II.
16. Similarly, La dialectique de la durée argues for the need to understand “being” in terms of 
“becoming” (DD 16).
17. Henri Bergson, Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience. Paris: Les Presses universitaires 
de France, 1927, 127. We will continue to refer to this book within the text as E.
18. Henri Bergson, Matière et mémoire. Essai sur la relation du corps à l’esprit. Paris: Presses 
universitaires de France, 1939, 232-233. We will continue to refer to this book within the text as 
MM.
19. Bergson, La Pensée et le mouvant, 237.
20. Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, “Force et résistance, le rythm de la vie.” In Bachelards & Bergson: 
continuité et discontinuité ?, by Frédéric Worms and Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, 27-37. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 2008, 29.
21. This conceptualization of rhythm as central concept does not come out of thin air. Quite 
the contrary, around the turn of the twentieth century rhythm was “one of European’s most 
fetishized keywords” (Lubkoll, Christine. “Rhythmus: Zum Komplex von Lebensphilosophie und 
ästhetischerModerne.” In Das Imaginäre des Fin de siècle: Ein Symposium for Gerhard Neumann, 
by christine Lubkoll (ed.), Freiburg: Rombach, 2002). It occupied a central position in the in the 
theoretical writings of philosophers, natural scientists, psychologist and social theorist and was 
often framed as a mechanism that underscores all movement (see also: Golston, Micheal. ““im 
anfang war der rhythmus”: rhythmic incubation in discourses of mind body and race from 1850-
1944.” Standfort Humanities Review, 5, 1996)
22. Michael Cowan, Technology’ pulse: Essays on Rhythm in German Modernism. London: Institute of 
Germanic & Romance Studies, 2012.

revisiting rhythmanalysis · 101 
23. In Le Rire (1910) we can ﬁnd a similar passage, when Bergson states that the power of rhythm 
and assonance in poetry is to “rocks [bercer] our imagination, taking it back from the same to 
the same in a regular swing, and thus gently preparing it to receive the suggested vision (Henri 
Bergson, Le Rire: Essai sur la signiﬁcation du comique. Paris: Felix Alcan, 1910, 62-63).
24. Christophe Corbier shows how most of the images that Bergson uses to illustrate the intuition 
of duration are distinctly amelodic: the strokes of the bell, the oscillation of a pendulum, the blows 
of the hammer (Christophe Corbier, “Bachelard, Bergson, Emmanuel: Mélodie, rythme et durée.” 
Archives de Philosophie 75, no. 2 [2012]: 296). 
25. Corbier, “Bachelard, Bergson, Emmanuel,” 298.
26. Francis C. T. Moore, Bergson: Thinking Backwards. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996, 95-96.
27. Bergson, Évolution Créatrice, 357.
28. Bergson, Évolution Créatrice, 29-30.
29. Edouard Le Roy, “Une Philosophie nouvelle - Henri Bergson.” Périodique: Revue des Deux 
Mondes 7, no. 6 (1912): 571.
30. Bachelard ascribes this statement to Gaston Roupnel. Throughout the whole book Bachelard 
will come back to the “Roupnelian theory.” We can see that Bachelard here adopts a similar 
rhetorical strategy as in the last chapter of Dialectique de la durée. Again Bachelard claims to explain 
and defend the theory of somebody who, although this time it is a published author, most of 
his readers will not know, thus creating an interesting confusion between ﬁrst- and second-hand 
knowledge. 
31. Bachelard was neither the only nor the ﬁrst philosopher to give the concept of habit an 
important place in his thinking and to see it as a creative act. Quite the contrary, by conceiving 
habit as something that is crucial for both the internal organisation of the living being and its 
relation with the environment Bachelard seems to inscribe himself into a discourse that emerged 
in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century that was advanced by philosophers like Albert Lemoine, 
Félix Ravaisson and—as we have seen—Bergson. Contrary to early modernist philosopher like 
Emmanuel Kant and Rene Descartes, who understood habit as an obstacle for freedom because 
it reduces human action to the order of the mechanical, these philosophers tried to give a more 
positive account of habit, understanding it as a creative act that is able to establish stability in an 
ever changing world (Elisabeth Grosz, “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze and Us.” Body 
& Society 2/3 [2013]: 217-239; Mark Sinclair, “Habit and time in the nineteenth-century French 
philosophy: Albert Lemoine between Bergson adn Ravaisson.” British Jounral for the History of 
Philosophy 1, no. 26 [2018]: 131-153). Gilles Deleuze is one of the more recent authors to have build 
on this line of thinking. In Diﬀerence and Repetition he connects habit to the passive synthesis of the 
present, arguing that habit is constitutive for our experience of the living present (Gilles Deleuze, 
Diﬀérence et répetition. Paris: Presses Universitaite de France, 1968).
32. Bachelard continues to connect the idea of constant renewal with the idea of progression. 
Habits are not only dynamic, constantly changing as they synthesize the memory of the old and 
the emergence of the new, but they are also progressive. Throughout its repetition, rhythms are 
gradually becoming more rational, more righteous and more beautiful. (II 94-95). Although, the 
rhythmic patterns that emerge are in themselves completely accidental, only the patterns that 
propel us into a better future will be preserved. All the other habitual patterns will eventually 
disappear. In other words, progression is not driven by a force that pushes it in a certain direction, 
but by a project that pulls us: “What compels us to preserve in being is then not so much a set of 
forces as it is a set of reasons” (MM 74).

102 · jonas rutgeerts 
33. Although Bachelard refers only a few times to science in Dialectic, we can see a close relation 
between Bachelard’s philosophy of time and his philosophy of science when he talks about the 
dialectics of time. For Bachelard the dialectical method is inherently to the scientiﬁc approach to 
knowledge production, where new scientiﬁc experiments always comes aims to negate, or falsify 
existing theories in order to come to new knowledge (see: Gaston Bachelard, La Philosophy du non: 
Essai d’une philosophy du nouvel esprit scientiﬁc. Paris: Les Presses universitaires de France, 1966.).
34. Bachelard here again enters into a polemical debate with Bergson. In Creative evolution Bergson 
argues that negation does not really exist, as it is simply “an aﬃrmation of the second degree” 
(Bergson, Évolution Créatrice, 288). Negation simply indicates the operation where “I add ‘not’ 
to an aﬃrmation” (Bergson, Évolution Créatrice, 289). This ‘not’ should not be understood in 
terms of absence or emptiness, but in terms of diﬀerence. Stating ‘X is not there,’ is actually the 
same as saying ‘something diﬀerent that X is there.’ For Bachelard, by contrast, negation is not an 
aﬃrmation of the second degree, but rather an essential part of the dialectical movement of time. 
35. For this reason we should make a distinction between rhythm and measure. Measure does 
not express the fundamental rhythm of the piece. It divides the whole piece into standard units 
of time, marked by the bar, but these units are simply pragmatic and secondary tools that enable 
the weaving of diﬀerent rhythmic patterns into a complex harmony. Metronomes can indicate the 
measure, but they can never really describe the “fabric of time” (DD 118). They are nothing but 
“crude instruments,” “the magnifying glasses with which weavers count the threads [compte-ﬁls] 
and not the looms themselves” (DD 117).
36. Perraudin argues that Bachelard sees the ﬁgure of the artist and the as “heroic types” as they 
animate the history of human progress. “These heroes beneﬁt other individuals through their own 
dynamisms” (Parraudin, A non-Bergsonian Bachelard, 471). 
37. Gaston Bachelard, Le Rationalimse Appliqué. Paris: Les Presses universitaires de France, 1966, 
26.
38. As an example of this type of poetry, Bachelard refers to the surrealists. With their clear 
preference for poems that do not follow a pre-deﬁned metrical pattern and their associative 
rhythmic strategies.(See DD 125-126)
39. Bachelard, Gaston. La poétique de l’espace. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1957, p. 17
40. Gaston Bachelard, L’engagement rationaliste. Préface de Georges Canguilhem. Paris: Les Presses 
universitaires de France, 1972, 7.
41. Chimisso, “Introduction,” 10.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 103-135
towards an interdisciplinary 
anthropology? the 
transformative 
epistemologies of bergson, 
bachelard, and simondon
johannes f.m. schick
A common thread that runs through the philosophies of Bergson, Bachelard and 
Simondon is that science is considered as a human, essentially technical practice 
that transforms our way to know and to act. Applying scientific principles and/
or material tools transforms the world we live in and the way we understand the 
world and ourselves. Together with Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon I wish to 
explore how this act of transformation can be grasped. Each philosopher stresses 
different aspects of this epistemic act and how it relates the subject to the world. 
They aim not merely at an understanding of the already existing scientific struc-
tures, but rather at the historical transformations of concepts and categories, as 
well as the epistemic act of the subject itself.
Their epistemological models have therefore to provide the means to (1) access 
the transformations that occur in being as an object, (2) to grasp the epistemic act 
itself as a transformation of the human mind and (3) to conceive of the epistemic 
act as a technique that transforms reality. These three epistemological goals pre-
suppose an ontology where being is in constant change and the epistemic subject 
has access to and participates in the transformative character of being. Otherwise 
transformation can neither be a phenomenon that can be perceived as an object 
of knowledge nor an experience of the epistemic subject that grasps itself in the 
act of knowledge. 

104 · johannes f.m. schick  
The transformative epistemologies of Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon are thus 
based upon an ontology that allows for novelty, change and transformation. Real-
ity is—according to them—constantly transforming itself. It seems, however, as 
if this implies a petitio principii: the transformative character of being is presup-
posed, while the epistemologies of Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon simultane-
ously wish to thematize ‘transformation.’ Change, transformation, and novelty 
appear to be properties of being that are shared by the human, epistemic subject. 
Thus, the question occurs, whether the epistemic subject can address and thema-
tize transformations without begging the question. Or, to put it differently: why is 
the epistemic act to grasp transformation necessary at all, if a principle of being 
is transformation? Why do we not immediately grasp the first principles of being 
and understanding?1
Although it is neither unusual that epistemology is asking for its first principles, 
nor surprising that epistemology is linked with ontology, Bergson, Bachelard, and 
Simondon provide an interesting rendition of this classical problem: they trans-
form the classical Aristotelian question “what is a being?” into the question “what 
does a being do?” They are not only interested in the structures that the sciences 
create and what can be known within this structures (e.g. what is a substance?), 
but they develop—despite their different approaches—epistemologies that focus 
on science and knowledge as practices of transformation (e.g. how does a sub-
stance operate?). This shift to focus on operations, rather than on structures has 
ontological, epistemological and anthropological consequences, which I wish to 
explore through following three major arguments:
1. First of all, human practices are technical practices. The human sub-
ject applies concepts in order to understand itself, life, and the universe. 
The understanding of concepts such as “substance,” “matter,” or “energy” 
changes over the course of time, according to the social milieu, and ac-
cording to the method one applies to fathom the phenomena. Science is 
thus a human practice—a technique—that applies, creates and modifies 
these concepts. Therefore, Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon conceive 
of concepts as intellectual tools. But, the tool-use is interpreted differ-
ently by each of the three philosophers. Bergson defines the human be-
ing as homo faber. The use of intellectual tools reduces the mobile reality 
to static elements. Concepts can only fathom inadequately what reality 
has to offer. Accordingly, scientific concepts are devoid of the dynamic 
aspects of reality. For Bachelard on the other hand, scientific concepts are 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 105 
the starting point of realization processes. Scientific concepts, theories 
and techniques are necessary to realize phenomena: the scientific process 
creates phenomena that could otherwise not be experienced by the epis-
temic subject (e.g. the wave-particle-dualism). This phénoménotechnique is 
an essential part of scientific work. While for Bergson science deforms re-
ality, for Bachelard, science creates new realities with its conceptual tools 
and allows to mobilize philosophical concepts. Therefore, the homo faber 
does not adequately represent the new scientific spirit. The value of tools 
shifts again when cybernetics enters the scene. According to Simondon, 
cybernetics realizes an operational technology in relating one science to 
another. Thus, the tools are no longer used to realize phenomena belong-
ing to a singular science, but the toolbox is opened for other sciences. If 
a problem arises in a specific science but cannot be solved within its con-
ceptual framework, other sciences and their phénoménotechnique might be 
helpful to pose the questions differently and/or to answer the question. 
Although this might be a common practice for the scientist herself, the 
scientific spirit of cybernetics is no longer merely interested in a phénomé-
notechnique, but rather in the technical operation of transposing a phéno-
ménotechnique into a different field.
2. Secondly, change, transformation, and novelty are phenomena that can 
be witnessed and are studied on all levels of being. They are the expression 
of an élan, which is either vital, scientific or encyclopedic. The élan is de-
rived out of the sciences themselves: for Bergson the theory of evolution 
provides evidence of the constant transformation of life. He introduces 
the concept of the élan vital to criticize a reductive interpretation of the 
theory of evolution. For Bachelard the development of the “new scientific 
spirit” shows how the transformation of Newtonian physics led not only 
to a new understanding of substance, matter, and energy that is relevant 
for the sciences, but also to a new understanding of these concepts in phi-
losophy. Finally, for Simondon cybernetics became the scientific paradigm 
to inquire into a new epistemology that takes account of the operations 
between science, philosophy, and technology, while moreover it considers 
the mode of existence of technical objects in their own right. 
3. Thirdly, it follows that science, technology, and philosophy operate 
within the realm of being. Being is not a structure that is unveiled by sci-
entists or philosophers; rather human beings participate in the transfor-

106 · johannes f.m. schick  
mative character of being by means of specific forms of practices, such as 
science, art, and philosophy. Scientific practice is a specific operational 
mode that creates structures such as the Cartesian plane, Newton’s law of 
gravity, etc. This does not, however, mean that the sciences just construct 
their world, but that the sciences create structures in exchange with their 
material, i.e. the world. The question as to whether or not the interrela-
tion of ontology and epistemology begs the question is—to use a famous 
expression of Bergson—a false one: the epistemic subject cannot avoid 
to beg the question since it is already operating within a field that exists 
prior to the epistemic subject. The metaphysical presuppositions allow-
ing for transformation are thus necessary or, to speak with Bachelard, one 
cannot escape one’s metaphysics2: metaphysical presuppositions have im-
plications for the observation and creation of scientific phenomena and 
their interpretation. The epistemological decision to address operations 
in the sciences and in being originates, however, in the sciences them-
selves: (1) Bergson shows that the notion of time is reduced to a mere 
quantitative term in Newtonian physics; (2) Bachelard follows the dynam-
ics of the “new scientific spirit” in the realization of phenomena that can-
not become the object of our immediate experience; (3) Simondon takes 
cybernetics as point of departure and claims that cybernetics itself, with-
out philosophical reflection, is unable to create an axiology since it lacks 
a proper ontology of values.3 This axiontology is based on the openness of 
being, which is a common thread that runs through the examined episte-
mologies.4 Epistemology is therefore neither a synthesis of the sciences, 
nor does it belong to the sciences; rather it is a genuine philosophical ef-
fort to understand human practices, or as Simondon puts it: an individua-
tion of knowledge.5 
All three philosophers are not merely interested in describing historical, scientific 
transformations, but also in the act of transformation itself, which opens new 
ways of understanding and acting: the epistemic act is transformative. Epistemol-
ogy is thus simultaneously an epistemology of transformation—an epistemology 
that has as its object the historical transformations within the sciences –, and a 
transformative epistemology—an epistemology that aims at the transformation 
of the experience of the epistemic subject. 
I will follow these anthropological, epistemological and ontological tendencies in 
a transductive movement from Bergson to Bachelard to Simondon. Accordingly, 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 107 
this essay has three parts. In the first part I will develop Bergson’s criticism of 
the sciences along the lines of the homo faber. The human being is conceived of 
as tool making animal. Science is considered as a specific human practice that has 
the same origins as technology. Science is therefore application-oriented and is 
creating stable, immobile concepts, which reduce the dynamic and transforma-
tive character of life into stable elements. The philosophical task for Bergson is to 
reverse the usual habit of the human intellect in order to find the origin of experi-
ence and to create “fluid concepts.” In the second part, I will show that Gaston 
Bachelard also sees within the sciences a technique at work, but he interprets 
in opposition to Henri Bergson the role of science entirely differently: science 
is a practice that allows to open up classical philosophical concepts. The phéno-
ménotechniques of the sciences establish a recursive relationship of the epistemic 
subject with the world. The categories of understanding are transformed by the 
attempts to realize scientific phenomena. Materiality resists and returns informa-
tion. The intellectual tools are not stable, but can and have to be modified over 
the course of time. Bachelard thus reveals the dynamic aspects of the scientific 
spirit and the plasticity of the human mind. Finally, I will move to Gilbert Simon-
don, who reacts to the challenges of cybernetics and modern technology: the fo-
cus on science and the phénoménotechnique shifts towards the operations between 
particular sciences and towards the mode of existence of the technical object. 
Simondon develops a conception of the human being in the midst of technical ob-
jects—and argues for the development of a “new encyclopedic spirit” that creates 
a new, open relation with science, technology and the world.6 In my concluding 
remarks, I would like to show, how the transformative epistemologies of Bergson, 
Bachelard and Simondon can contribute to an interdisciplinary anthropology.
GOING BEYOND THE HUMAN STATE: BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHICAL 
TASK
Bergson’s main metaphysical motif is transformation: life is change and evolves 
via constant transformations.7 But how can change be addressed and life in its 
evolution be adequately represented? Since any living being participates in life 
and its main task is to conserve oneself in life, all its faculties (to feel, act, and 
think) have to be considered in light of their vital function. According to Bergson, 
this means that the human intellects8 most important function is not to contem-
plate, but to manufacture “artificial objects, especially tools to create tools”9: to 
be human means to be primarily homo faber and not homo sapiens. This definition 
has two consequences: on the one hand, the genesis of the human intellect is de-

108 · johannes f.m. schick  
rived out of its exchange with matter; on the other hand, it is application oriented. 
The scientific practice is therefore only one amongst other human practices. The 
scientist is the homo faber whose toolbox is the scientific method.
It looks as Bergson has formulated a circular argument: the activity of the intel-
lect transforms reality, but a critique of the intellect is only possible by means 
of the intellect. But as Georges Canguilhem points out in his commentary of the 
third chapter of Creative Evolution: thought is not congruent with the intellect. 
The intellect is rather a habit of consciousness, a specific style of acting, which 
cannot generate itself, but has its roots in life itself.10 Even if the human intel-
lect is manufacturing static ideas and concepts, this work is only possible due to 
the immediate contact with reality provided by intuition. Since intuition itself is 
always related to an individual in its relation to the world, intuition signifies an 
act of an individual. But this act is not merely an intellectual act. Intuition rather 
suspends the oppositions of subject and object, mind and matter or mechanism 
and finalism created by the human intellect.11 The metaphysical task of philoso-
phy is to surpass the human intellectual conditions in an attempt to dissolve the 
classical oppositions and to enable thought in action, namely intuition. Bergson’s 
answer to the problem of the vicious circle is thus: “action breaks the circle”12.
Even if one starts with the discontinued experience created by the sciences, the 
circle can be broken: Even when complex phenomena, such as emotions, are re-
duced to stable units that can be measured (e.g. heart rate, skin conductance, 
neuronal state, intentional object, etc.), which interpenetrate each other in the 
experience of the emotion, the act of understanding turns into a practice guided 
by the phenomenon as soon as one attempts to understand the relation between 
the data and the original phenomenon. The scientist needs therefore at least a 
certain inherent knowledge to determine a phenomenon, i.e. she needs to know 
what it feels like to have an emotion in order to determine that a measurement of 
the heart rate or a galvanic skin response might express elements of an emotion. 
The composition of the elements alone, however, does not lead to an experience 
of the whole.13
Science and metaphysics differ, however, in their use of intuition. While the sci-
ences are based upon intuition and transform experience into stable units, meta-
physics uses intuition methodically and addresses phenomena in their mobility.14 
The intuition already hinted at in the sciences leads to the proper philosophical 
effort, which aims to go beyond the human state and to search for the sources of 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 109 
human experience:
It would be to seek experience at its source, or rather above that decisive 
turn where, taking a bias in the direction of our utility, it becomes properly 
human experience. … By unmaking that which these needs have made, we 
may restore to intuition its original purity and so recover contact with the 
real. This method presents, in its application, difficulties, which are con-
siderable and ever recurrent, because it demands for the solution of each 
new problem an entirely new effort. … [W]hen we have placed ourselves 
at what we have called the turn of experience, … there still remains to be 
reconstituted, with the infinitely small elements which we thus perceive 
of the real curve, the curve itself stretching out into the darkness behind 
them. In this sense the task of the philosopher, as we understand it, closely 
resembles that of the mathematician who determines a function by start-
ing from the differential. The final effort of philosophical research is a true 
work of integration.15
The path is ‘of experience’ has to be paved via the tools of critique. All the intellec-
tual edifices constructed to fulfill our needs have to be reversed. Yet, this negative 
work is just the point of departure and the condition of an ensuing constructive 
effort. Since reality is constantly changing, it is necessary to make each time a new 
effort to grasp a phenomenon and to create each time a new method.
Bergson connects the “turn of experience” with two transformations: on the one 
hand, it signifies the place where the human intellect transforms the immediate 
into the useful; on the other, it is the proper place of philosophy to realize an 
integral experience from the differential and fragmented experiences. This in-
tegral experience is, for Bergson, the proper object of metaphysics, secured by 
a metaphysical intuition connecting the natural sciences, literature, philosophy 
and reality. This intuition is, however, not a mystical event that overcomes the 
subject as revelation. It is rather achieved through “long and intensive fellow-
ship with the facts.”16 Therefore, it cannot be accomplished within the limits of 
philosophy alone. The exchange with the sciences is necessary to have a compre-
hensive understanding of the perspectives that are virtually possible.17 But, while 
the sciences can only reach a metaphorical understanding of reality, metaphysics 
is in search for an intuition of the things themselves. “Intuition gives us the thing 
whose spatial transposition, whose metaphorical translation alone, is seized by 
the intellect.”18

110 · johannes f.m. schick  
But what might be an adequate method to practice metaphysics, if the metaphori-
cal translation of the sciences provides only a spatial transposition? Language 
constitutes and expresses the condition of scientific research as well as of phi-
losophy. Language operates with concepts, which are the result of intellectual 
operations condensing dynamic phenomena into stable units. In this sense, they 
are literally metaphors: transpositions from the realm of operations into stable 
structures. Concepts are tools applied to reality creating structures of thought.19 
What kinds of action are necessary to break the circle?
RECAST THE CATEGORIES, CREATE FLUID CONCEPTS!
The aim of the philosophical effort is to enable participation with the élan vital 
creating sense in the universe. Bergson’s élan vital is characterized by transfor-
mation and evolution. Philosophical knowledge is therefore a transformative act. 
Sense is not achieved, it is not a telos that can be reached, but is generated:
The truth is that above the word and above the sentence there is something 
much more simple than a sentence or even a word: the meaning, which is 
less a thing thought than a movement of thought, less a movement than 
a direction. And just as the impulsion given to the embryonic life deter-
mines the division of an original cell into cells which in turn divide until 
the complete organism is formed, so the characteristic movement of each 
act of thought leads this thought, by an increasing sub-division of itself, to 
spread out more and more over the successive planes of the mind until it 
reaches that of speech.20
The argumentation approaches its object ex negativo: “meaning, which is less a 
thing thought than a movement of thought, less a movement than a direction.” 
Bergson attempts here to illustrate the intuition of duration in its transformative 
movement. We perceive separate things and locate them in order to realize that 
they are mobile. Yet, this movement is not merely a translocation from A to B, but 
presupposes a principle of movement in the universe providing a certain direc-
tion.
Bergson amplifies this description by an analogy: thought corresponds to the gen-
esis of an organism through cell division. The origin of this process was an impul-
sion that corresponds to intuition on the intellectual level. The intuition reaches 
the level of speech (parole) in expanding through differentiation. Speech (parole) 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 111 
refers once more to the dissolution of theory and practice. The philosopher is the 
actual empiricist: experience is not only addressed, but it is performed and ex-
perienced in a transformative, epistemic act. Bergson’s philosophy neither starts 
nor ends with pre-existing ideas or structures of knowledge. It rather turns to 
the mobility of one’s mind in vitalizing each time ideas anew when searching for 
them.
Although the natural sciences also address experiences, they still act within the 
limits of the homo faber. Experience within the constraints of the scientific meth-
od is limited to simultaneity and discontinuity. According to Bergson, the sci-
ences do not search for the turn of experience, but rather aim at measurement: 
“What distinguishes modern science is not that it is experimental, but that it ex-
periments and, more generally, works only with a view to measure.”21
Bergson does not deny the value of the natural sciences, nor their achievements, 
but he claims that their methods are inapt to address real transformations in actu. 
His central argument is that movement is divided into merely juxtaposed spatial 
positions and elements without considering the interval between them.22 Trans-
formation is, according to Bergson, a continuous process in time that does not 
allow for discontinuous elements, while the sciences create laws of repetition and 
measurability. Continuous wholes are thus transformed into discontinuous ele-
ments. The philosophical method does not only start with an intuition of a mobile 
reality, it also aims at an intuition. Intuition—being the mode of immediate ex-
perience—allows for participation in transformative processes within the subject 
and the world. The philosophical task is, according to Bergson, to enable trans-
formative processes in recasting the categories of human thought and in creating 
fluid concepts: 
But to do that, it must do itself violence, reverse the direction of the oper-
ation by which it ordinarily thinks, continually upsetting its categories, or 
rather, recasting them. In so doing it will arrive at fluid concepts, capable 
of following reality in all its windings and of adopting the very movement 
of the inner life of things. … To philosophize means to reverse the normal 
direction of the workings of thought.23
The dynamic aspects of reality lead to a universal and at the same time singular 
experience: an intuition of the “inner life of things.” Intuition is restricted to the 
aspects of reality, which are fluid and in motion themselves. The aim of philoso-

112 · johannes f.m. schick  
phy is to grasp the mobile reality and to create new, mobile concepts that are able 
to account for such things in motion. 
These things in motion are grasped through an analogous motion of the mind. 
While working mechanically with matter, the human mind is creating ideas, cat-
egories, scientific phenomena and technical objects. In order to understand the 
vitality of the process, the transformation of dynamic phenomena into stable ele-
ments has to be reversed. Thus, philosophy consists in an effort to go beyond the 
constraints of the homo faber: The homo faber describes the operational mode of 
the human mind in its daily routines. These routines encompass daily life prac-
tices, body techniques, material production of material tools and the scientific 
invention of immaterial tools (ideas, categories). Each and every idea, invention 
etc. is however rooted in an intuition of a dynamic phenomenon, which is then 
transformed into static elements. As artificial organs technical objects are exten-
sions of the human body that merely imitate nature, but are not producing some-
thing genuinely new and independent. 24
The technical world is for Bergson always related and relying on human beings. 
The human faculty of the intellect that creates material and non-material tools, 
is first and foremost interested, according to Bergson, to act on matter. The sci-
entific and technical practices act mechanically on matter and are only able to 
represent matter mechanically. The sciences and technology have, according to 
Bergson, only a very limited understanding of matter.25 
Matter—as a concept of human understanding—is for Bergson the result of the 
human intellectual practice. The concept of “matter” is a tool the scientist uses 
to produce results. Bergson conceives of the scientific concept of matter as an 
empty, merely mechanical entity, without much ontological quality. It is a cre-
ation of the human mind. Bergson claims, however, that a different understanding 
of matter is possible, if one reverses the “normal directions” of our thought. The 
relations of human practices with matter are thus addressed through a detour: 
By being reversed, Bergson tries to clarify the ontological and metaphysical pre-
requisites of the abstract concept of matter and to achieve an intuition of the 
human practice in its entanglement with the world. To anticipate a Bachelardian 
term, the practice itself serves as an epistemological obstacle—since it has to be 
reversed—that is necessary to illuminate the human subject about his situation 
in and with the world.

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 113 
We have seen that Bergson conceives of science as a specific human practice: it 
is a technique to extract stable elements out of the mobile reality. These stable 
elements can be repeatedly applied to the world and create a stable structures of 
thought and action. The dynamics of the human mind in applying the scientific 
technique can only be grasped, if this practice is reversed. Bergson points out that 
the positive sciences tend to build stable systems and cannot fathom transforma-
tions in action, since the sciences are constrained by their essentially technical 
and application oriented method. In the next part, we will see that Bachelard also 
focuses on the relation of technology and science, but interprets it entirely dif-
ferently.
BERGSONISM DISCONTINUED: ACTIONS OF THE INTELLECT AND THE 
REALIZATION OF PHENOMENA
Bachelard’s philosophy seems to be the exact opposite of Bergson’s philosophy: 
While Bergson’s homo faber—in using material and intellectual tools—translates 
the lived, dynamic, and mobile reality into stable, immobile entities, and thus 
deforms the immediacy of the phenomena in their duration, Bachelard claims 
that scientific activity renders the conception of the homo faber inadequate: While 
the homo faber is adapted to the ordinary, daily life, it cannot adequately describe 
the scientific development of the electrical, ondulatory and acoustic thought.26 
Whereas Bergson argues that to surpass the human being, one must reverse the 
activities of the intellect of the homo faber, Bachelard makes the opposite claim: 
modern chemistry,27 for instance, produces ideas and experiences that are not 
only the result of a technical realization process, but surpass also the memory, 
the imagination and the power of comprehension of a singular human subject.28 
This means that the scientific spirit is constantly surpassing the restrictions of 
the human intellect and consists in a collective effort, where the social, the scien-
tific and the technical sphere are tightly linked and thus constitute the scientific 
culture.29 Nature is left behind in the scientific process and human beings enter 
in a “factory of phenomena” when they think scientifically.30 The contemporary 
sciences create a new world and human beings can renew themselves in the “sci-
entific city.”31
The infrastructure of this city is built by a constant phenomenotechnical effort to 
participate in the contemporary debates. The produced phenomena are no lon-
ger natural, but technical and social phenomena.32 Thus, the modern sciences for 
instance require an essentially social act allowing for the individual subject to 

114 · johannes f.m. schick  
participate and to place oneself in the milieu of the contemporary polemics.33 In 
doing so, science cannot be (dis)qualified as either utopian, i.e. too far into the 
future, nor as erudite knowledge, i.e. an outdated practice unable to produce new 
phenomena.
This signifies an important difference to Bergson’s anthropological notion of the 
homo faber. As long as human beings restrict themselves to the impressions of 
natural phenomena, they remain themselves natural. As soon as they leave the 
natural sphere, they can become objective beings.34 Furthermore, as long as they 
remain on their own, they stick to their developed habits, their tools and their 
technical routines.35 It is the rational activity of human beings that allows them 
to surpass themselves in opening new ways of self-understanding, objectivity and 
community. This quasi-humanistic argument is, however, referred back to the 
principle of life and receives thus an ontological quality resounding Bergson’s 
philosophy of life:36 
With living beings, it seems that nature is attempting facticity. Life distills 
and filters. The green planet, forests and meadows, make photochemistry 
and chemically absorb energy from the sun. But all these pre-human phe-
nomena will be overcome when man reaches the cultural stage. The true 
working principle of active materialism is man himself, it is the rationalist 
man.37
Even though Bachelard traces the rational activity back to pre-human phenom-
ena, the difference with Bergson is evident: In order to arrive at an active materi-
alism, it is necessary that human beings expand their rational practices. Human 
beings themselves open up materialism and create new forms of matter with and 
in the world. Thus, Bachelards new materialism goes together with an entirely 
different conception of the human. The homo faber does not any longer possess a 
fixed and static rational structure, but is rather constantly transforming his intel-
lect in applying his intellectual tools. Yet, the practices to produce phenomena 
and to open materialism are only productive, because they rely on a recursive 
structure: matter resists the intellect and returns information, when the human 
intellect is trying to grasp it. The intellect thus returns to itself with new informa-
tion that initiates the change of its structure. Bachelard’s definition of the human 
does not return to a naïve form of rationalism. The rational does not realize itself 
easily and without the resistance of matter. 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 115 
Bachelard exemplifies the recursive relationship of the human, rational subject 
with contemporary scientific conception of matter in showing that the classical 
relation of form and matter has been reversed: 
It is matter that gives itself a form; it is matter that manifests directly its 
powers of deformation. Form is not any longer shaped, no longer imposed 
from the outside. The entire Bergsonism of the homo faber appears in its 
formal perspective, in its ingenious intellectualism as soon as the mixed 
materials thus act on each other. ... We see the multiplicity of problems a 
phenomenology aimed at matter raises, a phénoménotechnique constant-
ly creating new matters (matières), an intermaterialism instructing itself 
in mutual reactions of various substances. Faced with the hidden nature 
of matter, it seems that the conscience knows that it must reform its aims, 
take back its distances.38
The rational human being does not only act on matter, but matter acts upon it-
self and gives itself a form as well. The rational subject participates in processes 
of material becoming by means of a phénoménotechnique that allows her to create 
new matter, since it is instructed by the reactions of matter itself. This recursive 
relationship signifies an “era of an open technique,” which, according to Bach-
elard, has begun within matter itself.39 Thus, phénoménotechnique becomes the fac-
ulty par excellence of mankind to perform its transformative task.40
THE ÉLAN OF THE NEW SCIENTIFIC SPIRIT
The human, rational activity to open up concepts is conceived of as a dialectical 
process inspired by the new scientific spirit. Bachelard uses the vocabulary of Berg-
son to express that “understanding has a dynamic axis, it is a spiritual élan, it is a 
élan vital.”41 His criticism of Newtonian mechanism and Cartesian epistemology 
is similar to Bergson’s criticism of finalism and mechanism in The Creative Evolu-
tion: (1) the new scientific spirit does not pursue a predetermined goal (finalism); 
(2) it does not work within a determined framework, but is interested in operative 
clarity. The new scientific spirit advances with respect to the “old” Newtonian and 
Cartesian spirit by replacing clarity “as such” with operational clarity. Being no 
longer illustrates the relations in being, but the relations illuminate being.42 
This “realism of relations,” as Jean-Hugues Barthélémy puts it, already antici-
pates Simondon’s epistemology, where being as such has no longer priority in the 

116 · johannes f.m. schick  
sciences; rather, relations allow to think and know being.43 The old scientific spirit 
is only able to illustrate relations within being, i.e. the relations constitute a static 
framework, which is merely completed by the sciences, while the contemporary 
sciences illuminate being.
Yet, the old scientific spirit is not entirely negated. Its laws are still valid and used 
as epistemological obstacles by the new scientific spirit. Within the framework of 
the old scientific spirit it is, however, impossible to create new phenomena. The 
old scientific spirit can merely illustrate the relations in being and imitate what 
is already out there. The old scientific spirit lacks the innovative power, which is 
revealed in the relations within being. The relations themselves illuminate being 
and condition the understanding of being as operation.
This understanding of the relation of matter and scientific spirit is simultane-
ously Bergsonian and anti-Bergsonian: (1) The reference to the concept élan vital 
points to an ontology of transformation in the style of Bergson’s philosophy of 
life. (2) Bergson would, however, point out that life as a phenomenon cannot 
be grasped by definition within the framework of scientific thought. Bachelard 
is, interested in the process of conceptualization. Concepts are not stable units, 
but are developed in historical acts of conceptualization. They are deformed and 
transformed by the spirit. Science becomes the medium to realize phenomena. 
Science is neither purely formal nor purely empirical. Concepts are applied to 
concrete experience, or rather, are virtual experiences that create the object of 
science. Thus, they are necessarily open and have to be transformed if they en-
counter obstacles in the process of realization. The dialectics between concepts 
and epistemological obstacles replace the old image of the relationship between a 
priori and a posteriori. They make the epistemological obstacles of the immediate 
and the general visible and operative.44 Scientific thought constitutes a recursive 
relation of theory and praxis: “To think scientifically is to place oneself in the 
epistemological terrain which mediates between theory and practice, between 
mathematics and experiment.”45
Mathematics and experience are the two poles of the field of scientific thought. 
This field is the condition of possibility of all transformations. Only if it contains 
a certain tension between spirit and matter can phenomena be produced. This 
necessary tension already hints at the ontology of Simondon, who stresses the im-
portance of the concept of a ‘field.’46 As we will see in the next section, the clearest 
example for Bachelard of the importance of such a tension is the transformations 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 117 
of the conception of ‘substance’ in chemistry. The historical development of this 
concept shows how philosophy and science influence each other reciprocally. 
OPEN PHILOSOPHY AND THE PLASTICITY OF THE CATEGORIES
The exchange between science and philosophy is necessary in order to create a 
real philosophy of matter that goes beyond the old philosophical distinctions of 
idealism and realism as well as of form and matter. These metaphysical dichoto-
mies handed-down in the history of philosophy are not apt to describe the phe-
nomena created by the sciences. The “future science” of matter—chemistry—
opens and decenters the classical, core concepts by technical means.47 
The scientific method is no longer searching for universal, concrete substances, 
but rather for a systematic blueprint to realize substances. The new scientific 
spirit is interested in the relations within being and no longer in transcendent 
forms that have to be realized in each and every singular substance. For Bach-
elard, scientific reality is thus replaced with a dynamic process of realization. This 
process of realization constitutes an interplay of noumenon and phenomenon. Syn-
thetic chemistry describes becoming as a dialogue between substance and energy 
in focusing on the reactions of substance.48 
The dialogue between substance and energy refers once more to the notion of 
the field. Tension between energy and substance is necessary so that material 
modifications can take place in being. These material modifications transform the 
energetic state of the substance. The dialogue is not conceived as a continuous 
and unitary becoming, but rather as an exchange of energies, where differences 
become measurable and discontinuous to one another. Energy becomes an inte-
gral part of substance and receives the same ontological status. 
The interpenetration of energy and substance leads to a new, dynamic interpreta-
tion of substance. Substance is no longer the keystone of a metaphysical struc-
ture, but rather a multitude of rhythms resonating in all limbs of the metaphysical 
organism to spur it on: 
One may even ask oneself if this structured energy, vibrant, a function 
of a time unit, would not be enough in itself to define the existence of a 
substance. In this view, substance would be no more than a multireso-
nant system, a group of resonances, a sort of collection of rhythms ca-

118 · johannes f.m. schick  
pable of absorbing and emitting certain gamuts of rays. One can foresee, 
in this sense, a completely temporal study of substances which would be 
the complement of the structural study. Obviously the door is open to all 
adventures, to all anticipations. Only a philosopher can rightfully suggest 
such adventures to the spirit of research. By this piece of intemperance he 
wishes to demonstrate the sudden plasticity of the categories of under-
standing and the need to shape more synthetic categories in order to face 
up to the complexity of the scientific phenomenon.49
It is within this context that Bachelard refers to a central philosophical motive of 
Bergson: A study of substances in terms of time. This focus on substance serves 
thus as an example of how Bachelard ‘opens’ a concept: (1) it shows the internal 
difference of the concept to its historical predecessors in the history of the sci-
ence itself; (2) it draws the consequences for a philosophical and metaphysical 
understanding of the concept: the concept “opens” the philosophical understand-
ing and reverberates in a different realm and (3) the whole process of creating the 
concept occurs in a movement from the scientific mind to the concrete experi-
ence and back: both, the human mind and the concrete, realized experience have 
to be open, so that transformation can occur. 
This temporal study, complementary to a structural study of substance, is the 
framework within which the task of philosophy becomes clear. Unlike the sci-
ences, philosophy can undertake this adventure, since it is not its ambition to 
determine reality in all its elements, but rather to understand the activity of the 
mind.50 Philosophy is therefore not primarily searching for a better understanding 
of reality, but aims to examine the processes of transformation in action. In prov-
ing the plasticity of the categories of human understanding, philosophy becomes 
relevant for the sciences: the philosopher provides a theoretical foundation for 
the scientific practice where theory prepares concrete phenomena and is correct-
ed by experience. The foundation itself is not unchangeable. The transformative 
nature of the new scientific spirit also applies to metaphysics and philosophy: 
In a philosophy of no a new metaphysical shade of meaning makes its 
appearance in the notion of substance. In order to underline forcefully 
the fact that substance is defined by a group of external determinations, 
arranged in such a way that they cannot together achieve enough preci-
sion to acquire absolute interiority, one might perhaps enlist the term ex-
stance. Accordingly, sub-stance, sur-stance, ex-stance, such would be—for 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 119 
want of a better term—the play of pure concepts necessary for the clas-
sification of all the tendencies of metachemistry.51
This quote clearly shows the recursive relationship of philosophical reflection and 
scientific practices. If philosophy wants to play a part in the production of knowl-
edge, it has to deal with the sciences. The philosophy of no has to open up and to 
create concepts to identify and highlight the transformations in the sciences. This 
means that, for instance, the notion of substance can always receive new meta-
physical nuances. The point of departure of this process of opening (ouverture)52 
is an epistemological obstacle. The concept of substance blocks the path of the 
new efforts of realization. Within the new scientific framework, the classical un-
derstanding of substance can no longer be realized. It has to make way for a new, 
open form of conceptualization: “The process here is from a closed, blocked, lin-
ear conceptualization to an open, free, many branching, conceptualization, free 
from the fusion of experience and primitive thinking.”53
This does not mean, however, that philosophy becomes the subservient to the 
natural sciences and its ontology; rather, through the sciences new ontologies 
become possible. This creative and transformative potential cannot be found in 
stable metaphysical systems where the final goal or a comprehensive reality is 
pre-given. Epistemology has to become as mobile as the scientific spirit.54 Phi-
losophy consists in a process of thought that is constantly in search for its object, 
challenges its own categories, and abandons them when their potential to realize 
phenomena is lost.55 The task of the philosopher consists in a constant effort and 
exercise to modify axioms:
But this coherence must be lived through in its proper place by the philos-
opher; it is not automatic, it is not done easily. The philosopher who wants 
to learn surrationalism cannot come to it all at once. He must experiment 
by opening up rationalism in successive stages. He must seek out the axi-
oms to be dialectized one by one. Just one dialectized axiom brings all 
nature out in choral song. In my own experience, surrationalism, I have 
found, never has more than one sharp or one flat in its key-signature.56
The philosophical work on concepts is a collective and interdisciplinary act: Phil-
osophical concepts are developed in contrast to and in dialogue with other philo-
sophical positions. The sciences, however, apply concepts and test their concrete 
performativity in order to create experiences. These processes of transformation 

120 · johannes f.m. schick  
are the primary subject of philosophy, where concepts can be created that do not 
only leave impressions in the academic armchair, but are efficient in their realiza-
tion and produce phenomena. Opening a concept thus goes into two directions: 
It opens the concept internally, i.e. the concept is dialectized (dialectisée), and the 
spectrum of meaning within a concept is thus enlarged, while simultaneously the 
experience is specified (précisée).57 
Philosophy consists thus in an effort to search for and to establish the recursive 
relationship with the sciences. We have seen that Bachelard—as Bergson—for-
mulates the goal of philosophy as a surpassing of the constraints of the human 
intellect. In contrast to Bergson, however, the concept of matter in the sciences 
is not abstract and devoid of dynamic elements, but rather the result of the re-
cursive relationship of the scientific human mind with matter. The confrontation 
with the sciences allows us to open up philosophical concepts. The sciences play, 
so to speak, the part of epistemological obstacles for the philosopher that are nec-
essary to leave its preconceived ideas and categories behind. 
SIMONDON’S EPISTEMOLOGY OF CYBERNETICS OR THE NEW 
ENCYCLOPEDIC SPIRIT 
This recursive characterization of philosophy is also at stake in Simondon’s inter-
pretation of cybernetics. Philosophy, Simondon tells us, is not a specific domain 
or area that can be delimited. It is not an application of a specific form of thought 
to defend spiritual or temporal interests. Its function is rather to be open to for-
eign domains, in which problems of human existence arise, in order to ascertain, 
actualize and examine the problem. This new problematic occurs in what Norbert 
Wiener calls the “no man’s land” between the sciences. But here, it is no longer 
science that challenges philosophy to rethink its categories but the development 
of new techniques. On the one hand, machines have received an autonomy and 
do not need the human being as source of energy anymore. On the other a science 
can itself become a technique: when a problem in a specific scientific field arise 
and another science is as technique imported to solve the problem.58 
These new techniques are closely bound to the development of a new conception 
of the human. Simondon’s critique of the homo faber is analogous to Bachelard’s, 
but goes in some aspects even further: for Simondon, cybernetics and the theory 
of information have shown that technical objects have a mode of existence that 
is independent of the homo faber.59 A unilateral relation of human beings to tech-

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 121 
niques can neither explain technical objects, nor can it account for the reciprocity 
of the interactions of humans with technology. Human beings are no longer acting 
with mere tools to structure their reality, but are rather entangled in a network of 
technical objects, which they must coordinate and re-invent continuously.60 
This situation no longer describes the unilateral access to the reality of homo fa-
ber, but of a homo coordinans, who is not only structuring reality with his toolbox 
or creating new phenomena by technical means: the homo coordinans is also co-
ordinated by the technical realm.61 Technical objects are no longer conceived as 
mere structures mediating operations, but as a specific operational mode. The 
technical object entertains therefore not only relations with the human being, but 
also with nature. Reducing the technical to its use is missing this specificity of the 
technical object. 
Xavier Guchet points out that Simondon reproaches both Bergson and Bachelard. 
According to Simondon Bachelard misunderstood the value of the technical ob-
ject in confusing the operational and the practical level: Machines are accord-
ing to Simondon physico-chemical systems that lend themselves to an inductive 
study. The genuine technical operation makes, as does the scientific instrument, 
nature accessible for knowledge.62 
It was precisely this misunderstanding of technical activity that led, according to 
Simondon, to an emergency-call of technique to philosophy mediated through 
cybernetics.63 Until cybernetics entered the scene the technical was considered 
as an entity without problems and interiority.64 As a product of human creativ-
ity, it was considered to be explainable in human terms. According to Simondon, 
this only partially deals with the technical sphere: technical objects do not mere-
ly consist of human elements; rather, they enclose relations of the human being 
to the world and of consciousness to nature.65 The technical operation reveals, 
therefore, even on its most basic levels a recursive relationship of form and mat-
ter, of structure and operation.66 
Although this is also the case for the production of scientific phenomena, as we 
have seen above, the relation of structure and operation is reversed. While sci-
ence determines objective structures by inventing operations (i.e. specific meth-
ods to create phenomena or, to speak with Bachelard, phénoménotechniques), tech-
nique produces operations by inventing structures: “science determines objective 
structures by inventing (en inventant) operations, whereas technique produces 

122 · johannes f.m. schick  
operations by inventing structures.”67 It is important to note that the French en 
inventant points to a simultaneity of structure and operation. Science invents op-
erations and simultaneously determines objective structures. Techniques invent 
structures and produce simultaneously operations, e.g. the invention of the mo-
tor is the invention of a structure that produces a specific operation, which de-
fines it as a motor. 
This diametric relation of science and technique as well as of structure and opera-
tion illustrates in a nutshell the new problem that arose with cybernetics: due to 
the particularization of the sciences, a multitude of methods and operations exist 
next to each other. Universal geniuses, such as Leibniz, who had a comprehensive 
grasp of the sciences as such, do not exist anymore. Rather, specialists delimit 
their specific fields and are not interested in the neighboring field.68 The question 
for the cyberneticists—and also for Simondon—was, how do the sciences relate 
to one another? Is there a general method that allows for movement from one 
science to another?
THE NO-MAN’S LAND AND THE ALLAGMATIC METHOD
Simondon interprets cybernetics as the science capable of performing this task. 
But as opposed to Norbert Wiener, whose metaphor of the no man’s land suggests 
that a proper domain of cybernetics exists,69 Simondon claims that cybernetics 
might evolve into a similar compartmentalized science developing branches of 
cybernetics, such as servo-mechanics, a theory of influx etc.70 Instead of search-
ing for the promised no man’s land, cyberneticists should realize that they just 
have a complementary view of the “same” world.71 The philosophical task, which 
Simondon derives out of the discussion of cybernetics, is therefore to “invent a 
new structural notion allowing to develop an universal allagmatic.”72 
This new allagmatic is the “method of operations.”73 It is “symmetrical to the the-
ories of structures in the particular sciences.”74 Whereas the “sciences” deal with 
“structures,” the allagmatic method searches for the realms where these opera-
tions take place. The allagmatic method is marked by its two constitutive modes: 
on the one hand, it has “operations” as its object; on the other, it has to be itself 
an “operation” that provides communication between formerly separated levels 
of being.75

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 123 
Due to its interest in feedback mechanisms and exchange of information, cyber-
netics addresses these operations on a different reflexive level than the particular 
sciences. Simondon defines the work of the particular sciences in Bachelardian 
terms:
However, science aims, in each domain, at a theoretization of experience. 
The scientific gesture is free. Only the theoretical result of this gesture 
matters. The operational activity of science has in each domain only one 
control: the compatibility with experience, therefore with the object.76
The scientific gesture realizes the compatibility of theory with experience, of the 
abstract with the concrete, of mind and object. This relation signifies the knowl-
edge of an isolated system. Science “determines objective structures,” as we have 
seen above. A new, different mode of knowledge must therefore be developed 
to open the isolated systems to one another. This inter- or super-scientific knowl-
edge is, according to Simondon, universal technological knowledge (savoir tech-
nologique universel): 
Within the operational inter-scientific if not supra-scientific compatibility 
a mode of relation to the object is discovered, which is no longer scientific 
but technical. The technical subject-object relation is richer than the sci-
entific relation. The latter is abstract and concerns a limit case of an object 
not modified by the realization of consciousness and without relation to 
the world (isolated system). The technical relation on the contrary con-
siders the object in its concrete totality of its aspects, in its relation with 
the subject of knowledge and the world. The no-man’s land in between the 
particular sciences is not a particular science itself, but a universal techno-
logical knowledge. An inter-scientific technology that does not considers a 
theoretical object, cut out of the world, but a situation.77
While the scientific object is merely considered in its relation to the knowing 
subject, the technical object is considered in its relation to both the world and 
the knowing subject. Focusing on the relations between the sciences, or entering 
no-man’s land, opens a specific science in relating it to the world that surrounds it. 
Due to its technical structure, the operations at work on different levels of being 
can be addressed. This does not, however, mean that one operation is reduced to 
another, but that operations can be equivalent to one another:

124 · johannes f.m. schick  
One can call a situation equivalent to another, if the same technical gesture 
modifies both situations in the same way. Equivalency is not an identity 
of the nature of objects, but an operational activity, which has to be exer-
cised on them [the nature of the objects] to modify them in the same way. 
It is an analogy, if one understands analogy as a relation not of identity 
(resemblance or similitude), but as identity of relations, and to specify, 
operational relations.78
The technical gesture, which modifies a specific situation, allows us to relate dif-
ferent domains to each other. It is, however, important to note that it is a technical 
gesture and not a technical structure that allows for equivalency. Although struc-
ture and operation are, according to Simondon, complementary to each other, 
operation nevertheless has priority.79 The technical gesture is therefore an opera-
tion of its own that relates different operational modes with each other. It leads 
to the philosophical gesture, which, according to Simondon, aims at grasping the 
moment where structure turns into operation or operation turns into structure. 
This transformative experience is the “cogito of a new, reflexive philosophy”:
This cogito of a new reflexive philosophy, where the function grasps itself 
in its functioning, allows, after the ontological culmination, which marks 
the equivalency of being and acting, between operation and structure, to 
found an axiology. According to the cybernetic method, the only valuable 
axiology is an axio-ontology.80
This “axio-ontology” cannot, however, be derived from cybernetics itself, since 
there is still a crucial difference between cybernetics as a science and philoso-
phy. As already mentioned, the operational mode of philosophy is not exclusive. 
It does not delimit its proper domain in contrast to other domains, but is in its 
essence open and able to change its structure. This openness is precisely how Si-
mondon defines value: The change or transformation of a structure.
THE NEW ENCYCLOPEDIC SPIRIT
Yet, structural change only occurs, if a “thanatological element” enters a holis-
tic system and creates a problem, which threatens the living being in its existing 
structure. This thanatological element cannot be grasped with the concepts ap-
plied by cybernetics to describe vital processes—namely negentropy and homeosta-
sis—since they represent merely a function respective to a teleological mechanism 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 125 
of the living being:81 The living being, thus defined, does not change its structure, 
but increases it’s organization (negentropy) to remain the same (homeostasis).82 Si-
mondon turns cybernetics against itself: although cybernetics is right in address-
ing the question of information, it cannot formulate the question adequately in its 
own terms when it comes to living systems. Here, a non-probabilistic conception 
of information becomes necessary, in order to explain how a specific form is of 
higher quality in a specific holistic system or why a system needs to change its 
structure.83 
This qualitative notion of information is rendered possible by the philosophical 
effort, which makes a certain problem within a domain conscious that cannot be 
resolved within the domain by itself. Insofar, philosophy operates in analogy to 
cybernetics. The philosophical effort leads, however, not only to a consciousness 
of the system itself, but it also opens the system in providing culture. Culture in 
return, is defined as contact with a universal totality of systems, a contact with an 
“imaginary or real holistic system” capable of incorporating all other systems.84 
The philosophical effort thus solves a particular problem in integrating it in a 
general problematic and opening it for other systems:
The philosophical effort therefore provides a contact with a real universal-
ity. It integrates a system hitherto isolated in the immense society of sys-
tems. It solves a particular problem in integrating it in a general problem 
and it makes the solitude of problems cease to create a world of problems. 
It opens thus a system to relate it to others, due to a change of plan. The 
philosophical effort modifies in its encyclopedic intention in the Hegelian 
meaning of the term the individuality of the problems in striving towards 
the most synthetic and highest problem.85 
While a problem remains bound to a specific situation and has—since problems 
arise only for living beings, i.e. individuals86—individuality, the philosophical ef-
fort can relate it to a different, higher, and more abstract sphere. This does not 
mean that the individuality of the problem is lost, but that it is posed in a different, 
metaphysical way. The encyclopedic intention is that the individual understands 
the problem itself and relates it to a higher holistic system. The holistic system 
to which the individual relates is neither given in advance, nor is it a system that 
realizes itself during the course of history. The axio-ontology is not based upon 
the existence of the higher holistic system, but on the ability of the individual to 
perform the technical, scientific and philosophical gestures: to grasp itself and its 

126 · johannes f.m. schick  
relation to the world in the act. The value, the new axiomatic structure of opera-
tions is based upon, is the transformative character of being itself. This capacity is 
found, according to Simondon, in the individual itself prior to any distinctions.87 
Within the individual, a structure and operation are intrinsically linked without 
reducing one to the other. Within the individual both, structure and operation, 
are convertible and equivalent to each other. 
The epistemological task is to facilitate transformative operations in a philo-
sophical gesture in its encyclopedic intention. The reference for Simondon to 
develop a “new encyclopedic spirit” does not, however, only come from Hegel, 
but also—and more importantly—from Diderot and Alembert, as well as from the 
Sophists in Antiquity, from Plato, and finally from the modern cyberneticists.88 
The encyclopedic spirit has, therefore, a certain methodology: Its central point 
is that it allows for a general public access to technical knowledge. In doing so, 
it aims, according to Simondon, at a unification of operations and is itself a tool 
allowing individuals to reinvent and actualize technical gestures.89 It consists of 
a description of tools, and technical apparatus is not restricted to written lan-
guage, but uses plates, graphics and schemata to allow as many recipients as pos-
sible to participate in the technical developments. Its recipients and the form in 
which the technical operations are interpreted are not yet defined, but are virtual 
and open.90 The encyclopedia applies an operation, namely schematization, to 
instruct its reader of its operational mode. 
Simondon describes the encyclopedia as a machine that needs to be reinvented 
by a human gesture: 
All encyclopedic machines necessitate and call for a human gesture to put 
them into action: the shape of the pinax is followed by the finger or by 
the look, indentation after indentation; one pores over the book, since it 
refers from one article to another; one commands an automatic filing sys-
tem starting from a central platform. But to consider the pinax statically, 
to read a printed encyclopedia alphabetically, to let an automatic filing 
system work by chance, means to consider operational machines structur-
ally and not to account for its encyclopedic meaning. The modern ency-
clopedists are the modern scientist, that is the cyberneticians, these tech-
nicians of information, who work in teams and think communally, driven 
by their faith in this new postulat: logical empiricism.91

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 127 
The epistemological task comprises three elements: (1) the encyclopedia is de-
scribed as a machine that calls for a human gesture. The pinax, in this case the 
writing tablet of Thales, has to be touched or perceived: the book is pored over, 
since its articles are an integral part of a system of references that have to be un-
derstood as specific operational mode of the encyclopedia. One navigates through 
a data system starting from the home screen: structure and operation belong here 
together. Although structure is necessary, it is not preferred over and against op-
eration. (2) The gesture requires a specific, epistemological attitude towards the 
encyclopedic machine to be realized. One has to search for the operational mode 
and fathom the machine in analogy to oneself in order to understand it. Neither 
book, nor computer, nor basic writing tool can be considered merely as structure. 
Understanding the machine in analogy to oneself leads therefore not only to a 
genuine understanding of the machine, but also to a better self-understanding. 
The encyclopedia signifies a machine that mediates the production of a new per-
spective. (3) The encyclopedic spirit is a collective, interdisciplinary effort.92 It 
facilitates the operation to relate the individual to different technical and intellec-
tual systems. The compartmentalization of the sciences necessitates this collec-
tive effort. An individual scientist is no longer able to comprehend all the meth-
ods that are at work in the particular sciences. Cybernetics is thus a role model 
of interdisciplinary research: it is not interested in the definition of a particular 
field, but its operations attempt to understand “control” and “communication” as 
such, without being limited to a specific domain. The collective effort is the philo-
sophical gesture as such, attempting to relate to universality, yet this universality 
is not a closed system, but the mode of operation of individuals in their tension 
with the milieu as such. 
Simondon combines in an original way the epistemologies of Bergson and Bache-
lard. While he still holds that sciences tend to develop isolated systems—an argu-
ment echoing Bergson’s criticism that the sciences transform the mobile reality 
into stable elements—, Simondon is also aware of the productive aspects of the 
phénoménotechniques of the sciences and the dynamic character of the scientific 
mind as well as of technology. We have seen that he focuses on the technical ges-
tures and operations themselves that do not only allow to realize phenomena, but 
also to mediate between the sciences: Operations he exemplified and sees at work 
in the encyclopedic spirit. 

128 · johannes f.m. schick  
CONCLUSION
The transformative epistemology, I described in this article, followed different 
forms of an élan: it moved from the élan vital to the élan scientifique to the élan 
encyclopédique. I attempted to show that each of these epistemological movements 
consists itself in an operation, an epistemic act, which can open and transform 
static structures. This act ties anthropology, epistemology and ontology together: 
epistemology does not occur in an abstract realm, but is, as are scientific prac-
tices, realized by a subject in the world. This “applied metaphysics”93 of Bergson, 
Bachelard and Simondon, invites the human subject to participate in the transfor-
mations of life and knowledge. 
Although the differences between Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon are signifi-
cant, all three of them are advocates of a transformative epistemology of open-
ness. Their philosophies are inspired by a humanistic impetus that challenges hu-
man beings to understand themselves in their relationships with their scientific, 
social and technical environments. Their epistemological projects address human 
practices on different levels and relate them to each other. This effort to relate 
different domains to each other, can be understood as interdisciplinary anthro-
pology: the human is no longer considered from an essentialist vantage point. The 
anthropological question is, within this interdisciplinary anthropology, not “what 
is the human being?,” but rather “what does a human being do and what are its 
relations to and with the world?” This praxeontological move emphasizes the ne-
cessity of the human subject to create symmetry between different types of being, 
rather than sacrificing it for a transhumanist position. 
Reading Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon together provides thus a methodologi-
cal reflection on the conditions of possibility of an interdisciplinary anthropology 
that addresses human practices within and in between the different sciences.94 I 
therefore understand interdisciplinary anthropology not as a particular discipline 
or as a preconceived method, but as a philosophical effort to raise, develop and 
pose the anthropological question in exchange with the sciences. 
Bergson, Bachelard and Simondon show that this effort is a necessarily open 
endeavor: It relies upon an ontology that allows for openness, transformation 
and symmetry. Epistemology and philosophy are not excluded from the constant 
transformations of life and mind. This means in turn, that the epistemological 
project is necessarily open. The epistemic act is not merely transforming the rela-

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 129 
tion to the world, but also transforms the subject itself and provides the means in 
its encyclopedic effort to create new modes of humanism.95

130 · johannes f.m. schick  
NOTES
1. Ultimately, this is the classical problem of Aristotle’s Metaphysics. Aristotle uses the famous 
analogy of the nektyris (bat or nightowl) to describe the relation of the human intellect to its 
first principles: “Just as it is with bats’ eyes in respect of daylight, so it is with our mental intelli-
gence in respect of those things which are by nature most obvious.” Aristotle, Metaphysics, 993b9.
2. Gaston Bachelard, Le nouvel esprit scientifique. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1934.
3. Gilbert Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie” Sur la philosophie. Gilbert Simondon, Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 2016, 63.
4. Gilbert Simondon, L’individuation à la lumière des notions de forme et d’information. Grenoble: 
Éditions Jérôme Millon, 2013, 324f.
5. Simondon, Individuation, 36.
6. Jean-Hugues Barthélémy calls Simondon’s position a “difficult humanism.” See: Jean-Hugues 
Barthélémy, Simondon ou l’ encyclopédisme génétique. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2008.
7. Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution. Transl. by Arhur Mitchell. Mineola/New York: Dover Books 
on Western Philosophy, 1998, 30f.
8. I am aware that Bergson rather uses intelligence than intellect. Intelligence indicates a natural, im-
manent faculty that came about in the course of the evolution of life. Intellect, however, implies 
the Aristotelian transcendental faculty. Yet for Bergson, intelligence/intellect does not imply a 
hierarchical distinction. Instinct and intelligence/intellect are for him, although they differ es-
sentially, two solutions of vital problems. I chose to use intellect rather for reasons of coherence 
with the English translations (who from time to time translate intelligence with intellect or with 
intelligence), but I ask the reader to keep the immanent character of the human intellectual facul-
ties in mind.
9. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 139.
10. Georges Canguilhem, “Commentaire au chapitre iii de l’Évolution créatrice de Bergson 
[1943],” in: Frédéric Worms Ed., Annales bergsoniennes, vol. iii, Bergson et la science, Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 2007, 132.
11. Canguilhem, “Commentaire,” 132-134.
12. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 193.
13. See for a discussion of intuition and emotion: Johannes F.M. Schick, “Intuition et émotion: 
une relation méconnue,” in: Arnaud François, Anthony Feneuil, Ghislain Waterlot (Eds.), Annales 
Bergsoniennes VIII: Bergson, la morale, les émotions, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France, 141-167 
and Johannes F. M. Schick, Erlebte Wirklichkeit. Zum Verhältnis von Intuition zu Emotion bei Henri 
Bergson. LitVerlag: Münster/Berlin, 2012.
14. Henri Bergson, The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics. Trans. Mabelle L. Andison. 
Mineola/New York: Dover Books on Western Philosophy, 1946, 33.
15. Bergson, Matter and Memory, 184f.
16. Bergson, Creative Mind, 169.
17. Philosophy and science both are collective efforts that share a methodological impetus of 
constantly adapting to the phenomena: “For in this view, philosophy is no longer a construc-
tion, the systematic work of a single thinker. It needs, and unceasingly calls for, corrections and 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 131 
re-touches. It progresses like positive science. Like it, too, it is a work of collaboration.” Henri 
Bergson, Mind Energy. Lectures and Essays (translated by H. Wildon Carr), New York: Henry Holt 
and Company, 1920, 7.
18. Bergson, Creative Mind, 55.
19. Bergson formulates his critique of language already in the first passage of the Essai sur les don-
nées immédiates de la conscience. The translation of temporal phenomena into spatial terms is one 
of the central motives of Bergson’s philosophy. Henri Bergson, Essai sur les données immédiates de 
la conscience. Edition critique sous la direction de Frédéric Worms, Paris: Presses Universitaires 
de France, 2007 [1889], 1.
20. Bergson, Creative Mind, 100.
21. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 333.
22. Bergson, Creative Mind, 139.
23. Bergson, Creative Mind, 224f.
24. Henri Bergson, Les deux sources de la morale et de la religion. Edition critique sous la direction 
de Frédéric Worms. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 2008 [1932], 330.
25. Bergson, Les deux sources, 145.
26. Gaston Bachelard, Le rationalisme appliqué, Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 19663 
[1949], 163.
27. Although any particular science, such as physics or biology, can produce new ideas and impact 
philosophy, chemistry was particularly important for Bachelard. Cf. Christina Chimisso, “A matter 
of substance? Gaston Bachelard on chemistry’s philosophical lessons” In: Galavotti, Maria Carla; 
Nemeth, Elisabeth and Stadler, Friederich eds. European Philosophy of Science - Philosophy of Sci-
ence in Europe and the Viennese Heritage. Vienna Circle Institute Yearbook, 17. Springer, 2013, 33–44.
28. Gaston Bachelard, Le matérialisme rationnel, Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 19723 
[1953], 1.
29. Gaston Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste dans la physique contemporaine. Paris: Presses Univer-
sitaires de France, 1965, 10. Bachelard’s position that science, technology and society are inter-
related is in the contemporary debate in the Science and Technology Studies often overlooked. 
Juliette Grange, for instance, argues to revisit Bachelard over and against Simondon and Latour 
(Juliette Grange, “L’invention technique et théorique : la philosophie des sciences de G. Bach-
elard.” Imaginaire, Industrie et innovation. Ed Pierre Musso, Cerisy-la-Salle (September 2015), 
https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01336345/document (last visit: 02/04/2018).
30. Bachelard, Activité rationaliste, 10.
31. Bachelard, Matérialisme rationnel, 2.
32. Bachelard, Matérialisme rationnel, 31.
33. Bachelard, Activité rationaliste, 8.
34. Bachelard, Activité rationaliste, 7.
35. Bachelard, Activité rationaliste, 14.
36. Jean-Jacques Wunenburger points out that both Bachelard and Bergson refer to a primi-
tive force in the universe even though they differ in significant points: “Chez Bergson, l’action 
d’une force primitive dans le cosmos ou dans la Nature est ainsi censée se prolonger dans la 
conscience, qui puise dans ce dynamisme la capacité de mobilisation et de créativité psychique 

132 · johannes f.m. schick  
et intellectuelle. Chez Bachelard, une tonalité vitale, proche à certains égards d’un vouloir-vivre 
schopenhaurien va doter la rationalité scientifique et l’imagination poétique d’une puissance 
plastique de transformation des représentations. La référence à une semblable force primitive 
va donc leur permettre d’éclairer les processus de complexification de la vie de l’esprit, même si 
la médiation du langage inhibe, voire masque l’élan vital chez Bergson, alors qu’elle se présente 
comme la forme irréductible à travers laquelle la pensée active un dynamisme élémentaire chez 
Bachelard.” (Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, “Force et résistance, le rythme de la vie” Bachelard 
et Bergson. Continuité et discontinuité. Eds Frédéric Worms, Jean-Jacques Wunenburger, Paris: 
Presses universitaires de France: 2008, 28).
37. Bachelard, Matérialisme rationnel, 32f [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
38. Bachelard, Matérialisme rationnel, 16 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
39. Bachelard, Matérialisme rationnel, 115f.
40. Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste dans la physique contemporaine, 4.
41. Bachelard, Nouvel ésprit, 179.
42. Bachelard, Nouvel ésprit, 148.
43. Jean-Hugues Barthélémy, Penser l’individuation. Simondon et la philosophie de la nature, Paris: 
L’Harmattan, 2005, 20. This is also the case for Michel Serres as Massimiliano Simons shows in 
his contribution to this Special Issue.
44. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 5. and Gaston Bachelard, La formation de l’ésprit scientifique, 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1934, s. chapter 3
45. Gaston Bachelard, Philosophy of No. A Philosophy of the New Scientific Mind, New York: Orion 
Press 1968, 6.
46. Jean-Hugues Barthélémy suggests that Bachelard provided the groundwork for Simon-
dons ontology. While the ontology was implicit in Bachelard, Simondon makes it explicit. See: 
Jean-Hugues Barthelemy, ‘D’une rencontre fertile de Bergson et de Bachelard,’ 232f, in: Frédéric 
Worms, Jean-Jacques Wunenburger (Eds.), Bachelard et Bergson. Continuité et discontinuité, Paris: 
Presses universitaires de France: 2008, 223-238 and Jean-Hugues Barthélémy, ‘Théorie de la 
connaissance et relativité philosophique,’ in: Jean-Jacques Wunenburger (ed.), Gaston Bachelard: 
Science et poétique une nouvelle éthique?, Paris: Éditions Hermann, 75-87.
47. Bachelard, Le matérialimse rationnel, 24. Bachelard shows that chemistry is in need of what 
he calls a “metachemistry,” just as physics has its metaphysics. This metachemistry would have 
the same relation to metaphysics as chemistry to physics (Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 45). 
Metachemistry and metaphysics are the conditions of possibility of a science to critique its own 
foundations. In the case of chemistry the metaphysical or better ‘metachemical’ presuppos-
tions, are changed in the transition from seeing chemical substances as bodies that can become 
objects of our immediate experience to seeing them as products of scientific and technical 
means. The transformation of the concept of substance within chemistry thus shifts from a 
naive, prescientific realism towards a mature scientific concept. From the latter perspective, 
the immediate experience does not have to correspond with the scientific experience. The new 
concept of substance structures our experience and enables a phenomenon that contradicts the 
intuitions of our daily life. Moreover, Bachelard claims that within chemistry existence is never 
a monotonous function, but rather allows for a multitude of tones (Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 
46). A specific substance is therefore not always constituted in exactly the same way, but it can 
vary on different levels and does not have any predetermined coherency. For a study concerning 

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 133 
the relationship of metaphysics and metachemistry see Alfred Nordmann, ‘From Metaphysics to 
Metachemistry.” Philosophy of Chemistry: Synthesis of a New Discipline, in the series Boston Studies 
in the Philosophy of Science. Eds Davis Baird, Eric Scerri, Lee McIntyre, Dordrecht: Springer, 2006, 
347-362. Nordmann argues that Latour, in his “Pandora’s Box,” makes” a “metachemical argu-
ment” although he tends to overlook the works of Bachelard and Meyerson.
48. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 56.
49. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 58f.
50. For a comprehensive study of the development of “historical epistemology” in France see: 
Christina Chimisso, Writing the History of the Mind. Philosophy and Science in France, 1900 to 1960s, 
Hampshire (UK): Ashgate Publishing, 2008.
51. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 66.
52. Bachelard’s notion of ouverture is inspired by Ferdinand Gonseth. For a detailed, historical 
discussion of the influence of Gonseth on Bachelard, see Carlo Vinti, “Présence de Ferdinand 
Gonseth dans la pensée de Gaston Bachelard” Revue de synthèse : 5e série, 2005/2, 391-415 and 
Vincent Bontems, ‘L’éthique de l‘ouverture chez Gaston Bachelard et Ferdinand Gonseth,’ in: in: 
Jean-Jacques Wunenburger (ed.), Gaston Bachelard: Science et poétique une nouvelle éthique?, Paris: 
Éditions Hermann, 379-397
53. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 113f.
54. Bachelard, Rationalisme appliquée, 10.
55. Bachelard, Nouvel ésprit, 181-183.
56. Bachelard, Philosophy of No, 118.
57. Bachelard, Rationalisme appliquée,139. See also: Bonicalzi, “Gaston Bachelard: épistémologie 
ouverte et éthique de la connaissance,” 20f.
58. Simondon uses the term “technique” to address technical phenomena in general. He makes, 
however, the important distinction between “technique” and “technologie” to describe cybernet-
ics as a science of techniques (Gilbert Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 40).
59. Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d’existence des objets techniques. Paris: Aubier, 1958.
60. Simondon, Mode d’existence, 11f.
61. Johannes F.M. Schick, “Theaters of Individuation: Simondon and the Interrelations of Ethics, 
Techniques and Ontology” in: Journal of Badiou Studies 5: Archithéâtre, https://badioustudies-
journal.org/architheater/. 2017.
62. Xavier Guchet, Pour un humanisme technologique. Culture, technique et société dans la philosophie 
de Gilbert Simondon. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2010, 180.
63. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 38.
64. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 38.
65. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 38.
66. Simondon, Individuation, 40f. Simondon explains in his thesis on individuation (first pub-
lished 1964) using the production of a brick as example that the process of individuation cannot 
be reduced to a relation of an ideal form and pure matter: the materiality of the form takes as 
well part in the process of production as is the specificity of the material filled into the form. 
Form and matter entertain an intricate, recursive relation while the brick is produced. That 
means, matter has to be prepared and informed in the process of production.

134 · johannes f.m. schick  
67. Gilbert Simondon, “Épistémologie de la cybernétique” Sur la philosophie, Gilbert Simondon, 
186 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
68. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 39.
69. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 39; Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and 
Communication in the Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1948, 2.
70. Simondon, “Épistémologie de la cybernétique,” 185.
71. Simondon, “Épistémologie de la cybernétique,” 185.
72. Simondon, “Épistémologie de la cybernétique,” 185.
73. Jean-Yves Chateau, Le vocabulaire de Simondon. Paris: Ellipses, 2008, 11.
74. Gilbert Simondon, “L’Allagmatique,” 529, L’individuation. Gilbert Simondon, 529-536.
75. Simondon, “Allagmatique,” 529 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
76. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 40f [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
77. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 41 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
78. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 42 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
79. Simondon, “Allagmatique,” 534. This preference of operation is based upon Simondon’s 
ontology, which is intrinsically linked with epistemology and the methodical use of analogy. 
The concept of analogy hinges for Simondon on the understanding of being: beings have to be 
inseparably linked to their mode of action—their operation—in order to apply the “method of 
analogy.”
80. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 62.
81. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 62.
82. Wiener, Cybernetics, 11.
83. Gilbert Simondon, “Forme, information et potentiels,” 549, Individuation. Gilbert Simondon, 
537-558.
84. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 62 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
85. Simondon, “Cybernétique et philosophie,” 62.
86. Simondon, Individuation, 213f.
87. Simondon, Individuation, 535.
88. Gilbert Simondon, ‘Les encyclopédies et l’esprit encyclopédique,’ 121ff. Sur la philosophie. 
Gilbert Simondon, 117-129.
89. Simondon, “Les encyclopédies et l’esprit encyclopédique,” 121ff.
90. Simondon, “Les encyclopédies et l’esprit encyclopédique,” 118 [Translation J.F.M. Schick].
91. Simondon, “Les encyclopédies et l’esprit encyclopédique,” 129.
92. I follow here Jean-Hugues Barthélémy who claims that Simondon’s rendition of the ency-
clopedic spirit offers a theorization and justification of interdisciplinarity: “L’encyclopédisme, 
tel du moins qu’on peut le refonder aujourd’hui à la suite du philosophe français Gilbert Simon-
don, possède une vertu majeure : il pratique l’interdisciplinarité par le biais d’une unification 
philosophique des sciences, tout en offrant les premiers éléments d’une nouvelle et véritable 
théorisation de l’interdisciplinarité dans ses fondements, et donc dans ce qui peut la justifier.” 
Jean-Hugues Barthélémy, “Encyclopédisme et théorie de l’interdisciplinarité” Hermès, La Revue: 
Interdisciplinarité: entre disciplines et indiscipline 2013/3 Nr. 67, Paris: C.N.R.S. Editions, 165.

towards an interdisciplinary anthropology? · 135 
93. Paul-Antoine Miquel, Le vital. Aspects physiques, aspects métaphysiques. Paris: Kimé, 2011.
94. I will restrict myself to the epistemological aspects of the works of Bergson, Bachelard and 
Simondon. I will therefore not discuss “imagination” and the poetics of Bachelard, although, 
as for instance Jean-Jacques Wunenburger points out, both sides, the epistemological and the 
poetic side of the human mind are for Bachelard part of an integral anthropology (Jean-Jacques 
Wunenburger, “Bachelard, une anthropologie de l’homme integral,” in: Altre modernità. Rivista 
di studi litterali e culturali, Milano, Università degli Studi di Milano, 2012). I follow, however, 
Francesca Bonicalzi, who stresses the “point vélique” in Bachelard’s work to argue for the ethical 
and anthropological consequences of Bachelard’s epistemology of openness (Francesca Bonical-
zi, “Gaston Bachelard: épistémologie ouverte et éthique de la connaissance” Gaston Bachelard: 
Science et poétique une nouvelle éthique? Jean-Jacques Wunenburger (ed.) Paris: Éditions Hermann, 
13). I am aware that my account of an interdisciplinary anthropology cannot be comprehensive, 
since I limit myself to specific aspects of the aforementioned philosophers. An excuse, even if 
it is a weak one, might be that interdisciplinarity is always a practice that has to be created in a 
concrete situation.
95. I argue that interdisciplinary anthropology, as I have presented it, also subverts the classical 
oppositions between nature and culture as well as nature and technology. Jean-Hugues Barthélé-
my presents a similar argument, but is far more critical of “anthropology”: Jean-Hugues Barthé-
lémy, “What New Humanism Today?” Cultural Politics 1, 2010; 6 (2), 245.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 136-153
when memory flows into 
reason: outline of an 
epistemology symmetrized
jan maršálek
INTRODUCTION1
Let me arrive at Bachelard by a short detour that will take us far away from his in-
terests while still remaining close to his way of thinking. In 1746 in his Essay on the 
Origin of Human Knowledge, Etienne Bonnot de Condillac, “the French Locke” as 
he is sometimes called, develops an objection against Descartes’s methodological 
doubt. For Condillac, Descartes’s deconstruction of acquired knowledge eventu-
ally fails to clear the ground on which true knowledge is supposed to be rebuilt:
Descartes was right to think that in order to gain certain knowledge we 
must begin with the rejection of all the knowledge we believe we have ac-
quired; but he was wrong when he thought that it was sufficient to doubt 
that knowledge. To doubt if two and two are four, whether man is a rational 
animal, amounts to having ideas of two, of four, of man, of animal, and of 
rational. Thus doubt leaves the ideas subsisting such as they are; therefore 
doubt is no remedy, since our errors have their source in wrongly framed 
ideas. It can make us suspend judgment for a while, but in the end we do 
not escape from uncertainty except by consulting the ideas which doubt 
has not yet destroyed, and it follows that they will lead us astray as before 
if they are vague or poorly determined. So Descartes’ doubt is ineffectual.2

abbreviated title · 137 
Indeed, for Condillac Cartesian doubt is not radical enough, as it only reaches the 
validity of our ideas, leaving their “material” intact.3 Such doubt is “useless” (in 
the citation above, Hans Aarleff translates “inutile” as “ineffectual”) for it is too 
superficial. Since the very bases of our ideas fail to be attained, what was put into 
quarantine recovers altogether and regains its initial form, which is falsely reha-
bilitated because it was never truly challenged. 
A very simple idea can be preserved from Condillac’s argument: to credit some 
piece of knowledge with the mark of invalidity is not always sufficient for elimi-
nating it, even temporarily, from our mind. If I wish to highlight the fact that the 
same observation is inherent to Bachelard’s work and, as we shall see, even explic-
itly commented by him, it is not because my intention would be to set this view 
at the heart of Bachelard’s epistemology. I believe nevertheless that by focusing 
on the resistance deployed by diverse elements of science that were disallowed as 
invalid, we are susceptible to expanding historical epistemology’s range of com-
petency. Amplified in this sense, and with the help of an entirely internal source 
of Bachelardian epistemology, historical epistemology could find itself “symme-
trized” and, by the same way, markedly strengthened. 
THE “POLYMORPHIC” NATURE OF THE NOTION OF 
“EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBSTACLES”
The Formation of the Scientific Mind (1938)4 offers an inventory of epistemological 
obstacles that the human mind, but also the mind of presumably every individual, 
has (had) to overcome on its way to scientificity. This, at least, is how Bachelard’s 
book is usually presented: Bachelard identifies what obstructs the advent of sci-
ence, and what keeps the mind in its ante-scientific condition. Although the list 
that Bachelard establishes is not intended to be exhaustive, it is meant to be rep-
resentative enough to place the new object of the epistemological obstacle on the 
map of relevant epistemological problems. 
Cristina Chimisso is certainly right to point out that The Formation of the Scientific 
Mind is basically not about the progress of the scientific mind or of science itself.5 
Bachelard is nevertheless certainly not rejecting the idea of progress: in effect, he 
claims allegiance to the 19th-century French positivist Auguste Comte and finds 
inspiration in a Comtian hierarchy of different, historically constituted manners 
of knowing. In a way, Bachelard extends Comte’s three-stage model: if the theo-
logical and metaphysical periods in the history of human knowledge laid down 

138 · author  
by Comte find themselves dissolved by Bachelard into a single pre-scientific era 
(stretching from Antiquity to the 18th century), then the Comtian positive stage 
is, on the contrary, split in two by Bachelard’s distinction between the scientific 
mind (from the end of 18th century to the beginning of the 20th century) and the 
stage of the new scientific mind launched by Einstein’s theory of relativity and un-
known, of course, to Comte. We can here leave out the question whether the 
principles of Comte’s epistemology make it ready for such a development. In any 
case, in The Formation of the Scientific Mind Bachelard considerably reduces the 
real scope of his analysis when he places himself on the very edge of pre-science 
so that he might observe and qualify its inertia.
Alongside to the image of a barrier preventing the advent of science, another un-
derstanding of Bachelard’s concept of the epistemological obstacle can be put for-
ward, and the global appreciation of The Formation of Scientific Mind consequently 
modified. It is Dominique Lecourt who, in Gaston Bachelard’s Historical Epistemol-
ogy, points out—rather inconspicuously indeed—that the place of the epistemo-
logical obstacle in the knowledge process is susceptible to variation:
It can arise at the moment of the constitution of the knowledge, or at a lat-
er stage in its development, once it has already been constituted as a sci-
entific knowledge. In the first case it can be said to be a “counter-thought,” 
in the second a “suspension of thought” (arrêt de pensée). […] In other 
words, I shall say that in one case [the epistemological obstacle] prevents 
scientific thought from arriving, in the other, when it has already arrived, 
it demotes it to the rank of ordinary thought. For everything, ultimately, 
amounts to the re-establishment of the broken continuity between scien-
tific thought and ordinary thought.6
I find this distinction remarkably far-reaching. Lecourt emphasizes that in both 
cases the obstacle stems from pre-science. In both his versions, the function of 
the epistemological obstacle is the same, as it corresponds to “a point of resis-
tance of thought to thought”7. This conflict can nevertheless occur in two dif-
ferent situations that assign to the epistemological obstacle the role of either 
obstructing scientific thought in the process of seizing power, or of intruding or-
dinary thought—in fact the term non-scientific thought sounds to me better suited 
to the variability of historical examples that Bachelard discusses—into science as 
already constituted. In this second sense, then, instead of preventing the advent 
of science, the epistemological obstacle causes a local impurity within already-

abbreviated title · 139 
established science.  
It is crucial to realize that for Bachelard, this intrusion of the past (within the gen-
eral historical framework that Bachelard sketches, pre-scientific thought indeed 
acquires this temporal locus) into the “present” (i.e. into scientific knowledge) 
can occur despite the scientist’s vigilance. It is precisely this insight that calls to 
mind Condillac’s critique of Descartes referred to in the introduction of this pa-
per. By the same token the “no” so valued by Bachelard since it is required by all 
scientific renewal shows its problematic side. 
EXAMPLE 1: RATIONALIZATION ON AN ABSURD BASIS
Unfortunately, and it would be unfair if we forgot to mention it, illustrations of 
“ordinary thought” contaminating scientific knowledge already constituted are 
quite rare in The Formation of the Scientific Mind. We will look at two examples of 
this manifestation (should we say type?) of epistemological obstacle, which Bach-
elard treats in some detail even though he does so as part of his general search and 
without distinguishing between them and obstacles of the first kind (i.e. obstacles 
to the arrival of scientific thought). 
The first example is drawn from the history of medicine and pharmacology. In 
chapter VII of The Formation, which engages in “psychoanalyzing realists,”8 Bach-
elard discusses the issue of abusive transfers of the economic value that certain 
materials, such as gemstones, habitually acquire, which used to result in their 
valorization within contexts a priori disconnected from the sphere of merchant 
exchanges. Precious stones are thus empowered with precious healing powers 
that ensure them an astonishing longevity within pre-scientific medicine: “Even 
when a critical spirit comes into being, it still respects the value it is attacking. 
[…] Even when beliefs are denounced as superstitious, they have to be looked at a 
second time in order to be sure that the writer is rid of them.”9 
The hesitations of the French chemist and physician Étienne François Geoffroy 
(1672–1731) are discussed by Bachelard as a representative example of this ardu-
ous conversion to scientificity: Despite his doubts about the merit of traditional 
theories regarding the therapeutic powers of precious stones, Geoffroy fails to 
truly put these age-old speculations aside. Even if he has a clear idea about the 
superstitious nature of these theories, he decides to retain what he presumes to 
be their robust core. For Geoffroy, in spite of the lack of evidence, the wisdom of 

140 · author  
the ancients must be preserved:
“We must not therefore proscribe precious stones from Pharmacy’s com-
positions without good cause,” he affirms, “for they have been accepted 
for many years and approved by long and blessed patience.” And so we 
have to respect a science we do not understand!10
As Bachelard remarks, Geoffroy shows himself just as respectful towards the 
knowledge of Arabs who attributed curative virtues to the gold. Gold’s benefi-
cial qualities are explained by Geoffroy with arguments nourished by the force 
of analogy, artfully mixed with modern materialism: the Sun restores life to all of 
nature; the Sun is the source of the sulphur contained in the gold; gold, which is 
incorruptible, preserves blood from all corruption when it is mixed with it, and re-
stores human nature just as the Sun does. Nevertheless, as Bachelard points out, 
Geoffroy hesitates before accepting these propositions. And this hesitation is, in 
the eyes of Bachelard, the very sign of continued subjugation to the pre-scientific 
mind:
Geoffroy is no doubt reluctant to accept such convergences; however, this 
reluctance is in fact characteristic of the pre-scientific mind. It is this re-
luctance that prompts us to say that pre-scientific thought is encounter-
ing an obstacle here which, while not yet surmounted, is in the process of 
being so.11 
Despite these words, which seem to keep Geoffroy outside the bounds of scienti-
ficity, Bachelard doesn’t really feel the need to settle whether Geoffroy should still 
be counted among the ancients. Mainly, he is curious about Geoffroy’s hesitation, 
which possibly situates him “in-between” the two epochs, which is an excellent 
position from which to observe the hard (and basically collective) work required 
in order to overcome “superstition.”12 
Realism13 prevents Geoffroy from abandoning an ancient theory that he would 
have all the reasons to dismiss. It is indeed this very fact that, in this example, 
traditional knowledge is not allowed to enter uncritically, which conducts me to 
interpret it as an illustration of the “epistemological obstacle” accepted within 
its second meaning (i.e. as having for effect the intrusion of the ancient knowl-
edge into new science). Although preserved, the past knowledge is revised and 
transformed. Bachelard affirms this very explicitly: Geoffroy’s case illustrates the 

abbreviated title · 141 
situation in which “more or less accurate experience joins up with completely er-
roneous tradition despite very strong criticism.”14 Critical distancing is already at 
work, and even if it fails, it is not without effect:
Writers first of all feel the need to note these beliefs, for keeping silent 
here would doubtless disappoint their readers and breach the continuity 
of culture. Then however—and this is more serious—writers often take 
upon themselves the task of partially rectifying these beliefs, thus bringing 
about a rationalization on an absurd basis...15
On the basis of this example, I would like to formulate the hypothesis that the 
science of the past does not infiltrate the new science in any simple way, but pen-
etrates it transfigured (and that, of course, makes it more difficult to track).
EXAMPLE 2: INVALID INVALIDATION
Let us come to our second example of epistemological obstacles that disrupt the 
scientific thought, and cause the “induration of old beliefs.”16 Bachelard’s discus-
sion, in chapter IV of The Formation, of the “abusive extension”17 of the image of 
sponge offers a new insight into the mechanism of contamination of the new by 
ancient stereotypes. First, Bachelard describes the attractiveness of the term: 
We now wish, in this short chapter, to be even more precise and consider 
an instance where a single image or indeed a single word constitutes the 
entire explanation. […] Here though we shall be taking the simple word 
“sponge” and seeing that it allows the most varied of phenomena to be 
expressed. And because we are expressing these phenomena, we believe 
we are explaining them. We believe we know them because we recognize 
them.18
The function of the sponge is so clear that it doesn’t call for explanation; the 
sponge is thus ready for use as an explanans. René-Antoine de Réaumur’s account 
of the compressibility of air provides a good illustration. Bachelard extensively 
quotes from Mémoires de l’Académie royale des Sciences (1731) in order to show how 
willingly Réaumur accepts the image of sponge when arguing against Mariotte. 
But the most interesting moment in Bachelard’s analysis comes with the next 
step, when Réaumur seeks more liberty for the term “sponge,” claiming that a 
“sponge of the air” can of course be dissimilar to an ordinary sponge. Bachelard 

142 · author  
comments:
Yet all his thought has developed from this image and cannot leave its 
primary intuition behind. When he wishes to erase the image, the image’s 
function remains. […] In other words while he is in the end very willing to 
sacrifice the sponge, he wishes to keep spongiosity.19
As a matter of fact, Réaumur refrains from raising the question of the composi-
tion of the air and, in so doing, avoids conflating “air” and “sponge” on the basis 
of their similar make-up. Nonetheless, he presumes that air and sponges share 
the same functional features: whatever the form of the “grains of air,” they can be 
penetrated by water just like a sponge.  
Bachelard pursues his analysis with a couple of additional illustrations of a similar 
and even more explicit use of the image of the sponge by several “subaltern au-
thors.” He creates interesting contrast by eventually arriving at Descartes, whom 
he sees as an example of a “very great mind […] stuck, so to speak, in primary 
images.”20 It could be assumed, nevertheless, that his account should be here 
more nuanced. For even if it was accepted by all that Réaumur’s attempt to drift 
away from the common image of the sponge was only verbal (in fact we believe 
there are good reasons to be wary of this judgment)21, as Bachelard claims, we 
find the difference between his conscious effort to abandon the metaphor of the 
sponge and Descartes’s explicit keenness to accept it significant. It may be that 
both authors were “stuck” in primary images, but these primary images do not 
seem to be allowed to enter their science through the same channels. Descartes 
(but not Réaumur), as Bachelard reminds us, considered the image of the sponge 
perfectly clear and distinct, and as such suitable for scientific explanation:
Descartes’s confidence in the clarity of the image of the sponge is very symptom-
atic of this inability to bring doubt to bear on the detail of objective knowledge, 
to develop a discursive doubt that would wrench asunder all reality’s bonds and 
images’ every angle. General doubt is easier than particular doubt.22
Let us add that Descartes is not the sole target of these critical words. The motif 
of the “detail” that “philosophers” neglect is to be found at the heart of Bach-
elard’s epistemological program in The Philosophy of No, published only two years 
after The Formation of the Scientific Mind. In this work, Bachelard condemns the 
“integral philosophy of the philosophers,” too monist and naïve in its prescrip-

abbreviated title · 143 
tions, that needs to be completed by the “differential scientific philosophy”23 sensi-
tive to every epistemological detail.24 It suggests not only that every notion, hypoth-
esis, problem, experience or equation (the list is Bachelard’s) needs to be studied, 
but also—and more importantly—that every piece of any scientific construction 
should be given the chance to present its particular philosophy. This epistemolo-
gist’s cautious stance, however, should not be confused with careless tolerance. 
This is why Descartes’ credulous acceptance of the image of the sponge rightfully 
earns him Bachelard’s criticism.
Credulously or not, Descartes and Réaumur share the image of the sponge, and 
this very fact is sufficient for Bachelard to treat them on an equal footing. This 
continuity, as it was suggested, merits to be challenged. Unlike Descartes, Réau-
mur actually failed to overcome the power of the image of the sponge despite the 
fact that he was mistrusting its validity (Condillac is, in this respect, more lucid 
than Bachelard is when criticizing Descartes for having doubted too generally). 
In this respect, Réaumur’s situation appears to differ from that of Descartes: al-
though repudiated, in the end the image of the sponge is maintained by Réaumur, 
since it is reconstituted, in the amended knowledge, in the seemingly desubstan-
tialised form of spongiosity. For the scientist, but also for the epistemologist, this 
type of situation appears to be even more defying that the kind of full-on resis-
tance that only the future deplores.
Identification of the ancient knowledge reemerging, in the new science, trans-
figured, constitutes a serious challenge. In a slightly different context, Bachelard 
discusses the same metaphor of the sponge in his “Lumière et substance” (1934), 
a short paper on the history of photochemistry, that has been longtime obtruded 
by the materialistic image of the light absorbed by the matter. The light combines 
with matter and communicates to it its properties (some even claim it provides 
a “substantial principle of colors”). The metaphor of the sponge proves to be 
particularly tenacious as it shows ready to transform itself and to adapt, with the 
metamorphosis of the “materialistic intuition” that supports it, to new condi-
tions:
Materialistic intuition can, moreover, return under another more or less 
diverted form, under a more scientific aspect, leading one to imagine a 
pure and simple conservation of force or vibration, as one imagined in the 
eighteenth century a conservation of a specific fluid or substance.25

144 · author  
The idea of absorption (associated to the sponge) thus re-emerges in a new form 
when, for instance, the coal is supposed (according to George Stephenson that 
Bachelard comments) to “conserve” the light it has received during the day and to 
give it back on fire. As long as the image of the absorption is invoked as an answer, 
and not as a problem, the rational science is suspended by the immediate realism. 
And the sponge seems to be, for Bachelard, its object-fetish. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF NO CHALLENGED
We have already conceded that examples of infiltration of ancient knowledge into 
new science, whether explicitly refuted or not, are rather rare in Bachelard’s book. 
And yet we have good reason to believe that this issue is by no means marginal in 
his mind. The next quotation comes from Bachelard’s foreword to The Formation: 
Even in a clear mind there are dark areas, caverns still haunted by shades, 
and traces of the old remain in our new ways of thinking. The eighteenth 
century still lives secretly within us and may—alas—return. We do not see 
this as proving the permanence and fixity of human reason, as Meyerson 
thought, but rather as evidence of the somnolence of knowledge and the 
miserliness of cultivated minds that go over and over the same knowl-
edge and culture and become, as all misers do, victims of the gold they so 
lovingly finger. We shall indeed show the improper endosmosis occurring 
when the assertoric is made to flow into the apodeictic and memory into 
reason.26
We find it also significant that Bachelard uses Plato’s allegory of the cave to pre-
pare his readers to hear about non-scientific residues within scientific knowledge 
rather than about the mind’s inability to cross the border of positivity. All this 
should be seen as confirming the sincerity of the subtitle of The Formation which 
reads: A Contribution to a Psychoanalysis of Objective Knowledge, and provides the 
same message—it is the non-scientific within the scientific, more than non-scien-
tific thinking preventing the advent of science, that preoccupies Bachelard.
The general exegesis of Bachelard’s book is nevertheless not my first interest. In-
stead, I wish to bring forward several suggestions concerning the possible devel-
opments of Bachelard’s observations. I find indeed the image of “improper endos-
mosis” occurring when “memory flows into reason”27 highly evocative as it invites 
to complete, and even amend, the manner how Bachelard is usually understood. 

abbreviated title · 145 
In fact, this formula brings us beyond the situation of science disrupted by com-
mon knowledge (Lecourt’s ordinary thought) and allows us to consider all cases 
in which, due to ordinary intuitions and natural28 tendencies of human mind, the 
new knowledge is insufficiently secured in the face of the undesirable vitality of 
what was brought into disrepute. Once the possibility that the new science’s “no” 
addressed at ancient science may be challenged accepted, several propositions can 
be formulated.
1. First, a piece of advice (a moral, if one prefers) for scientists; a plea 
for the kind of “epistemological vigilance” known to sociologists, however 
surprising this reference may sound. We take the term, of course, from The 
Craft of Sociology, an openly Bachelardian “handbook” by Pierre Bourdieu, 
Jean-Claude Chamboredon, and Jean-Claude Passeron.29 Largely preoc-
cupied with the contamination of the sociologist’s work by “spontaneous 
sociology,” it links up very explicitly with Bachelard’s epistemology, which 
it applies and develops in order “to enable students of sociology to be-
come better equipped to cope with the pitfalls of sociological research.”30 
An interesting tension, however, arises between this incentive to “epis-
temological vigilance,” as it is addressed to individual researchers, and 
Bourdieu, Chamboredon and Passeron’s critique of Bachelard’s psycholo-
gism. For in the view of these authors, it is a mistake to ascribe (epistemo-
logical) errors31 directly to knowing subjects. Errors are not to be directly 
imputed to persons; more likely they are functions of epistemological 
positions “that can only be fully understood in the social field in which 
they are put forward.”32 It may be answered, nonetheless, and however 
paradoxically may it sound, that to invite researchers to practice “epis-
temological vigilance” is not to deny, but on the contrary, to reaffirm the 
non-psychological theory of error. Proceeding from the conviction that 
the mind is never scientific in itself, the “vigilance” is supposed to rest 
not only on the “adequate knowledge of error” (inspired by Bachelardian 
epistemology) but also on the knowledge about “the mechanisms that can 
induce it”33 (informed by the sociology of knowledge). 
The Craft of Sociology does adhere to the therapeutic tone of Bachelard’s 
psychoanalysis. After all, the sanative ambition of the book is announced—
along with Bourdieu’s and his collaborators’ acerbic argumentative style—
since its very first sentence:

146 · author  
In contrast to the tradition which draws the line at the logic of 
proof, refusing on principle to enter into the arcana of invention, 
thereby condemning itself to oscillate between a rhetoric of formal 
exposition and a literary psychology of discovery, we try here to 
provide the means of acquiring a mental disposition which is the 
precondition for both invention and proof.34 
However, epistemological vigilance as an acquired mental disposition does 
not combat the researcher’s own “idiocy.”35 Its inspiration is sociological: 
Instead of reforming scientist’s morale, it helps him to take better control 
of his epistemic operations. 
2. Other suggestions may be of interest for philosophers of sciences. We 
believe indeed that Bachelard’s insights have not been fully expanded 
upon. One example where there is much room for following up on Bach-
elard is when studying the full trajectories of “officially” expired but still 
refractory knowledge. Lorraine Daston’s proposition to survey the “bi-
ographies of scientific objects” could be seen as an analogous invitation, 
given that scientific objects (objects of scientific inquiry), as she insists, 
not only come into being but also pass away:
Sometimes they are banished totally from the realm of the real, as 
in the case of unicorns, phlogiston, and the ether. More often, they 
slip back into the wan of reality of quotidian objects, which exist 
but do not thicken and quicken with inquiry.36
Here the picture of slipping into the wan of reality of quotidian objects is very 
similar to the one evoked by Dominique Lecourt who, as we have seen, 
calls his readers’ attention to the type of epistemological obstacle that 
“demotes [scientific thought] to the rank of ordinary thought.” However, 
in light of our subsequent analysis, this fear of the ordinary may appear 
as based on too clear-cut distinctions. In fact, Bachelard’s detection of 
the improper endosmosis of memory into reason suggests that repulsed or 
otherwise abandoned scientific objects sometimes embark on more com-
plex paths. An identification of this phenomenon not only allows us to 
presume that outmoded scientific objects are not always withdrawn from 
scientific practice as easily as scientists would like; it also suggests that 
their déclassement37 may take the form of a gradual retreat that is performed 

abbreviated title · 147 
inside the scientific enterprise. Within the special context of the history 
of chemistry, Michael Friedman, for instance, offers an excellent example 
of such a progressive retirement when identifying, among the models of 
molecules proposed at the end of the 19th century, “hybrids” that found 
themselves halfway between the fading use of paper (folded) models and 
the newly promoted iconic representations.38
Epistemology not only appears to be technically well disposed to take over 
this research field, it may also find some help in its exploitation for its bet-
ter understanding of the heterogeneous structure of science. It was said 
that the scientist should commit himself to “epistemological vigilance” in 
order to better resist the resurgence of the past; the epistemologist, for 
his part, should have the ambition of discerning its forms and functions.  
3. The program of exploring trajectories of memory flowing into reason re-
quires a more conciliatory attitude than the one Bachelard manifested 
towards this type of irregularity. For him, “endosmosis” was always “im-
proper” (abusive), and therefore its condemnation prevailed over its posi-
tive observation. Significantly enough, Bachelard’s successor at the fore-
front of French-style39 historical epistemology, Georges Canguilhem, can 
be seen as someone who was inspired by the same indignation. While pro-
moting a sharp distinction between science and scientific ideology, Canguil-
hem seems to uncompromisingly exclude the study of “repudiated knowl-
edge” from the legitimate occupations of the epistemologist:
…the separation between ideology and science should prevent, in 
the history of science, the situation in which any element of ideol-
ogy seemingly preserved would be placed in continuity with the 
scientific construction that has dismissed the ideology. 40 
Even if Canguilhem’s concern is somehow different from that of Bache-
lard (it is above all related to good practice in the history of science, which 
should be wary of false and superficial resemblances), his refusal to deal 
with “scientific ideologies” potentially dissuades the epistemologist to fol-
low officially dismissed knowledge during its process of retreat.
An objection could be raised here at this point. Isn’t it true that in his 
1969 conference “What is Scientific Ideology?,” from which our quotation 

148 · author  
comes, Canguilhem chooses a rather compliant attitude vis-à-vis scientific 
ideologies? “A history of sciences that deals with a science in its history, 
considered as a painstaking purification of the norms of verification, cannot 
ignore scientific ideologies.”41 Nevertheless, it is obvious that the purpose 
of this broadening of the scope of the historian’s investigations is not to 
study the history of scientific ideologies. It is significant that when Can-
guilhem wishes to give “a persuasive example of the process of destitu-
tion of a [scientific] ideology,”42 he takes no interest at all, in his analysis, 
in any kind of historical movement. Thus, when Canguilhem discusses the 
work of the French philosopher and naturalist P. L. Maupertuis, he does 
so exclusively in order to censure Maupertuis’s inclusion into the history 
of genetics, which in Canguilhem’s view was legitimately inaugurated only 
by G. Mendel. To conclude, if scientific ideology needs to be addressed by 
the historian of sciences, it is first and foremost to say he will be able to 
better orient himself within the “integral past,” which is en bloc not worthy 
of his consideration. 
Canguilhem’s treatment of Herbert Spencer’s evolutionism brings an ad-
ditional and even more eloquent confirmation to our analysis. For Can-
guilhem, Spencer is an imposter: in fact, his “organicism” conceals just a 
weak relationship between the biological theories of his time, to which he 
regularly refers, and his own speculations, which are foremost politically 
motivated. In this case, the process of the destitution of scientific ideology is 
well evoked by Canguilhem, although very significantly, it is in the end 
handed over to sociology: scientific ideologies disappear when “historical 
conditions of possibility change.”43 As was said above, we have good rea-
sons to think that this transformation of the (epistemological) question of 
“how” into the question of “why” is far from being an accident.
Is epistemology in its traditional form inhibited by the over-valorization 
of validity that abusively informs its object? It is not our ambition to de-
velop the question further at this time. After these short reflections in-
spired by Bachelard and Canguilhem, we simply wish to suggest that the 
value and the function of a “past” that slips in the “present,” a process 
that Bachelard views negatively, perhaps merits more and closer study in 
an empirical fashion. 

abbreviated title · 149 
CONCLUSION: HISTORICAL EPISTEMOLOGY SYMMETRIZED
“What would happen if the humble workers of the proof, still and always reactive 
through the nature of trials and proofs, suddenly discovered the truth, unbeliev-
able and bare: that the intimate motivation to explore, that the key to discov-
ery, that the possible unveiling of true intuition, dwell neither in the competition 
nor in the desire to dominate, but in the rejoicing?”44 This is how Michel Serres 
concludes his review, already cited, of Bachelard’s The Formation of the Scientific 
Mind, which he attacks for its therapeutical and moralizing character, but also—
and here Serres aims at the very heart of Bachelard’s philosophy of no—for the 
assent it gives to the “malevolence” that dwells “in the root of the knowledge”45 
of occidental man: “To know is to hunt, conquer, violate, empower, destroy. […] 
Knowledge is against: against nature, against its own understanding, against itself 
and against the past, against others, one by one and all together.”46 The “rejoic-
ing hypothesis” that Serres suggests as an alternative sounds, nonetheless, like 
something that adds more psychology to epistemology, which on the contrary 
needs to be lightened in this respect. Surprisingly enough, as Bachelard shows, it 
is the category of validity that sometimes appears to be overly psychologized. By 
the same token the efficiency of the “violence” with which science discredits and 
expels the non-scientific from its heart shows weakened. 
Whether science progresses by refutations or whether its growth is powered by 
some kind of joyful energy is eventually an empirical question. In the same way, 
an empirical inspection is needed in order to learn more about the (potentially 
typical) trajectories of all these “epistemological details” that, even though ac-
knowledged as invalid, continue to inform the science growing on their grave. 
Bachelard’s survey of “epistemological obstacles” as offered in his The Formation 
of the Scientific Mind can be interpreted as showing what the first steps on this path 
might look like. This is, at least, what I found in Bachelard’s analysis of Geoffroy’s 
and Reaumur’s thought, supported by illustrations of “epistemological obstacles” 
understood as causing abusive intrusions of pre-scientific knowledge into new 
science. Under a generalized form of memory’s endosmosis into reason, it was then 
suggested that epistemology could profit from disregarding the offence to reason 
thus caused when preparing better conditions for a thorough study of the relics 
of the past.
In the final analysis, it is perhaps Bachelard’s commitment to the value of scien-
tific progress that caused him to be somewhat insensitive to the field of research 

150 · author  
that we propose to explore systematically. It is my suggestion that accepting this 
new object of inquiry—the posthumous life of the discarded science—would not 
only allow to broaden epistemology’s range of action, but above all it could help 
epistemology to definitively shift its focus from the triumphant to the living sci-
ence, and consequently strengthen its status.

abbreviated title · 151 
NOTES
1. I would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on the first 
version of this paper and their stimulating suggestions.
2. Étienne Bonnot de Condillac, Essay on the Origin of Human Knowledge. Translated and edited 
by Hans Aarsleff. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, Part II, Section 2, §33, 210–211.
3. For a closer analysis of this point, see André Charrak, Empirisme et métaphysique. L’Essai sur 
l’origine des connaissances humaines de Condillac. Paris: Vrin, 2003, esp. 118–122.
4. Gaston Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind. A Contribution to a Psychoanalysis of Objec-
tive Knowledge. Trans. Mary McAllester Jones. Manchester: Clinamen Press, 2002.
5. Cristina Chimisso, Writing the History of the Mind. Philosophy and Science in France, 1900 to 1960s. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008, 144.
6. Dominique Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology: Bachelard, Canguilhem and Foucault. Trans. Ben 
Brewster. London: NLB, 1975, 65.
7. Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology, 65.
8. “Psychoanalysing realists” is the title of the chapter VII, 136–153.
9. Bachelard, The Formation, 138.
10. Bachelard, The Formation, 139.
11. Bachelard, The Formation, 141.
12. “Exiling gold! How can it be said, calmly and collectedly, that gold does not bring health, that 
gold does not give courage, that it does not stem the flow of blood nor dispel the phantoms of the 
night, the burdensome memories arising from the past and from our errors, that gold is not the 
ambivalent wealth protecting both heart and soul? For this, real intellectual heroism is required, 
and an unconscious that has been psychoanalysed, that is to say a scientific culture completely 
removed from any unconscious valorization. The pre-scientific mind of the eighteenth century 
has not achieved this freedom to judge.” (Bachelard, The Formation, 141-142)
13. “Realism” gains a specific meaning in this discussion. It combines “substantialist convic-
tions” with a “miser’s joy” of possessing the riches of the reality that has to be jealously guarded. 
This is how the preciosity of precious stones undergoes a “mutation of values” and reappears in 
their healing power. See Bachelard, The Formation, 136-137.
14. Bachelard, The Formation, 138.
15. Bachelard, The Formation, 139, emphasis in the original text.
16. Bachelard, The Formation, 138. Notice that Bachelard doesn’t speak about the hardness or the 
resistance of old beliefs; he chooses instead the medical term “induration” in order to indicate 
that what he has in mind is a reaction to the critical re-examination of ancient beliefs.
17. “Extension abusive” is the French expression Bachelard uses in the subtitle of the Chapter IV. 
The complete title of its English translation gives: “An example of a verbal obstacle: sponge. On 
the over-extension of familiar images.” See Bachelard, The Formation, 81–90.
18. Bachelard, The Formation, 81.
19. Bachelard, The Formation, 83. A similar formulation is to be found in Bachelard’s Psychoanalysis 
of Fire: “We are never completely immune to the prejudice that we spend a great deal of time in at-
tacking.” (Gaston Bachelard, The Psychoanalysis of Fire. Trans. Alan C. M. Ross. London: Routledge 

152 · author  
& Kegan Paul, 1964, 65.
20. Bachelard, The Formation, 86.
21. Bachelard discusses the metaphor of the sponge in the forth chapter of The Formation as a rep-
resentative illustration of “ verbal obstacles” to scientific mind to which the chapter is dedicated. 
Although he speaks, in the very first paragraph of this chapter, about “purely verbal habits” that 
hinder scientific thought, Réaumur’s case seems to prove that it would be a mistake to charge 
the word itself with full responsibility for postponing the entering into scientificity. According 
to Bachelard, Réaumur’s dropping of the word “sponge” is “simply and solely a linguistic move-
ment” (Bachelard, The Formation, 83), i.e. nothing more than a linguistic movement. Erasing the 
word doesn’t therefore constitute a notable step forward. I tend to disagree with this judgment. 
Even if the disappearance of a word cannot here count for an “epistemological act” as Bachelard 
understands it (as an unexpected impulsion intervening in the scientific development, see Gas-
ton Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine. Paris: Presses universitaires de 
France, 1951, 25), it is likely to produce what we suggest to call an “epistemological event,” given 
that some important part of the control on the image structuring the thought is lost.
22. Bachelard, The Formation, 86.
23. For Bachelard’s use of the term “scientific philosophy” compared to that of the Vienna School, 
see Sandra Pravica, “‘Scientific Philosophies’ in the early 1930s and Gaston Bachelard on ‘induc-
tion’,” Epistemology and History from Bachelard and Canguilhem to Today’s History of Science (pre-
print), Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, 2012, 159–169, available at: https://www.
mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/Preprints/P434.PDF
24. For Bachelard’s epistemological program, see especially the foreword of The Philosophy of No 
(Gaston Bachlard, Philosophie du non. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1983, 1–17)
25. Gaston Bachelard, “Lumière et substance,” (1934) in Etudes. Présentation de G. Canguilhem. 
Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, Paris 1970, pp. 45-75.
26. Bachelard, The Formation, 19.
27. Bachelard, The Formation, 19. Bachelard borrows the term “endosmosis” from biology where 
it denotes the phenomenon of penetration of a substance from the extern milieu into a closed 
system.
28. Here I follow Dominique Lecourt who calls our attention to the figure of Nature that Bach-
elard put forward. With regard to The Formation of scientific mind, Lecourt remarks: “Apparently, 
Bachelard does not care, here, about the effective history of the sciences in the 18th century. What 
is given to us to decipher in these texts [studied by Bachelard], it is the mythical figure of a ‘natural 
state’ of the scientific mind: quite at the same time native and trans-historic state where can be 
read, in a straightforward manner, the essence of a mechanism, today veiled by its own manifesta-
tion.” (Dominique Lecourt, Bachelard. Le jour et la nuit. Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1974, 127-128)
29. Pierre Bourdieu, Jean-Claude Chamboredon, Jean-Claude Passeron, The Craft of Sociology. 
Epistemological Preliminaries. Trans. Richard Nice. Berlin—New York: Walter de Gruyter 1991. The 
book, which was originally published in 1968, represents an astonishing attempt to apply Bach-
elard’s epistemology to social sciences. Bourdieu, Chamboredon and Passeron do not deny that 
such an undertaking may cause some difficulties, but they are convinced that these are to be stud-
ied instead of nourishing “artificial distinctions” between natural and social sciences.
30. Bourdieu, Chamboredon, Passeron, The Craft of Sociology, v. Yves Gingras notes that Bach-
elard himself speaks, in a similar context, about an “intellectual watch on oneself” (survéillance 

abbreviated title · 153 
intellectuelle de soi). See Yves Gingras, “Réflexivité et sociologie de la connaissance scientifique” 
in L. Pinto, G. Sapiro, P. Champagne (eds), Pierre Bourdieu, sociologue. Paris: Fayard, 2004, 338 
(337-347).
31. “Errors” are here to be understood as misconducts in relation to the true scientificity. 
32. Bourdieu, Chamboredon, Passeron, The Craft of Sociology, 3. In fact, Bachelard is not com-
pletely ignorant of that. Consider his commentary on Geoffroy: “Exiling gold! How can it be said, 
calmly and collectedly, that gold does not bring health, that gold does not give courage, that it 
does not stem the flow of blood nor dispel the phantoms of the night, the burdensome memo-
ries arising from the past and from our errors, that gold is not the ambivalent wealth protecting 
both heart and soul? For this, real intellectual heroism is required, and an unconscious that has 
been psychoanalysed, that is to say a scientific culture completely removed from any unconscious 
valorisation. The pre-scientific mind of the eighteenth century has not achieved this freedom to 
judge.” (Bachelard, The Formation, 141–142).
33. Bourdieu, Chamboredon, Passeron, The Craft of Sociology, 3.
34. Bourdieu, Chamboredon, Passeron, The Craft of Sociology, 5 (the excerpt quoted actually corre-
sponds to the first sentence of the introduction to the French edition of the book: Pierre Bourdieu, 
Jean-Claude Chamboredon, Jean-Claude Passeron, Le métier de sociologue.Livre I. Paris: Mouton/
Bordas, 1968, 23).
35. The term is M. Serres’s: “A new great book about the idiocy: The Formation of the Scientific 
Mind.” (Michel Serres, “Déontologie : La réforme et les sept péchés” in M. Serres, Hermès II : L’In-
terférence. Paris: Les éditions de Minuit, 1972, 203 (201–222).
36. Lorraine Daston (ed.), Biographies of Scientific Objects. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2000, 
13.
37. The term is used by Dominique Lecourt in the text quoted above, where the original verb 
“déclasser” is translated by “to demote.” 
38. Michael Friedman, “A Failed Encounter in Mathematics and Chemistry: the Folded Models 
of van ’t Hoff and Sachse.” Theory of Science, 37:3 (2016, 359–386). The issue 3/2016 of the journal 
Theory of Science is entirely devoted to the problem of transformation, degradation, and disappear-
ance of scientific objects. See: http://teorievedy.flu.cas.cz/index.php/tv/issue/view/32
39. Here I refer to Jean-François Braunstein’s observation that French historical epistemology, 
even in its best years, wasn’t united by any shared research program but rather by a single style of 
the research. See Jean-François Braunstein, “Bachelard, Canguilhem, Foucault. Le ‘style français’ 
en épistémologie,” Les philosophes et la science. Ed. Peter Wagner, Paris: Gallimard, 2002, 921–963.
40. Georges Canguilhem, “Qu’est-ce que l’idéologie scientifique ?,” in G. Canguilhem, Idéologie et 
rationalité dans l’histoire des sciences de la vie. Paris: Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, 2000, 45.
41. Canguilhem, “Qu’est-ce que l’idéologie scientifique ?,” 44–45.
42. Canguilhem, “Qu’est-ce que l’idéologie scientifique ?,” 40.
43. Canguilhem, “Qu’est-ce que l’idéologie scientifique ?,” 43.
44. Serres, “Déontologie : La réforme et les sept péchés,” 222.
45. Serres, “Déontologie : La réforme et les sept péchés,” 221.
46. Serres, “Déontologie : La réforme et les sept péchés,” 221.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 154-173
gaston bachelard's 
philosophy of science: 
between project and practice
bas de boer
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, I will explore the relation between science as a rational project and 
scientific research as a human practice. On the one hand, science can be under-
stood as a project manifesting a rationality that transcends the situatedness of 
human practices. On the other hand, however, science seems to be a fundamental 
human activity as it is in scientific practices that scientific objects and facts come 
into being. The French philosopher Gaston Bachelard was among the first to spe-
cifically address the relation between the rational and the practical aspects of sci-
ence, without prioritizing either of the two. 
Without pretending in any way to be lay-
ing the foundations of modern physics, I 
hope to suggest how common philosophical 
positions must be modified to accommo-
date reality as it is revealed in the scientific 
laboratory.
—Gaston Bachelard, The New Scientific 
Spirit

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 155 
Based on developments in 20th century physics, Bachelard maintains that science 
is best understood as a collective activity taking place in local scientific practices, 
and he emphasized that the objects of the sciences exist only insofar they can 
be realized in what Bachelard calls phenomenotechnique.1 This concept denotes 
Bachelard’s insights that the objects of physics are not to be found in an external 
nature, but are artificially realized in scientific experiments and the technologies 
used in those experiments. When extending to contemporary scientific practices 
in general, we can no longer understand the different sciences as being concerned 
with the discovery of their objects, but instead with the construction of them. Ac-
cordingly, the way in which scientific objects are created within scientific prac-
tices is the central focus of Bachelard’s epistemology.2 
Nowadays, the idea that scientific objects are constructed in situated practices, 
and are therefore for a large part dependent on human interventions, figures 
prominently in (continental) philosophy and anthropology of science. For exam-
ple, it forms the core of the early work of the French philosopher-anthropologist 
Bruno Latour, who is interested in studying practices of science-in-the-making, as 
opposed to focusing on the finished theories and facts of “ready-made science.”3 
In showing that the objects of the sciences are actively constructed by groups of 
scientists, Latour challenges the idea that science is a rational project able to at-
tain universal truths about an external world.4 In this context, Latour and Woolgar 
approvingly, yet mistakenly as I hope to show in this paper, refer to Bachelard’s 
concept of phenomenotechnique:
The artificial reality, which participants describe in terms of an objective 
entity, has in fact been constructed by the use of inscription devices. Such 
a reality, which Bachelard (1953) terms the “phenomenotechnique,” takes 
on the appearance of a phenomenon by virtue of its construction through 
material techniques.5 
In this quote, Latour and Woolgar contrast objectivity with construction. This 
contrast implies that while the researchers in the laboratory act as if they are 
speaking about an entity that is objectively out there, in fact they are speaking 
about something that is constructed and does not exist outside of the structure 
of the laboratory. Hence, while Latour stresses that scientific objects are situated 
constructions realized in scientific practice, he does not explicitly address the 
question whether there are specific characteristics to their process of produc-
tion that justify the adjective ‘rational,’ which was a central question in Bach-

156 · bas de boer  
elard’s epistemology. As a consequence, his analyses of scientific practices tend 
to emphasize the practical character of knowledge production, but often fail to 
appreciate the rational criterion that warrants the specific practical actions. This 
brief discussion allows to formulate the question I address in this paper more 
precisely: How are the ‘rational’ and the ‘practical’ integrated in scientific prac-
tices? Bachelard was similarly concerned with this question when distinguishing 
between the practice of the science and the project of science. His work has not 
received much attention in recent philosophical analyses of scientific practice.6 
In this paper, I propose to use Bachelard’s epistemology as an entry-point to the 
question how ‘scientific’ and ‘practice’ are interrelated such that something as 
‘scientific practice’ is constituted.
The paper is structured as follows: Firstly, I show why, according to Bachelard, 
science can only be realized through an epistemological rupture with our ordi-
nary experience (1). Secondly, I will show how this break is realized in scientific 
practice by introducing Bachelard’s notion ‘phenomenotechnique’ (2). Thirdly, I 
discuss why Bachelard holds that a scientific rationality remains to be assumed 
within phenomenotechnical constructions, and why he holds that scientific ob-
jects are not only technical, but also rational realizations (3). Fourthly, I use 
Bachelard’s epistemology to show how the scientific object ‘cognition’ is realized 
within the cognitive neurosciences (4). To conclude, I offer some thoughts of how 
Bachelard’s epistemology can be of ongoing relevance by showing how it allows 
to evaluate the socio-material environment in which science takes place in terms 
of the interrelation of the practical and the rational within the phenomenotech-
nique (5).
1. SCIENCE AND THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL RUPTURE 
One of the central aspects of Bachelard’s philosophy of science is his notion of 
epistemological rupture, which stresses that there is—and should be—a funda-
mental divide between scientific experience and ordinary experience. Science 
should overcome the “obstacles that everyday life has set up.”7 Bachelard juxta-
poses the world of everyday life with the world of science, and argues that science 
should break with our initial experience in order to realize its rational potential. 
In fact, he holds that science “must be formed against nature, against all that 
comes from nature’s impetus and instruction, within us and outside us, against 
natural allurements and colourful, diverse facts.”8 Only when successfully sup-
pressing human primary impulses, it becomes possible to enter the domain of 

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 157 
science that aims for the development of theoretical knowledge. 
According to Bachelard, our initial contact with the world is—contrary to the ra-
tionalist purpose of science—grounded in our primary drives that induce reverie 
and dream.9 Primitive encounters with objects induce reveries that create im-
ages transcending the objects that we encounter. This act of transcending takes 
place through our primitive drives, and precedes any kind of reflection: “We are 
being faithful to a primitive human feeling, to an elemental organic reality, a fun-
damental oneiric temperament.”10 This oneiric aspect of our primary experience 
is characteristic of the way the reality of everyday life is constituted. Only when 
overcoming this oneiric state, a rational stance towards the world can come into 
being. Rationality is a continuous process of overcoming primary impulses: “In 
point of fact I see no solid basis for a natural, direct, elemental rationality […] 
Rationalist? That is what we are trying to become.”11
The second reason for the need for an epistemological rupture between science 
and everyday life is illustrated in The Philosophy of No in the context of develop-
ing a scientific understanding of heat: “Between sensory knowledge and scientific 
knowledge there is a gap. Temperature is seen on a thermometer, one does not 
feel it. Without theory, one would never know whether what is seen and what one 
feels correspond to the same phenomenon.”12 We need theory in order to con-
nect the different ways in which temperature can become present to us. Without 
theory, so Bachelard holds, it is not rationally warranted to infer that the numeri-
cal presentation of heat on a thermometer is related to the heat of the sun that we 
feel on our skin. Only when appreciating the complexity of temperature requires, 
and breaking with our everyday experiences, it can be understood that the con-
cept of heat is complex, and to investigate how the different aspects of heat are 
integrated.
Bachelard explicitly terms his philosophy of knowledge a non-Cartesian epistemol-
ogy.13 His non-Cartesianism is most clearly visible in his criticism on Descartes’s 
wax argument. In the Second Meditation, Descartes argues that wax cannot be clear 
and distinctly perceived by the senses because its form changes when heated, “for 
whatever came under the senses of taste, smell, sight, touch or hearing has now 
changed; and yet the wax remains.”14 This is why he concludes that the idea of 
wax is not grasped by the senses, but is understood by the mind alone. Bachelard, 
however, argues that precisely the diverse manifestations of the wax under differ-
ent circumstances are the basis of scientific research because these complicate 

158 · bas de boer  
our initial experience. When revealing complexity it becomes possible to connect 
the different complex elements of wax. At the same time, revealing this complex-
ity works against our natural inclination to think of wax as a singular object in 
our ordinary experience. While Descartes concludes that certainty is founded in 
a simplicity existing in the mind alone, Bachelard holds, on the contrary, that sci-
entific certainty should be found in the complexity of the shape of the wax under 
different experimental circumstances.
In Bachelard’s view, when asking for the possibility of scientific certainty, we 
should not start from the individual mind of the philosopher, but turn to how 
processes of objectification actually take place within the sciences. When look-
ing at scientific practice, it becomes clear that the scientific objects never exist in 
the mind alone, but always have a twofold relation with the empirical results of 
scientific experiments. Firstly, the objects of science are complex objects in the 
sense that they are connections of different observed phenomena. Secondly, it is 
in relation with this increasing complexity that science is able to overcome the 
subjective aspects of ordinary experience, and strive for objectification. Only in 
this way can we understand the continuous development of the sciences: “subjec-
tive [Cartesian] meditation is bent on attaining clear and definitive knowledge; 
objective meditation differs from this by the very fact that it makes progress, by 
its intrinsic need always to go further, to extend the limits of the known.”15 
The objective meditation of the laboratory scientist realizes an epistemological 
rupture with how nature is ordinarily encountered. While Descartes concludes 
that the changing qualities of the wax force us to dismiss the trustworthiness of 
sensory experience, Bachelard holds, on the contrary, that it is precisely the ex-
perimental revealing of the diverse manifestations of the wax that allows for its 
objectification. Scientists must continuously be open to experience new objects, 
which are constituted by how different aspects of them are experimentally re-
vealed. The objective meditation strives to continuously expand the limits of the 
known through the rational integration of experimental diversity. The extent to 
which such an objective mediation of the complexity of scientific objects indeed 
requires, as Bachelard would have it, an absolute rupture with ordinary experi-
ence remains up for discussion. However, Bachelard’s understanding of the ratio-
nality of science in terms of an epistemological rupture opens up the possibility 
to make clear that scientists in practice construct scientific objects that cannot 
be reduced to the sensory experiences of scientists. Rather, as is expressed in 
Bachelard’s notion of phenomenotechnique, the realization of scientific objects is 

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 159 
one of rationally integrating a diversity of complex phenomena into objects that 
explain this diversity.
2. PHENOMENOTECHNIQUE
The start of the 20th century was marked by great developments in physics. It saw 
the birth of relativity theory and quantum mechanics, and broke with earlier theo-
ries in physics that were grounded in classical mechanics. According to Bachelard, 
this break did not just have scientific consequences, but also forced philosophy to 
“modify its language if it is to reflect the subtlety and movement of contemporary 
thought.”16 Philosophy should follow the course of these most recent scientific 
developments, because “science in effect creates philosophy.”17 
One of Bachelard’s key epistemological insights is that the objects of 20th century 
physics cannot be cut loose from the technologies used to observe them. For ex-
ample, the phenomena observed in the scientific experiments such as electrons, 
are constructed within scientific experiments, and do not exist independent of the 
technologies through which they are realized.18 This is why Bachelard argues that 
we should understand the objects as constituted within a phenomenotechnique, 
because “it is then that we understand that science realizes its objects without 
ever just finding them ready-made. Phenomenotechnique extends phenomenol-
ogy. A concept becomes scientific in so far as it becomes a technique, in so far as it 
is accompanied by a technique that realizes.”19 If epistemology and philosophy of 
science are indeed to be grounded in the development of science, it should be ac-
knowledged that scientific objects cannot be cut loose from technology, because 
(i) these are the product of a technical mode of action, and (ii) their existence is 
instantiated by technologies used in scientific experiments.
According to Bachelard, “when we have followed contemporary physics, we have 
departed nature to enter in a factory of phenomena.”20 Scientific practices are de-
pendent on the uniform working of scientific technologies, which are interpreted 
as reified theorems that “provide a certitude which is lacking in more passive 
knowledge.”21 In this sense, science resembles industrial technology because both 
depend on the stabilization of their objects. Technologies provide the basis for 
the construction of scientific phenomena that remain stable in different experi-
mental contexts in a similar way that their use in mass production creates a sta-
bility among a set of products. However, we should not conceive of this analogy 
as a way to diminish the distinction between scientific practices and the practices 

160 · bas de boer  
of mass production in industrial factories. While the maintenance of stability is a 
sufficient condition for pursuing the ends of technological thinking, this stability 
must be transcended in scientific practice.
The transcending of the stability of the given phenomenon is what Bachelard de-
scribes as the “unanticipated paradox, which shows knowledge to be fleeting and 
mobile, and the action, which it brings to light to be solid and assured.”22 Although 
science relies on stable technical actions, attaining knowledge is a matter of mov-
ing beyond what is technically created.  According to Bachelard, the crucial dif-
ference between science and industrial technology must be located in the fact 
that the end of a technological process for industrial means is part of the way it is 
realized, while this goal-directedness is absent in science. For example, the work-
ing of a water wheel generating electricity can be exhaustively explained in terms 
of the empirically observable functional mechanism through which a particular 
amount of electricity is realized. The observation of an electron in a scientific ex-
periment, on the contrary, assumes prior mathematical assumptions that are not 
part of its realization, but are required to integrate a complex set of observable 
effects can be integrated into the singular object ‘electron.’
Industrial technology deals with closed systems that can be characterized in 
terms of their finality. The knowledge that is needed of the exact workings of 
this system is relative to what it intends to achieve: technology aims for an ap-
proximate knowledge relative to goals already set.23 On the contrary, science can-
not be limited to the schemes in which technological systems work in everyday 
situations. Scientific experimenting and theorizing are part of an open process of 
knowledge development that cannot be described in terms of the ends they serve. 
Accordingly, the phenomenotechnique that constitutes scientific practice must 
not be equated with a particular technical mode of action that realizes its goals by 
employing scientific technologies. 
Reminiscent of Descartes, Bachelard distinguishes between knowledge and ac-
tion.24 Industrial technologies are concerned with the domain of everyday life ac-
tion, while the phenomenotechnique constructs objects about which scientific 
knowledge can be obtained. The difference between the two becomes clearly vis-
ible when contrasting scientific experiments with the technological realization 
of a certain goal within a closed system. In industrial systems, technological pro-
cesses are used to continuously make the same product: any unexpected results 
would be considered failures. In mass industry, the goal is to create a large set 

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 161 
of indistinguishable products, and the coming into existence of each individual 
product can be defined in terms of the actions through which they are created. 
The objects of science are not the product of a goal-oriented endeavor. Scientific 
experiments are based on existing hypotheses that structure how an experimen-
tal set-up is build, but they are supposed to generate something new by increasing 
the complexity of the object under study. This is why experiments do more than 
just testing a hypothesis, because in the confrontation between hypothesis and 
empirical manifestation, new scientific objects may be realized. In contrast with 
technology, science is an ongoing open process of hypothesizing and correcting 
previous knowledge that is contradicted in scientific experiments.
3. THE RATIONALITY OF SCIENCE AND THE PHENOMENOTECHNIQUE
Bachelard interprets the history of epistemology as an ongoing debate between 
rationalists and realists. He opposes the idea that certain knowledge, i.e. scientific 
knowledge, must be understood either in realistic terms (knowledge successfully 
reflects the structure of an external reality) or in rationalistic terms (knowledge 
is the product of the human mind). According to Bachelard, both of these posi-
tions fail to do justice to how science actually works. They are “the results of 
impermissible abstractions that did not do justice to the complexity of the con-
temporary sciences.”25 When looking at scientific practice, Bachelard notes that 
those two positions do not conflict, but “coexist peacefully in the modern sci-
entific mind.”26 Science is as significantly the product of the rational activity of 
the scientific mind, as it depends on the material manifestation of phenomena in 
scientific experiments. Accordingly, a philosophy of science should reflect both of 
these aspects.
According to Bachelard, the new sciences of the early 20th century break with ear-
lier philosophical theories of knowledge in two ways: (i) New science is based on 
the co-existence of rationalism and realism, and cannot be reduced to either of 
the two, and (ii) the objects that new sciences speak about are not ‘discovered’ in 
‘nature,’ but are constructions that are phenomenotechnically realized in scien-
tific practices. Consequently, a philosophy of science should aim to come to a syn-
thesis of rationalism and realism that takes into account the constructed nature 
of scientific objects. Bachelard uses the terms ‘applied rationalism’ or ‘technical 
materialism’ to refer to the position that adequately reflects this middle position 
between rationalism and realism.27 These terms illustrate that a philosophy of sci-
ence should always oscillate between the rationality of science itself, which cre-

162 · bas de boer  
ates a domain of inquiry that breaks with ordinary experience, and the construct-
ed nature of scientific objects that are the product of technological manipulations 
on a rationally plain.28 No priority should be assigned to either the rationality of 
mathematics or the way scientific objects become empirically accessible within 
the phenomenotechnique. The material environment in which scientific phenom-
ena become visible helps realizing scientific objects, but it is only because these 
can be meaningfully interpreted against an already existing mathematical back-
ground that these phenomena become significant. The objects of science appear 
in an environment that is “mathematically meaningful before it is phenomenally 
significant.”29  
Bachelard develops his philosophical position by answering the question: ‘How 
are the objects of science made?’ Or in Bachelard’s words: “Tell me how you are 
sought and I will tell you what you are.”30 As we saw, in Bachelard’s view, science is 
realized by establishing an epistemological rupture with ordinary experience. Ac-
cordingly, the phenomena encountered within the phenomenotechnique should 
not be related to as objects of ordinary experience. Loosely following the Kantian 
distinction between phenomenon and noumenon, Bachelard holds that strictly 
speaking, scientific objects are not grounded in sensory experience, but are the 
products of mathematical thinking. However, the twist that Bachelard gives to 
the Kantian distinction conflicts with Kant’s conception of the noumenon. While 
the noumenon is by definition inaccessible in Kant’s view, Bachelard holds that 
the fact that some scientific phenomena can never be perceived does not prevent 
scientists from having epistemological access to them.31 Bachelard locates the ra-
tionality of scientific practice in the creation of a noumenal plain in which scien-
tific objects appear. Contrary to the Kantian noumenon, Bachelard’s noumenon is 
scientifically constructed and knowable by the human being. 
In 20th century microphysics, Bachelard holds, mathematics is a technique through 
which a noumenon is created in which scientific objects are made accessible. This 
mathematical grounding distinguishes scientific practices from ordinary practic-
es in which technologies are involved. This does of course not imply that techno-
logical systems do not involve mathematical reasoning. For example, the product 
output of an industrial factory may well be mathematically predicted in terms 
of the amount of products the machinery is likely to manufacture in a certain 
amount of time. However, in contrast with scientific practices, the existence of 
the product (say, a shoe) is not dependent on this mathematical prediction. That 
is, contrary to scientific phenomena, the presence of mathematics is not constitu-

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 163 
tive of the existence of technical products. 
However, the sciences should not be reduced to their mathematical character. 
On the one hand, Bachelard argues that the sciences should rationalize reality in 
order to construct scientific phenomena against nature. On the other hand how-
ever, the reality of rationalizations is shaped in the way they become empirically 
accessible. This empirical realization of rational thought is, according to Bach-
elard, constitutive of the experimental character of 20th century science. This du-
ality is reflected in the phenomenotechnique of scientific practice: the structure 
of the phenomenotechnique always works on the basis that a mathematical sur-
face is rationally present, and can only realize scientific phenomena within this 
surface. This is why, in Bachelard’s view, technologies are both reified theorems 
and provide phenomenal stability across experiments because they perform ho-
mogeneous actions. The phenomenotechnique both contains the mathematical 
technique of creating a noumenal plain, and technologies that allow for the stable 
appearance of scientific phenomena across experiments.
Science takes place through “the application of the rational technique of scientific 
thinking [that] determines a genuine recurrence of rationality.”32 This can only 
be realized through the apodictic acceptance of rational values: it requires what 
Bachelard calls a rational apodicticity. Rational apodicticity makes it possible to 
break with ordinary experience and engage in a relation with the complexity of the 
phenomena realized through the phenomenotechnique. Thus, the apodicticity of 
rationality organizes the experience of scientists and enables them to recognize 
phenomena not as referring to natural objects but as complex relations out of 
which the rational objects of science can be constructed. Hence, phenomenotech-
nique is the recurring rationalization of a rationality that is already established, 
but must be continuously enacted in order to remain present as a prerequisite for 
the recurrence of scientific thinking. This is why science is never just mathemati-
cal: The objects of science are not merely realized through the rationality of the 
scientific mind, but are also constituted through their empirical realization within 
phenomenotechnique. 
Bachelard’s view that philosophy should be guided by the development of science 
coincides with his acceptance of these developments as a standard of rationality. 
As was already hinted at in Bachelard’s reply to the Descartes’s wax experiment, 
it is only in comparison with contemporary scientific practices that earlier types 
of inquiry can appear as irrational, i.e. as not having been able to break with ordi-

164 · bas de boer  
nary experience. Bachelard does not refer to any standards of rationality that are 
external to the actual development of science. Only by looking at contemporary 
scientific practices can philosophers discover the workings of rationality. 
Bachelard holds that science always develops in relation to previous scientific 
discoveries, and therefore partly involves the incorrect scientific judgments of the 
past.33 Furthermore, he holds that scientists can never fully overcome the epis-
temological obstacles, i.e. they can never fully break with ordinary experience.34 
Science always develops against previous scientific discoveries; it stands always 
in a dialectical character with its own past. For Bachelard, this means that earlier 
epistemological obstacles and scientific errors remain a part of present research. 
It is only in relation with earlier scientific theories and scientific objects that new 
objects can emerge that can be theorized about, and new standards of rationality 
can come into being.35 Accordingly, Bachelard characterizes science as a dynamic 
process both guided and striving for rationality.
If science requires scientists to engage in a rational apodicticity, the question aris-
es how this apodicticity is realized in scientific practices, and how it subsequent-
ly structures how scientific objects come into being. According to Bachelard, it 
is not the technique of creation that singles out the scientific character of the 
phenomenotechnique. Whereas the technique of creation brings objects within 
the field of the human senses, science should “amplify what is revealed beyond 
appearance”36, which is for example illustrated in his remarks on temperature dis-
cussed earlier. The mere perceptual experience of a (constructed) phenomenon 
does not warrant its scientific character, but assumes a prior engagement in the 
rationality of the scientific project. 
While Bachelard’s epistemology mostly focuses on (micro-)physics and chemis-
try, he considers all scientific specializations to be rational insofar they partici-
pate in the rationalist project of science at large, i.e., they presuppose a rational 
apodicticity. Yet, when arguing that science has regional rationalisms that belong 
to the particular sciences, he suggests that the process of constructing scientif-
ic objects may differ greatly across the different sciences.37 However, Bachelard 
holds that while each scientific practice is different, they are similar to the extent 
that they are scientific. While they differ in their specific practical make-up, they 
all are equally concerned with the rationalization of the real. That is, the structure 
of the particular phenomenotechnique at work within a particular scientific con-
text can only function because it participates in a scientific rationality. 

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 165 
How must we understand the relation between the micro-aspects of practices 
across the different sciences, and the general rationality of the scientific project? 
In Bachelard’s view, science, as a project, is a manifestation of rationality. Sci-
ence takes place in a ‘scientific city,’ and the inhabitants of this city should aim 
to come to a collective understanding of scientific objects through participating 
in the rationality of science. In Bachelard’s view, rationality emerges out of the 
social exchanges between scientists. Only within collectives is it possible that in-
dividual scientists do not obey their instinctual desires and drives characteristic 
of an ordinary experience of nature, and are classified by Bachelard as epistemo-
logical obstacles that should be overcome.38
Also this idea of the scientific city is grounded in how Bachelard conceives of the 
actual structure of scientific practice. When discussing that most of the papers 
appearing in scientific journals are written by several authors, he stresses that this 
cooperative aspect is typical for the way rationality is manifested in new science, 
i.e., in 20th century physics.39 This collective rationality functions as a model for 
how science should be organized, and how scientists are capable of communicat-
ing among each other in a rational manner. The idea that rationality can only be 
obtained when participating in actual scientific practice, and by relating to other 
scientists is most dramatically expressed in Bachelard’s latest fragments on poet-
ics that were posthumously edited and published. In the Fragments of a Poetics of 
Fire, he writes:
I am of the conviction that an active rationalism must be associated with 
scientific labor, transforming all knowledge into scientific knowledge. 
Thus, if I were to write a new book as a rationalist, I would have to go to 
the school of one of the contemporary sciences. One can no longer be 
rationalist by oneself, on the fringe of contemporary scientific activity. It is 
necessary to learn together with the workers of rationality.40 
The lonely individual is unable to produce rational knowledge, because rational-
ity is constituted in the scientific city through the discursive practices between 
scientists. Only in this environment can the human mind engage in a rational apo-
dicticity. The individual, on the contrary, is only capable of producing desires and 
dreams that are private by definition, and can only be expressed in poetry. Hence, 
a specific social structure is a necessary precondition for engaging in the scientific 
project. This collective rationality is not limited to personal interactions between 
scientists, but also structures how scientists relate to the phenomena they study. 

166 · bas de boer  
In the scientific city, rationality is expressed in the books that are written about 
scientific phenomena. This collective discursive layer of the written word provides 
an extra foundation of the sciences, which adds to the noumenal construction of 
the scientific plain through mathematical techniques. Polemically, Bachelard re-
fers to this discursive structure as providing a bibliomenon that helps providing a 
stability for the existence of scientific phenomena within the scientific commu-
nity.41 Through the constant interaction with the scientific phenomena that exist 
within the bibliomenon, scientists remain constantly aware that the objects that 
science is about are not natural objects, but are artificially created. The collectiv-
ity of the bibliomenon is especially important for Bachelard, because the irratio-
nality of the our ordinary experience remains constantly present in each scientist. 
According to Bachelard, this collective and discursive structure of the scientific 
city guides how science is practiced on a micro-level. The micro-experience of 
scientific practice participates in the scientific project that guides scientific think-
ing. He conceptualizes this scientific project in terms of a rationality that con-
tinuously aims to correct previous errors. No matter what technologies, research 
objects, and concepts are present, the different sciences can all be considered 
scientific insofar they participate in the rationalist project of science at large. The 
structure of the particular phenomenotechnique at work within a particular sci-
entific context can only function because it participates in a scientific rationality. 
Consequently, the micro-activity of scientific practice can only be performed to 
the extent that they are part of the macro-aspect of science as a rational project.
Scientific objects that are constructed within in a phenomenotechnique can only 
be appreciated within a structure that supports the possibility of engaging in a 
rational apodicticity. This structure is realized in the construction of a rational 
environment in which scientists are capable of continuously overcoming episte-
mological obstacles in their interactions with each other in the scientific city in 
which scientific phenomena are stabilized. Only in such an environment can the 
human mind by rectified such that it overcomes epistemological obstacles. The 
structure of the scientific city should therefore embody the rationality that is real-
ized within the phenomenotechnique: the rationality present in the way scientific 
objects are realized in scientific practice should therefore be incorporated in the 
socio-material environment in which science takes place. 

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 167 
4. PHENOMENOTECHNIQUE AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Let me try to make clear the ongoing relevance of Bachelard’s epistemology by dis-
cussing a recent development in the cognitive neurosciences, thereby indicating 
that the notion of phenomenotechnique is not limited to microphysics, but can 
also be productively extended to other contemporary scientific practices. In the 
course of the history of the neurosciences, cognitive functions such as ‘attention,’ 
‘empathy,’ and ‘agency,’ have been made available for investigation. Researching 
these specific cognitive functions requires the presence of specific technologies 
such as functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging ((f)MRI) or Electroencephalography 
(EEG), and the active construction of experimental set-ups in which they could 
be made present. These developments gave rise to specialized discipline of cogni-
tive neuroscience. During experiments in the cognitive neurosciences also par-
ticipants have an active role because they have to perform certain tasks that are 
thought to be potential measures of a specific cognitive function. Only within 
such experiments can brain states be linked to existing conceptualizations of hu-
man behavior. In other words, it requires the presence of a phenomenotechnique 
to realize these cognitive functions as scientific objects. 
Mathematics plays a formative role within the phenomenotechnique. The brain 
activity displayed on (f)MRI scans are generated by comparing activity in differ-
ent regions of the brain, a statistical task heavily dependent on computing power 
considering that fMRI divides the brain into approximately 138,000 voxels that 
are compared with one another.42 Scientists cannot execute such a mathematical 
analysis independent of a computer, which introduces an opaqueness into the 
way brain scans are generated. In fact, there is no possibility for neuroscientists 
to retrace the mathematical processes through which brain scans are generated 
step by step. Besides linking experimental outcomes to existing psychological 
concepts to explain human behavior, neuroscientists also have to evaluate how 
such are concepts are mathematically realized within the phenomenotechnique. 
Let me try to make clear with an example how this problem is solved in the neu-
rosciences when considering that scientific objects are the interplay between the 
phenomenotechnique and a rational apodicticity. In 2012, Craig Bennett and col-
leagues won the Ig Nobel Prize in neuroscience with a study that showed brain 
activity in a dead salmon using fMRI.43 The task that the salmon had to perform is 
described as follows by Bennett and colleagues:

168 · bas de boer  
The task administered to the salmon involved completing an open-ended 
mentalizing task. The salmon was shown a series of photographs depict-
ing human individuals in social situations with a specified emotional va-
lence, either socially inclusive or socially exclusive. The salmon was asked 
to determine which emotion the individual in the photo must have been 
experiencing.44 
The point of this experiment is not to detect brain activity in a dead salmon, but 
to reveal the flaws occurring in statistical analyses in the cognitive neurosciences 
that did not correct for the so-called multiple comparisons problem. This problem 
states that, when a large amount of statistical comparisons are made, there is a 
significant chance that the test will yield some random results because of noise 
fluctuations. These random results are called false positives. Bennett et al. aimed to 
show that without employing statistical techniques correcting for this problem, 
several areas of the dead salmon’s brain were significantly active during the task. 
This result was visualized in a brain scan that contained red dots representing the 
brain activity in the significantly active regions: a result that would be an absur-
dity.
At this point, two things could be inferred: either the dead salmon was indeed 
cognitively active during the task, or the significant results were artifacts that 
could be explained by the multiple comparisons problem. Normally, when us-
ing living subjects in psychological experiments, the existence of artifacts can be 
explained by the experimental subject’s head movements or technological fail-
ures, but Bennett et al. aim to show that also an improper statistical analysis can 
generate artifacts. When reminding that fMRI compares approximately 138.000 
voxels, the likelihood of false positives is extremely high in research in the cogni-
tive neurosciences that uses fMRI. When no statistical analysis correcting for this 
problem is applied, brain scans thus falsely display red dots that indicate brain 
activity. Only when interpreters of brain scans are aware that they are confronted 
with phenomenotechnical realizations, it becomes possible to establish a critical 
relation with the practice and results of cognitive neuroscience. That is, only in 
this way can it be understood why the outcome of an object that is the product 
of mathematical relations can be mistakenly be taken to show brain activity in a 
dead salmon.
In the above example, revealing how scientific objects are the product of phe-
nomenotechnical construction allows to reveal which existing scientific princi-

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 169 
ples (such as the application of proper statistical analysis) need to be in place in 
order for a practice to function as a scientific practice. At the same time, what are 
the existing scientific principles—e.g., what is considered to be a proper statisti-
cal analysis—is itself dynamically constituted in the relation with the objects that 
are realized through the phenomenotechnique. The awareness of and reflection 
on these principles coincides with engaging in a rational apodicticity that allows 
for establishing a relation with the noumenal plain in which the objects of a sci-
entific discipline are realized. Accordingly, the realization of human cognition in 
scientific practice is the product of a continuous re-integrating of the rational 
and technical aspects of its phenomenotechnical realization. What this points to 
is that a philosophical analysis of scientific practice should be one in which the 
mathematical aspects that shape how scientific objects are realized are included. 
For example, without taking into account that the realization human cognition re-
quires the presence of a mathematical plane into which experimental results are 
integrated, the complexity of the phenomenotechnique within which the object 
‘human cognition’ is realized cannot be appreciated.
5. CONCLUSION
Let me move back to the question posed at the start of this paper, and ask how 
Bachelard’s philosophy can help us answering the question how the ‘rational’ and 
the ‘practical’ are integrated in scientific practices? Bachelard’s notion of phenom-
enotechnique is crucial when connecting the rational and the practical. Introduc-
ing this notion has at least three different implications. Firstly, the realization of 
scientific objects is dependent on performing practical actions in relation with 
technologies. Secondly, the phenomenotechnique creates a rational plane—Bach-
elard’s noumenon—in which the complexity of scientific objects comes into be-
ing. Thirdly, the phenomenotechnique helps constituting a scientific city in which 
the epistemological obstacles grounded in the primitive experiences of individual 
scientists can be suppressed. 
When considering these three different implications of approaching scientific 
objects as realized within a phenomenotechnique, it appears that the practical 
and the rational aspects of scientific practice are integrated in the realization of 
increasingly complex objects. The practical actions—for example in scientific 
experiments—are structured by a rational apodicticity, but the complexity cre-
ated by such actions at the same time challenge existing standards of rationality. 
Bachelard maintains that we should understand the rationality of the scientific 

170 · bas de boer  
project in terms of the way it is realized in the latest scientific developments, 
and that epistemology should incorporate this form of rationality. Taking into 
account the insight that scientific objects are phenomenotechnical realizations, 
an epistemology inspired by Bachelard allows to connect (i) the practical actions 
that scientists perform in relation with technologies, (ii) the rational apodictic-
ity that allows to integrate a complexity that is revealed within scientific practice 
into a scientific object, and (iii) the way a socio-material environment is realized 
that supports the rationality of the phenomenotechnique.
The ongoing re-realization of scientific objects within the scientific project not 
only points to the interrelation of the practical and the rational on a micro-level, 
but also to ongoing changes on the socio-material level. By considering the ratio-
nality within the phenomenotechnique on a micro-level, Bachelard’s epistemol-
ogy allows to develop a framework for the organization of the scientific city. For 
example, our discussion of the ‘dead salmon’ in §5 suggests that the realization of 
human cognition as a scientific object strongly depends on how it can be math-
ematically realized. This suggests that scientific subjects should be able to criti-
cally reflect on whether these mathematical realizations conform to their existing 
concepts of human cognitive functions. The phenomenotechnical realization of 
human cognition should therefore be accompanied with the realization of a socio-
material environment in which the complexity of the phenomenotechnique can 
be appreciated. Accordingly, looking at the structure of the phenomenotechnique 
not only allows us to study the realization of scientific objects on a micro-level, 
but also to find a starting-point for how the socio-material environment in which 
science takes place could be rationally organized.  

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 171 
NOTES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is a modified version of a presentation held at the Bachelard Today conference at the 
KU Leuven. I wish to thank the organizers and participants of this conference for their valuable 
feedback on my presentation.
1. Gaston Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind: A Contribution to a Psychoanalysis of Ob-
jective Knowledge. Trans. Mary McAllester Jones. Manchester: Clinamon Press, 2002, 70.
2. In the French (continental) philosophical tradition, no strict distinction between ‘epistemol-
ogy’ and ‘philosophy of science’ is made. In this paper, I will use these terms interchangeably.
3. See: Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1987, 2-6. 
4. Other examples are: Karin Knorr-Cetina, Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999, Andrew Pickering, Constructing Quarks: A Sociological 
History of Particle Physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
5. Bruno Latour & Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (2nd edition). 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 64.
6. Notable Exceptions are: Teresa Castelao-Lawless, “Phenomenotechnique in Historical Perspec-
tive: Its Origins and Implications for Philosophy of Science.” Philosophy of Science 62:1 (1995, 44-
59), Alfred Nordmann, “From Metaphysics to Metachemistry” Philosophy of Chemistry: Synthesis of 
a New Discipline. Eds Davis Baird, Eric Scerri, & Lee McIntyre. Dordrecht: Springer, 2006, 347-362, 
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, “Gaston Bachelard and the Notion of ‘Phenomenotechnique.’” Perspectives 
on Science 13:3 (2005, 316)
7. Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind, 28.
8. Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind, 33.
9. The idea that our immediate encounter with reality is grounded in our primitive drives is why 
Bachelard occasionally refers to his project as a psychoanalysis of knowledge. See for example: 
Gaston Bachelard, The Psychoanalysis of Fire. Trans. Alan C.M. Ross. London: Routledge, 1964. A 
detailed analysis of this aspect of Bachelard’s philosophy is beyond the scope of this paper. For an 
excellent discussion on this topic, see for example: Cristina Chimisso, Gaston Bachelard: Critic of 
Science and Imagination. London: Routledge, 2013, 181-218.
10. Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Matter. Trans. E.R. Farrell. 
Dallas: The Pegasus Foundation, 1999, 5.
11. Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams, 7.
12. Gaston Bachelard, The Philosophy of No. Trans. G.C. Waterson. London: Routledge, 1968, 9.
13. See: Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 135-177. For an extensive discussion of Bachelard’s 
non-Cartesian epistemology, see: Mary Tiles, “Technology, Science, and Inexact Knowledge: Bach-
elard’s Non-Cartesian Epistemology” Continental Philosophy of Science. Ed Gary Gutting. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2005, 157-175.
14. René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy 3rd Edition. Trans. D.A. Cress. Indianapolis: 
Hackett Publishing Company, 1993, 21.
15. Gaston Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit. Trans. Arthur Goldhammer. Boston: Beacon Press, 
1984, 171.

172 · bas de boer  
16. Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 3.
17. Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 3.
18. See, Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 6.
19. Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind, 70.
20. Gaston Bachelard, L’Activité Rationaliste de la Physique Contemporaine. Paris: PUF, 1951, 10.
21. Gaston Bachelard, “From La Essai Sur la Connaissance Approchée. Trans. Mary Tiles” Conti-
nental Philosophy of Science. Ed Gary Gutting. Oxford: Blackwell, 2005, 180. 
22. Bachelard, “From La Essai Sur la Connaissance Approchée,” 176.
23. Bachelard, “From La Essai Sur la Connaissance Approchée,” 181.
24. Descartes made this distinction to make clear that his doubt was a methodological asset in his 
search for certain and indubitable knowledge, but should not be without hesitation be transferred 
to the domain of practical action. See: Descartes, Meditations, 16.
25. Rheinberger, “Gaston Bachelard and the Notion of ‘Phenomenotechnique’,” 316.
26. Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 1.
27. Gaston Bachelard, Le Rationalisme Applique. Paris: PUF, 1951, 5.
28. An excellent discussion of these concepts can be found in: Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, An Episte-
mology of the Concrete: Twentieth-Century Histories of Life. Durham: Duke University Press, 2010, 
25-37.
29. Gaston Bachelard, ‘Noumenon and Microphysics,’ trans. Bernard Roy. Philosophical Forum 36:1 
(2006, 79).
30. Bachelard, The New Scientific Spirit, 143.
31. See: Cristina Chimisso, ‘From Phenomenology to Phenomenotechnique: The Role of Early 
Twentieth-Century Physics in Gaston Bachelard’s Philosophy.’ Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Science Part A 39:3 (2008, 387).
32. Bachelard, Le Rationalisme Applique, 121, trans. by author.
33. This implies that scientific theories or paradigms can never be fully discontinuous , as each 
new scientific theory necessarily develops in interaction with the erroneous scientific judgments 
that it aims to overcome. Despite their seeming similarities, it is on this point that Bachelard’s 
epistemology significantly differs from the Kuhnian notion of paradigm. See: Thomas Kuhn, The 
Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962. For further discus-
sion on the relation between Bachelard and Kuhn, see for example: Stephen W. Gaukroger, “Bach-
elard and the Problem of Epistemological Analysis.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 7:3 
(1976, 189-244), Dominique Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology: Bachelard, Canguilhem and Fou-
cault. Trans. Ben Brewster. London: NLB, 1975, 7-19. For an in-depth discussion of the mutual 
influence of Kuhn’s work and French epistemology, see: Massimiliano Simons, “The Many En-
counters of Thomas Kuhn and French Epistemology.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Part A 61 (2017, 41-50)
34. See: Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind, 20.
35. See: Rheinberger, “Gaston Bachelard and the Notion of ‘Phenomenotechnique’,” 315.
36. Bachelard, The Formation of the Scientific Mind, 13.
37. Bachelard, Le Rationalisme Applique, 119-21.
38. For an extensive discussion of Bachelard’s notion ‘scientific city,’ see: Cristina Chimisso, Gas-

gaston bachelard's philosophy of science · 173 
ton Bachelard: Critic of Science and Imagination, 198-201.
39. The claim that cooperation between scientists is typical for 20th century science can be doubt-
ed on historical grounds. For an account of the cooperation in the 17th century between scientists 
(natural philosophers) and the need for experiments to be public events to be observed by other 
scientists, see for example: Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison, Objectivity. New York: Zone Books, 
2007. Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer, Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and the Experi-
mental Life 2nd Edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011.
40. Gaston Bachelard, Fragments of a Poetics of Fire. Trans. Kenneth Haltman. Dallas: The Pegasus 
Foundation, 1997, 9.
41. See: Bachelard, L’Activité Rationaliste de la Physique Contemporaine, 6-7.
42. See for example: Adina  L. Roskies. “Are Neuroimages Like Photographs of the Brain?” Philoso-
phy of Science 74 (2007, 860-872).
43. The Ig Nobel Prizes are a counterpart to the Nobel Prizes, and are awarded to “achievements 
that first make people laugh and then make them think.” See: Improbable Research. “About the IG 
® Nobel Prizes.” Accessed September 12, 2017. http://www.improbable.com/ig/ 
44. Craig M. Bennett et al., “Neural Correlates of Interspecies Perspective Taking in the Post-
Mortem Atlantic Salmon: An Argument For Proper Multiple Comparisons Correction,” Journal of 
Serendipitous and Unexpected Results 1:1, (2010, 2). 

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 174-206
the two bachelards of louis 
althusser
david maruzzella
One thing that often strikes readers of Louis Althusser’s classic works Pour Marx 
and Lire le Capital as out of place, if not totally bizarre, is the constant references 
made to non-Marxist philosophers, indeed, to philosophers whose theoretical po-
sitions are commonly held to be thoroughly idealist. Looking perhaps for reader’s 
guides or introductions to Marx’s thought, they are met instead with Althusser’s 
passion for theory and scientificity. Classical Marxist themes such as exploitation, 
alienation, and commodity fetishism, not to mention class struggle, are hardly 
mentioned. After all, are not philosophers working in Marx’s wake supposed to 
be transforming the world and not merely contemplating it and producing vari-
ous theories about it? Of course, it is well-known that Marx sought to settle his 
philosophical accounts with Hegel’s idealism (and his young leftist followers) and 
Feuerbach’s attempted materialist reversal of Hegel in texts such as the German 
Ideology and the Theses on Feuerbach. Althusser, in his typology of Marx’s work, 
classifies these polemical texts as so-called “works of the break,”1 that is, works 
wherein Marx had not yet fully articulated and elaborated the dialectical mate-
rialist philosophical position that would later be considered one of his greatest 
theoretical innovations—still under the shadow of German Idealism, Marx had 
not yet worked out the philosophical position his nascent historical materialism 
required. We even know today that Marx read and took extensive notes on Spi-
noza’s Theological Political Treatise as well selected fragments and correspondence 
in 18412, but certainly nowhere in these notes does Marx claim, as Althusser fa-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 175 
mously will, that Spinoza is “Marx’s only direct ancestor.”3 Rather, as Alexandre 
Matheron notes, it is difficult to conclude what exactly Marx gleaned from his 
reading of Spinoza, which is ultimately more of a montage of citations than a close 
reading: perhaps Marx projected his own ideas on to Spinoza or perhaps Spinoza 
was a kind of foil for Marx.4 Though Marx’s texts themselves do not directly make 
clear this relation of direct ancestry that Althusser posits, Pierre Macherey, one 
of Althusser’s most inventive and precocious students, ends his 1977 study Hegel 
ou Spinoza by drawing out this connection between Spinoza and the dialectical 
materialism Marx sought to found: 
In what conditions can a dialectic become materialist? …What is or what 
would be a dialectic that functions in the absence of all guarantees, in an 
absolutely causal manner, without a prior orientation that would attach 
to it, from the beginning, the principle of absolute negativity, without the 
promise that all the contradictions in which it is engaged are by rights re-
solved, because they carry within them the conditions of their resolution?
This would be, as Macherey suggests, a Spinozist critique avant la lettre of the 
Hegelian dialectic, that is, a truly materialist dialectic, a dialectic purged of all te-
leology. Althusser, for his part, only loosely seems to suggest this in an important 
footnote to his 1961 essay on the Young Marx. Whereas the Hegelian dialectic 
presupposes a “rupture in conservation,” that is to say, “a substantial continuity in 
the process” where the final stage of the dialectical movement contains the “truth” 
of the previous moments, Marx, Althusser claims, does not produce a science that 
would be the “truth” of a set of ideologies, but rather, establishes a new theoreti-
cal position that “constitutes a break [rupture] with ideology,”5 a break that does 
not result in ideology’s sublation and overcoming in the form of a science. Science 
does not take the place of an ideological problematic, but rather displaces it. Spi-
noza’s distinction between the three kinds of knowledge is the obligatory refer-
ence for Althusser, and decidedly not Hegelian Aufhebung: “Between the first and 
second kinds of knowledge, Spinoza established a relation that, in its immediacy 
(if we abstract from the totality in God) implies precisely a radical discontinuity 
[discontinuité radicale]. Though the second kind allows for the intelligibility of the 
first, it is not its truth.”6
Althusser’s reference here to Spinoza contra Hegel in order to explain the event 
of the founding of Marx’s new science implicitly relies upon another non-Marxist 
reference: Gaston Bachelard, the great thinker of rupture and discontinuité radicale 

176 · david maruzzella  
in the history of science and the formation of the scientific spirit. If a passionate 
Spinozism, as Althusser will confess in his Éléments d’autocritique, was a kind of 
antidote to the predominant structuralist tendency in French thought7, so-called 
French Historical Epistemology is no doubt the other most important of Althuss-
er’s non-Marxist references. Not only was Bachelard Althusser’s master’s thesis 
supervisor in 1947—though he apparently did not read a word of the mémoire on 
Hegel that Althusser submitted—but he will become for Althusser, beginning in 
the early 1960s, a point of reference, both nominally and conceptually, that will 
mark the entirety of his thought. However, Althusser’s fidelity to Bachelard, as 
well as to fellow travelers Jean Cavaillès, Alexandre Koyré, Georges Canguilhem, 
and Michel Foucault, earned him scorn among Marxist intellectuals. Michel Va-
dée, writing in 1975, in fact dedicated an entire book to this topic. He writes in his 
Bachelard ou le nouvel idéalisme épistémologique that a Marxist philosopher turn-
ing to Bachelard represents “…an abandonment of the very foundations of the 
theoretical conceptions of Marx and Engels.”8 On this account, Bachelard, who 
Althusser invokes to defend Marxism’s scientificity turns out to be the source of 
the uncriticized idealist tendencies that Althusser smuggles into his reading of 
Marx at the expense of losing all materialist credentials! 
What follows is a reconstruction of the way in which Althusser borrowed the 
philosophical category of “epistemological break” from Bachelard while simul-
taneously transforming its meaning and its theoretical function.9 In other words, 
Althusser does not simply mechanically apply the epistemological break to Marx, 
but rather in so doing, to borrow an expression from Canguilhem, varies “its ex-
tension and comprehension” and confers upon it “the function of a form.”10 In-
deed, Alain Badiou writing in 1967 argued that Althusser implicitly defines dialec-
tical materialism “…as being a formal theory of breaks [coupures],”11 that Althusser, 
in some sense, attempts to both formalize and generalize what in Bachelard’s 
work only remained a kind of philosophical refrain or theme that is never devel-
oped systematically. 
What’s more, however, Althusser’s relationship to Bachelard changes in impor-
tant ways as his own thought evolves. If the language of epistemological break—
both coupure and rupture— and radical historical and epistemic discontinuity re-
main more or less consistent in Althusser’s work, the role that these categories 
play in his philosophical strategy change significantly. Put rather schematically, 
Althusser first employs Bachelard in order to produce a novel solution to a loosely 
Popperian problematic of demarcation12, that is, appealing to Bachelardian epis-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 177 
temic discontinuity in order to guarantee, as it were, the distinction between sci-
ence and ideology and to produce a theory of this very distinction. In a second 
moment, Althusser withdraws materialist philosophy from this epistemological 
debate and from theories of knowledge as such. This withdrawal no doubt cor-
responds directly to Althusser’s later claim in his explicitly self-critical texts that 
“philosophy is, in the last instance, class struggle in theory,”13 leading some to argue 
that this new politicized theory of philosophy “formalised the shift away from 
Bachelardian epistemology”14 while others used it as proof for the claim that 
“there never was an Althusserian epistemology.”15 
But, on the contrary, what I intend to show is that this redefinition of philosophy 
as class struggle in theory in fact signals a rapprochement between Althusser and 
Bachelard, and not the former’s abandonment of the latter. What will hopefully 
become clear is that Althusser paradoxically is able to ally himself more closely 
with Bachelard at precisely the moment when his initial philosophical project, the 
one propped up most explicitly by an appeal to Bachelard’s authority, collapses. 
By turning to recently published archival material, I aim to show that the Bach-
elard that Althusser initially constructed in fact evolved over the course of two 
decades.
Perhaps Althusser only became a faithful student of Bachelard over the course of 
many years and after laborious reformulations of his philosophical approach. And 
yet the culmination of Althusser’s engagement with Bachelard results in a kind of 
deconstruction of the classical problems of epistemology, what Badiou will call a 
“de-epistemologization of philosophy.”16 Tracking this désépistémologisation de la 
philosophie is precisely what I intend to do in the following sections by following 
the place of Bachelard in the development of Althusser’s thought from 1965 to the 
recently published manuscripts drafted in the late 1970s.
THE ROLE OF BACHELARD IN ALTHUSSER’S THÉORIE PROJECT
The explosion althussérienne17, as François Dosse has called it, was fully underway 
in 1965 when Althusser published his two most well-known works, Pour Marx and 
Lire le Capital, in a new collection he was directing at the radical left-wing publish-
ing house François Maspero. The new collection, bearing the name Théorie, was 
no doubt intended to be a larger platform for the philosophical research Althusser 
himself was inaugurating in the two aforementioned works. What exactly was the 
goal of this new philosophical undertaking? Althusser explains the Théorie proj-

178 · david maruzzella  
ect in two places. First, in a short text included on the back cover of the original 
French editions of Pour Marx and Lire le Capital, Althusser explains that the Théo-
rie collection will include texts and essays that will seek to define and explore “the 
field of a philosophy conceived of as Theory of the production of knowledges” 
and it is to be both “critical and positive.” Critical insofar as it will attempt to 
establish a non-idealist philosophical position and positive to the extent that it 
will propose categories “suited to think the forms and modes of the process of the 
production of knowledges.” This will in turn require a “theory of the structure of 
theoretical practice” and its difference from other practices, a “theory of the his-
tory of the production of knowledges” and its difference from other histories, and 
finally a “theory of the structure and the history of non-theoretical practices upon 
which theoretical practice is articulated.” 
This three part theory—theory of theoretical practices, theory of the history of 
the production of knowledges, and theory of the structure and history of non-
theoretical practices—is in fact already contained in Marx’s work. Dialectical ma-
terialism, as any Marxist knows, is the official name of this “new philosophical 
project.” However, as Althusser often points out, Marx devoted more time to the 
development of historical materialism and less time to developing the philosophy 
of dialectical materialism, which is left in l’état pratique in works like Capital. But 
the Théorie collection is also greatly inspired by “a certain number of original 
works in epistemology” as well as works on the history of ideologies and the his-
tory of knowledge and scientific research. This new collection will ultimately be 
the site of an encounter, une rencontre, of mutual “examination, exchange, and con-
frontation” between Marxism and certain works in epistemology and the history 
of science, which Althusser claims are from this point forward, indispensable to 
one another. 
Second, Althusser adds one crucial clarification to this understanding of the Théo-
rie project in a short section of Pour Marx, which is not included in the English 
translation. In a page-long text that appears between the introduction to Pour 
Marx and the book’s first chapter, Althusser explains why he has chosen to adopt 
the term Théorie. He writes, “the article on the Materialist Dialectic [sic] propos-
es the term Theory (with an uppercase) in order to designate Marxist ‘philoso-
phy’ (dialectical materialism)—and reserves the term philosophy for ideological 
philosophies.”18 There is, however, as Althusser himself notes, a precedent for 
adopting this terminology. Althusser rather confusingly quotes Engels in what he 
calls “his first preface to Anti-Dühring,” by which he means what is today known as 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 179 
“The Old Preface to Anti-Dühring” or as “On Dialectics,” first published in 1925 as 
part of Dialectics of Nature. Engels writes: “If theoreticians are semi-initiates in the 
sphere of natural science, then natural scientists today are actually just as much 
so in the sphere of theory, in the sphere of what hitherto was called philosophy.”19 The 
emphasis here seems to be Althusser’s20 and he immediately follows up this quo-
tation with commentary that reads: “This remark proves that Engels had felt the 
need to inscribe in a terminological difference the difference that separates ideo-
logical philosophies from Marx’s absolutely new philosophical project.”21 A termi-
nological difference is thus needed to account for a real theoretical difference, the 
difference that separates ideological philosophy from the “scientific philosophy 
founded by Marx.”22 
This is then the point at which Bachelard comes into play. Althusser, as announced 
in two introductory places in his seminal work, has proposed a terminological 
difference in order to account for what he insists is a profound theoretical differ-
ence between Marx and his predecessors. Théorie indicates that philosophy as it 
has been understood and practiced since its inception must, in light of Marx, be 
radically transformed. What is important, however, is that Althusser is not claim-
ing that philosophy post-Marx need simply be replaced by revolutionary practice 
or class struggle, but rather that philosophy is itself a theoretical practice and in 
turn needs to be revolutionized and nourished by Marx’s theoretical discoveries. 
Indeed, this is the task of Pour Marx: to develop in the French idiom a distinc-
tive contribution to Marxist philosophy.23 And Althusser’s wager is precisely that 
Marxist philosophy is qualitatively different from previous philosophical systems. 
Marx’s philosophy is scientific whereas all previous philosophies are ideological. 
This qualitative difference or “specific difference…thus takes on the form of the 
question of knowing whether or not in the intellectual development of Marx there 
existed an epistemological break [coupure épistémologique] marking the emergence 
[surgissement] of a new conception of philosophy.”24 Immediately following this 
loose invocation of Bachelard, Althusser claims that a Marxist theory and method 
will be crucial in locating the site of this break: “without a theory of the history of 
theoretical formations we would not be able to grasp and designate the specific 
differences that distinguishes two different theoretical formations.”25 Now comes 
the first mention of Bachelard in the book. Althusser tells us that his usage of the 
concept26 “epistemological break” is owed to Gaston Bachelard while the concept 
“problematic” comes from his friend Jacques Martin, despite the clear Bachelard-
ian origins and resonances of the term.27 In order to give an account of the specific 
difference between the scientific concepts put to work by Marx in Capital and the 

180 · david maruzzella  
ideological pre-history with which Marx broke, Althusser believed:
it possible to borrow for this purpose the concept of ‘problematic’ from 
Jacques Martin to designate the particular unity of a theoretical formation 
and hence the location to be assigned to this specific difference, and the 
concept of an ‘epistemological break’ from Gaston Bachelard to designate 
the mutation in the theoretical problematic contemporary with the foun-
dation of a scientific discipline.28
Althusser’s project during this early period, as described by the young Jean-Luc 
Nancy, “is not any different than the Bachelardian analysis of the constitutions of 
modern physics, or the works of Koyré.”29 Indeed, Althusser endeavors to show 
that with Marx the theoretical problematic shifts, old philosophical questions are 
displaced, new concepts are produced and are in need of elaboration—a material-
ist dialectic that is essentially overdetermined, a theory of structural causality, a 
new theory of ideology, etc. Engels too, in his introduction to the second volume 
of Capital, underlines precisely that the history of science is defined by mutations 
and discontinuities. Marx’s discoveries in the field of political economy are analo-
gous to Lavoisier’s discovery-production of oxygen, which led to the overturning 
of the phlogiston theory and the birth of modern chemistry.30 Just as Bachelard 
claims that “There is thus no transition between Newton’s system and Einstein’s 
system. We do not go from the former to the latter by amassing knowledges, dou-
ble checking measurements, lightly rectifying principles. What is necessary, on the 
contrary, is an effort of total novelty,”31 Althusser too insists in Lire le Capital that 
with Marx we witness “the absolute beginning of the history of a science.”32 En-
gels is then, according to Althusser’s reading, a proto-historical epistemologist to 
the extent that he shows how an apparently circumscribed scientific problematic 
(phlogiston theory, bourgeois political economy) can give rise to an absolutely 
discontinuous new problematic that restructures the entire scientific field. Pour 
Marx, it might be said, attempts to establish the specific difference or rupture 
between dialectical materialism and previous philosophical systems (Feuerbach, 
Hegel), while Lire le Capital performs the same operation with respect to histori-
cal materialism by inquiring into the specific difference that separates Marx from 
the classical economists. Marx formulates the questions to which the bourgeois 
economists gave answers despite themselves, without realizing that the terms 
and stakes of the investigation must be fundamentally changed. The theory of 
symptomatic reading33 introduced by Althusser at this point in his exposé is meant 
to help detect these changes in theoretical problematics, but is never developed 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 181 
beyond the introduction to Lire le Capital.
Where would Althusser have found inspiration for such claims in Bachelard’s 
work? Althusser never gives any precise references to specific passages in Bach-
elard, but perhaps he had in mind the final chapter of Le matérialisme rationnel: 
“We believe,” Bachelard writes, “that scientific progress always displays a rup-
ture, perpetual ruptures, between common knowledge and scientific knowledge, 
as soon as we approach an evolved science, a science which, due to the very fact 
of these ruptures, bears the marks of modernity.”34 Reading this passage along-
side the one cited above where Bachelard describes a kind of incommensurability 
between the systems of Einstein and Newton, it becomes clear that “rupture” 
might here have a double sense: on the one hand, there are ruptures, to greater 
or lesser degrees, between different scientific theories, between different con-
ceptual systems. In the example given above by Bachelard, it might be said that 
there is a rupture between Einstein and Newton, but also that Einstein’s theory 
restructures, redefines, and recasts the terms of Newton’s theory. On the other 
hand, there is another rupture, this time more absolute, between what Bachelard 
calls common knowledge and scientific knowledge. In short, science is, in this 
view, defined essentially by a break with everyday experience, immediate percep-
tion, and common notions. Bachelard of course also sought to analyze the way in 
which our ordinary experience crystalizes into images that in turn block the path 
of science, producing what he called “epistemological obstacles.”35 The history of 
science is then neither linear in a crude empiricist sense—science does not sim-
ply function by accumulating observations about an unchanging external reality 
nor is it the slow unveiling of pre-given truths—and a science’s development is 
impossible without the active intervention of concepts and techniques, without 
an applied rationalism and a technical materialism.36 This second sense of rupture 
even helps to make sense of Althusser’s famous theoretical anti-humanism: does 
not Althusser, like Bachelard, simply wish to say, by way of this polemical turn of 
phrase, that knowledge can never be the result of immediacy? Or as Bachelard 
put it, “when we turn towards ourselves, we turn away from the truth. When we 
have intimate experiences, we fatally contradict objective experience.”37 In oth-
er words, Marx does not produce the theory of the capitalist mode of produc-
tion, that is, knowledge concerning a particular theoretical object, by appealing 
to first person experience, immediate perception, or to an uncriticized notion of 
“man”, but rather arrives at knowledge of this later by way the detour of theory: 
“These men [real men] are thus the point of arrival of an analysis that begins with 
the social relations of an existing mode of production, class relations, and the 

182 · david maruzzella  
class struggle.”38 Science begins only by a step beyond immediate sensible experi-
ence, beyond what is given to consciousness. The phrase scientific knowledge is, 
as Georges Canguilhem remarked, a pleonasm since there is nothing scientific 
nor objective in pre-theoretical knowledge and our everyday experience of the 
world.39 In the world of phenomenological experience there is only error. In the 
language of Althusser, we might say that science begins by breaking with ideology 
and never ceases, beginning with this initial rupture, to break with itself. On this 
point Althusser and Bachelard certainly seem to converge.
Two points merit being addressed here concerning how Althusser transforms 
Bachelard’s thought. The first concerns Althusser’s claim, in Pour Marx and in 
contemporaneous texts40, that Marx, unlike others who inaugurated scientific 
revolutions before him (the birth of Mathematics in the ancient world, Galileo, 
Newton, Lavoisier)41, in fact founded two distinct sciences, Historical Materialism 
and Dialectical Materialism. Indeed, as was suggested above, Althusser is claim-
ing that with Marx philosophy becomes a scientific discipline for the the first time 
in history. Althusser writes in “Matérialisme historique et matérialisme dialec-
tique”, an untranslated text from 1966, that “Marx’s philosophy occupies a place 
of exception in the history of philosophy,” that is, like a science breaking with its 
ideological pre-history, Marx’s philosophy “presents this unique characteristic in 
the history of philosophy of breaking with this ideological past, and installing phi-
losophy on new bases, which confer to it a character of objectivity and theoretical 
rigor comparable at every point to that of a science.”42 The details of what exactly 
Althusser means by this claim is admittedly not always clear, but he suggests that 
it is Marxism’s discovery of the continent of history and the development of his-
torical materialism that allows Marxist philosophy to take the place of idealist 
theories of knowledge that, by their ignorance of the history of the production of 
knowledges, were doomed to “lack and mask the reality of history.”43
Now this claim that Marx founded both a science of history and a scientific philos-
ophy goes against the spirt and the letter of Bachelard’s project. Indeed, nowhere 
does Bachelard suggest that philosophy has or will ever itself become a unique 
scientific discipline. On the contrary, as Dominique Lecourt shows in his master’s 
thesis published in 1969 as L’épistémologie historique de Gaston Bachelard, Bachelard 
never tires of ridiculing philosophers who have failed to appreciate the innovative 
conceptual power of the sciences to displace classical philosophical problems. 
The philosopher, by and large, tends towards a double obfuscation of scientific 
practices. On the one hand, philosophers ignore the conceptual function of words 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 183 
like “space”, “time”, “substance”, and “matter” in the scientific contexts in which 
they are produced.44 On the other hand, philosophy “wishes with science to get 
to the bottom of things. And in order to do so, it searches for origins. It returns 
to the rudimentary…and little by little introduces into the philosophy of sciences 
the most fully entrenched axioms of the philosophy of knowledge: the axiom that 
would have it that the primitive be always the fundamental.”45 Bachelard, against 
the ontologizing and fundamentalist ambitions of the philosopher of immediate 
experience and intuitive knowledge, precisely sought to se met à l’école des sci-
ences, that is, to produce a philosophy subtle enough to be thoroughly informed 
by the scientific breakthroughs of the 20th century. “Science does not yet have 
the philosophy it deserves,”46 writes Bachelard in the opening chapter of Le maté-
rialisme rationnel, and Althusser, for his part, is suggesting that with the advent of 
Marx’s dialectical materialism that philosophy is finally in a place to authentically 
understand the history of science conceived of as the history of the production of 
knowledges. Dialectical materialism is, in other words, the philosophy that science 
deserves. 
Combined with Marxism’s historical analysis, Althusser no doubt thought it pos-
sible to develop a non-empiricist epistemology combined with a non-teleological 
history of scientific practices that would be able theorize the sciences as distinct 
historical theoretical practices that produce knowledges according to the imma-
nent norms of their proper development without the need to appeal to external 
or extra-scientific criteria of truth. In this way, Althusser believes himself to have 
displaced all of the classical problems of epistemology or theories of knowledge. 
By classical problems of epistemology and theories of knowledge, Althusser has 
in mind a number of different philosophical positions. He explains in the recently 
published Initiation à la philosophie pour les non-philosophes, in a chapter entitled 
“Scientific Practice and Idealism”, that empiricism, formalism, and neo-positiv-
ism all share a common philosophical problematic, namely, they all attempt, from 
a position external to the scientific practice itself, to produce “guarantees” for 
the validity and objectivity of scientific knowledge, and in so doing, they presup-
pose the prior existence of certain necessary conditions of possibility and forms 
of experimentation that govern scientific practice. Philosophers then control and 
determine the validity and limits of scientific practice from an external position 
of authority. This externality, Althusser claims, has a precise political function as 
well: “The philosophical guarantee of science has changed its meaning; instead of 
basically serving the liberation of the sciences and of men, it becomes a principle 
of the authority of order.”47 Essentially a philosophy of order, the various strands 

184 · david maruzzella  
of idealism all seek to define, delimit, and control scientific practice (and political 
practice) by defining in advance the validity of certain forms of practice. 
Materialism, on the contrary, seeks neither to prescribe forms nor to produce 
speculative guarantees for the content of particular practices. Instead, by con-
ceiving of knowledge as the effect or result of distinct theoretical practices, as what 
is produced in and by thought by way of a process of conceptual labor—this is 
Althusser’s famous reading of Marx’s 1857 Introduction48—Marxist philosophy is 
able to open up a new philosophical problematic distinct from that of the tran-
scendental a priori conditions of the possibility of knowledge and experience 
(Kant) and that of the knowing subject (the ego cogito in Descartes or Husserl). 
Replacing it with a new set of questions and problems, in particular, the material-
ist epistemological question par excellence becomes thus: 
by what mechanism does the process of knowledge, which takes place entirely 
in thought, produce the cognitive appropriation of its real object, which exists 
outside of thought in the real world? Or again, by what mechanism does the 
production of the object of knowledge produce the cognitive appropriation of the 
real object, which exists outside of thought in the real world?49
In addition, this materialist epistemological question is inserted into a historical 
problematic. Althusser writes, for example, in a text from April 1965 that:
The object of dialectical materialism is constituted by what Engels calls 
‘the history of thought’, or what Lenin calls the history of the ‘passage 
from ignorance to knowledge’, or what we can call the history of the pro-
duction of knowledges—or yet again, the historical difference between 
ideology and science, or the specific difference of scientificity—all prob-
lems that broadly cover the domain called by classical philosophy the ‘the-
ory of knowledge.50
Dialectical materialism both can help to address questions about how thought is 
capable, by means of a purely immanent process, of producing knowledge of the 
real. That is to say, as Nicos Poulantzas explains, “…producing the most concrete 
concepts, that is to say concepts that are the richest in theoretical determina-
tions, which allow for the knowledge of real objects, concrete and singular”51 and 
permitting an historical understanding of how the distinction between science 
and ideology plays out in particular conjunctures. Indeed, Althusser writes in 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 185 
the opening text of Lire le Capital that “Marx was only able to become Marx by 
founding a theory of history and a philosophy of the distinction between science 
and ideology.”52 Althusser, then, it might be said, hopes to use Marx’s materialist 
analysis of history in order to more fully flesh out a general theory of epistemo-
logical breaks or ruptures, that is to say, to reconstruct elements of Bachelard’s 
epistemological project on the basis of historical materialism. 
This leads to the second point concerning the way in which Althusser transforms 
Bachelard. An important consequence that follows from integrating a theory of 
epistemological breaks into a materialist analysis of history is the need to pro-
duce a new theory of ideology. That is to say, a materialist theory of epistemological 
obstacles. Certainly one of Bachelard’s greatest merits was precisely to psychoana-
lyze objective knowledge, that is, to refuse to see the history of science as quaran-
tined off once and for all from the intrusion of non-scientific elements53, to argue 
that for the scientific mind that “Nothing goes without saying. Nothing is given. 
Everything is constructed.”54 Science requires perpetual effort and transforma-
tion, a constant vigilance, hence why Bachelard will claim that the philosophical 
rationalism that ought to accompany scientific practice is always at the order of 
a recommencement.55 And so if Bachelard seems to affirm, in his own way, that 
knowledge must be conceived of as an historical production, one shortcoming of 
Bachelard’s thought seems to be that the idea of epistemological obstacles is nev-
er put onto a materialist basis. Dominique Lecourt writes, for example, “It must 
be candidly stated: all that enables Bachelard to think the necessity of the ‘epis-
temological obstacles’ is a certain conception of the human soul which roots the 
‘imaginary relationship’ in the imaginary images produced by the imagination.”56 
In other words, Bachelard has yet to produce a materialist theory of ideology, one 
wherein the epistemological obstacle belongs not to the psyche of the individual 
scientist or some atemporal human nature, but is rather theorized as an instance 
in the social formation.57 
BACHELARD AS AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBSTACLE
As I hope to have shown in the previous section, Althusser’s two 1965 publica-
tions, which sought to reinvigorate Marxist dialectical materialism—re-baptizing 
it as Théorie so as to mark its qualitative difference from all previous philosophical 
inquiry—results in its identification with an historical epistemology as well as in 
Althusser’s more elliptical claim that this encounter of Marxism with the works 
of Cavaillès, Bachelard, Koyré, Canguilhem, and Foucault will aid in securing the 

186 · david maruzzella  
scientific credentials of both historical and dialectical materialism. It should of 
course be noted here that Althusser’s argument is explicitly circular and he ad-
mits as much. In order to read Marx we must have at our disposal “a Marxist 
theory of the differential nature of theoretical formations and their history, that 
is to say a theory of epistemological history, which is Marxist philosophy itself.”58 
Echoing this point Pierre Macherey writes in his contribution to Lire le Capital:
Philosophy is nothing other than knowledge of the history of sciences. 
Philosophers are today those who produce the history of theories, and at 
the same time the theory of this history. The problematic of philosophy is 
thus double, but not divided: to philosophize is to study in what conditions 
and on what conditions scientific problems are posed. For a materialist, 
these conditions are not purely theoretical: they are first of all objective 
and practical.59
Again, the circularity or double aspect of Marxist philosophy—Althusser suggests 
at one point that this is in fact what makes it dialectical60—implies that, employing 
the concept of history elaborated in historical materialism, it will be able to give a 
rigorous account of the historical production of knowledges and their difference 
from ideologies. This can then in turn be applied to historical materialism in or-
der to show the shift in problematic from classical bourgeois economy to Marx’s 
Capital and to dialectical materialism in order to show the shift in problematic 
from mechanical materialism and idealist dialectics to Marx’s new historical ma-
terialist epistemological problematic. In other words, by claiming that Marxist 
philosophy is founded precisely on theorizing the historical difference between 
science and ideology, Althusser believes that he has proven, in some sense, that 
both historical and dialectical materialism have earned the title of science. Their 
retrospective differences with respect to previous theories allows us to draw a 
line of demarcation between science and ideology.
Yet there is precisely a contradiction at the heart of Althusser’s attempt to use 
Bachelard to help establish both the scientificity of Marxism and to develop the 
theory of the specific difference between science and ideology that essentially 
defines Marxist philosophy. The problem is not simply that Bachelard nowhere 
treats Marxism as a science and devoted none of his efforts to establishing its his-
torical emergence as a unique scientific discourse—focusing instead on physics, 
chemistry, and mathematics—but rather that nowhere does Bachelard attempt 
to develop a general theory of scientificity, that is, a general theory of the differ-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 187 
ence between science and ideology, science and non-science. Furthermore, in the 
absence of such a theory, Bachelard never seeks to prove scientificity by seeing 
particular sciences as evidence for the validity of his general theory, but rather, 
he seeks to reorient philosophy in the light of the development of particular sci-
ences, demanding that philosophers reform their ontologizing and foundational-
ist projects alongside and after the sciences recast and transform their concepts 
and problematics. 
For Bachelard then, science leads the way and philosophers should follow, not the 
other way around. And as the sciences become more specialized and plural, the 
more it is necessary for philosophy to abandon its attempts at hierarchizing and 
systematizing knowledge into one coherent over-arching system. If there ever 
was ever a Bachelardian revolution in philosophy, it lies precisely in this reversal 
of determination and the demand that a scientifically enlightened philosophy be 
produced, one attuned to the complexities and subtleties of contemporary phys-
ics, chemistry, and mathematics: “When everything changes in culture, and meth-
ods and objects, we might be surprised that philosophical immobility is valued. 
Such a philosopher who at 60 years of age that he is still defending the claim he 
defended 30 years ago. The entire career of certain philosophers today is thus a 
‘constant defense.’”61 Philosophers, for Bachelard, would do well to stop defend-
ing their tried and true positions and instead open themselves up to a productive 
dialogue with the sciences. Though Althusser seems to affirm this view through-
out his work, it is arguably nothing other than this idiosyncratic use of Bachelard 
that creates a kind of epistemological obstacle for Althusser, an obstacle that he will 
have to address directly in the years following Pour Marx and Lire le Capital. In 
fact, it is only in subsequent texts that Althusser will claim that philosophy exists 
in the wake of scientific and political revolutions, that is, that philosophy is condi-
tioned by science and politics.
Étienne Balibar directly addresses these problems in his 1977 talk “The Concept of 
Epistemological Break from Bachelard to Althusser.” There, Balibar suggests that 
the appeal to Bachelard indeed feels like an attempt to guarantee the scientificity 
of Marxism—keeping in mind that Althusser’s materialist epistemology appeared 
not to concern itself with guarantees or juridical (transcendental) questions62, 
but only sought to understand the mechanism by which thought produced knowl-
edge of the real. In other words, the appeal to Bachelardian epistemic discontinu-
ity becomes for Althusser a kind of argument by analogy that Althusser imports 
into his discussion of Marx. In turn, Althusser seeks a kind of external guarantee 

188 · david maruzzella  
or verification for the scientificity of Marxism in the figure of Bachelard, that is to 
say, in something extrinsic to the scientific theoretical practice itself:
We can then no longer escape, in one form or another, the hypothesis of 
an essence of Science [LA science], the object of a general Theory that can-
not be absolutely distinguished from a theory of knowledge or a Science 
of sciences (even though Althusser directs his whole polemic against such 
an idea…we might even ask ourselves if…the concept of ‘epistemological 
break’ is not for Althusser an ad hoc concept intended in advance to include 
Marxism (and psychoanalysis) in the field of science.63
By making use of the category of rupture or break in this way, Althusser tried to 
formalize a general theory of breaks that would itself be inscribed in the a general 
theory of the history of sciences conceived of as an historical process of the pro-
duction of knowledges.
And yet it is this appeal that directly violates, on Althusser’s own terms, one of 
the crucial aspects of Bachelard’s thought that he also defends in the same breath, 
namely, the requirement that a science’s criterion of truth and validity be purely 
immanent to its operation. As Alain Badiou rightly points out, “Althusser is truly 
an immanentist thinker, at every level of its determination. A truth of a theory—if 
truth exists, if there is something like truth—lies purely within the theoretical 
process, inside the process of scientific theory and not in the value of an exter-
nal guarantee.”64 After all, Althusser, again reasoning analogically, writes in Lire 
le Capital that “No mathematician waits for physics, where entire parts of math-
ematics are applied, to have verified a theorem in order to claim that it has been 
demonstrated: the ‘truth’ of the theorem is supplied to it 100% by criteria purely 
internal to the practice of mathematical demonstration, thus by the criteria of the 
mathematical practice.”65 Mathematics needs nothing other than itself to legiti-
mize itself, its criteria of truth and normativity are strictly internal to its practice 
and rely neither upon empirical verification or falsification nor upon any other 
discourse, such as physics.
But the Théorie project, for all its talk of immanence and internal criteria of truth, 
and despite its attempts to defend the practice of sciences against appeals to tran-
scendental conditions of possibility and empiricist theories of knowledge that 
seek to ground scientific practice in verification or falsification procedures—what 
Althusser calls pragmatism66—ultimately seems to be propped up by the impor-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 189 
tation of the Bachelardian theme of discontinuity as the marker, indeed the hall-
mark, of the birth of a science.
To my mind, to put it a rather schematically, Althusser has indeed transposed the 
Bachelardian language of rupture and break into a context—the political-polem-
ical not to mention theoretical context of defending the scientificity and novelty 
of Marx—where this very notion serves a function incompatible with Bachelard’s 
project, that is to say, Althusser sees in the category of “epistemological break” 
the possibility of producing, to borrow an expression from Karl Popper, a “criteri-
on of demarcation.” In order to distinguish between science and pseudo-science, 
to exclude Marxism and Psychoanalysis from the kingdom of science, Popper fa-
mously argued that a science must specify the conditions under which crucial 
experiments might come to falsify the conjectures that define a scientific theory. 
Despite the explanatory power of Marxism and its apparent systematic coher-
ence, it, like Freudianism and Adlerian individual psychology, seemed to be able 
to explain everything and saw every event as a confirmation of an overarching 
theory that could not be disproven.67 
Without entering into the details here, it seems to me that Popper and Althusser 
are in agreement up to a certain point: a science can never be a theory of every-
thing, but rather must produce knowledge of a particular object. For Althusser, 
what is most important is that the object be constructed in theory—and Althusser 
is quite clear that Marxism, at least historical materialism, produces knowledge 
of the theoretical object known as the “capitalist mode of production”68—and not 
confused with real objects existing in the world.69 Popper, however, implicitly re-
mains an empiricist—despite his attempts, for example, in his response to Kuhn70 
where he argues that he always maintained that scientists work within a particu-
lar paradigm or “problem situation” and thus maintains that sciences construct 
their objects in some sense—since he explicitly establishes himself in the wake 
of Hume’s problem of induction: given that I am limited to my experience, I can 
never exhaustively verify or confirm a given scientific theory, but at the very least 
I can hope to falsify it. Though Popper’s reversal here is no doubt innovative, it 
still relies essentially upon the finitude of the knowing subject whose represen-
tations limit it to the domain of experience from which it cannot be extracted.71 
Science post-Hume is then not hopeless, rather, it simply does not proceed in-
ductively and by way of verification, but deductively and negatively, by way of 
falsification. Falsification can thus finally be elevated to demarcate or distinguish 
between science and non-science. The explanatory power of Marxism might be 

190 · david maruzzella  
interesting, but it is certainly cannot be considered scientific if its practitioners 
cling to it dogmatically.72
For Althusser, however, demarcation, if we can rightly call it that, takes the form 
of a historical process, which is already many steps beyond the rigidity of falsifica-
tion, a notion that many, including Thomas Kuhn have criticized as being an un-
tenable and unfounded in the history of science.73 All theories are falsified all the 
time, especially when they are first introduced.74 Bachelard masterfully articulates 
this point: “All knowledge at the moment of its construction is polemical knowl-
edge [i.e. neither falsified nor verified]; it must first destroy to clear a space for its 
constructions.”75 Althusser’s historical process of demarcation is above all retro-
spective, which means, unlike Popper, we cannot appeal to one eternal criterion, 
“methodological falsification,” which would allow us to know in advance which 
theories are scientific and which are not. The field of differences and distances 
that relate sciences and ideologies is never determined once and for all and is 
above all polemic, defined by relations of forces and shifting conjunctures leaving 
open the possibility of new forms of rationality. In a 1967 article, “The Humanist 
Controversy,” Althusser most explicitly explains the nuances of his thinking on 
this question:
The ideology/science opposition is thus always based on a retrospection or 
recurrence. It is the existence of science itself which establishes the ‘break’ 
in the history of theories which can then serve as the grounds for declaring 
the prehistory of science ideological. This break and this retrospection are, 
however, the correlatives of a real process, that of the constitution of sci-
ence (born in ideology) through theoretical work  that leads up to a criti-
cal point which explodes in a break, instituting the new field in which the 
science will establish itself. Whence a paradox: science is plainly born of 
ideology and in ideology—yet the ideology of which science is born as it 
tears itself away from ideology can be given the name ideology only by the 
science born of it and separated from it.76
Critics, and there are still many, who accuse Althusser of a rigid and clean distinc-
tion between science and ideology would do well to read this important passage.77 
The “post-structuralist” critique, in many ways influenced by Rancière, that all 
sciences are ideologies or that there is ultimately no way to differentiate between 
the two, was already anticipated by Althusser: the sciences swim perpetually in 
ideology and yet still remain irreducible to it to the extent that scientific practice 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 191 
produces effects of knowledge distinct from ideology’s effects of recognition. In 
other words, there is still something, some excess or rather, some effect that sci-
ence produces that ideology, strictly speaking, cannot. And in this sense, it is not 
clear that the distinction science/ideology directly maps onto the distinction sci-
ence/non-science; ideology is not the opposite of science, but rather a different 
practice occupying a different theoretical space.78 Everything hangs on this dis-
tinction between opposition and difference.
But to return to Balibar’s point, we must insist on the question: does Althusser 
simply make use of Bachelard’s terminology merely to produce a definition of sci-
ence that would include, against the prohibitions of Popper, Marxism and Psycho-
analysis? Yes and no. This very tension traverses two important texts by Étienne 
Balibar that justify our hesitant response. In a 1988 article “Coupure et refont: 
l’effet de vérité des sciences dans l’idéologie,” Balibar distinguishes Althusser’s 
project from Popper’s: “Far from being able to disintricate them in advance, the 
concepts of science and those of ideology only begin to exist after the fact of the 
break.”79 Against Popper, as we have already seen, nothing comes before the break 
and the demarcation between science and ideology is strictly retrospective. Thus 
for Balibar, if nothing comes before the break that distributes and redistributes 
the positions assigned to sciences and ideologies, then Althusser’s problematic 
has nothing in common with Popper’s. Yet, in Balibar’s earlier article on the con-
cept of epistemological break, he is forced to admit that despite Althusser’s best 
efforts that he remains “caught in the relation of the specular ‘guarantee’ that he 
never ceased to describe: in order to be able to think the ‘epistemological break’ of 
Marx, he had to anticipate its form by invoking the epistemological breaks typical 
of mathematics, physics, and chemistry…‘Bachelard’ is then the guarantor of this non 
critical anticipation.”80 In other words, Althusser’s argument in this period reasons 
by analogy and assumes that the breaks that define the history of mathematics, 
physics, and chemistry can simply be identified in the formation of all sciences, 
including Marxism and Psychoanalysis. Althusser, in other words, might have, de-
spite himself, produced the very philosophy of immobility that Bachelard never 
ceased to decry. 
On the one hand, it appears that Althusser transforms Popper’s problematic by 
making the the science/ideology distinction the result of an immanent and histor-
ical process where the two terms do not pre-exist their retrospective distinction. 
On the other hand, in order to establish this distinction, even minimally, and even 
if it only is produced après coup, after the break, Althusser needs the category of 

192 · david maruzzella  
epistemological break he borrows from Bachelard to guarantee scientificity. If one 
can locate a break between two theories then one has successfully baptized a new 
science. This ultimately requires the intervention of a historical epistemologist, 
in this case Althusser, capable of reconstructing the historical process by which 
the new science is born out of an ideological configuration, subsequently making 
the ideology appear, for the first time, as ideological. In the same text that was 
cited above where Althusser provides a sophisticated account of retrospection, he 
writes that “If Marx had not produced the new concepts appropriate for thinking 
the objects of his discovery, we would not be able to pronounce the Judgement of 
ideology that we apply to the notions with which he had to break.”81 It is Althusser 
here who capitalizes the J in Judgement and insists that it is indeed a question of a 
retrospective judgement that is capable of identifying ideology in the theories with 
which Marx broke on the basis of Marx’s new scientific concepts. Again, to even 
distinguish minimally between science and ideology one must have recourse to a 
judgement, which in turn presupposes a criterion of demarcation. It is worth re-
calling that the Greek kriterion means principle, element of reference that permits 
adjudication, estimation, or the defining of something as well as, in mathematics, 
a practical method permitting one to very if a mathematical object possess or not 
a determinate property. Marxism’s scientificity is thus in the hands of dialectical 
materialism, that is, in the hands of philosophy, and not immanent to its theoreti-
cal practice.
ALTHUSSER’S DECONSTRUCTION OF EPISTEMOLOGY
What I would like to propose in this final section is that, if Althusser wants to de-
fend a theory of science wherein normativity and a knowledge producing power 
are immanent to scientific practice while maintaining that Marxism is a science, 
then what needs to change is precisely Althusser’s definition of philosophy as 
Théorie. In turn, he must, on his own terms, renounce both that Marxist dialecti-
cal materialism is a scientific philosophy and that Marxist philosophy, scientific or 
otherwise, takes as its object the historical difference between science and ideol-
ogy. This, I maintain, is the major focus of Althusser’s self-critical period and is 
the only way to begin to understand Althusser’s subsequent writings such as the 
1968 talk “Lenin and Philosophy” and its final claim that Marxism is not a new 
philosophy of practice—indeed, from now on there is no such thing as a new 
philosophy for Althusser—but a new practice of philosophy.82 Far from being “the 
most obscure and sterile moment of Althusserianism,”83 “the least profound text 
Althusser ever published”84, or “sheer non-sense,”85 Althusser’s re-discovery of 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 193 
Lenin’s philosophical writings is the necessary philosophical adjustment needed 
to escape the aporias of Théorie. Though many associate this Kehre with the pub-
lication of Éléments d’autocritique in 1974, Althusser, in many places, indicates that 
he in fact began questioning the efficacy of the Théorie project as early as the au-
tumn of 1967. Indeed, it could easily be shown that the self-critical phase begins 
with Althusser’s “Philosophy Course for Scientists,” a lecture series he held at the 
École Normale Superieure during the 1967-68 academic year (not published, and 
only partially, until 1974) and which marked an important shift in the Althusserian 
theory of science and its relationship to philosophy.
What is essential in this period is that Althusser fundamentally changes his defi-
nition of philosophy. No longer is Marxist philosophy concerned with answering 
epistemological questions such as the one posed at the end of the introduction 
to Lire le Captail, namely, the supposedly materialist question of the cognitive 
mechanism by which thought grasps the real in thought, nor does it attempt to 
produce a general theory of science and scientificity (the passage from ignorance 
to knowledge), rather, philosophy is henceforth defined as a distinct theoretical 
practice without an object, and will later become nothing other than class strug-
gle in theory, the continuation of the proletarian class struggle in the domain of 
theory. If philosophy no longer produces a general theory of science it is because 
philosophy now defends the scientificity of science in the class struggle in theo-
ry—like in Bachelard, philosophy for Althusser becomes essentially polemical and 
functions by drawing lines of demarcation between idealist and materialists the-
ses. Thesis 20 of Althusser’s course reads: “Philosophy has as its major function to 
trace lines of demarcation between the ideological of ideologies on the one hand, 
and the scientific of the sciences on the other hand.”86 This change of language is 
important even if subtle. Althusser’s claim is precisely that philosophy no longer 
produces a theory of scientificity and ideology in general, that its essential to task to 
is theorize the historical passage from ignorance to knowledge, but rather that 
philosophy is now said to intervene in the theoretical domain of the philosophical 
by drawing lines of demarcation or distinguishing between the scientific-ness of 
the sciences and the ideological-ness of ideologies. In other words, it mobilizes 
distinctions in a polemical theoretical field to produce certain effects, to produce 
a defense of scientificity against the ideological, but without producing a general 
epistemological theory or seeking philosophical guarantees for the legitimacy and 
validity external to scientific practice.87 As Giorgos Fourtounis writes, “Marxism’s 
epistemological claim can function epistemologically only as a thesis…and thus it 
is not submitted to a judgement that would operate by subsuming Marxism under 

194 · david maruzzella  
a general concept of science produced in turn by a philosophy external to it.”88
By producing a finally object-less philosophy, Althusser can begin to assume the 
materialist position he had been sketching throughout his earlier works against 
the juridical-epistemological position essential to idealism:
It is not by chance if, in order to respond to the ‘question of right’, the 
classical theory of knowledge puts to work a category like that of the 
‘subject’(from the Cartesion ego to the Kantian transcendental Subject 
and ‘concrete’ Husserlian transcendental subjects). This category is only 
the reprise, in the philosophical field, of the ideological notion of the ‘sub-
ject’, itself taken from the juridical category of the ‘subject of right’. And 
the couple ‘subject-object’, ‘the subject’ and ‘its’ object, only serve to re-
flect in the philosophical field, and within a properly philosophical mode, 
of the juridical categories of the ‘subject of right’, ‘owner’ of itself and of its 
goods (things). Thus ‘consciousness’ is the owner of itself (self-conscious-
ness), and of its goods (consciousness of its object, its objects)… From this 
analysis we will thus retain the following: the immense majority of phi-
losophies, whether religious, spiritualist or idealist, maintain a relation of 
exploitation with the sciences. This means: the sciences are never taken for 
what they really are… exploiters, in general, and not only in philosophy, 
never have the impression of being exploiters.89
It seems to me, that in such a passage, Althusser has re-oriented and re-adjusted 
his theory of philosophy—and important to Althusser’s thought in this period is 
the claim that philosophical theses are indemonstrable, neither true nor false, 
but rather ‘correct’ [justes]90—so as to let philosophy operate polemically, not in 
order to control or limit scientific practice, but rather to aid scientists in over-
coming their spontaneous philosophical prejudices. Materialism, though its his-
torical forms change91, always seeks to defend, and not prove, the real existence 
of diverse scientific practices producing knowledge of well-defined theoretical 
objects, while idealism searches for conditions of possibility, guarantees for the 
objectivity of knowledge, and poses insurmountable obstacles to what is know-
able, insisting on the finitude of the subject before an unknowable reality that 
constantly recedes from thought.92 Like Bachelard, Althusser is attempting to 
produce the philosophy that the sciences deserve, one that does not exploit them 
for the sake of practical ideologies, but rather is allied with them, that shares their 
values and interests. Philosophy intervenes in historically determined theoretical 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 195 
struggles and conjunctures in order to defend scientificity and objectivity with-
out producing epistemological theories. To take a position in theory, Althusser is 
suggesting, is thus always a political undertaking93, that it is to say, the representa-
tion of a class position within a specific conjuncture. Epistemology qua theory of 
knowledge, Althusser tells us in a long footnote of his Elements d’autocritique is 
an idealist undertaking by definition since it always attempts to justify the self-
legitimating and self-norming scientific practices in a discourse extrinsic to the 
scientific practice itself.94 Materialism, by refusing to see knowledge as a problem 
to be solved philosophically, displaces the classical epistemological problematic, 
making the objectivity and existence of scientific knowledge a thesis to be defend-
ed, not justified philosophically.
During this period, Althusser was no doubt influenced by the works of his young 
student, Dominique Lecourt, who was one of the first to systematically and ex-
plicitly spell out the theoretical kinship between Bachelard and Althusser. In re-
cently published manuscripts such as Initiation à la philosophie pour les non-phi-
losophes and Être marxiste en philosophie, Althusser positively cites Lecourt’s 1973 
book, Une crise et son enjeu, where Lecourt analyzes at length Lenin’s non-episte-
mological defense of scientific objectivity and his specific way of intervening into 
the class struggle in theory against the philosophical position known at the time 
as empirio-criticism. Led by Ernst Mach, the Austrian physicist and philosopher, 
empirio-criticism sought to marry idealism and materialism into a new episte-
mological and ontological theory. However, following Engel’s famous claim that 
the history of philosophy is an age-old struggle between idealism and material-
ism, Lenin, as read by Lecourt, shows how empirio-criticism is simply the wolf of 
idealism in sheep’s clothes—philosophy is thus this strange theoretical practice 
where every position is already accounted for, “every space in the first is already 
taken”95, and within which there appears to be no history other than “a history 
of the displacement of the indefinite repetition of a null trace whose effects are 
real.”96 For Lenin, Mach only re-packages and repeats Hume and Berkeley, forc-
ing Lenin to play the role of Diderot against them. There is then, no third way, no 
position outside of the struggle between materialism and idealism, and the task 
of dialectical materialism, is to affirm and defend the following theses in the fol-
lowing order: 1) being has primacy over thought, or the primacy of practice over 
thought 2) there are scientific practices that produce objective knowledge.97
Arguably Althusser too read Lenin’s Materialism and Empirio-Criticism seriously 
for the first time beginning in 1967, that is, after having complained to Franca 

196 · david maruzzella  
Madonia in a letter from December 1962 that he is “reading (rereading) Lenin’s 
theoretical texts philosophy. God, its weak.”98 This is the very same Lenin, and for 
that matter, Engels, that Althusser too quickly dismissed in his writings from the 
early 1960s99 with the single exception being a little-read article from 1964, which 
served as an introduction Pierre Macherey’s systematic reading of Georges Can-
guilhem in the article “Georges Canguilhem’s Philosophy of Science: Epistemol-
ogy and History of Science.” Here Althusser suggests that Lenin was the first to 
realize that rationalism need not be idealist, but might in fact be compatible with 
dialectical materialism.100 However, this new encounter with Lenin is absolutely 
crucial—Althusser suggests as much at the end of his second lecture in the course 
for scientists.101 It is as if, writes Warren Montag, “his earlier view of Lenin is not 
simply corrected or rejected in 1967-68, but is strangely reversed, as if Althusser’s 
initial denial of the perpetual war in and of philosophy simultaneously affirmed 
and denied the nature and stakes of this conflict, leaving them visible even as he 
crossed them out.”102
It is typically thought that Althusser wrote and published little during the 1970s, 
that is, after the events of May 1968, which cemented his status an intellectual 
out of touch with popular movements. The supposed silence on Althusser’s part 
is today being contested by the discovery and publication of complete manu-
scripts at the IMEC archives in Caen that Althusser had composed during this 
time. As the title of Lecourt’s second book already suggests—Pour une critique de 
l’épistémologie, for a critique of epistemology—there is something fundamentally 
incompatible about the classical project of epistemology and philosophical ma-
terialism, two opposing projects that Althusser once sought to unite by way of 
Bachelard. In the preface to the English edition of Lecourt’s early writings, Marx-
ism and Epistemology, Lecourt sketches an underground materialist current that 
runs from Spinoza to Bachelard, by way of Marx and Lenin. After citing a passage 
from L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine where Bachelard describes 
the role of rational values that impose themselves autonomously in the history of 
a scientific practice, Lecourt writes:
Bachelard is stating…the philosophical thesis that underpins all his episte-
mological works: that the truth of a scientific truth ‘imposes itself’ by itself. 
In Spinozist terms: ‘veritas norma sui’ (the truth is its own measure). In 
Leninist terminology: Bachelard is posing the thesis of the objectivity of 
scientific knowledges. He is posing it, not discussing it. He does not seek 
to found, to guarantee this objectivity. He is not concerned to pose to sci-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 197 
entific knowledge the traditional question of its claims to validity. This 
point is crucial, for we maintain that this position is a materialist posi-
tion. A position which enables to take a step outside the theoretical space 
of what idealist philosophy in its classical period called the ‘problem of 
knowledge.’103
The materialist position in philosophy according to Lecourt, who clearly is de-
veloping Althusser’s thought on this point, consists in refusing to make scientific 
knowledge’s possibility and its objectivity problems to be solved by philosophical 
speculation. To attempt to solve them interior to philosophy can only lead to the-
ories of objectivity, validity, and truth that are external to the scientific practices 
in question. The history of philosophical idealism is, according to Lecourt and 
Althusser, an attempt to solve a problem that simply does not exist for Spinoza, 
Bachelard, and Marxism-Leninism. 
A similar declaration is made by Althusser in his Être marxiste en philosophie, an 
introductory philosophy manual he completed drafting towards the end of 1976 
before abandoning the manuscript. Spinoza and Marx, writes Althusser, affirm 
the existence of scientific knowledge “without any commentary.”104 Spinoza’s 
Habemus enim ideam veram is for Althusser a primitive fact on the basis of which 
materialism must intervene against all forms of idealism. The same goes for Marx 
who, according to Althusser, “begins from the fact that knowledges exist, some 
scientific, others not…and thus rejects the possibility of a prior juridical question.”105 
Materialism thus seeks to defend the scientificity of scientific knowledges with-
out first posing juridical questions about the subject’s right or cognitive ability to 
know. Althusser, though he had attempted to critique the juridical foundations 
of epistemology in Lire le Capital, ultimately repeated the very same problem-
atic by posing the question of the cognitive mechanism by which thought grasps 
the real.106 Hence why Badiou argued in 1967 and more recently that Althusser’s 
early epistemological problematic requires a kind of Kantian schematism to link 
thought to the real, to explain how the real object remains distinct from the object 
of knowledge and how theoretical concepts help to organize our understanding 
of the empirical world.107 Returning in the mid-1970s to Marx’s 1857 Introduction, 
the same text that Althusser commented on at length in 1965, he now argues that 
Marx sidesteps the entire problematic of epistemology and the theory of knowl-
edge as such “by his simple silence with respect to every question of right, which 
constitutes the idealist theory of knowledge as a theory of knowledge.”108 Like 
Spinoza’s true idea, Althusser describes a Marx advancing almost axiomatically 

198 · david maruzzella  
from the existence of scientific knowledges:
Marx begins from the fact that knowledges exist, some scientific, others 
not. To begin then from the fact (in Spinoza like in Marx) is clearly to 
refuse the question of right (what can man know, his faculties being what 
they are?), it is to refuse that idea that we should have to pose to the fact 
of knowledge (non-scientific then scientific) the question of its titles of 
legitimacy: for example, the question of knowing if metaphysics, rational 
psychology (which deduces the properties of the human subject from its 
faculty of thought and of freedom), rational theology (which deduces from 
the total perfection of God his faculties and intentions), rational cosmol-
ogy (which deduces the world’s properties from its unity) are or are not 
scientific knowledges, and the question of what(in chemistry or in psy-
chology) scientific knowledges that man might someday attain, etc. This 
is —and we must not shy away from it—a very strong idea, which amounts 
to recognizing the primacy of the fact and the derivative character of right, 
which rejects the possibility of a prior juridical question…109
This long passage indicative of what might be called Althusser’s deconstruction, 
or even destruction, of epistemology, resonates with a similar remark Althusser 
makes in the contemporaneous “Sountenance D’Amiens” where Althusser again 
treats Spinoza’s Habemus enim ideam veram:
What does Spinoza in fact mean when he writes in a famous phrase, “Habemus 
enim ideam veram…”? That we have a true idea? No: the weight of the phrase lies 
on the “enim”. It is in fact because and only because we have a true idea that we 
can that it is true, because it is “index sui”. Where does this true idea come from? 
That is quite a different question. But it is a fact that we do have it (habemus), and 
whatever it may be that produces this result, it governs everything that can be 
said about it and derived from it. Thus Spinoza in advance makes every theory of 
knowledge, which reasons about the justification of knowledge, dependent on the 
fact of the knowledge which we already possess. But this does not prevent Spinoza 
from talking about knowledge: not in order to understand its Origin, Subject and 
Justification, but in order to determine the process and its moments, the famous 
‘three levels’…110
Spinoza, like Marx, Lenin, and Bachelard, it seems, give us knowledge without 
epistemology, that is without a foundationalist justification for its possibility and 

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 199 
existence, and without the elaboration of the origin of knowledge (in the subject 
or the object) or the subject’s right to know or possess such knowledge. A ma-
terialist epistemology, writes Lecourt in his Bachelard: Le jour et la nuit, is a true 
“theoretical monstrosity,”111 and the Althusser post-1967 would no doubt agree. 
To enter in the field of classical epistemology is to admit necessarily that scien-
tific knowledge is a problem and that its existence must be justified and secured 
philosophically by a theory of knowledge that guarantees its objectivity, validity, 
as well as a theory of the subject’s right to knowledge. The true materialist posi-
tion, as Lecourt explains in his treatment of Lenin, is to simply affirm that objec-
tive scientific knowledge exists. Marxist philosophers caught up in the class strug-
gle in theory are then tasked with defending the unique knowledge produced by 
historical materialism, since, as Lenin once said, it is the only knowledge whose 
truth implies the complete and necessary destruction of the prevailing capitalist 
mode of production.112 If Marxism is an exceptional in the history of sciences, it is 
because the knowledge it produces is directly implicated in the political practice 
of the proletarian class struggle. This is why Althusser will later say in his essay 
“Sur Marx et Freud” that Marxism and Psychoanalysis are conflictual sciences.113 
We can thus say that Althusser’s philosophical position was always a kind of “sci-
entism,” as William Lewis has recently argued114 insofar as scientific knowledge 
was always considered politically efficacious and essential when inserted into the 
proletarian class struggle. What changed, however, was Althusser’s theory of phi-
losophy, which shifted from attempting to produce novel solutions to classical 
epistemological problems, to contesting and refusing epistemology as such. Phi-
losophy was always a distinct theoretical practice for Althusser, but the nature 
of this peculiar practice changes drastically between 1965 and 1967. Materialism 
affirms the prior existence of scientific knowledges and seeks to defend them in 
theory; philosophy is then a theoretical practice of intervention, of drawing lines 
of demarcation between necessarily opposed and incompatible positions. One 
way to recognize idealism, Althusser seems to be suggesting, is to look for epis-
temology and theories of knowledge. Against the earlier writings from Pour Marx 
and Lire le Capital, Althusser, beginning in 1967, undertakes a deconstruction and 
destruction of the classical theory of knowledge that he once that Marxism could 
produce, but only at the cost of repeating Kant’s schematism and Popper’s prob-
lem of demarcation. Althusser’s rejection of epistemology, however, is coupled 
with a militant defense of scientificity, knowledge, truth, and objectivity making 
his thought anathema to post-modern philosophers. It is a question of defend-
ing the knowledge produced by Marxism that is ultimately crucial to the working 

200 · david maruzzella  
class’ struggle against capitalist exploitation. Defending the scientificity of Marx-
ism means to recognize the power and efficacy of knowledge in class struggle at 
the theoretical, political, and ideological levels.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize again that despite positively citing Bach-
elard throughout his entire philosophical career, Althusser only ever becomes a 
materialist and a faithful Bachelardian by eliminating precisely the epistemologi-
cal problematic that defined the theoretical stakes of Pour Marx and Lire le Capi-
tal, which are perhaps the two Althusserian works most explicitly indebted, but 
only on the surface, to Bachelard. As soon as the question of the scientificity of 
science ceases to be the central Althusserian philosophical question Althusser 
can authentically assume Bachelard’s thought. To be a materialist, Marxist and a 
Bachelardian in epistemology means quite simply to no longer do epistemology 
in the classical sense. Alain Badiou is absolutely right to claim that Althusser ini-
tiated a radical “de-epistemologization of philosophy.” Whence the paradoxical 
conclusion: Althusser is one of the most important inheritors of French historical 
epistemology precisely at the moment when he refuses epistemology.

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 201 
NOTES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper was originally presented in French under the title “De Bachelard à Bachelard: Louis 
Althusser, héritier de l’épistémologie historique française” at the Bachelard Aujourd’hui conference 
KU Leuven, 24 - 25 April 2017. This version has been extensively re-worked and expanded for its 
publication. Translations from the French are my own unless otherwise noted.
The author would like to thank Massimiliano Simons and the other organizers of the Bachelard 
Aujourd’hui conference for their generosity and unparalleled knowledge of Bachelard, historical 
epistemology, and the history of sciences. 
1. Louis Althusser, Pour Marx (Paris: Maspero, 1965), 26.
2. Karl Marx, “Le Traité Théologico-Politique et la Correspondance de Spinoza: trois cahiers d’étude 
d’année 1841” in Cahiers Spinoza 1, (Paris: Éditions de Réplique, Été 1977).
3. Louis Althusser, Lire le Capital I (Paris: Maspero, 1968),128. References to Lire le Capital are to 
the second edition published in 4 volumes between 1968 and 1973 in the series “Petite collection 
Maspero”.
4. Alexandre Matheron, “Le Traité Théologico-Politique vu par le jeune Marx” in Cahiers Spinoza 1, 
212.
5. Pour Marx, n40, 75.
6. Ibid., n40, 75.
7. Louis Althusser, Éléments d’autocritique (Paris: Hachette, 1974), 65.
8. Michel Vadée, Bachelard ou le nouvel idéalisme épistémologique (Paris: Éditions Sociales, 1975), 8.
9. It is worth mentioning that, as Étienne Balibar and others have pointed out, Bachelard does not 
use the language of coupure épistémologique. He speaks rather of a “rupture épistémologique” on 
page 104 of Le rationalisme appliqué and of a “rupture entre connaissance commune et connais-
sance scientifique” on page 102 of this same book. The final chapter of Le matérialisme rationnel 
also treats the rupture between common and scientific knowledge.
Balibar is right to claim that the point of commonality between Bachelard and Althusser seems to 
be more generally the “idea of discontinuity”. See Balibar’s essay “Le concept de ‘coupure épisté-
mologique’ de Gaston Bachelard à Louis Althusser” in Écrits pour Althusser (Paris: La Découverte, 
1991). Balibar will go on to expand his treatment of Althusser and la coupure épistémologique in his 
essay “L’objet d’Althusser” in Politique et philosophie dans l’œuvre de Louis Althusser sous la direction 
de S. Lazarus (Paris: PUF, 1993).
10. Georges Canguilhem, Études d’histoire et philosophie des sciences (Paris: Vrin, 1970, 2edition), 
206.
11. Alain Badiou, “Le (re)commencement du matérialisme dialectique” in Critique, N°240 mai 
1967, 452.
12. Though I am certainly not the first to have pointed out the role of the demarcation problem in 
Althusser’s thought, I tend to side with Étienne Balibar’s subtle analyses, which I will treat explic-
itly below. In other words, I do not think Althusser and Popper formulate and address the problem 
of demarcation in the same way. Paul Patton suggests the opposite when he writes “Thus, from the 
standpoint of this broader perspective, Althusser’s theoretical tactic of defending Marxism as a 
science occupies the same theoretical space as Popper’s denunciation of it as a non-science some 
30 years ago” (“Althusser’s Epistemology: The Limits of the Theory of Theoretical Practice” Radi-
cal Philosophy no. 19 (Spring 1978), 18). More recently, William S. Lewis echoes this claim “Dur-

202 · david maruzzella  
ing this period [1960-1965], Althusser solved the problem of demarcation by bringing in Marxist 
philosophy as arbiter” (“Althusser’s Scientism and Aleatory Materialism” Décalages vol. 3 (1), 2016, 
11).
13. Louis Althusser, Réponse à John Lewis (Paris: Maspero, 1973), 11.
14. Margaret A. Majumdar, Althusser and the End of Leninism? (London: Pluto Press, 1995), 82.
15. Pierre Raymond, « …et la théorie dans la lutte des classes » in Dialectiques no 15/16, Paris, au-
tomne 1976, 138.
16. Alain Badiou, “Qu’est-ce que Louis Althusser entend par ‘philosophie’ ?” in Politique et philoso-
phie dans l’œuvre de Louis Althusser sous la direction de S. Lazarus (Paris: PUF, 1993), 33-4.
17. François Dosse, Histoire du Structuralisme. Tome I: Le champ du signe 1945-1966 (Paris: La Dé-
couverte, 2012 [1991]), 343.
18. Pour Marx, 33.
19.http://marxists.anu.edu.au/archive/marx/works/1878/05/dialectics.htm
20. It is worth keeping in mind that Engels, in the passage quoted above, is simply stating that a 
scientist’s knowledge is always necessarily limited to the particular domain a scientist researches, 
and that outside of that circumscribed scientific domain, every scientist is a “layman”, a “semi-
initiate” or “vulgo.” It follows in turn that all scientists will be semi-initiates in other sciences and 
in philosophy, just as all philosophers will have to become semi-initiates in science. Engels says 
as much to prepare the reader that he too is going to appear as a lay-person or semi-initiate the 
discussion of natural science that readers would ostensibly find in Anti-Duhring. 
21. Pour Marx, 33.
22. Ibid., 33.
23. Ibid., 11-21.
24. Ibid., 24.
25. Ibid., 24.
26. It is worth noting that Althusser calls both epistemological break and problematic “concepts.” 
His later redefinition of philosophy will require that we refer to them as “categories.” For the sake 
of this article, I have chosen to call them categories except when quoting Althusser or referring to 
these direct quotations.
27. Patrice Maniglier “What is a problematic?” in Radical Philosophy 173 (May/June 2012): 21-23.
28. Pour Marx, 24.
29. Jean-Luc Nancy “ Marx et la philosophie” in Esprit 394 (mai 1966), 1076.
30. Althusser comments at length on this passage in Lire le Capital II, in particular section VI. on 
“Epistemological Propositions of Capital (Marx. Engels).”
31. Gaston Bachelard, Le nouvel esprit scientifique (Paris: PUF, 1999 [1934] ), 46.
32. Lire le Capital I, 12.
33. Ibid., 28.
34. Gaston Bachelard, Le matérialisme rationnel (Paris: PUF, 1953), 207.
35. Bachelard treats epistemological obstacles in particular detail in the first chapter of La forma-
tion de l’esprit scientifique (Paris: Vrin,1938).
36. On this point, see Le rationalisme appliqué and Le materialisme rationnel.
37. Gaston Bachelard, La psychanalyse du feu (Paris: Gallimard, 1965 [1938]), 14.
38. Réponse à John Lewis, 33.
39. Georges Canguilhem, “Science et philosophie” (Interview with Alain Badiou) in Revue de l’en-
seignement philosophique (décembre 1964-janvier 1965), 10-17.
40. In particular two texts with a strange publication history: the untranslated “Matérialisme his-

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 203 
torique et matérialisme dialectique.” Cahiers Marxistes-Léninistes, no. 11, Avril 1966 and “Theory, 
Theoretical Practice and Theoretical Formation: Ideology and Ideological Formation.” Philosophy 
and the Spontaneous Philosophy of the Scientists & Other Essays. Ed. Gregory Elliot. London:Verso, 
1990, which has yet to be published in French, but was circulated to the likes of Jacques Rancière 
who makes extensive use of this text in his polemic La leçon d’Althusser (Paris: Gallimard, 1974).
41. For a full list of scientific revolutions and their corresponding philosophical inheritors see 
Louis Althusser Sur la reproduction (Paris: PUF, 1995), 37-38.
42. “Matérialisme historique et matérialisme dialectique”, 113.
43. Ibid., 114.
44. Dominique Lecourt, Marxism and epistemology trans. Ben Brewster (London: NLB, 1975), 36.
45. Gaston Bachelard, L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine (Paris: PUF, 1951), 6.
46. Le matérialisme rationnel, 20.
47. Initiation à la philosophie pour les non-philosophes (Paris: PUF, 2014), 200.
48. Lire le Capital I, 38 sq.
49. Ibid., 67.
50. Louis Althusser, “Theory, Theoretical Practice and Theoretical Formation: Ideology and Ideo-
logical Formation.” Philosophy and the Spontaneous Philosophy of the Scientists & Other Essays. Ed. 
Gregory Elliott. (London:Verso, 1990), 8.
51. Nicos Poulantzas, Pouvoir et classes sociales I (Paris: Maspero, 1972 [1968]),12.
52. Lire le Capital, 14.
53. See the final chapter of Le matérialisme rationnel for the critique of “continuists”, 207-224.
54. La formation de l’esprit scientifique, 14
55. Le rationalisme appliqué, 123.
56. Marxism and epistemology,140.
57. See Ben Brewster’s article “Althusser and Bachelard” in Theoretical Practice no. 3 + 4 (Autumn 
1971): 25-37.
58. Pour Marx, 31.
59. Lire le Capital IV, 9.
60. Pour Marx, 31.
61. Le rationalisme appliqué, 43.
62. In Lire le Capital I, we read: “The question we are posing [the question of the cognitive mecha-
nism of appropriation]…is not a question of guarantee” and on the next page “The simple substi-
tution of the question of the mechanism of cognitive appropriation of the real object by means of 
the object of knowledge for the ideological question of guarantees of the possibility of knowledge 
contains in itself this mutation of problematic that delivers us from the closed space of ideology, 
and opens for us the open space of the philosophical theory that we are seeking.” (66-67)
63. “Le concept de ‘coupure épistémologique’ de Gaston Bachelard à Louis Althusser”, 26.
64. Alain Badiou,“The Althusserian Definition of Theory” in The Concept in Crisis: Reading Capital 
Today ed. Nick Nesbitt (Durham: Duke UP, 2017), 23.
65. Lire le Capital I, 71-72.
66. Lire le Capital I, 67 sq.
67. Popper explains his motivations for developing his theory of falsification in his 1953 talk “Sci-
ence: Conjectures and Refutations” reprinted in Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scien-
tific Knowledge (London and New York: Routledge, 1963).
68. Althusser writes in “Sur le travail théorique: difficultés et ressources” (La Pensée no. 132, avril 
1967) that “Marx’s Capital analyzes not a social formation (a real concrete society), but the capital-

204 · david maruzzella  
ist mode of production: we will say it bears on a formal or abstract object” (7).
69. Borrowing from Spinoza, Althusser also finds this same distinction in Marx. Cf. Lire le Capital 
I, 39 sq. 
70. Karl Popper, “Normal Science and its Dangers” in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge ed. 
Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1970), 51.
71. I have in mind here Quentin Meillassoux’s claim that Hume is the first correlationist philoso-
pher. For Meillassoux , Hume “inaugurates the properly correlationist form (a sceptical form, in 
fact) of the ‘correlational circle’: rom the circle, he no longer deduces that all reality is spirit, but 
that we cannot extract ourselves from the sphere of impressions and ideas, and that the thing in 
itself must remain irreducibly unknown to us.” (See Meillassoux’s paper “Iteration, Reiteration, 
Repetition: A Speculative Analysis of the Meaningless Sign” available online: https://cdn.shopify.
com/s/files/1/0069/6232/files/Meillassoux_Workshop_Berlin.pdf )
72. Imre Lakatos writes, for example, “Thus the early predictions of Marxism were bold and stun-
ning but they failed. Marxists explained all their failures…the Marxian lagged behind the facts and 
has been running fast to catch up with them.” (“Science and Pseudo-Science” in The Methodology 
of Scientific Research Programmes ed. John Worrall and Gregory Currie. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
UP, 1978), 6).
73. Thomas S. Kuhn The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd edition). (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1970).
74. In recently published archival texts, Althusser explicitly treats Popper’s theory and agrees on 
the importance of falsification and experimentation in science, but believes that Popper’s idea of 
falsification and experimentation are too narrow. Althusser seems to suggest that class struggle 
is itself a field of possible experimentation and falsification. Not to mention that Althusser’s Spi-
nozism combined with Leninism led him to redefine verification and falsification, which he ex-
plains with respect to Lenin’s famous “Marx’s theory is all powerful because it is true.” In “The Al-
thusserian Definition of ‘Theory’” (cited above), Alain Badiou explains Althusser’s anti-pragmatic 
position, which claims that true theories are not true because they are tested in practice, and in 
this way, Althusser destroys all dialectical relationship between theory and practice (See in partic-
ular page 22). For Althusser’s discussion of Popper and falsification see Être marxiste en philosophie 
(Paris: PUF, 2015) pages 94-97 and Initiation à la philosophie pour les non-philosophes (Paris: PUF, 
2014) in particular chapter 9 “Scientific practice and idealism”.
75. Gaston Bacehalrd, Dialectique de la durée (Paris: Boivin, 1936), 14.
76. Louis Althusser, The Humanist Controversy and Other Writings (1966-1967). Ed. François Math-
eron. Trans. G.M. Goshgarian. (London:Verso, 2003), 268.
77. We read, for example, in Agon Hamza: “…we can say that the very distinction between science 
and ideology is ideological in itself.” (“Fidelity that is not Interpellation: Reading Althusser’s Mis-
readings” in Crisis & Critique: Reading Capital 50 Years Later vol. 2, no. 2 (2015), 269).
78. Pierre Macherey clarifies this point in detail in “A propos de la rupture” in La nouvelle critique, 
no 166, mai 1965. He writes, “This is why we cannot say that science replaces ideology, nor that it is 
preferable to ideology or superior: science is not ‘better’ than ideology, since precisely these two 
terms cannot be compared” (138).
79. Étienne Balibar, Lieux et noms de la vérité (La Tour d’Aigues: Éditions de l’Aube, 1997), 129.
80. “Le concept de ‘coupure épistémologique’ de Gaston Bachelard à Louis Althusser”, 25.
81. The Humanist Controversy, 268.
82. Louis Althusser, Lénine et la philosophie suivi de Marx et Lénine devant Hegel (Paris: Maspero, 
1972), 44-45.

the two bachelards of louis althusser · 205 
83. Emilio di Ípola. Althusser, el infinito adiós (Buenos Aires: Siglo veintiuno editores, 2007), 62.
84. Éric Marty. Louis Althusser, un sujet sans procès: anatomie d’un passé très récent (Paris: Gallimard, 
1999), n3, 90.
85. Helena Sheehan, Marxism and the Philosophy of Science: A Critical History (London: Humanities 
Press, 1985), 145-146.
86. Louis Althusser, Philosophie et philosophie spontanée des savants (1967) (Paris: Maspero, 1974), 26. 
87. For a close analysis of Althusser’s course, and thesis 20 in particular, see Pierre Macherey, “Al-
thusser and the Concept of the Spontaneous Philosophy of the Scientists” trans. Robin Mackay. 
Parrhesia no. 6 (2009): 14-27.
88. Giorgos Fourtounis, “Balibar and the Philosophy of Science: The Question of the ‘Epistemo-
logical Break’. Balibar and the Citizen Subject ed. Warren Montag and Hanan Elsayed (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh UP, 2017), 204.
89. Philosophie et philosophie spontanée des savants (1967), 93-95.
90. Ibid., 14. Though the term “correct” in English is perhaps a bit clunky, the English expression 
“to adjust” or “adjustment” nicely captures what Althusser has in mind when he redefines philo-
sophical practice in this way.
91. This is precisely why Alain Badiou’s thought is materialist. It is not because he produces a 
theory of matter or takes into account material conditions, but because he has drawn out the 
immense philosophical implications of axiomatic set theory. Infinity, in the current scientific-
political conjuncture, is the materialist category par excellence.
92. Is this not the position maintained today by most speculative realists? Objects ultimately be-
long to a strange science-fiction universe wherein their being is irreducible to their primary and 
secondary qualities, resulting in the inexhaustibility of their essentially mysterious nature. A line 
of demarcation must be drawn between the work of Quentin Meillassoux, who defends the power 
of mathematical formalization to exhaust the real, and somebody like Graham Harman, who sim-
ply radicalizes Kant to claim that not only can humans not have direct access to the real, but 
objects cannot even be said to interact with each other directly since they too lack access to the 
real. Does he not, in expanding Kant in this extreme way, simply apply mechanically to the entire 
universe the finitude Kant reserved for the human subject? Is this not the most crude anthropo-
morphism despite Harman’s attempt to produce an object oriented philosophy? 
93. Knox Peden’s recent treatment of Althusser in his ambitious and thoroughly researched Spino-
za Contra Phenomenology: French Rationalism from Cavaillès to Deleuze (Stanford: Stanford UP, 2014) 
insists throughout that Althusser’s commitment to science (rationalism) forecloses any possible 
political commitment (see page 14-15, 174-17, 262-263 and passim). Indeed, this is the thesis of 
Peden’s entire book. Peden substantiates this claim by quoting Althusser saying “In the same way, 
it may be said that the science of politics is not political,” but rather than suggesting that science 
is “neither…determined by the political nor does it have an effect on the political” (174), I take it 
that Althusser is in fact arguing that science qua internal theoretical consistency of its theoreti-
cal practice is politically indifferent. In other words, truths qua being true are not automatically 
politically efficacious, but, for Althusser, must be fused with the class struggle of the proletariat. 
Was it not Spinoza who radically re-thought the Cartesian distinction between true and false to 
make it such that the sheer presence of truth is not enough to dissolve what is false? And is this 
not commensurate with Althusser’s thought?
94. Éléments d’autocritique, n1, 51-53. “a word…Epistemology. It led us to Bachelard who constantly 
used the word, and to Canguilhem, who, we did not notice, rarely used the word. We abused it 
(myself above all) and we did not know how to control it…What do we mean by Epistemology Lit-

206 · david maruzzella  
erally: the theory of the conditions and the forms of scientific practice and its history in different 
concrete sciences. But this definition can be understood in two senses. In a materialist sense, it 
could have led us to study the material, social, political, ideological, and philosophical conditions 
of theoretical ‘modes of production’ and ‘processes of production’ of existing knowledges: but 
then this would domain would fall under Historical Materialism! And conversely in a speculative 
sense, Epistemology could have led us to formulate and develop a theory of Scientific Practice [la 
pratique scientific] in its difference from other practices: but how is this different from philosophy 
defined as well as ‘Theory of theoretical practice’? We were this on the terrain of ‘Dialectical Ma-
terialism’, since philosophy was, and only was, Epistemology…If Epistemology is philosophy itself, 
their speculative unity cannot but reinforce theoreticism. But if Epistemology falls under…His-
torical Materialism, then we must inscribe it therein, and, at the same time, recognize the illusion 
and imposture of its project. We must (as we have since noted) renounce and criticize idealism 
and the trace of all Epistemology.”
95. Philosophie et philosophie spontanée des savants, 116.
96. Lénine et la philosophie, 40-41.
97. Dominique Lecourt, Une crise et son enjeu: essai sur la position de Lénine en philosophie (Paris: 
Maspero, 1973), 47 and passim.
98.Louis Althusser, Lettres à Franca: 1961-1973 (Paris: STOCK/IMEC, 1998), 306.
99. We read for example in “Matérialisme historique et matérialisme dialectique” that Marx’s 
philosophy is still in the practical state, unlike historical materialism, which Marx was able to 
elaborate in depth in Capital. “It [Marx’s philosophy] is presented in a still partially ideological form 
in the great polemical texts of Engels and Lenin. In none of these ‘works’, is Marxist philosophy 
given to us in a truly adequate and rigorous form.” (98)
100. Louis Althusser “Présentation” of Pierre Macherey’s “La philosophie de la science de Georges 
Canguilhem: épistémologie et histoire des sciences” in La pensée no. 113 (janvier-février 1964): 
50-54.
101. Philosophie et philosophie spontanée des savants, 78.
102. Warren Montag, “Althusser’s Lenin” in diacritics, Vol. 43, No. 2 (2015), 61.
103.Marxism and epistemology, 12.
104. Être marxiste en philosophie, 173-4.
105. Ibid., 173-174.
106. Althusser, Lire le Capital, 65-85. 
107. “The Althusserian Definition of Theory”, 33.
108. Être marxiste en philosophie, 172.
109. Ibid,, 173-174.
110. Louis Althusser, “Is it Simple to be a Marxist in Philosophy?” Essays in Self-Criticism. Trans. 
Grahame Lock. (London: New Left Books, 1976), 187-188.
111. Dominique Lecourt, Bachelard: Le jour et la nuit. (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1974),170.
112. Lenin, “Marxism and Revisionism (1908)” in Collected Works, Volume 15 (Moscow: Progress 
Publishers, 1973), 29.
113. Louis Althusser, “Sur Marx et Freud” Écrits sur la psychanalyse. (Paris: Stock/IMEC, 1993), 229.
114. William S. Lewis, “Althusser’s Scientism and Aleatory Materialism” in Décalages, Vol. 2, no. 1, 
2016.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 207-231
the new axiomatix method: 
bachelard on the meaning 
and deformation of concepts
boris demarest
INTRODUCTION
Interpreters of Bachelard have always been particularly engaged in demonstrat-
ing his actuality by insisting on those ideas that point towards a completely new 
approach and conception of science, and—more importantly—of philosophy and 
its relation to science. In doing so, they are wont to distinguish between those 
ideas that are novel and challenging, the marks of a flexible mind adjusting to new 
times, and those ideas that are atavistic remnants of the philosophical past, or of 
the present that Bachelard was just then revealing to have become outdated. In the 
analysis of Bachelard’s reflections of science, the ideas that have been identified 
as the “actuality” of Bachelard are his conception of discontinuity between the 
scientific mind and common sense and the material dimension of his conception 
of science, as exemplified in his concept of phenomenotechnics and of the social 
nature of knowledge. But the champions of the revolutionary character of these 
ideas equally stress that Bachelard at times failed to maintain their revolutionary 
character, which led some to discern a truth behind Bachelard’s philosophy, of 
which the latter is at times an unfaithful reflection. We see this, for instance, in 
how Latour and Woolgar or Lecourt respond to Bachelard’s own elaborations of 
the social nature of science. Latour and Woolgar complain that Bachelard’s “ex-
clusive interest in ‘la coupure épistémologique’ prevented him from undertaking 

208 · boris demarest  
sociological investigations of science, even though many of his remarks about 
science make better sense when set within a sociological framework,”1. They sug-
gest, in other words, that Bachelard failed to grasp the implications of the social 
nature of science. Lecourt, on the other hand, shows surprise at Bachelard’s own 
theoretical elaboration on his conception of the social nature of science, namely 
as characterized mostly by a split within a single subject that introduces a nor-
mative element to his reasoning through internalized intersubjective control. 
For Lecourt, this seems to be a possible sign of “philosophical bad conscience.”2 
These reactions are but some samples of complaints over the traditional tones to 
Bachelard’s rationalism.
In this paper, I want to resist these attempts to “actualize” Bachelard, to distin-
guish between the forward-pointing and the retrograde elements of his thought. 
In my opinion, the actualization of Bachelard reduces his central ideas to vague 
inklings, to suggestive and imprecise phrasings of ideas with which later philoso-
phers of science became infatuated. To do so, I will offer an interpretation of Bach-
elard’s theory of concepts on which, contrary to what his constant insistence on 
discontinuity, his constant polemic against continuism would suggest,3 Bachelard 
leaves much room for continuity in his image of science, and most remarkably, 
in his image of scientific concepts. More specifically, I will argue that, although 
Bachelard regards scientific concepts as amenable to historical change, he consid-
ers this as a change of the same concept. In order to substantiate this thesis, I will 
provide an account of Bachelard’s conception of the meaning of a concept, and of 
what happens to this meaning as a concept changes. In offering such an account, 
I want to present the actuality of Bachelard, not as a precursor to discontinuist or 
social-constructivist approaches in the philosophy of science who failed to think 
through his own ideas, but as an inspiration to current attempts to bridge the gap 
between different approaches to philosophy of science.
The starting point of my interpretation is one of the traits Bachelard stably de-
scribes to the new scientific spirit in The Formation of the Scientific Spirit, The New 
Scientific Spirit, and The Philosophy of No, and that returns even more explicitly in 
Applied Rationalism. This repetition reveals that it is eminently important to him, 
even as he leaves his readers without any truly systematic treatment of it. I believe 
that a reconstruction of this recurrent idea can help us better understand Bach-
elard’s theory of conceptualization, and its relation to his mathematicism and his 
dynamicism, by revealing how Bachelard meant to harmonize these two strands 
of his thought. He could, of course—or so I will argue—by recognizing that nei-

the new axiomatic method · 209 
ther of these positions means quite what we expect them to mean.
The recurrent idea that I want to take as my point of departure is Bachelard’s 
comments on the relation between comprehension, extension and application of 
concepts, for instance in a famous and suggestive passage from The Formation of 
the Scientific Spirit:
In my opinion, the richness of a scientific concept can be measured through 
its capacity for deformation. This richness cannot be attached to an iso-
lated phenomenon discovered to be richer and richer in characters, richer 
and richer in comprehension. Even less can this richness be attached to a 
collection that would gather round the most heteroclite phenomena, that 
would be extended, in a contingent manner, to new cases. The intermedi-
ary nuance would be realized if the enrichment in extension became nec-
essary, as coordinated as the richness in comprehension.4
This passage, which continues with a discussion of the conditions of application 
of a concept and proceeds to introduce, all too summarily, the concept of a phe-
nomenotechnique, is rich in concepts and notions, and difficult to penetrate. Part 
of my goal in this paper is to explain how Bachelard views the relation between 
extension and comprehension, both in the old and in the new scientific spirit. The 
key to understanding these and other similar passages is a brief and equally enig-
matic statement from Applied Rationalism: “The extension and the comprehen-
sion, far from being inverse the one to the other, as is presented in the problem of 
classifications, would be, in some way, proportional.”5 Although this comment has 
not passed unnoticed in the literature, it has not received any systematic treat-
ment either, perhaps because most readers share with Lecourt the idea that “[d]
espite the terminology they borrow, these remarks are not the fruit of a study of 
Formal Logic; they derive from a direct reflection on the structure of scientific 
discourse”6. Although this judgment is not wholly erroneous, it does discourage 
serious attempts to understand what these remarks would mean “logically.” I will 
argue in this paper that Bachelard’s conception of the relation between the com-
prehension and the extension of a concept in the new scientific spirit is prompted 
by the role played by the axiomatic method in the science of his time, and that he 
is taking notice of important difference between the axiomatic method as it used 
to be conceived, and the axiomatic method as it is pursued in the new scientific 
era. In the first section, I will briefly introduce the old image of the axiomatic 
method, focusing mostly on those features that are at stake in Bachelard’s dis-

210 · boris demarest  
cussion, namely the relation between generality and simplicity, and the role of 
general logical principles. In the second section, I will give a brief overview of the 
axiomatic method as envisioned through the Hilbert program, and forming the 
basis of both revolutions in mathematics and physics, most importantly the emer-
gence of non-Euclidean geometry and non-newtonian mechanics, as well as the 
lessons Bachelard draws from it. In the third section, I will draw the implications 
of this picture of axiomatic thought for his view of the system of concepts and 
conceptualization. In the final section, I suggest a reading of Bachelard’s theory 
of the meaning of concepts as one that allows them to persist through change and 
thereby harmonize his insistence on rationalism and progress with a historical 
and dynamical picture of science many take to imply radical discontinuity.
THE AXIOMATIC METHOD IN EARLY MODERNITY
In this first section, I will briefly sketch the main interesting features of the math-
ematical method in philosophy, and its implication for the conception of a con-
cept, in the Early Modern period, and especially the 18th century. This restriction 
to the 18th century is not gratuitous: it is inspired by Bachelard’s own interest, in 
the Formation of the Scientific Spirit, in the nature of this spirit in the 18th century. 
Although the mathematical method was a major source of inspiration for early 
modern philosophy, there were also major disagreements on its nature, its scope, 
and its utility. Bachelard’s own position towards mathematics seems to resonate 
with that of the early modern period. Specifically, Bachelard seems sensitive to 
the connection between the major epistemological obstacles faced by the eigh-
teenth century, pre-scientific spirit and the “esprit géométrique” of this period.
That respect for mathematics, and in particular for the accomplishment that is Eu-
clid’s Elements, was great in both antiquity and modernity, hardly needs reminder. 
What is important, however, is that the philosophical interpretation of the virtue 
of mathematics changed substantially. Agreement on the idea that mathematics 
is the paradigm of real knowledge can obscure intense disagreement on what this 
means for epistemology. Many Early Modern authors saw themselves as struggling 
to shake off the yoke of the Aristotelian interpretation of the axiomatic method. 
For the Aristotelians, at least as read by their early modern critics, the axiomatic 
method consists of deriving from high-level, highly general principles, principles 
that either form the basis of the specific science at issue, or are so general that 
they transcend the boundaries of different sciences, more specific consequences.7 
The great logical tool for connecting the various levels of this hierarchical system 

the new axiomatic method · 211 
of principles and concepts is deduction, more specifically the syllogism.
In the early modern period, this picture of the scientific method is attacked from 
various angles.8 Most famous and influential are the attacks mounted by Bacon 
and Descartes. In the Novum Organum, Bacon attacks the deductive, syllogistic 
method of the Aristotelians, and seeks out a variety of sources of bias that stand in 
the way of the proper scientific method. A central complaint of Bacon against the 
Aristotelian method is that the latter jumps all too precipitately to the most gen-
eral concepts, where these should be formed through extensive empirical inquiry 
into all the various phenomena that could be relevant to that concept.9 Bachelard 
discusses the Baconian method of inquiry in the Formation of the Scientific Spirit, 
for instance in commenting on the example of a call for research on the nature of 
coagulation by the Académie des Sciences in 1669, commenting that we see there 
“phenomena of a most diverse, most heteroclite nature, incorporated under the 
heading: ‘coagulation’.”10 Bachelard regards this as a clear instance of the Baconi-
an spirit, which he seems to chastise as insufficiently appreciative of the scientific 
need for theoretical and conceptual guidance.11
But Bachelard is not just critical towards the fumbling empiricism he finds in the 
Baconian tradition. He also attacks the Cartesian doctrine that became the core 
of what the Early Moderns called the geometric Spirit. The Cartesians agreed with 
Bacon’s criticism of the Aristotelian idea that high-level generalities are the key 
to science. They correspondingly criticized the Aristotelian interpretation of the 
role of the axioms in the geometric method, according to which the solidity of 
the geometric method stemmed from two sources: the evident nature of the first 
principles, and the validity of the deductive methods which transferred evidence 
or certainty from the axioms to the theorems. For Cartesians, the certainty of 
mathematics was not due to either of these elements: Aristotelians overestimated 
both the role of first principles and of deductive procedures in the scientific pro-
cess. According to them, the excellence of mathematics derived largely from the 
clarity of its concepts. Mathematicians, so Cartesians like Arnauld12, Pascal13 and 
even Locke14 argued, were capable of certain knowledge because they made sure 
that their ideas were sufficiently simple and clear, and that they reasoned only on 
what they immediately recognized to be evidently true of these ideas and their 
mutual relations. Far more important than the tissue of principles and deduc-
tions is the transparent content of each individual concept. In this way, in early 
modernity, the superiority of the mathematical method, exemplified in Euclid’s 
geometry, came to be regarded as due to the simplicity and clarity of the concepts 

212 · boris demarest  
used in it, more than due to the logical connections between its axioms, postu-
lates and theorems. 
The concepts central to Early Modern science were thought to relate to each oth-
er according to a law, namely the law that states that more general concepts are 
poorer in content, and involve less concepts. Kant formulated the law as follows: 
“[t]he content and extension of a concept stand in inverse relation to one anoth-
er. The more a concept contains under itself, namely, the less it contains in itself, 
and conversely.”15 This means that a concept’s extension is inversely related to its 
intension, i.e. the more particulars fall under it, the less concepts are contained 
in it, and vice versa, which implies that the most general concepts are the most 
fundamental concepts, and they themselves involve the least concepts. 
To illustrate this with a well-known Aristotelian example, namely the relation be-
tween the concepts of animal and of human. The intension of such a concept 
could be interpreted as the list of criteria which an object must satisfy to fall 
under this concept. Such criteria are themselves the concepts under which an 
object must jointly fall in order to fall under the concept specified through it. In 
our Aristotelian example, the intension of the concept of animal would be “sens-
ing living natural being.” This concept has a greater intension than, for instance, 
that of living being, because the latter contains all the same criteria, but lacks the 
criterion of sensation. On the other hand, the concept of “human” would have 
a greater intension, because it contains all the criteria for being an animal, but 
adds a further criterion, i.e. reason. The more specific a concept, then, the greater 
its intension. But the same example shows how the extension decreases as the 
concept becomes more specific, as all humans are animals, but not all animals are 
humans, i.e. there are more things that are animals than there are things that are 
humans.16
Ideally, the fundamental concepts of scientific thought should have no content 
except for themselves, should be simple and immediately clear. For Bachelard, 
who frequently refers to the “esprit géométrique,” the formulation of this idea 
by Pascal is perhaps most significant. According to Bachelard, the latter spirit 
consists in defining only that which needs definition, and to seek no definition of 
words that are perfectly simple and perfectly general:
[Geometry] doesn’t define any of the things like space, time, movement, 
number, equality, nor those many like them, because these terms naturally 

the new axiomatic method · 213 
denote the things they signify, to those who understand the language, such 
that the clarification one would make would bring about more confusion 
than instruction. For nothing is weaker than the discourse of those who 
wish to define primitive words.17
Pascal himself notes the irony that geometry doesn’t define any of the terms that 
denote its own principal objects, but regards the perfectly simplicity and trans-
parency of these objects to be the great virtue of this science. The axiomatic 
method, to early moderns like him, did not mean the deductive science inferring 
from general principles the content of a science, but was rather characterized by 
the following main features:
1. The more general and basic a concept, the simpler it is.
2. In science, we should strive to reason on the basis of simple ideas, and 
hence should seek to reduce complexity to simplicity, in order to ensure 
precision.
3. In the case of more general concepts of which we do not yet have the 
content, we should abstain from postulating one, and merely study the 
broadest possible extension of the concept.
Throughout his works on the New Scientific Spirit, Bachelard seeks to show how 
more recent developments in the sciences have decisively rejected this procedure 
in science. In what follows, I will argue that he agrees with the early modern in-
sistence on the implications of the geometric method for the nature of scientific 
concepts rather than on its deductive method, and that he believes recent evolu-
tions in the axiomatic method also call for changes in our conception of scientific 
concepts.
THE NEW GEOMETRICAL SPIRIT
The new geometrical Spirit, the new axiomatic method that emerged in the 19th 
century and became dominant in the early 20th was based partly on a development 
in geometry, namely the investigations on the parallel postulate. Whereas the old 
axiomatic method was based on the exemplary role of Euclidean geometry, the 
new axiomatic method was based on that of non-Euclidean geometry. In this sec-
tion, I want to argue that Bachelard’s insistence on non-Euclidean geometry in 
the New Scientific Spirit is due to his appreciation of the new axiomatic method, 
and that, to him, the new axiomatic method is philosophically relevant because 

214 · boris demarest  
of what it teaches us about concepts, concept formation and concept application. 
I will first describe the new axiomatic method, insisting on features that are rel-
evant to my discussion of Bachelard’s theory of concepts and conceptualization.
A seminal starting point for the description of the axiomatic method is a lecture 
by David Hilbert from 1918, titled “Axiomatic Thought”18. In this lecture, Hilbert 
set out to explain the new agenda for science set by the new Axiomatic method. 
According to Hilbert, any sufficiently advanced field can be axiomatized in the 
following way:
When we assemble the facts of a definite, more-or-less comprehensive 
field of knowledge, we soon notice that these facts are capable of being or-
dered. This ordering always comes about with the help of a certain frame-
work of concepts [Fachwerk von Begriffen] in the following way: a concept 
of this framework corresponds to each individual object of the field of 
knowledge, and a logical relation between concepts corresponds to every 
fact within the field of knowledge. The framework of concepts is nothing 
other than the theory of the field of knowledge.19
He continues to note that this ordering allows us to recognize certain basic prin-
ciples underlying the field:
If we consider a particular theory more closely, we always see that a few 
distinguished propositions of the field of knowledge underlie the construc-
tion of the framework of concepts, and these propositions then suffice by 
themselves for the construction, in accordance with logical principles, of 
the entire framework.20
This results in what is likely to be the traditional image of the axiomatic method, 
namely as method that determines the first principles of a theory or domain and 
then derives conclusions through mere deduction:
These fundamental propositions can be regarded from an initial stand-
point as the axioms of the individual fields of knowledge: the progressive 
development of the individual field of knowledge then lies solely in the 
further logical construction of the already mentioned framework of con-
cepts.21

the new axiomatic method · 215 
This seems to suggest that Hilbert regards a science as virtually complete once 
its foundations have been laid, and the development of that field to be an issue 
of logical deduction. But this misses an important second aspect of the axiomatic 
method, which results from the idea that the basis can itself be questioned:
in the cases mentioned above the problem of grounding the individual 
field of knowledge had found a solution; but this solution was only tempo-
rary. In fact, in the individual fields of knowledge the need arose to ground 
the fundamental axiomatic propositions themselves. So one acquired 
‘proofs’ of the linearity of the equation of the plane and the orthogonality 
of the transformation expressing a movement, of the laws of arithmetical 
calculation, of the parallelogram of forces, of the Lagrangian equations of 
motion, of Kirchhoff’s law regarding emission and absorption, of the law 
of entropy, and of the proposition concerning the existence of roots of an 
equation.
 
But critical examination of these ‘proofs’ shows that they are not 
in themselves proofs, but basically only make it possible to trace things 
back to certain deeper propositions, which in turn are now to be regarded 
as new axioms instead of the propositions to be proved. The actual so-
called axioms of geometry, arithmetic, statics, mechanics, radiation theory, 
or thermodynamics arose in this way. These axioms form a layer of axioms 
which lies deeper than the axiom-layer given by the recently-mentioned 
fundamental theorems of the individual field of knowledge. The proce-
dure of the axiomatic method, as it is expressed here, amounts to a deepen-
ing of the foundations of the individual domains of knowledge—a deepening 
that is necessary for every edifice that one wishes to expand and to build 
higher while preserving its stability.22
The progress of the axiomatic method is thus a movement in two directions: one 
towards the consequences of the axioms, and one towards the foundations of the 
axioms. Hilbert himself regards the second movement as required for the for-
mer. Moreover, his main concern seems to be that of the unity of science, and he 
regards the deepening as a move towards unification. I suspect he believes that, 
without ensuring the consistency of two fields by grounding their axioms in a 
deeper field, the results of the different fields might give rise to contradictions. 
Hilbert concludes by stating that it is through the axiomatic method that math-
ematics acquires a leading role in science: 

216 · boris demarest  
anything at all that can be the object of scientific thought becomes de-
pendent on the axiomatic method, and thereby indirectly on mathemat-
ics, as soon as it is ripe for the formation of a theory. By pushing ahead 
to ever deeper layers of axioms in the sense explained above we also win 
ever-deeper insights into the essence of scientific thought itself, and we 
become ever more conscious of the unity of our knowledge. In the sign 
of the axiomatic method, mathematics is summoned to a leading role in 
science.23
It would be an error, however, to regard the role of the axiomatic method as solely 
one of either providing an a priori source of scientific theorems, or a source of 
unification. Much more important for Hilbert is the two tasks it sets on assessing 
a system of axioms:
If the theory of a field of knowledge—that is, the framework of concepts 
that represents it—is to serve its purpose of orienting and ordering, then 
it must satisfy two requirements above all: first it should give us an over-
view of the independence and dependence of the propositions of the theory; 
second, it should give us a guarantee of the consistency of all the proposi-
tions of the theory. In particular, the axioms of each theory are to be exam-
ined from these two points of view.24 
Together, these two tasks can serve the purpose of clarifying the concepts of this 
theory by showing how and whether different propositions following from the 
system are dependent upon each other, and how and whether they are consistent 
with each other. An important comment Hilbert makes in this context is that 
“electrodynamic inertia and Einsteinian gravitation are compatible with the corre-
sponding concepts of the classical theories, since the classical concepts can be 
conceived as limiting cases of the more general concepts in the new theories”25.
This gives us a more central role of the axiomatic method: the ability to test anew 
the concepts of a theory by showing how they relate, and whether they in fact 
contradict certain other concepts, in case we are otherwise badly placed to assess 
these. These properties are, I believe, central to understanding Bachelard’s own 
interest in the axiomatic method. Hilbert does not figure centrally in Bachelard’s 
work, but when he does figure in it, it is as a reminder of the axiomatic method. In 
the context of a discussion of Gustave Juvet’s work on the relation between the 
axiomatic method and the recent developments of physics, Bachelard quotes the 

the new axiomatic method · 217 
famous opening lines of Hilbert’s Foundations of Geometry:
Let us consider three distinct systems of things. The things composing the 
first system, we will call points and designate them by the letters A, B, C, 
…; those of the second, we will call straight lines and designate them by 
the letters a, b, c, …; and those of the third system, we will call planes and 
designate them by the Greek letters α, β, γ, …. The points are called the 
elements of linear geometry; the points and straight lines, the elements 
of plane geometry; and the points, lines, and planes, the elements of the 
geometry of space or the elements of space.26
What is remarkable about this opening is that it does not start from the notions 
of points, lines and planes. Rather, it introduces these notions as names of three 
distinct systems of things. The work than proceeds to characterize these systems 
through axioms. This is regarded as an effort of abstraction and formalization: 
an effort is made to think, under these concepts, no more than what is explicitly 
attributed to them through the axioms, and these axioms are, correspondently, 
regarded as offering an implicit definition of these concepts. Bachelard comments 
on the passage as follows:
All precautions have been taken, then, to ensure that the comprehension 
of objects is, so to say, a comprehension from above and not from be-
low, as the comprehension of substantial origin was. Stated yet otherwise, 
these are uniquely relation, and in way substantial qualities.27
This passage indicates that, for Bachelard, a central feature of the axiomatic meth-
od is that it characterizes concepts and objects through their mutual relations, 
rather than internally. Important for my present purposes is that he describes 
this as a shift in the notion of comprehension or intension. For the previous con-
ception of a concept, the thing was thought through its comprehension “from 
below,” for the new axiomatic method, it is thought through its comprehension 
“from above.” This comprehension from above, the context reveals, is the com-
prehension as implicit definition through axioms and other such relations.
It is this distinction between two conceptions of comprehension which allows 
us to understand Bachelard’s otherwise rather enigmatic, and seemingly illogi-
cal statement, that in the new scientific spirit, a concept is generalized by adding 
to its comprehension. I will here briefly present an analysis of the New Scientific 

218 · boris demarest  
Spirit according to which this “intensional enrichment” comprises two compo-
nent movements.
Bachelard means to show this through various examples, but I will focus here 
on his discussion of non-Euclidean geometry and non-Newtonian mechanics. Of 
non-Euclidean geometry, Bachelard writes the following:
One could say, in a paradoxical manner, that the starting point of non-
euclideanism consists in the purification of a pure notion, in the simplifi-
cation of a simple notion. In fact, […] one ends up wondering whether the 
straight line with the parallel doesn’t correspond to a special straight line, 
to a notion that is too rich, in short, to a notion that is already composite.28
Bachelard is commenting here on the movement through which one realizes that 
the line as we consider it in Euclidean geometry is not a simple notion, but rather 
a composite one, and that it is therefore only a special case of the line. If we were 
to eliminate the special restrictions, we would arrive at a simpler, more general 
notion, and thereby extend the notion of line to new geometries. This sounds 
natural enough as a reading, but it also seems to say the exact opposite of what 
Bachelard seems to hold about the relation between extension and intension in 
the new scientific spirit, namely that it generalizes through enrichment in com-
prehension. Here, Bachelard seems to say that in non-Euclidean geometry, we 
realize that a concept we thought was perfectly general and perfectly simple is, 
in fact, complex and therefore restricted. Sure enough, the comprehension is en-
riched in this case, but no extension seems to be won. And the concept of a line 
is extended beyond the case of Euclidean geometry, but only, it seems, through 
further simplification. The old law linking intension and extension as inversely 
related is upheld perfectly.
This initial puzzle, I want to suggest, rests on a confusion, and more precisely a 
confusion about the shifting meaning of comprehension in the two statements. 
The above story describes the process of generalization of the concept of a line 
from the perspective of its comprehension “from below,” namely the internal 
meaning. In this respect, it is perfectly true that the notion of a line in Euclidean 
geometry is revealed to contain hidden specifications, and that the removal of 
these specifications yields a more general concept. But Bachelard also wants us to 
consider the idea from the perspective of the comprehension “from above”: “the 
pangeometry eliminates arbitrary presuppositions, or rather she neutralizes them 

the new axiomatic method · 219 
by the sole fact that she seeks to offer a complete picture of all presuppositions.”29 I 
propose that we read this passage in the following manner: the process of gener-
alization through which the axiomatic method arrived at a more general concept 
of line, not restricted to the Euclidean case, is indeed one whereby the concept 
is purified. But this was possible only by increasing the amount of relations to be 
specified between concepts, and the internal criteria of application for the con-
cept. Only by effacing the need to specify a variety of possible variations along 
several dimensions could the concept of a line in euclidean geometry be regarded 
as simple, and it is this simplicity that prohibited its generalization. Ironically 
then, the higher generality of the concept of a line in geometry is gained through 
the multiplication of relations between concepts and of parameters to be speci-
fied. Bachelard makes a similar point with respect to the concept of mass in non-
Newtonian mechanics:
Naturally, […] it would be all too easy to find the classical mass as a par-
ticular case of relativist masses. For this, it would suffice to efface the in-
ternal mathematics, to suppress all the theoretical finesse that would yield 
a complex rationalism. We would find back the simplified reality and the 
simplified rationalism. Hence, we would deduce, by effacement, Newto-
nian mechanics from Einsteinian mechanics, without ever being able to 
make the inverse deduction, in detail or in the whole.30
The process of specification to the restricted case is regarded here as a process of 
effacement of precisely the complexity of theory and of the internal mathematics 
of a notion. The restricted case is not a product of specification, of complication, 
but of simplification. This is essential to Bachelard’s philosophy, and reveals that, 
by comprehension he means the rich structure of the theory as that which deliv-
ers meaning, rather than the content of an individual concept. Concepts can be 
generalized once their solipsism is opened up, i.e. once they are revealed to have 
a rich content, consisting of all the choices and suppositions made, and all the 
parameters the values of which were held fixed rather than variable. Here, we find 
the conceptual holism which other commentators31 have found in Bachelard. The 
meaning of a concept reflects the theory in which it is embedded, and grows as its 
relations within this theory become more elaborate and precise.32
 

220 · boris demarest  
INTENSIONAL ENRICHMENT AND PHENOMENOTECHNIQUE
From the cases described just now, Bachelard draws a further lesson:
When one makes the balance of knowledge in the system of the 19th cen-
tury and in that of the 20th, with respect to particular concepts, one must 
conclude that these concepts have enlarged by becoming more precise 
and that they can no longer be taken to be simple, except to the extent 
that one remains content with simplifications. Before, it was imagined that 
it was through application that concepts became complicated—it was 
believed that concepts were always applied well or poorly; considered in 
themselves, they were believed to be simple and pure. In the new thought, 
the effort of precision is no longer made at the moment of application: it 
is made at the origin, at the level of principles and concepts.33
Bachelard’s picture of past thought is that there, concepts were thought to be 
perfectly simple and general in themselves, and that the problem of precision 
were an issue of application: a concept is immutable and perfectly general. The 
problem of application is the problem of our relating the concept to reality, of 
relating its comprehension to its extension. Here, we might be in error, due to the 
complexity of nature and the finite nature of our capacities. For Bachelard, how-
ever, the problem of complexity and precision is proper to concepts themselves. 
The process through which a concept becomes applicable is that through which it 
also loses its vagueness, through which it is opened up to reveal the parameters, 
the compatibilities and incompatibilities, that it hid from sight in its simple or 
simplified form. This rejoins the crucial passage from the Formation of the Scientific 
Spirit, which I will repeat and complete:
In my opinion, the richness of a scientific concept can be measured through 
its capacity for deformation. This richness cannot be attached to an iso-
lated phenomenon discovered to be richer and richer in characters, richer 
and richer in comprehension. Even less can this richness be attached to a 
collection that would gather round the most heteroclite phenomena, that 
would be extended, in a contingent manner, to new cases. The intermedi-
ary nuance would be realized if the enrichment in extension became nec-
essary, as coordinated as the richness in comprehension. In order to incor-
porate new experimental proofs, one ought to deform primitive concepts 
and study the conditions of application of a concept in the meaning of the 

the new axiomatic method · 221 
concept itself and should especially incorporate the conditions of applica-
tion of concept in the meaning of a concept itself.34
We are now in a better position to assess the relation between conditions of ap-
plication and comprehension. The analyses of the previous sections revealed that, 
for Bachelard, a concept becomes more general as it is more exactly characterized 
by explicating the suppositions, the parameters, the conditions laying behind it. 
Only when subsumed under a rich system of concepts, only when the relations 
between these concepts become fully specified, can the full extension of the con-
cept be properly assessed. But in this case, it also becomes clear how it is appli-
cable to the situation. The various parameters to be considered in applying the 
concept are not extraneous to it, are no external complications, but are part of its 
meaning, in the sense of its comprehension from above.
But the explicitation of meaning in this way has a further important benefit. It 
reveals possibilities that were unfathomed before. For the Cartesian image of a 
concept, the modalities regarding this concept were considered to be seen, im-
mediately and clearly, in the concept itself. The possibility of its generalization 
to another case, the restriction to a specific case, or the applicability to an un-
considered case, were all seen directly as part of the concept. By opening up the 
concept, but understanding its meaning through its complex relations and the 
axiomatic system in which it figures, new possibilities are recognized. Two pa-
rameters which were previously seen as organically related can now be regarded 
as independent. More important, assumptions that were previously considered 
ludicrous now become a possibility. In the case of geometry, this became the sus-
picion that non-Euclidean geometries might be consistent, and that the concepts 
of points and lines did not automatically preclude a geometry where the parallel 
postulate does not hold. But it also suggests important things for physics. In the 
Philosophy of No, Bachelard describes the case of Dirac’s concept of a negative 
mass:
For the scientist of the 19th century, the concept of a negative mass would 
have been a monstrous concept. It would have been a fundamental sign of 
an error in the theory that would have produced it. […]
 
It is in this way that the dialectical philosophy of “why not?,” which 
is characteristic of the new scientific spirit, enters the scene. Why can’t 
mass be negative? Which essential theoretical modification could legiti-
mate a negative mass? From which experimental perspective would we 

222 · boris demarest  
be able to discover a negative mass? […] In short, the theory holds strong, 
she doesn’t hesitate, at the expense of some modifications at the base, to 
search for realizations of an entirely new concept, without roots in com-
mon reality.35
This passage again contrasts the older conception of a concept, which has a clear 
inner comprehension, excluding and including certain possibilities necessarily, 
with the new conception as concerned primarily with a concept’s impossibility 
from the perspective of the total system of concepts. Here, we see again the axi-
omatic method, which explicitly asks the question of independence and consis-
tency, and tries to envisage a system in which the assumption of negative mass 
would turn out coherent. By mathematically elaborating the concept of mass, Di-
rac uncovered new possibilities, possibilities previously considered ludicrous a 
priori. One of the core virtues of the new axiomatic method is to create these new 
possibilities through mathematical analysis.
But this does not just happen through mathematical analysis. Bachelard reveals 
that the concept of negative mass as a possibility prompts at least two questions, 
namely:
1. How must our theory be altered such that this concept can be coherent 
and consistent with the rest of the theory?
2. What would it mean to discover, by means of an experiment, such a 
negative mass?
The second question, Bachelard immediately proceeds to clarify, is the issue of 
realization. The new conceptual possibility generates a new concept, and the new 
scientific spirit is thereby prompted to realize this concept, which is, Bachelard 
notes “without roots in common reality.” 
This is how the axiomatic method also steers research: we are not just dealing 
with a theoretical exercise, but we are already thinking about a possible experi-
ence that would instantiate that theoretical insight. This realization, this possible 
experience, we all know, must be constructed, by the mediation of theoretically 
informed instruments, in what he calls phenomenotechnique. What these realize 
are new possibilities, new concepts, and, since these concepts are thought through 
their relations, new relations between concepts. In experiments, concepts are pit-
ted against each other, their boundaries and relations are put to the test, put un-

the new axiomatic method · 223 
der stress, and this, of course, can happen only if their relations are precise, are 
explicit. If the concepts remain too vague, if the relations between them remain 
imprecise, no experiment, no observation can be instructive on them.
This is part of Bachelard’s anti-Baconianism. It is not that we must not strive to 
take into account the whole extension of a concept, nor that our concepts cannot 
be informed by our experience. It is rather that it is a precise concept, formulated 
in advance, which must be put to the test in its extension. And here, the instances 
are less informative than the constructed case where the boundaries of this con-
cept, its ability to be precisified in these different contexts, and its precise rela-
tions and differences with other conferences, become realized.
But Bachelard warns us that it is a mistake to think of the phase of theoretical 
reflection and that of theory testing as two-distinct phases. If one does so, one is 
considering theoretical reflection in science as abstract reasoning in which one 
(largely qualitatively) appreciates the implications of one’s theory, and only later 
devises a method to test the truth of a hypothesis. In such an attempt, the precisi-
fication and the conditions of application of a concept are relevant only when one 
proceeds to the testing phase. For Bachelard, such a view misunderstands both 
the fruitful role of experimentation in concept-formation, and the productive role 
of mathematics in theorizing. In his view, new theoretical vistas can be reached 
only through mathematical precision, and the latter is always partly motivated by 
questions concerning experimental set-up and measurement.
This reveals that, for all his talk of instruments, technology and practice, Bache-
lard’s philosophy remains a philosophy of concepts, or more precisely of concepts 
and their relations. Concepts, however, cease to be pre-given, individual entities, 
but become rather nodes in a structural network of relations, determining possi-
bilities, and conditions of application. Shifts in these relations, unsuspected pos-
sibilities, prompt further experimentation, which is the attempt to instantiate a 
possibility, to put to the test, not a theory, but a relation between concepts, and 
perhaps most importantly, to test the capacity for deformation of concepts.
CONCEPT FORMATION AND CONCEPT DEFORMATION
In the passage of the Formation of the Scientific Spirit on which this paper is ulti-
mately a long commentary, Bachelard uses the notion of deformation twice to 
characterize what happens to scientific concepts. I want to finish with a sugges-

224 · boris demarest  
tion on how to read this idea, and what it serves to reveal. The puzzle offered by 
Bachelard’s philosophy, and by similar philosophies insisting on both the struc-
tural, holistic nature of systems of concepts and historical change, is that they 
incur challenges in explaining the continuity of concepts. In itself, this might be 
thought unimportant for those interested in the historical discontinuities charac-
terizing science. Read from this perspective, Bachelard does not have a problem: 
he can simply insist that, underlying the stability of the term, the concept, e.g. 
of “mass” or of “line” has changed irrevocably, such that it is no longer the same 
concept. The stability of the term perhaps fools some philosophers, who fail to 
pay close attention to the development of the sciences, that the same concept is 
at stake, whereas in fact we are now in an incommensurable system of concepts, 
where the original term takes on a completely new meaning.
But this does not seem to be what Bachelard imagines as the progress of science. 
Sure, the scientific spirit itself is marked by discontinuities, and methods can be 
valid in one historical phase and invalid in the next. But this does not mean that 
the system of concepts succeed one another discontinuously. This is already sug-
gested by Bachelard’s own statements on how earlier sciences relate to later, how 
Euclidean geometry relates to the pangeometry of the new era, how Newtonian 
mechanics relate to Einsteinian mechanics:
The generalization by the no ought to include what it denies. In fact, the 
whole spring of scientific thought for the past century stems from such 
dialectical generalizations with the envelopment of what they deny. In this 
way, non-Euclidean geometry envelops Euclidean geometry, non-Newto-
nian mechanics envelops Newtonian mechanics: wave mechanics envel-
ops relativist mechanics.36
For Bachelard to be able to say this, some relation between two historical phases 
of the same concepts must be maintained, such that we can reasonably say that it 
is still the same concept. This should not be a surprising result, since Bachelard 
insists time and time again on the historicity of concepts, and a concept could 
not have a history if it can only be replaced. We should take the language of gen-
eralization more at face value: for a concept to become generalized, it is neces-
sary that it be opened, that it become more complex, that it reveal its relations to 
other concepts, its precise conditions of applications. It is not the case that one 
concept is replaced by another, that a concept changes if its comprehension, i.e. 
its meaning changes. Again, in the crucial pages of the Formation of the Scientific 

the new axiomatic method · 225 
Spirit, we read:
Scientific conceptualization requires a series of concepts on its way to be 
perfected in order to receive the dynamism that I’m aiming for, in order to 
form an axis of inventive thoughts.
 
This conceptualization totalizes and actualizes the history of a 
concept. Beyond history, pushed by history, it solicits experiments in or-
der to deform a historical stage of the concept. In experiment, it seeks 
occasions to complicate the concept, to apply it in spite of the resistance of 
this concept, in order to realize the conditions of application that reality 
never brings together.37
This famously historicist and developmental picture of science is a picture of 
conceptualization. Conceptualization is continuous process whereby the differ-
ent historical stages of a concept are deformed, or rather, are prompted to be de-
formed by complication cum application, and the concept at any historical stage 
is marked by the history of these deformations. A concept is a fruitful scientific 
concept, engaged in an axiological axis, to the extent that it can be transformed in 
spite of its resistance.
I am tempted to expand here on an inkling of Canguilhem’s namely that, when 
Bachelard finally seeks to characterize the broad image of his historicist structur-
alism, he does so in unmistakenly biological terms, such as mutation, élan vital, 
etc….38 And indeed, it is difficult to overlook the peculiar image of a concept in 
Bachelard, which somehow, in spite of itself, prompts its own deformation, and 
shows its use and longevity in its ability to overcome these challenges through 
successful deformation. A good concept overcomes its earlier, vague, imaginative, 
intuitive content, but does so because of the virtues of that content, virtues in its 
capacity to prompt and undergo deformation. A Bachelardian concept is valued 
in the same way as a Canguilhemian organism: by its capacity to overcome its cur-
rent norms, but its capacity to adapt, to create a new norm for itself, by its plas-
ticity and capacity to deformation in order to remain alive. Like a Canguilhemian 
organism, a Bachelardian concept is one that persists to the extent that it can 
balance its robustness with its adaptiveness, such that the latter is always not just 
in spite of, but also for the sake of the former.
As Ferdinand Gonseth, philosophical fellow traveler to Bachelard, once wrote: 
“a living concept cannot be created at once by a merely verbal definition, but 

226 · boris demarest  
emerges from its past and is modified by its use”39 Gonseth stresses the notion 
of “living,” seemingly aware of the organic connotations of the properties he is 
ascribing to a concept, and thereby, once again, resonating with Bachelard’s meta-
phors. These metaphors, then, are not superficial, but instead express something 
essential about the theory of conceptualization we find in these authors. It could 
be worth it to prompt these concepts, and their as yet but metaphorical imagery, 
to become more precise, and to be deformed. One way to do so may be through a 
different interpretation of the meaning of an axiom. Gonseth, after all, continued 
the passage I just quoted with the following remark:
Of the extent to which a word can veer away from its original sense bit by 
bit, the extent to which the concept that it covers can vary by impercep-
tible degrees and at times by sudden jumps, the word axiom is right now 
a striking example.40
I believe the word axiom is a striking example precisely because it evolved from 
the concept of that which stipulates, for now until eternity, the meanings and in-
teractions of concepts, to a concept that is at the heart of a dynamical picture of 
concepts and conceptualization. As I remarked in the second section of this paper, 
Hilbert thought of the axiomatic method as comprised of two movements: one 
that deduces results from the basis axioms in the old style, and one that deepens 
the basis by seeking to unify and generalize. In this paper, I have sought to show 
that Bachelard saw the potential of the second movement as one of the motors 
of the process of conceptualization. It is this process which opens up concepts, 
articulates their simple states by increasing their relations with each other, by 
interdefining them to a greater and greater extent. But I have also wanted to sug-
gest that the process of conceptualization is therefore also the process whereby 
concepts persist through scientific change by changing in this way. This is not a 
paradox, as Bachelard admitted in his early Essai sur la connaissance approchée that 
concepts are marked by plasticity:
There are in the life of the mind moments that leave indelible traces, ele-
ments that nothing, it seems, could rectify: such are concepts. Of course, 
certain concepts that reveal themselves to be perfectly inadequate can 
disappear altogether, but they cannot fold to express as yet an experience 
that no longer supports them.
 
But these solidly fixed elements present themselves at the summit 
of the process of conceptualization. If we could penetrate into the dust 

the new axiomatic method · 227 
of minor concepts that spring immediately from sensation, we would see 
their fundamental plastic character.41
Bachelard rejects the idea that concepts are fixed, and thereby also rejects the 
idea that they either persist unchanged or disappear altogether. This idea that 
concepts need to remain fixed to persist is the fundamental idea that lies behind 
both anti-historical perspectives and historical perspectives that insist on relativ-
ism and incommensurability: any change in the meaning of the concept would 
imply that we are, in fact, dealing with another concept.42 To Bachelard, this is 
wrong: concepts are dynamical in nature, and can persist through change. It is 
this very plasticity that can allow them to persist while theories, paradigms, epis-
temes, etc. change around them. Of course, some die out, some fail to persist, but 
those that do, do so not just because they have overcome the obstacles thrown 
at them by recalcitrant experience or theoretical change, but rather because they 
pre-empted the latter by their internal impulse for complication, and have over-
come the internal obstacles that lead them to avoid deformation, all while main-
taining enough of their identity. The new scientific spirit, for Bachelard, is one 
that recognizes this change and participates in the elaboration of concepts. Such 
a dynamic picture of concepts can maintain continuity and rationality in the face 
of historicity. 
That Bachelard’s philosophy is, in this manner, a philosophy of concepts, does 
not mean that he ultimately falls prey to the atavistic positivism that is often 
criticized in his name. This judgment is based on the idea that all aspects of such 
a theory are ultimately hazardous to understanding discontinuity, technology and 
the social in science. Rather, Bachelard’s specific way to focus on concepts may 
help overcome some of the tensions to which attention to discontinuity, technol-
ogy and the social have given rise. For one, Hans Radder has expressed concern 
over the tendency among some philosophers of experiment to regard concepts as 
local to experiments, and suggests that the non-locality of theoretical concepts 
is what allows them to have “‘unintended consequences’ that might arise from 
their potential use in novel situations”43. Bachelard’s philosophy of concepts as 
persisting through deformation and suggesting unsuspected possibilities might 
be crucial to understanding how, for him, experiment has an “instructive” role in 
science. Secondly, this picture of Bachelard’s philosophy of concepts might aid in 
some of the problems his discontinuist picture raises for the dialogue between 
history of science and philosophy of science, as has been recognized by Christina 
Chimisso:

228 · boris demarest  
Bachelard’s view of history of science […] seems to leave little space for 
narratives that are not those ‘sanctioned’ by current science and that link 
present science with lapsed doctrines. It also interdicts long narratives, as 
science for Bachelard has only begun at the end of the eighteenth-centu-
ry.44
On my interpretation, Bachelard ultimately allows for some continuity between 
the different deformations of the same concept, and ascribes to conceptual reflec-
tion some transformative role in science. In this way, his picture allows for a more 
positive role of history of science in philosophy of science than one would expect. 
The actuality of Bachelard thereby seems to consist in the opportunity he allowed 
for a philosophy of science that pays equal attention to all dimensions of science 
and integrates the various approaches to the sciences in a relation that he might 
have preferred to call dialectical. 

the new axiomatic method · 229 
NOTES
1. Bruno Latour & Steve Woolgar (1986). Laboratory Life. The Construction of Scientific Facts. Prin-
ceton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, p. 258.
2. Dominique Lecourt (1975). Pour une Critique de l’épistémologie (Bachelard, Canguilhem, Foucault. 
Paris : François Maspero, p. 83.
3. For an account that stresses the revolt against continuism as central to Bachelard’s thinking, 
see Dominique Lecour (1972). Marxism and Epistemology, trans. Ben Brewster. London: NLB, p. 
22.
4. Gaston Bachelard (2011). La formation de l’esprit scientifique. Paris: Vrin, p. 74. All translations of 
quotes from Bachelard are mine.
5. Gaston Bachelard (1966). Le rationalisme appliqué (3rd ed). Paris : Presses Universitaires de 
France, p.125.
6. Lacourt, Marxism and Epistemology, p. 83.
7. For a sustained historiographical reconstruction of the Aristotelian Model of Science, see Wil-
lem R. de Jong & Arianna Betti (2010). “The Classical Model of Science: a millennia-old model of 
scientific rationality,” Synthese 174: pp. 185-203. 
8. For an extensive treatment of the partial rejection of Aristotle’s axiomatic method in the Early 
Modern period of philosophy, see Boris Demarest (2013) “From the More Geometrico to the 
More Algebraico: D’Alembert and the Enlightenment’s Transformation of Systematic Order,” 
Philosophica 88: pp. 71-102.
9. Cf. Francis Bacon’s Instauratio Magna in (1975). The Works of Francis Bacon vol. 4, edited by 
James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis & Douglas Denon Heath. London: Longmans, p.50.
10. Bachelard, Formation, p. 76.
11. Bachelard is in all likelihood thinking of the equally heteroclite—to the modern eye—“table 
of essence and presence” of heat to be found at Bacon, Instauratio Magna, pp. 127-129, as the 
main source of inspiration for such assortments of phenomena.
12. In the Port Royal Logique, Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole explicitly cast doubt the Aris-
totelian evaluation of syllogistics in favor of conceptual clarity. Cf. Antoine Arnauld and Pierre 
Nicole. (1684). La Logique ou l’art de penser (5th ed.). Lyon: Mathieu Libéral, pp. 215-216.
13. Blaise Pascal, De l’esprit géométrique, in Victor Rocher (ed.) (1873) Pensées de pascal publiées 
d’après le texte authentique et le seul vrai plan de l’auteur avec des notes philosophiques et théologiques 
et une notice biographique. Tours : Alfred Mam, p.471.
14. John Locke (1975), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding Locke, J. (ed. Nidditch, P. H.). 
Oxford: Clarendon press, p. 671.
15. Immanuel Kant, Jäsche Logik, in (1992). Lectures on Logic (ed. & trans. Michael Young). Cam-
bridge : Cambridge University Press, p.593.
16. In later developments in the history of logic, the validity of law has been called into question, 
of course (see for instance Clarence Irving Lewis (1918). A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, p.322.
17. Pascal, De l’esprit géométrique, pp. 473-474.
18. David Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” in William Ewald (ed.) (1996). From Kant to Hilbert: A 
Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics vol. 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1105-
1115.
19. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” pp. 1107-1108.
20. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” p. 1108.

230 · boris demarest  
21. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” p. 1108.
22. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” pp. 1108-1109.
23. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” p. 1115.
24. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” p. 1109.
25. Hilbert, “Axiomatic Thought,” pp. 1111-1112
26. David Hilbert (1950). The Foundations of Geometry, trans. E.J. Townsend. Lasalle: Open Court, 
p. 2.
27. Gaston Bachelard (1934). Le nouvel Esprit Scientifique. Paris : Presses Universitaires de France, 
p. 33.
28. Bachelard, nouvel Esprit, p. 27.
29. Bachelard, nouvel Esprit, p. 31, my stress.
30. Bachelard, nouvel Esprit, pp. 51-52.
31. Cf. Mary Tiles (1985). Bachelard, Science and Objectivity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp.145-146.
32. The role of late 19th century developments in mathematics and theoretical physics and their 
implications for the nature of concepts and for epistemological change figure in a similar way 
in Ernst Cassirer (1910) Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff. Berlin: Bruno Cassirer Verlag. Both 
philosophers insist that the meaning of the basic of concepts of science change to more rela-
tional and functional and less “substantial.” I am not sure whether this is due to a direct influ-
ence, and suspect rather that the influence of Brunschvicg on Bachelard made the latter sensitive 
to neo-Kantian ideas. In fact, there is a way in which Bachelard’s approach, with its insistence on 
a productive role for the a priori, is still a neo-Kantian approach, and Bachelard himself admits 
that his non-kantism is not a rejection, but rather a rectification of Kant, in the same way in 
which the Marburger Schule considered itself to be a rectification of Kant informed by the devel-
opment of science.
33. Bachelard, nouvel Esprit, p. 52
34. Bachelard, Formation, p. 74.
35. Gaston Bachelard (1940). La Philosophie du Non. Paris : Presses Universitaires de France, pp. 
35-36.
36. Bachelard, Philosophie du Non, p. 138.
37. Bachelard, Formation, pp. 74-75.
38. Georges Canguilhem, “L’histoire des sciences dans l’oeuvre épistémologique de Gaston 
Bachelard,” in (2015). Études d’histoire et de philosophie des sciences concernants les vivants et 
la vie. Paris: Vrin, p. 193.
39. Ferdinand Gonseth (1936). Les mathématiques et la réalité : essai sur la méthode axiomatique. 
Paris: Alcan, p. 236.
40. Gonseth, mathématiques et réalité, p. 236.
41. Gaston Bachelard (1928). Essai sur la connaissance approchée. Paris: Vrin, p. 17.
42. A more subtle version of this view, which can be discerned in Dominique Lecourt’s work (cf. 
Lecourt, Marxism and Epistemology, pp. 84-86), is that the continuity is as it were retroactive: a 
new stage of science establishes retroactive continuity by projecting its own knowledge into the 
past, and assimilating its earlier stage into the former. Although one could reconstruct passages 
such as those on the relation between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry in this fashion, 
Stephen Gaukroger was right to insist that this does not square with all of Bachelard’s comments 
on the persistence of concepts (cf. Stephen Gaukroger (1976). “Bachelard and the Problem of 
Epistemological Analysis.” Studies in the history and Philosophy of Science 7(3), p. 234.). Of course, 

the new axiomatic method · 231 
Lecourt could regard these passages as atavistic but inessential, where Gaukroger regards them 
as essential and revealing of a central flaw. In this paper, I have attempted to offer a different ap-
preciation, and regard this as Bachelard’s actuality.
43. Hans Radder (2003). “Technology and Theory in Experimental Science,” in Hans Radder 
(ed.) The Philosophy of Scientific Experimentation. Pittsburgh, Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press, 
158.
44. Christina Chimisso (2015). “Narrative and epistemology: Georges Canguilhem’s concept of 
scientific ideology,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 54, p.66.

parrhesia 31 · 2019 · 232-257
automate the womb: 
ecologies and technologies 
of reproduction. helen hester, 
xenofeminism (polity, 2018)
bogna m. konior
Xenofeminism is a “feminism frustrated with the need for its existence.”1 With 
regards to other feminisms, it is a scavenger. It strips for parts, reassembles, takes 
what it wants, hacks and reorients. It wants to develop a symbiotic or parasitic 
relation to already existing technologies (including those of thought). One of the 
timely passages from the manifesto, 
...the excess of modesty in feminist agendas of recent decades is not propor-
tionate to the monstrous complexity of our reality, a reality crosshatched 
with fibre-optic cables, radio and microwaves, oil and gas pipelines, aerial 
and shipping routes, and the unrelenting, simultaneous execution of mil-
lions of communication protocols with every passing millisecond...
alludes to xenofeminism’s willingness to deal with problems inherent to digi-
tal culture or global complexity and trespass where, it claims, feminist theory 
might not dare.2 Xenofeminism sees the rising wave of technocracy but instead of 
searching for a buoy, it wants to catch the surf. It wants “superior forms of cor-
ruption.” Its hands and souls are not pure but synthetic. Its body is not made in 
the Garden of Eden but continually engineered in accordance with available tools. 
There is nothing, it claims, “that cannot be studied scientifically and manipulated 
technologically.” 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 233 
In my encounters with people interested in the manifesto, from scholars of phi-
losophy and politicians to crypto-inclined artists and post-witchcraft feminists 
frustrated with the commodification of their once-revolutionary pursuits, it be-
came apparent that it was a versatile beast. It produced widely incompatible in-
terpretations. Some admired its disavowal of redemptive identity politics and of 
transphobia, some were interested in the aesthetics of accelerationism, others in 
cyberfeminist legacy. All, however, were drawn to xenofeminism’s explicit alliance 
with reason, artifice, technology, and science: “our lot is cast with technoscience, 
where nothing is so sacred that it cannot be re-engineered.” For mainstream femi-
nist theory, dominated by postmodern and poststructural philosophy, statements 
such as “emancipatory tactics can be scaled up for universal implementation” 
or “science is not an expression but a suspension of gender” are heresies. More 
so, against feminist luddites, xenofeminism embraces the artificial and desires to 
drive a stake through the heart of ecofeminist affirmations of women as caring 
parental and environmental protectors.  
“The Xenofeminist Manifesto,” first released online by Laboria Cuboniks in 2015 
and later printed by Verso was a polemic and a provocation, borne out of furious 
paragraph assembling in a collectively-edited Google doc.3 If some hands were 
more crafty than others in this labor, we can only tell it by studying the solo work 
of its authors, picking and guessing, recognizing overlapping thematic or stylistic 
concerns across publications. This, however, would be to the displeasure of the 
collective, which asserted in the manifesto that Laboria Cuboniks is a blueprint 
for an open source software, “a mutable architecture,” a platform. For those who 
wanted to engage in an annotated polemic, this presented a dilemma: how can we 
debate with a faceless manifesto that changes its directions with ease, like colored 
blocks on a Rubik’s cube? Manifestos are slippery, incoherent. As Lucca Fraser of 
Laboria Cuboniks said, manifestos are like “stand up comedy...their job is to point 
things out . . . [t]o nudge you into adopting a point of view that might not have 
seemed available beforehand.”4 
The initial commitment to anonymity was a tip of the hat to cyberfeminism. In 
the early days of our omnivorous cyberswamp the possibility of erasing and col-
lectivising ourselves on anonymous networks was quite the narrative.5 The mani-
festo’s cyberpunky 90s online aesthetics allude in particular to VNS Matrix, the 
legendary “terminators of the moral code, mercenaries of slime...saboteurs of big 
daddy mainframe.”6 But anonymity is hard to preserve these days. Soon enough, 
faces were put to sentences and it became more difficult to not see the manifesto 

234 · bogna m. konior  
as an intersection of its makers’ specific interests rather than a generic layout. 
Amy Ireland, Helen Hester, Patricia Reed, Diann Bauer, Lucca Fraser and Katrina 
Burch first met in Berlin in 2014 at an intensive workshop, “Emancipation as Nav-
igation: From the Space of Reasons to the Space of Freedoms,” organized by phi-
losophers Armen Avanessian, Reza Negarestani and Peter Wolfendale and hosted 
at the Haus der Kulturen der Welt in Berlin, an institution that has proven itself 
hospitable to theoretical research willing to contend with the contemporary.7 
Collectives are intriguing and one could easily imagine a Laboria Cuboniks profile 
in The New Yorker, where it would be presumed that the key to the text always lies 
in its authors’ biographies. Character traits could be played up until we end up 
with a fraudulent but catchy cast of six xenofeminists in our remake of Jeff Van-
derMeer’s Annihilation: the cyberwitch, the academic, the hacker, the engineer, 
the artist, the sociologist. This would be a fool’s errand for each of them is all six 
at once.8 And yet, for scholars of xenofeminism, stalker impulse cannot be easily 
overcome, mostly because each postulate in the manifesto becomes clearer for 
knowing the solo work of its writers. Digging around, one could even suspect that 
the group’s name, an anagram of Nicolas Bourbaki, a collective of mathematicians 
that devoted themselves to rigorous abstraction, was the brainchild of Burch who 
performs under the name Yonda Lemma, a term also borrowed from mathemat-
ics, which describes the embedding of a local category into a set of functions as 
morphisms.9 
While not all members of Laboria Cuboniks led research clusters at that fateful 
summer school, the two that did already signaled what was to become crucial for 
the manifesto. Fraser listed her topics as “universality as intersectionality” and 
“intersectionality and genericity,” while Hester’s were “feminism and technol-
ogy after [Shulamith] Firestone” and “re-engineering embodiment.” How could 
it be, xenofeminism asks, that contemporary feminism can accept the systemic 
nature of a totality called capitalism while at the same time championing “local, 
fragmented, or partial” solutions? Hester summarizes the problem well by citing 
an intersecting analysis: 
Nancy Fraser, too, has addressed this apparent “shrinking of emancipato-
ry vision at the fin de siècle,” linking this with “a major shift in the feminist 
imaginary” during the 1980s and 1990s—that is, with a move away from 
attempting to remake political economy (redistribution) and towards an 
effort at transforming culture (recognition).10

helen hester, xenofeminism · 235 
Rather than participating in the game of representations, xenofeminism wants to 
focus on seizing material tools, technologies with which to re-engineer biology 
and society. While it might recognize the strategic benefit of identities, it main-
tains its commitment to shedding them in the future, like a snake sheds its skin. 
Xeno, after all, means strange, alien, unfamiliar. It would be correct to think of 
xenofeminism as a xenomorph. As a tool, xenofeminism is a way of admitting that 
we are already inside a giant technological accelerator and we need to keep adjust-
ing accordingly. This calls for strategic flexibility: no-body is sacred and the fu-
ture might demand bio-engineering ourselves beyond current species limitations. 
After all, the manifesto asserts that we “[live in] a world that swarms with tech-
nological mediation, interlacing our daily lives with abstraction, virtuality, and 
complexity.” We are all jacked into a planetary machine that continually speeds 
up, the question is, which sockets do we plug into? If xenofeminism is a platform, 
a program, a protocol, a tool that can be grasped across its different iterations, it 
is united by the desire to write the outside in, to undermine what appears natural 
and therefore lend itself to continued context-dependent use of technology.   
In the manifesto, the concepts of nature and alienation work in tandem—one is 
discouraged and the other one is applauded. Two of the earliest academic publica-
tions assessing this rhetoric, by Emma Wilson and myself respectively, were very 
much critical of how the concept of ‘nature’ was used—Wilson showed that biolo-
gist and feminist scholar of technology Donna Haraway contributed to resolving 
the false binary of technology and nature, while I pointed out that xenofeminism’s 
desire to overcome ‘nature’ is undermined by its disregard for decolonial and an-
thropological scholarship as well as its unawareness of advances made in the field 
of animal studies.11 Because of this omission, the vilified ‘nature’ becomes little 
more than a strawman, an aestheticised choice of machine over flesh that is only 
valid on terms of its own misdefinition of ‘nature’ as separate from technology.  
One of its most daring propositions, that “alienation is the labor of freedom’s 
construction,” seems to allude to Marxism but disappointingly turns out to be a 
stylistic choice, an interesting way of saying ‘embrace technology, refuse nature 
(the given),’ rather than an attempt to challenge Marx assessment of ‘alienation’ 
as an oppressive axiom of capitalism. In xenofeminism, alienation means siding 
with the artificial, ‘unnatural’ and unfamiliar as well as refusing the use of ‘na-
ture’ to justify wholly ‘social’ configurations such as the ‘natural’ predisposition of 
women to motherhood or care. This position ostensibly goes directly against the 
early ecofeminist dogma that womanhood (1) is defined by its proximity to nature 

236 · bogna m. konior  
and (2) is therefore predisposed as separate from technology. In a previous ar-
ticle, I protested that by this logic, both xenofeminism and ecofeminism perpetu-
ate the nature/technology split, while in fact it would be more correct to say that 
nature grasped properly is technology and technology grasped properly is nature. 
To further summarise my previous criticism, while ecofeminism hailing from the 
1990s is indeed guilty of essentialism and naïve fetishisation of ‘nature,’ fetishis-
ing ‘artifice’ and ‘technology’ does little to amend the problem. Decolonial and 
new materialist feminist scholarship today works hard to conquer these dogmas, 
often amending the problems of early ecofeminism and frankly providing a more 
nuanced approach to the relation between nature and culture than xenofeminism 
does in the manifesto.12 
With this specific definition of alienation in mind, embracing alienation and ar-
tifice is a common thread running through the manifesto, which proclaims that 
“the real emancipatory potential of technology remains unrealized,” opening up 
to speculative design. Like Cypher in the infamous steak-savoring scene, xeno-
feminism not only stays in the Matrix but wants to be its architects. This, for 
Burch and Reed, translates into doing away with the human as an unremarkable 
given. Burch has recently written about ‘xenolistening’ and ‘xenotemporality,’ her 
term for the increasingly common idea that the anthropogenic perception of time 
has to open up towards scales beyond humans’ perceptual capacities:
We would like to recode machinic blasts from the future, decaying some-
place else. Could be—a science fiction—leaking of sound into the skin, can-
nibalized hard, core soaked, bled from pixel-seasoned flesh. Navigational 
schemes are hitched by the xenotype... The coming techno-sapiens’ living 
body never listens alone. It traverses cosmically low. And wide enough, 
to pulse in flowering nonhuman drones, and to array purple-shifting anti-
bodies for transcendental immanence.13
Reed similarly appreciates the unfamiliar. She writes, “alienation is a necessary 
force of estrangement from what is.” This can point us to the yet unarticulated 
genealogies of xenofeminism, for example in the work of Wendy Chun or Luci-
ana Parisi. Reed recalls Chun’s observation that algorithms are often structured 
through “homophily in network design,” an “automation of familiarity” that cre-
ates self-replicating ‘echo chambers’ and where coming into contact with the alien 
is written out of the algorithm itself. “Xenophily,” as she explains, is a proposition 
for an infrastructure of machinic intelligence that would write the alien in.14 In 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 237 
calling for “commitments [both to and] beyond our species” as a principle that 
should guide both automation and speculative design in the climate change era, 
Bauer explicitly relates such inquiries to justice.15 Fraser, who works on variety of 
theoretical and practical projects, sees in xenofeminism a rejuvenation of cyber-
feminism but this time able to both respond to and design artificial intelligence or 
emancipatory online spaces. In critical dialogue with the works of Firestone, Sar-
ah Kember, Alison Adam and Nick Land, Fraser understands xenofeminism as a 
project continuous with the Enlightenment, where the mastery of ‘nature’ would 
lead not only to the abolition of sex but to “the emancipation of intelligence.”16   
Hester and Ireland have most explicitly taken up the problem of xenofemininity. 
In an unofficial capacity a historian of the Cybernetic Cultures Research Unit, 
Ireland also remains its most visible heir through the focus on the continuity 
between femininity and alienated, inhuman virtuality. It is useful to keep her take 
on this matter in mind as we move through Hester’s book. “We are used to calls 
to resist the total integration of our world into the machinations of the spectacle,” 
Ireland says in an interview, “to throw off the alienated state that capitalism has 
bequeathed to us and return to more authentic processes, often marked as an 
original human symbiosis with nature.”17 She prefers to throw her lot in with the 
bots, her methodology akin to that of Tetsuo, the Iron Man, the extreme Japanese 
horror film in which the union between man and machine is literal: “I feed my-
self to machines.”18 Following from Sadie Plant’s reading of Luce Irigaray, Ireland 
affirms occult operations within the formless, commodified, inhuman bodies of 
women. Future intelligence will arrive as a thing, she says, and only things can 
understand things—by turning women into things, patriarchy makes women’s al-
liance with machines easy, against its own interest. That womanhood is already 
a spectacle or an ‘unnatural’ simulation without origin is the woman’s gain, not 
her curse: “Because she is continuous with [the spectacle], she is imperceptible 
within it.” This weaponisation of imperceptibility is what aligns women to de-
mons to machines, all excluded from the economy of the Phallus on the shiny 
side of the screen. Like other members of the collective, Ireland argues against 
the repetition of the same, the homeostasis of heteronormativity, in favor of ‘the 
replicunt’: “woman plus man produces homeostasis (the equilibrium of inequal-
ity), but woman plus woman, or woman plus machine, recalibrates the productive 
drive,” eventually pushing it over the edge and into something else, something 
inhuman, a glitch on the smooth reproduction of the same.19 Following from same 
assumptions, “Gender Acceleration: A Black Paper” by n1x, an affiliate rather than 
core member of the collective, argues that there exists an affinity between trans 

238 · bogna m. konior  
women and the machines, both contribute to the literal erosion of sexed identi-
ties. Artifice is a powerful weapon. Trans women will birth AI daughters.20  
 
With these congruent takes in mind, while Helen Hester’s recently published 
book is titled Xenofeminism it would be a mistake to think that it exhausts the sub-
ject. For those interested in xenofeminist takes on digital economy, artificial intel-
ligence, modern warfare, or climate change, it will be disappointing that, while the 
manifesto claims that xenofeminism is “a feminism of unprecedented cunning, 
scale, and vision,” Hester’s book is only a skilled update of existing Anglophone 
queer and feminist theories interested in domestic, ‘small,’ mundane technolo-
gies and acts of care, which with time may translate bodily autonomy into scalable 
political change. ‘Repurposing’ is for Hester a key methodology; it describes not 
only her self-professed DIY approach to technology but also her method of engag-
ing with existing feminist oeuvre. This can hardly be levelled as a criticism of the 
book, which is transparent about its scope and written with considerable care and 
intelligence. As an academic work, it also provides a bibliography, showing us a 
part of xenofeminism’s genealogy. While it works well as an origin story, the more 
daring elements of the manifesto that seemed to have attracted most attention 
and were visibly diverging from feminist theories in the modern academia are 
not addressed in Hester’s book, including the influence that neorationalism, left 
and right accelerationism and contemporary technologies had on xenofeminism. 
Instead, Hester uses the monograph to build bridges between various existing 
strands of feminism, re-activating and updating well-known feminist proposi-
tions of bodily autonomy.  
In the introduction, Hester briefly mentions xenofeminism’s varied genealogy—
“cyberfeminism, posthumanism, accelerationism, neorationalism, materialist 
feminism and so on” (1)—but her contribution has a particular lineage, informed 
by her expertise in trans, queer and feminist studies as well as Marxism (which in 
the book is implied rather than explicit). The slim volume focuses on one issue 
in particular: the relation between social and biological reproduction, a largely 
unwaged labor of reproducing both the species and the fabric of society that has 
been historically assigned to women. Women are not separate from technolo-
gy but are already frequently used as sexual and/or reproductive technologies. 
Xenofeminism asks whether a technology can hack itself to begin reproducing 
something alien on a mass scale. For Hester, this means reclaiming some of the 
legacies of feminist post-structuralism, which teaches us that what presents itself 
as ‘natural’ is indistinguishable from social norms. Notably, Hester sees in xeno-

helen hester, xenofeminism · 239 
feminism and in its embrace of ‘artifice’ a way of invalidating the claims of trans-
exclusionary radical feminism in which the correlation between ‘nature,’ ‘women’ 
and ‘goodness’ is particularly visible.   
In this context, Hester names the three pillars of xenofeminism: technomaterial-
ism, anti-naturalism and gender abolitionism (6). The book is divided into three 
sections, all of which focus on re-engineering social and sexual reproduction. In 
“What is Xenofeminism?,” her chief interlocutors are Shulamith Firestone and 
eco-feminist thinkers like Vandana Shiva and Maria Mies. Here, Hester challenges 
normative uses of ‘nature’ and instead proposes a synthetic or technologized un-
derstanding of womanhood, which accommodates both trans and cis women. In 
“Xenofeminist Futurities,” her main references are Haraway and queer theorist 
Lee Edelman, who have been vocal on the issues of non-reproductive futures. If 
read literally, this can mean direct discouragement of having babies. Through an 
attentive close reading, Hester puts forth a proposition for a futurity that does 
not loop itself in the boring, oppressive repetition of the daddy-mommy-me fam-
ily structure while also being hospitable to actual parents and children. As much 
as the first two resemble a literature review, “Xenofeminist Technologies” is an 
extended case study chapter of Del-Em, a menstrual extraction tool designed by 
American feminists in the 1970s. This surgical device allowed one to pass the en-
tire menses at once and doubled as an early abortion technique. While the project 
was short-lived, Hester uses it as an example of proto-xenofeminist tech. 
Each chapter, in its own way, declares a war on ‘nature,’ a strategy shared with the 
manifesto. Hester’s book deals mostly with how things are constructed as natu-
ral or are made to appear natural, although she also considers a future in which 
currently biologically sexed states such as pregnancy could be technologically 
mutated. I have previously argued that xenofeminism fails to define what it con-
siders as ‘nature’ and thus perpetuates the modernist split between nature and 
technology. For Hester, ‘nature’ chiefly means ‘natural womanhood,’ or simply 
‘the normative,’ as in what appears ‘given’ and thus naturalised or accepted as 
if it was natural. This is not only hardly novel but also quite confusing. What 
is meant here by ‘nature’ is a cultural construct of what ‘nature’ is, a question 
that feminism occupied itself with since its academic inception, and particularly 
with Judith Butler to new materialism, post-humanism or even philosophers like 
Catherine Malabou.21 As Hester herself mentions by referring to the work of Eliza-
beth Wilson, biology itself is neither binary nor normative (21). To the contrary, 
biology grasped scientifically is strange and unfamiliar and does not obey human 

240 · bogna m. konior  
gender binaries. From that standpoint, xenofeminism is natural and it is patriar-
chy that is artificial. What only appears natural changes frequently over time; the 
normative is a more widely-applicable word albeit with less dramatic and stylistic 
potential. When Hester writes that “xenofeminism is invested in constructing an 
alien future,” she really means confronting what is normative, not natural, that is 
the heterosexual social matrix (33). Sympathetic as we may be to the xenofemi-
nist project, in the Anthropocene, defining ‘nature’ as ‘the normative’ is a lot to 
ask. Unlike the normative, nature, understood as the field of science, cannot be 
just or unjust, nature does not care, regardless of whether humans place ethical 
judgments in its name. Hester already knows this; as she writes in a recent es-
say, “[Xenofeminism] privilege[s] the synthetic over the organic, the mediated 
over the immediate, and technologized natureculture over an inflated idea of “the 
natural” but this consideration has not quite made it into the book.22 Flawed as it 
is, the slogan of “changing nature” nevertheless groups potent imageries together 
and lets xenofeminism address both the normative and some of the current limi-
tations of biology.
Xenofeminism, a feminism frustrated with the necessity of its existence, longs to 
automate itself, to be the mechanism by which women write themselves out of 
the labor of having to continually reproduce feminism. I titled this review “Auto-
mate the Womb” to allude to Hester’s focus on challenging naturalised patterns 
of social and sexual reproduction and re-engineering the structures of women’s 
labor, from bodies to homes and workplaces. This title also refers to Hester’s and 
Laboria Cuboniks’ desire to nip in the bud trans-exclusionary feminism: noth-
ing about women’s bodies, and especially the romanticised space of gestation, 
is so sacred that it cannot be re-engineered. Automating bodies is about freeing 
us from limitations and breaking whatever connection they might have to the 
ideal of ‘womanhood,’ while remaining vigilant in materialist analyses of how the 
diversity of bodies that women inhabit provoke various types of oppression. In 
the remainder of this essay, I will review Hester’s book and contextualise it by 
relating it to the arguments she advances in her other published work and to the 
Xenofeminist Manifesto.
 
NOTHING ‘NATURAL’: WHAT IS XENOFEMINISM? 
 
Nothing should be accepted as fixed, permanent, or ‘given’... anyone who has 
been deemed ‘unnatural’ in the face of reigning biological norms, anyone’s who’s 
experienced injustice wrought in the name of natural order, will realize that the 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 241 
glorification of ‘nature’ has nothing to offer us—the queer and trans among us, 
the differently-abled, as well as those who have suffered discrimination due to 
pregnancy or duties connected to child-rearing.
Xenofeminist Manifesto 
 
“In the name of feminism, ‘Nature’ shall no longer be a refuge of injustice, or a 
basis for any political justification whatsoever! If nature is unjust, change nature!” 
These lines spell the closing sentences of the manifesto. But what does nature 
mean here? Is changing nature about free access to hormones or geoengineering? 
Is it about breeding animals for human organ transplants? Is it about Monsanto 
crops, industrial farming and climate change? Is it about biology or health? Or 
maybe about developing ectogenesis chambers for all mammals? How can nature 
be just or unjust at all? Is that not a purely theological question? While the mani-
festo promises riches, enthusiastically naming perplexing technological complex-
ity as its goal of study and reform, Hester is interested in a much more common 
feminist theme: ‘nature’ as a code word for essentialist gender identity. 
There are two general ways to think about identity: destructive or restorative. The 
first is the idea that as subjects we should struggle against identities and recognize 
how they are constructed. While identity markers might serve us well in finding 
one another or even developing political projects, “[in the longer term] the full 
range of these traits should be stripped of their social significance, and therefore 
of their ability to act as vectors of discrimination” (29). This is a balancing act be-
cause patriarchy also calls for removing identity from consideration. The patriar-
chal project, however, is strongly irrational and subjective, for the only gendered 
characteristics it wants to abolish are those that it simultaneously constructs as 
‘female.’ When patriarchy calls for the abolition of gender, what it means is the 
exclusion of those whom it perceives as women or ‘womanly.’ When the mani-
festo calls for the abolition of gender, it calls for a genuinely abolitionist project 
carried out through to the end, where gender becomes a meaningless designation 
and therefore identitarian “characteristics are no more a basis of discrimination 
than the color of one’s eyes,” as the manifesto puts it. 
While Hester recognizes the importance of exposing gendered histories, in which 
women are ‘naturally’ predisposed to something, at the moment when “a recogni-
tion of historical gender roles tips into an apparent naturalization of these roles is 
the point at which this approach loses its xenofeminist efficacy” (37) and tilts to-
wards the politics of restorative or redemptive identity. This approach posits that 

242 · bogna m. konior  
there exists an ‘innate’ identity—there is something ‘natural’ to how gender is 
organised, which is tweaked and perverted, and therefore has to be restored. One 
way to understand this is through the quarrel that Hester has with the version of 
ecofeminism advocated by Vandana Shiva and Maria Mies, who criticise science, 
technology and patriarchy as ways of manipulating or intervening into nature 
(17), and defined women as naturally caring “environmental guardians attributed 
to their connection with practices such as familial care, subsistence farming, and 
social reproduction” (37). The manifesto minces no words about such ideas: “Es-
sentialist naturalism reeks of theology—the sooner it is exorcised, the better.” To 
define nature as a pseudo-theological limit to what humans are or could be is by 
definition preservationist or conservative, where trespassing against a narrative 
of the natural has to be punished. Alyson Escalante’s Gender Nihilism: An Anti-
Manifesto notices similar redemptive undertones in relation to some branches of 
trans* politics based on the idea that ‘we are born this way:’
The current politics of trans liberation have staked their claims on a re-
demptive understanding of identity. Whether through a doctor or psy-
chologist’s diagnosis, or through personal self-affirmation in the form of a 
social utterance, we have come to believe that there is some internal truth to 
gender that we must divine [my emphasis]. (27)
This is of no interest to xenofeminism, which, replicating Haraway’s cyborg, fa-
vors bio-synthetic, technologically-assembled bodies that escape ‘natural’ iden-
tities as smoothly as zombies crawl away from both death and life. For Haraway, 
whose influence on xenofeminism is clear, the ‘cyborg’ is “a world without gender, 
which is perhaps a world with no genesis,” without an origin to be recovered.23 In 
agreement with Judith Butler, the manifesto is not only opposed to gender bina-
ries but to all possible gender formations that stake their claim in the belief that 
the gender ‘we were born with,’ whatever that may be, is natural and that all we 
need to do is to reclaim it:
 
A sense of the world’s volatility and artificiality seems to have faded from 
contemporary queer and feminist politics, in favour of a plural but static 
constellation of gender identities, in whose bleak light equations of the 
good and the natural are stubbornly restored.
In contrast to such redemptive politics, in an interview, Lucca describes trans-
artificiality as xenofeminism: 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 243 
It’s not really surprising, for example, that there’s a disproportionately 
large overlap between computer hackers and trans people. You’re unlikely 
to try to hack your own endocrine system and radically rebuild yourself as 
a social and embodied subject if you don’t have a bit of restless radicalism 
in you. It’s not surprising if the same sensibility eventually has you reverse 
engineering software and searching for exploits.24 
Thus recognizing how identity is used to reinforce oppression in the present, xe-
nofeminism also wants to continually engineer ‘artificial’ identities. This might 
mean going against what is currently celebrated as ‘natural’ or the idea that our 
‘natural’ bodies are sacred and cannot be modified through biohacking or hor-
mone therapy. In her monograph, Hester also opposes the idea that anyone, cis or 
trans, should look for the truth of who they are in Mother Nature or in Facebook’s 
drop-down menu of 72 custom gender options. Her quarrel is with all so-called 
‘original’ truths that ostensibly define us. Thus, Lady Gaga’s dictum “born this 
way,” referred to sarcastically in the manifesto, might be a welcome change of 
tune but what it affirms is still only a theological naturalism. “And God created 
man and woman” does not suddenly become a better sentence if we add “and 
seventy-two categories of the gender-nonconforming.” Andrea Long Chu makes 
a similar argument when she asks whether we could see transition “recast in aes-
thetic terms, as if transsexual women decided to transition, not to ‘confirm’ some 
kind of innate gender identity, but because being a man is stupid and boring.”25 
Beyond the false correlation of ‘natural’ with ‘good’ and ‘innate,’ desire is a syn-
thetic, it is the artifice to trump the supposed truth of God or Gaga-given identity. 
We would rather be engineers than goddesses. 
Aside from being a poor riff on theology, the idea that identity is something to 
struggle towards rather than away from might make it harder to see how gender 
is intrinsic to the economy, not to our bodies. Reflecting on how identities relate 
to economy could strengthen Hester’s argument. In the commercial realm, sexed 
identity does not simply mean blue micro-suits for boys and pink dresses for girls. 
It is not just boys and girls. “Their name is Legion, for they are many,” to borrow 
from the highly quotable Gospel of Mark.26 As Malcolm Harris writes, capital does 
not “double down” but multiplies and “splits,” it is not a bureaucratic stiffness 
but an ever-multiplying fluid network of porous powers that spit up identity con-
stellations through exploitation.27 As a ‘gender nihilist’ would add, understand-
ing that there is no transcendent truth to identity simultaneously shows us how 
identity is assembled under power: “Gender, race, sexuality, and every other nor-

244 · bogna m. konior  
mative category is not referencing a truth about the body of the subject or about 
the soul of the subject. These categories construct the subject and the self” [my 
emphasis].28 Joni Pitt and Sophie Monk demonstrate how queerness is not an 
identity but a relation of economic marginalisation:
[We] understand queerness not only as something to pair with precarity, 
but queerness as precarity…Welfare cuts not only constitute deprivation, 
but also serve a disciplinary function: to individualise the welfare needs 
of the queer community into discrete cases, and exclude the possibility 
of collective organising and solidarity. Since the proletarian queer must 
individually justify their reliance upon welfare services, this intensifies the 
precarity of their access to welfare and forecloses the possibility of genu-
ine ‘support’... Think also about those queer orphans expelled from the 
family unit. As long as their parents can be shown to have assets, housing 
benefit remains unavailable to the child unless they endure a long and 
emotionally harrowing process of documenting that they are genuinely 
estranged from their parents.29
Xenofeminism could considerably benefit from considering how queerness is en-
acted by capital as an identity of economic precarity and how capitalism is a type 
of magical thinking or sorcery, which creates with one hand what it describes with 
the other. To treat identity not as a tool but as a truth is no revolutionary gesture 
but grist to the mill of neoliberal capitalism. As the middle-class disappears, as 
more people are pushed towards poverty while working longer hours without ba-
sic social services, as the proletariat turns into the ‘precariat’ that survives from 
one short-term contract to the next, capitalism breeds and commodifies pseudo-
difference in seventy-two shades. In that, it homogenizes through difference, that is, 
commercial identity is carved out in ways so specific and static as to secure the 
proliferation of small bubbles that produce very specific advertising outcomes. 
On a psychological or organisational level, this translates into a promise that if we 
specify our search criteria diligently enough we will finally be not among strang-
ers but friends who are like us. From this angle, the fact that xenofeminism wel-
comes the stranger, the unknown, “all of our alien kin,” as the manifesto says, is 
potentially very promising. This contingency and incompatibility should be wea-
ponised and gamified, not rejected in favor of ‘more of the same.’
In this opposition to the stasis of sameness, Hester’s monograph goes beyond 
challenging how personal identities are carved out. Echoing feminist critique of 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 245 
normativity, she wants to challenge the household and the nuclear family unit: 
From the street to the home, domestic space too must not escape our ten-
tacles. So profoundly ingrained, domestic space has been deemed impos-
sible to disembed, where the home as norm has been conflated with home 
as fact, as an un-remakeable given. Stultifying ‘domestic realism’ has no 
home on our horizon.30
The success of this idea of the single family home is really quite remarkable when 
one considers its many limitations: it tends to be isolated, labor intensive, and en-
ergy inefficient; it’s also riven with tensions, interpersonal animosities, and power 
asymmetries, which are often felt particularly acutely by queer youth.31
Hester insists that the home must be reimagined because so many are already 
forced outside of it. Indeed, a report by the Albert Kennedy Trust in 2015 tells 
us that close to 70% of British LGBT youth experienced abuse from their own 
families. Ejected from the family structure, they compose 24% of youth home-
less population. How could we insist on reproducing the home if it so often is a 
predatory space for women, trans* and queer people who are forced to conform 
to a structure that uses them as cannon fodder to its own replication? Patriarchy 
desires the uninterrupted reproduction of the home, the copying of mommies 
into wives, the replication of blissful and oblivious childhoods complete with the 
uneven distribution of labor that assures them. Nostalgia for the good old times 
pervades the hearts of those who were at the receiving end of reproductive labor 
but remained blind to its workings.
The family can inflict passivity and isolation—women are expected to seamlessly 
invest all ethical ambition and unpaid labor into their children while withdrawing 
from public life. Just by the possibility of being mothers, women are supposed to 
be a natural measure of virtuous commitment yet they are rarely allowed to par-
ticipate, as mothers, in the political sphere. The manifesto urges to build alterna-
tive families and homes, not bound in the endless reproduction of this paralysis:
We see too well that reinventions of family structure and domestic life 
are currently only possible at the cost of either withdrawing from the eco-
nomic sphere—the way of the commune—or bearing its burdens many-
fold—the way of the single parent. If we want to break the inertia that 
has kept the moribund figure of the nuclear family unit in place, which 

246 · bogna m. konior  
has stubbornly worked to isolate women from the public sphere, and men 
from the lives of their children, while penalizing those who stray from 
it, we must overhaul the material infrastructure and break the economic 
cycles that lock it in place.
For Hester, this means better communal infrastructure, “a renewed emphasis on 
community resources, collective housing, and socialized care practices [which] 
could offer real opportunities for restructuring social reproduction.”32 While on 
the surface these ideas read as unproblematic, xenofeminism must be weary of 
how the idea of the ‘commune,’ popular in the west since the 1960s, is currently 
re-deployed in the service of neoliberal working spaces. For example, in her article 
“Promethean Labors,” Hester writes approvingly of previous feminist attempts at 
communal living but they also sound suspiciously close to the Facebook campus 
2.0.:
These feminists devised various approaches to rethinking domesticity, 
such as collective residential neighborhoods featuring cooperative house-
keeping centers and kitchen-less houses, apartment hotels with commu-
nal dining rooms and spaces for shared childcare, and courtyard housing 
blocks with a common laundry, parlor, and library (as well as spaces for 
food preparation).33
The general argument is that an ‘artificial,’ that is, not normative approach to 
identity and family could eventually scale up to a polity but how to achieve this 
remains an open question. Contrary to the manifesto’s enthusiasm for large-scale 
thinking, Hester proposes small actions and local interventions, without explain-
ing how exactly could they scale up or compete with neoliberal ‘community’ mod-
els. If not facilitated by supra-national corporate infrastructures, how could this 
transition happen without a large actor, such as the state? In the absence of such 
explanation, her xenofeminism implicitly embraces standard state-socialist blue-
prints, satisfying little of the appetite for systemic techno-political complexity 
that the manifesto awakens and alienating a sizeable portion of geopolitical ter-
ritories that have already witnessed the failure of this model. 
BEYOND SEX: XENOFEMINIST FUTURITIES
No more futureless repetition on the treadmill of capital, no more submis-
sion to the drudgery of labour, productive and reproductive alike, no more 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 247 
reification of the given masked as critique. Our future requires depetrifica-
tion. 
Xenofeminist Manifesto 
The idea of seizing technological progress to re-engineer reproduction has been 
enjoying popularity in recent conceptual fiction. In Louis Erdrich’s Future Home of 
the Living God, evolution runs backwards and women birth primordial species.34 In 
XX, a lesbian couple uses an ovum-to-ovum technology, which lets them conceive 
offspring without sperm.35 The Handmaid’s Tale, now adapted as a series, seduces 
with its reproductive dystopia.36 Reproductive labor is also at the heart of Hes-
ter’s book. This concerns both social reproduction and sexual reproduction. As 
described by Silvia Federici, with the rise of capitalism, most reproductive work 
was confined to the realm of the domestic, where women reproduce the fabric of 
society by giving birth to the workforce, managing the household and maintain-
ing familial bonds.37 By naturalising and exploiting this unwaged labor, capitalism 
deferred the lion’s share of its own reproduction to women, who were perceived 
as ‘naturally’ predisposed to it. As dismissive as society is towards these jobs, they 
are the necessary social glue that assures the smooth reproduction of both the 
workplace and the family, with women’s secretarial, administrative, emotional, 
and sexual work as the invisible foundation. 
While absent in the monograph, in her published essays, Hester pays attention to 
the future of work from the perspective of the so-called ‘feminisation’ of labor, 
which means that work is becoming ‘naturalised’ to the extent that most of it is 
unpaid. It is here worth repeating that for Marx, capitalism as a historical stage 
that displaced feudalism is defined by the alienation of workers from the fruits 
of their own labor. In essence, capitalist exploitation means that an ever-smaller 
group of people benefits from the population’s growing productivity. In fact, in-
equality will expand alongside the increase in production, rather than despite of it. 
Unlike money, which decreases as we use it, capital breeds capital, allowing for 
the number of its owners to decrease and for the wealth gap to grow with time. 
This is precisely why Marx tells us that wealth is measured through disposable 
time, that is, time that multiples its own surplus and becomes truly free. Because 
disposable time is the measure of wealth and the wealth gap is growing, everyone 
but the wealthy has increasingly less free time. Ignoring Marx while repeating 
him, the object-oriented ontologist Ian Bogost calls this “hyperemployment,” de-
fined by growing time-costs of maintaining our social, personal and working lives:

248 · bogna m. konior  
Pay is almost beside the point, because the real cost of hyperemployment 
is time [my emphasis]. We are doing all those [administrative] things oth-
ers aren’t doing instead of all the things we are competent at doing.38 
Acting in a vast conspiracy that continually forces me to cite men in order to point 
out how incompetent they can be at literature review, Bogost gleefully neglects 
the body of work on that exact subject produced at least since the paradigm-set-
ting ‘Wages for Housework’ project in the 1970s. The movement, which is of a 
visible influence on Hester, started in Italy and focused on how capital exploits 
women’s unwaged reproductive labor. Being a woman is the original hyperem-
ployment: it is where personal, administrative, emotional, waged and unwaged 
labor is as necessary as it is disregarded, naturalised and derided. Women are so 
skilled at this work that the work itself became invisible. 
This brings us to Hester’s expertise the field of labor studies, which is not rep-
resented in the book but well-worth mentioning here as a supplement to the 
arguments she advances. In the “Technically Female: Women, Machines, and 
Hyperemployment,” Hester, in dialogue with Nina Power, points out that auto-
mation has long been replacing work coded as feminine. Power recounts how 
the more that women’s disembodied voices are present in society—in interactive 
animated pornography, at the automated shopping checkouts, in apps, on urban 
transport systems—the less the interests of actual women are recognized in the 
public sphere. Hester sums up, “women’s voices have historically been used to is-
sue instructions...precisely because women themselves have not been around [in 
public spaces] to be heard,” which made the sound distinct in all-male environ-
ments.39 Simultaneously, jobs become valued at the moment that machines, rather 
than women, perform them. All work associated with women is rendered either 
invisible or mocked but becomes valuable as soon as the same work is done by a 
machine or an app:
As feminised work becomes technologised work, it may come to be less 
culturally denigrated, and therefore more available to be taken up by dif-
ferent kinds of subjects. Those with choice and cultural capital, in other 
words, may be more willing to perform this labour if it is associated with 
culturally valued [technical] objects rather than with socially disparaged 
[female] subjects.40

helen hester, xenofeminism · 249 
This dynamic of labelling the most necessary work as the most unworthy marks 
women not only in the public workspaces but also in their second office—the 
house. Maintaining a foetus and then bringing up a child is as necessary for the 
species as it is looked down on. Does this mean that as long as women have babies, 
“the heteronormative centre chugs on”? In the second chapter of the book, Hester 
ponders this question through a critical reading of Lee Edelman’s queer-fatalist 
refusal. It is not by accident that every mainstream dystopian film ends with the 
reinstatement of the nuclear family, as if imagining ecological disaster served to 
stir people’s libido and force them to make more babies so that the species can 
survive. This narrative simultaneously makes ‘infertile’ queer lives unworthy of 
reproducing or sustaining, leading Edelman to write, “fuck the social order and 
the Child in whose name we’re collectively terrorized...fuck the whole network 
of Symbolic relations and the future that serves as its prop.”41 While she sympa-
thizes with the way Edelman refuses the violence of heterosexual futurity, Hester 
wants new family structures but also reproductive justice for existing mothers 
and children: taking care of those who do the work of reproduction, making sure 
that the air they breathe is clean, their children, if they want to have them, have 
access to healthcare and a roof over their head, that food and water of quality is 
available, and that sexual harassment and domestic violence are eradicated (55-
65). It is on these grounds that maintaining a liveable environment is for Hester a 
xenofeminist goal. Too often, she is quick to point out, do environmental activists 
mirror paranoid guards of the ‘natural order,’ asking that the bodies of human and 
nonhuman animals are conserved in their present state rather than encouraged to 
co-evolve with and adapt to the increasingly ‘artificial’ environment (45). (Cue the 
famous Alex Jones meltdown about frogs becoming gay because of ‘chemicals.’)42
Hester thus warns not to correlate species survival with forced heterosexuality 
and with the Child as the only figure that commands environmental action while 
at the same time excluding anyone who does not worship its dogma. The book 
would benefit here from engaging with contemporary ecofeminism rather than 
the one from three decades ago! For example, putting into dialogue the work of 
Rebekah Sheldon and Donna Haraway, Sophie Lewis writes that “society requires 
the cipher of the Child…it prefers the ‘melancholic anticipation of future loss’ to 
the messy response-ability of situated ‘living and dying together on a damaged 
earth.’”43 (This fallacy repeats when it comes to other animals: tearing up at the 
prospect of a future loss of a species while at the same time abdicating the respon-
sibility for billions and billions of animal young living their lives under grotesque 
torture in factory farms.) The poster of the Child, seemingly neutral, is no friend 

250 · bogna m. konior  
to queers neither to actual children. Hester criticizes celebrating “the wealthy, 
white ‘yummy mommy’” marching in greenwashed parades with printouts of baby 
faces demanding a better future, while “teenage mothers, black and Latinx par-
ents, trans* and genderqueer subjects, immigrants, refugees, and benefits claim-
ants” are rarely perceived as ‘the future’ that is worth fighting for (52). Indeed, as 
Hester notes, it is people of color, native populations and migrants who had long 
suffered medical racism, eugenics and forced sterilization (14); or were mandated 
to give up their children ‘for their own good,’ no more visibly than in the case of 
Australia’s Stolen Generations, or, even today when Native Canadian women are 
asked to agree to sterilization right after labor if they want to keep their newly-
born children.44 Thus, Hester’s interprets Haraway’s slogan of “make kin, not ba-
bies!” as a call for “post-gender, multi-parent genetic engineering,” where bodies 
and families are “hospitable to otherness” (64-65) and reproductive future means 
something more than just the state refurbishing its ranks by cloning the nuclear 
family (53). 
It is a shame that Hester does not engage decolonial theory, which has been point-
ing out the flaws of ecofeminism since the 1990s. Similarly to the manifesto, Hes-
ter paints ecofeminism as naïve, romantic or essentialist. While it may serve as a 
useful foil against which xenofeminist celebration of artifice can form, this risks 
defining ecofeminism primarily through its new age-ish, western image, ignoring 
politically cognizant, sharp visions of ecofeminism present in the work of indig-
enous scholars. For example, Laura E. Donaldson critiques Clarrisa Estes’ infa-
mous Jungian-tribal Women Who Run with the Wolves: Myths and Stories of the Wild 
Woman Archetype for the misplacement of collective indigenous politics onto the 
terrain of individual growth for wealthy western women.45 Indeed, mainstream 
ecofeminist discourse often slips into the aesthetics of bad self-help books, where 
the essentialised Nature was to be utilized as a site of self-growth for women dis-
connected from their “roots.”46 Decolonial theory points out that these problems 
persist today and that the underlying colonial logic of environmental degradation 
keeps being ignored; these studies are the unacknowledged genealogy of Hester’s 
argument above.47 The move to celebrate ‘artifice’ and reject ‘nature’ can erase 
the work of those who have been deconstructing nature for the last few decades, 
often working in imperial or colonial contexts. Furthermore, while xenofeminism 
describes itself as a feminism of large scale and indeed has ambition to redefine 
not only our individual relation to our bodies but the seemingly immutable social 
structures, it is yet to address the fundamental question of the future, which is 
the ecological crisis. With its current definition of nature as simply ‘the norma-

helen hester, xenofeminism · 251 
tive,’ it appears not best-equipped to do so, a point I already made in my previous 
article on xenofeminism. Despite its promise to challenge the given, Hester’s xe-
nofeminism only envisions single-species households and predominately human 
spaces, thus far providing no reflection on interspecies or ahuman/asocial spaces 
to come.   
 
OUTRO: XENOFEMINIST TECHNOLOGIES 
Why is there so little explicit, organized effort to repurpose technologies 
for progressive gender political ends? XF seeks to strategically deploy ex-
isting technologies to re-engineer the world.
Xenofeminist Manifesto 
Xenofeminism takes cyberfeminism’s positive valuation of technological alien-
ation seriously, it is turned on with—and by the machines, rejects originary 
authenticity, and has days where it wants to merge with matrix.48
Inevitably, Hester also considers the pivotal point of women’s reproductive work: 
pregnancy and child-rearing. The internally estranging process of having a human 
being grow inside one’s body should not be easily disregarded for anyone interest-
ed in the politics of strangeness and alienation—Maggie Nelson’s The Argonauts 
manages to capture this process of othering while at the same time breaking the 
seemingly immutable connection between pregnancy and the heteronormative 
family.49 Hester herself says in an interview that “the baby is the ultimate chemical 
weapon. It makes you feel things that you might not want to feel. Very strange to 
be on the receiving end of.”50 Despite the unfamiliarity of pregnancy and its po-
tential to reconfigure the family unit, we often hear the opposite argument: that 
being a mother or wanting to become one is the most ‘natural’ thing in the world 
and that heteronormative family structure necessarily follows from it. Shiva and 
Mies celebrate submitting to this wild and uncontrollable life force by refusing 
reproductive technologies, and here lies Hester’s quarrel:
[For Shiva and Mies], reproductive technology offers a disenchanted 
alienation, achieved via devolving epistemic authority to medical experts, 
whilst nature offers a (for some reason vastly preferable) enchanting alien-
ation, achieved via the subjection of the impregnated body to forces be-
yond its control.” (17)

252 · bogna m. konior  
Embracing ‘disenchanted’ birth control against natural contingency of concep-
tion, Hester criticizes equating pregnancy with the experience of all women, a 
word far too wide to encompass specifically the group of fertile cis women. Of 
course, under patriarchy, pregnancy has been and continues to be the bane of cis 
women’s oppression, given that a woman’s worth has been historically correlated 
with her ability to produce offspring and ensure the elongation of the family line, 
a fact immortalized in the still enduring tradition of naming kids after the father 
even though almost always it is the mother who suffers all consequences of bear-
ing and bringing up children. Here xenofeminism departs from post-structuralist 
focus on discourse, echoing the return to material reality in the work of scholars 
such as Katerina Kolozova, whose work represents the feminist return to catego-
ries such as the real, the material or the bodily as existing independently of cultur-
al discourse.51 While Hester admits that as of now, pregnancy may be a biological 
difference between various groups of women, xenofeminism “dispute[s] that this 
difference is immutable” (20). In fact, we have already been using technology to 
change this, most notably through in vitro. In the future, there is no reason why 
we should not deploy technology in the service of xeno-pregnancy, either through 
ectogenesis or as of yet undiscovered forms of surrogacy. 
This can make one daydream well beyond Hester’s own arguments. If all human 
bodies could augment themselves or technologically-outsource the production of 
offspring, the marker of ‘womanhood’ might become largely irrelevant as a sexual 
identity and instead transform into a generic technology, allowing the species to 
extended itself through controlled artifice. Even if we were to follow the idea that 
because of being mothers, women are more rational (they have to both decide 
which genes are worth passing and which environments are good for having off-
spring in), that would be all the more reason to make pregnancy a technology ac-
cessible for all. If we set down this path, however, xenofeminism must remember 
how wealthy women’s reproductive labor, from cleaning to child-rearing, has al-
ready been outsourced to poor women, often of color or from developing regions 
such as Eastern Europe. In this morbid ‘solution,’ patriarchy automates its own 
reproduction and the only way for women to reduce their reproductive labor is 
to defer it to other women. We are yet to develop technologies that challenge this 
stasis rather than reproduce current asymmetries.  
Surprisingly, rather than drawing blueprints for contemporary xenotechnologies, 
Hester closes the book with a lengthy case study chapter that focuses on a single 
object, “the Del-Em menstrual extraction device devised by American feminists in 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 253 
the 1970s” (70). It is no wonder that this domestic appliance, born at the height of 
women’s self-help and solidarity movement, is central to a book largely informed 
by scholarship from Second Wave Feminism. A detailed analysis, where every bit 
of information matters, makes the chapter difficult to summarize but shows with 
clarity how Hester’s xenofeminist proposals work in action. A tool of DIY care, 
Del-Em has large-scale applicability (many women menstruate regardless of geo-
political standing), bypasses gatekeepers and functions within a network of com-
munal care. Given the condescension and rejection that women have historically 
suffered and still suffer at the hand of the medical system, this is a fitting case 
study, which connects to the practices of midwives, denounces racist histories 
of genealogy, discusses hormone biohacking, community-created self-care guide-
books for cis and trans women, the National Black Women’s Health project and 
Native American health initiatives, while also reclaiming self-care from YouTube 
influencers and making a case for a feminist international beyond the West. In her 
analysis, Hester demonstrates how she understands the ‘intersectional universal-
ism’ of xenofeminism, akin to Michelle Murphy’s ‘protocol feminism,’ “a form of 
feminism concerned with redrafting and distribution of techno social practices by 
which the care and study of sexed living-being could be conducted” (108). This is 
an argument for adaptability: for a protocol to work, it must be both attentive to 
context and translocal, in other words, it must be intersectional. In her descrip-
tions of such everyday acts of biohacking, Hester embraces cyberfeminist legacy, 
stating that the Internet could facilitate a “bottom-up movement centred on self-
equipping via knowledge exchange” (95). 
On the one hand, Hester’s attentiveness to past feminist and queer work is ad-
mirable, her careful writing style, mindful to remain inclusive, is exemplary. It 
rejuvenates and makes readily relevant various feminist theories from the past 
few decades, giving us a lesson in picking apart problematic legacies.  From this 
angle, it almost rejects the bravado of the manifesto, whose aesthetics are nec-
essarily provocative, its propositions presented as novel, as if without a source. 
Hester, an academic, rushes to correct this, showing us that xenofeminism is in 
fact very aware of its debt to existing feminist work. On the other hand, the mani-
festo—as any manifesto—promises the new, or at least something with which 
to justify its urgency. It is indisputable that the matters of everyday social and 
bodily oppression of women, which Hester pays attention to, are as relevant as 
ever. Yet in the manifesto there is a promise, an allusion to the unacceptable, to 
bio-industrial forms growing someplace dark, where actions lose coherence and 
causality, a world without us. Thus far, it remains only that—a promise, a whisper 

254 · bogna m. konior  
from the other side, a troubled signaling that we need something else or that we 
begin to perceive a challenge of a scale not seen before, humming somewhere 
alongside our digital axes, across our machines, our plants, our bodies, ourselves. 
Hester’s monograph gives us a necessary foundation of xenofeminism—a caring, 
down to earth assessment of every feminism’s obligation to its roots. This type 
of genealogical work is the first step of every feminist praxis. But from the future 
arrives something else, it may even be a crisis that effortlessly drills holes in our 
fabrics of sense, action, temporality. Extinction, automation and cunning autono-
mous intelligences that remain to be detected already wrap themselves around 
our bodies, families, states and planets. Nowhere to be found in the monograph, 
the promised xenofeminist vision of “unprecedented cunning” and scale is still 
to come. 
BOGNA M. KONIOR is a Lecturer in New Media and Digital Culture at the 
University of Amsterdam, a Research Fellow at the International Research 
Institute for Cultural Techniques and Media Philosophy at the Bauhaus-
Universität Weimar, the Media and Technology editor at the Hong Kong 
Review of Books and the editor of Oraxiom: A Journal of Non-Philosophy. 
In 2016, she was a visiting researcher in Media and Culture at the ICON 
Center for the Humanities at the University of Utrecht. She publishes 
widely across academic and popular venues, on the subjects of media, cli-
mate change, technology-oriented feminism, contemporary continental 
philosophy, as well as post-globalist collapse cultures. Her recent work is 
published in Transformations: Journal of Media and Culture and Identities: 
Journal for Politics, Gender and Culture. She collaborated with film festivals 
internationally, including the Five Flavour Film Festival in Warsaw and 
the ReVersed: Poetry-film Festival in Amsterdam. She holds a BA in Film 
Studies (Theory and Practice), RMa in Media Studies, PhD in Cultural 
Analysis, and was previously teaching classes in media and culture at the 
Lingnan University and the Hong Kong Baptist University.
 

helen hester, xenofeminism · 255 
NOTES
1. Diann Bauer, XF take 4, Vimeo video, 4:48, May 10, 2016, https://vimeo.com/216831883.
2. Laboria Cuboniks, “The Xenofeminist Manifesto,” accessed January 22, 2018,  http://www.labo-
riacuboniks.net/. 
3. Laboria Cuboniks, The Xenofeminist Manifesto. London: Verso, 2018.
4. Esme Hogeveen and Lucca Fraser, “Feminisms of the Future, Now: Rethinking Technofeminism 
and the Manifesto Form,” C Magazine, issue 132, winter 2017, https://cmagazine.com/issues/132/
feminisms-of-the-future-now-rethinking-technofeminism-and-the-ma
5. I discuss this in depth in my forthcoming article. Bogna M. Konior, “Apocalypse Memes for the 
Anthropocene God: Mediating Crisis and the Memetic Body Politic“ Post-Memes: Seizing the Memes 
of Production. Eds Daniel Bristow, Alfie Bown. New York: Punctum, 2019. 
6. VNS Matrix, “The Cyberfeminist Manifesto for the 21st Century,” accessed January 22, 2018, 
https://vnsmatrix.net/the-cyberfeminist-manifesto-for-the-21st-century/ 
7. “Summer School: Emancipating the Concept of Freedom,” Haus der Kulturen der Welt, July 11, 
2014, https://www.hkw.de/en/programm/projekte/veranstaltung/p_104884.php.
8. Jeff VanderMeer, Annihilation (The Southern Reach Trilogy), New York: Farrar, Straus and Gir-
oux, 2014.
9. Rosemary Heather, “The Next Universal—An Interview with Laboria Cuboniks,” Kunsthalle 
Wien, December 11, 2015, http://kunsthallewien.at/#/blog/2015/12/next-universal-interview-labo-
ria-cuboniks.
10. Helen Hester, “Promethean Labors and Domestic Realism,” e-flux, September 25, 2017, https://
www.e-flux.com/architecture/artificial-labor/140680/promethean-labors-and-domestic-realism/ 
11. Emma Wilson, “Cyborg Anamnesis: #Accelerate’s Feminist Prototypes,” PLATFORM: Journal 
of Media & Communication 6:2 (July 2015): 33–45. 
12. For example, Diana Coole and Samantha Frost, New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics, 
Durham: Duke University Press, 2010; or Richard Grusin, ed Anthropocene Feminism, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2017. 
13. Katrina Burch, “Xenolistening,” Academia.edu paper, assessed January 22, 2018,  https://www.
academia.edu/22864128/Xenolistening.
14. Patricia Reed, “Xenophily and Computational Denaturalization” e-flux Architecture: Artifical La-
bor. Eds. Nick Axel, Nikolaus Hirsch, Christoph Thun-Hohenstein, Anton Vidokle, Marlies Wirth, 
accessed January 22, 2018, http://www.aestheticmanagement.com/writing/xenophily-and-compu-
tational-denaturalization/. 
15. Diann Bauer, “Crisis of work“ Harvard Design Magazine 46.  
16. Olivia Lucca Fraser, “Artificial Intelligence in the Age of Sexual Reproduction: Sketches for 
Xenofeminism” Glass Bead, September 29, 2014. 
17. Edia Connole and Amy Ireland, “Edia Connole Interviews Amy Ireland for Freaky Friday!!” 
Queen Mobs, December 26, 2014, https://queenmobs.com/2014/12/edia-connole-interviews-amy-
ireland-freaky-friday/.
18. Ibid.
19. Amy Ireland, “Black Circuit: Code for the Numbers to Come” e-flux 80, March 2017, https://
www.e-flux.com/journal/80/100016/black-circuit-code-for-the-numbers-to-come/. 
20. n1x, “Gender Acceleration: A Blackpaper” Vast Abrupt, October 31, 2018, https://vastabrupt.
com/2018/10/31/gender-acceleration/.
21. For example, Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Abingdon: 

256 · bogna m. konior  
Routledge, 1990; Catherine Malabou, Changing Difference: The Feminine and the Question of Philoso-
phy. Trans. Carolyn Shread. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2011.  
22. Hester, Promethean Labors. 
23. Donna Haraway, “The Cyborg Manifesto” Manifestly Haraway, Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 2016, 3-91, 7. 
24. Hogeveen and Fraser, “Feminisms of the Future.”
25. Ibid.
26. In this epic scene, Jesus asks a possessed man how many demons currently live inside him. The 
man replies, “My name is legion for we are many,” before the demons are cast out and hide in a pig, 
which starts running manically around and then drowns itself. Mark 5:9. 
27. Malcolm Harris, “Turn Down for What?” The New Inquiry, July 14, 2014, https://thenewinquiry.
com/turn-down-for-what/. 
28. Alyson Escalante, “Gender Nihilism: An Anti-Manifesto,” libcom.org, June 22, 2016, https://
libcom.org/library/gender-nihilism-anti-manifesto.
29. Joni Pitt and Sophie Monk, “‘We build a wall around our sanctuaries’: Queerness and Precari-
ty” Novara Media, August 28, 2016, https://novaramedia.com/2016/08/28/we-build-a-wall-around-
our-sanctuaries-queerness-as-precarity/.
30. Laboria Cuboniks, The Xenofeminist Manifesto.
31. Francis Tseng and Helen Hester, “Particular Universals” The New Inquiry, December 22, 2016, 
https://thenewinquiry.com/particular-universals/. 
32. Helen Hester, “The World Transformed through Care,” The Progressive Policy Think Thank, 
October 10, 2017, https://www.ippr.org/juncture-item/the-world-transformed-through-care-by-
helen-hester. 
33. Hester, “Promethean Labours.”
34. Louis Erdrich, Future Home of the Living God, New York: Harper, 2017. 
35. Angela Chadwick, XX. London: Little, Brown Book Group, 2018.
36. Margaret Atwood, The Handmaid’s Tale. New York City: Anchor Books, 1998.  
37. Silvia Federici, Wages Against Housework. Bristol and London: Power of Women Collective, 
Falling Wall Press, 1975. 
38. Ian Bogost, “Hyperemployment, or the Exhausting Work of the Technology User” The Atlantic, 
November 8, 2013, https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/11/hyperemployment-
or-the-exhausting-work-of-the-technology-user/281149/.
39. Helen Hester, “Technically Female: Women, Machines, and Hyperemployment” Salvage, Au-
gust 8, 2016, http://salvage.zone/in-print/technically-female-women-machines-and-hyperemploy-
ment/.
40. Ibid.
41. Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive. Durham: Duke University Press, 
2004. 
42. Bruce Y. Lee, “Alex Jones’ Top 10 Health Claims And Why They Are Wrong” Forbes, August 
16, 2018, https://www.forbes.com/sites/brucelee/2018/08/16/alex-jones-top-10-health-claims-and-
why-they-are-wrong/#6c5c669f3e7f. 
43. Sophie A. Lewis. “Enjoy It While It Lasts: From Sterility Apocalypses to Non-Nihilistic Non-
Reproduction” Science as Culture, 27:3 (2018): 408-412, 408. 
44. CBC Radio, “Indigenous women kept from seeing their newborn babies until agreeing to 
sterilization, says lawyer” CBC radio, November 13, 2018, https://www.cbc.ca/radio/thecurrent/
the-current-for-november-13-2018-1.4902679/indigenous-women-kept-from-seeing-their-new-

helen hester, xenofeminism · 257 
born-babies-until-agreeing-to-sterilization-says-lawyer-1.4902693?fbclid=IwAR1trSxyLWquio-
otYfGyTiWLHjloGftDNBWpceVVluhXG2FDkhxAe23NDM.
45. Laura Donaldson, “On Medicine Women and Whites Shame-Ans: New Age Native American-
ism and Commodity Fetishism as Pop Culture Feminism” Signs 24:3 (1999): 677-696. 
46. Charlene Spretnak, “Ecofeminism: Our roots and Flowering” Reweaving the World: The Emer-
gence of Ecofeminism, Eds Irene Diamond, Gloria Orenstein. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 
1990, 3-15, 7. 
47. A preliminary reading list. Xhercis Mendez, “Notes Towards a Decolonial Feminist Methodol-
ogy: Revisiting the Race/Gender Matrix” Trans-scripts 5 (2015): 41-59; María Lugones, “Hetero-
sexualism and the Colonial/Modern Gender System” Hypatia 22:1 (2007): 186-209; Devon Abbott 
Mihesuah, Indigenous American Women: Decolonization, Empowerment, Activism. Lincoln: Univer-
sity of Nebraska Press, 2003; Joyce Green, ed. Making Space for Indigenous Feminism. Nova Scotia: 
Fernwood Publishing, 2007; Cheryl Suzack and Shari Huhndorft. Indigenous Women and Feminism: 
Politics, Activism, Culture. Vancouver: University of British Colombia Press, 2010; Zoe Todd, “Indi-
genizing the Anthropocene” Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environ-
ments and Epistemologies. Eds Heather Davis, Etienne Turpin. London: Open Humanities Press, 
2015, 241-255.
48. Edia Connole and Amy Ireland, “Edia Connole Interviews Amy Ireland.” 
49. Maggie Nelson, The Argonauts, Minneapolis: Graywolf Press, 2015.
50. Robert Barry, “Doing Gender: Helen Hester on Xenofeminism” The Quietus, March 31, 2018, 
http://thequietus.com/articles/24298-xenofeminism-helen-hester-interview.
51. Katerina Kolozova, Cut of the Real: Subjectivity in Poststructuralist Philosophy. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2018.

