
Plant Genetics and Genomics: Crops and Models
Volume 8
Series Editor
Richard A. Jorgensen
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/7397


Stefan Jansson · Rishikesh P. Bhalerao ·
Andrew T. Groover
Editors
Genetics and Genomics
of Populus
123

Editors
Stefan Jansson
Umeå Plant Science Centre
Department of Plant Physiology
University of Umea
SE-901 87 Umea
Sweden
Andrew T. Groover
Institute of Forest Genetics
Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station
USDA Forest Service
Davis CA 95618
USA
Rishikesh P. Bhalerao
Umeå Plant Science Centre
Department of Forest Genetics
& Plant Physiology
Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences
SE-901 83 Umea
Sweden
ISBN 978-1-4419-1540-5
e-ISBN 978-1-4419-1541-2
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2
Springer New York Dordrecht Heidelberg London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009943301
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 233 Spring Street, New York,
NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in
connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software,
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are
not identiﬁed as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject
to proprietary rights.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
Trees are truly amazing! Woody species underpin vital terrestrial ecosystems rang-
ing from the Amazon rainforests to the Krummolz forests that grow on harsh
mountaintop environments, to the vast boreal forests that ring the northern hemi-
sphere. Forest trees also present a complex array of evolutionary novelties, including
the ability to measure and anticipate the changing seasons (perennial growth), and
the ability to produce massive, woody bodies. Indeed, forest trees include the old-
est (Pinus longaeva) and largest (Sequoiadendron giganteum) sexually producing,
non-clonal species. Among species with clonal reproduction, it has been suggested
that the massive “Pando” grove of Populus tremuloides in Utah may be the largest
organism in the world.
Forest trees also provide important beneﬁts and commodities. Trees provide lum-
ber and wood products, pulp and paper, and are a major energy source for many
developing countries. Trees also play a key role in the major biogeochemical cycles,
including water, oxygen, and nitrogen. Notably, forests are second only to oceans
in the biological sequestration of carbon, and forests are recognized for their vital
role in regulating the concentration of the greenhouse gas, CO2. At the same time,
forests are threatened by land clearing for development and agriculture, introduced
pathogens and insects, and by climate change.
A fundamental need encompassing all of these scientiﬁc, economic, and manage-
ment issues is a better understanding of the basic biology of forest trees. One proven
strategy for biological research is the development of so-called model organisms, in
which an organism is identiﬁed that both presents biological traits of interests for
study, and for which key experimental tools can be developed. Increasingly, the
basis for modern model species development often revolves around genomics. In
this regard, the ultimate resource is the determination of the full genome sequence
of the organism, which both reveals the entire complement of genes and allows
development of advanced genomic tools indexed to the genome.
As the power of genetic model systems for biological research became increas-
ingly obvious, the need for a good tree model system grew. Gradually, Populus – a
genus consisting of over 30 species with a wide geographic distribution – developed
into the prime model system for tree research. Populus have many fundamental
differences to Arabidopsis and other current plant model species. With regards to
life habit, Populus species are ecologically dominant species, have long life spans,
v

vi
Preface
and form large woody bodies. They have extended juvenile phases, are dioceous and
therefore obligate outbreeders, and some species are often found in extensive clones.
Through their relatively long life spans Populus are exposed to extreme abiotic
conditions and have numerous antagonistic and symbiotic interactions with other
organisms. However, from a phylogenetic point of view Populus and Arabidopsis
are relatively closely related organisms – for example they are more closely related
than Arabidopsis and tobacco. This phylogenetic relatedness makes comparisons of
gene content and function in Arabidopsis and Populus relatively straightforward.
Trees are found among many phylogenetic groups. It can not be excluded that the
last common ancestor of today’s angiosperms and gymnosperms was woody, and
transition from herbaceous to tree life habit (or tree to herbaceous) is apparently
relatively simple in evolutionary terms. This suggests that the genetic differences
underlying the deﬁning characteristics of forest trees could ultimately be homol-
ogous, but are highly plastic and easily modiﬁed to produce the wide array of
organisms called “trees.” Undoubtedly, the tree life habit is rather different from
the herb life habit and the unique selection pressures acting on trees versus herba-
ceous plants are at least in part responsible for variation in different characters. With
the advent of Populus as a full-ﬂeshed model system for plant genetic and genomics,
tools are now available for plant researchers to explore these fascinating aspects of
tree biology. Tools and approaches are currently being developed for Populus that
address genetic variation of traits at the levels of species, populations, and gene func-
tion. Importantly, most forest trees, including Populus spp, are characterized by high
levels of genetic variation, making them highly amenable to population genomics
approaches. Indeed, approaches such as association mapping that exploit natural
genetic variation in outcrossing species that are now being applied to Populus have
more in common with human genetics than crop genetics.
Several key innovations in the evolution of land plants that are largely lacking in
Arabidopsis and other herbaceous annual models can be studied in Populus. These
include processes underlying perennial growth and seasonality (for example in cam-
bial activity, leaf senescence and dormancy), extensive wood formation, as well as
many processes relating to biotic interactions. There are also research areas, not
yet well developed, where Populus holds great promise as a model system. For
example, studies in ecosystem genomics are supported by the recent sequencing
of Populus symbionts (Laccaria bicolor and Glomus intraradices) and a pathogen
(Melampsora larici-populina). With regards to developmental traits, juvenile to
mature transitions may be better studied in a tree versus herbaceous plant, and it is
also possible that epigenetic processes may be of increased importance in an organ-
ism with a long time span. Therefore, we expect that in the decade to come, many
discoveries will be made in Populus that will impact plant science in general.
Although the Populus genetics and genomics community started to grow in the
nineties, the decision to sequence the Populus genome in the winter of 2001/2002
prompted additional researchers to choose Populus for their studies. The authors
of this book is a blend of researchers that have spent most of their research career
on Populus and those that have moved to Populus from other model systems. The
chapters describe (for both experienced Populus researchers and newcomers to the

Preface
vii
ﬁeld) both genetic and genomic approaches for Populus and some of the interesting
biology that has been elucidated using genomics. Notably, research on Populus
forms a useful complement to research on Arabidopsis. In fact, many plant species
found in nature are – in terms of the life history and genetics – more similar to
Populus than to Arabidopsis. Thus the genetic and genomic strategies and tools
developed by the Populus community may serve as inspiration for researchers
working in other, less well developed, systems.
Umea, Sweden
Stefan Jansson
Rishikesh P. Bhalerao
Davis, California
Andrew T. Groover


Contents
Part I
Overview and an Introduction to the Biology of Populus
Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree” . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Brian Ellis, Stefan Jansson, Steven H. Strauss, and Gerald A. Tuskan
Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation
of Populus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Gancho T. Slavov and Peter Zhelev
Growth and Physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Sophie Y. Dillen, Stewart B. Rood, and Reinhart Ceulemans
Part II
Populus Genetics and Genomics
The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Carl J. Douglas and Stephen P. DiFazio
Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium
and Complex Trait Dissection in Populus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Pär K. Ingvarson
Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus . . . . . . . .
113
Victor B. Busov, Steven H. Strauss, and Gilles Pilate
Populus Resources and Bioinformatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
Nathaniel R. Street and Chung-Jui Tsai
Part III
Genetics and Genomics of Key Populus Traits
Reproductive Development in Populus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
155
Amy M. Brunner
Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling
and Overwintering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
171
Päivi L.H. Rinne, Annikki Welling, and Chris van der Schoot
ix

x
Contents
Wood Formation in Populus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Andrew T. Groover, Kaisa Nieminen, Ykä Helariutta,
and Shawn D. Mansﬁeld
Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
225
Urs Fischer and Andrea Polle
Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
George Newcombe, Francis Martin, and Annegret Kohler
The Impact of Genomics on Advances in Herbivore Defense
and Secondary Metabolism in Populus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
C. Peter Constabel and Richard L. Lindroth
Part IV
Populus for the Future
Populus Breeding: From the Classical to the Genomic Approach . . . .
309
Brian J. Stanton, David B. Neale, and Shanwen Li
Conservation Genomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
349
Elena Hidalgo, Santiago C. González-Martínez, Christian Lexer,
and Berthold Heinze
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
369

Contributors
Amy M. Brunner Department of Forest Resources and Environmental
Conservation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA
24060-0324, USA, abrunner@vt.edu
Victor B. Busov School of Forest Resources and Environmental Science,
Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI 49931, USA, vbusov@mtu.edu
Reinhart Ceulemans Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, 2610
Wilrijk, Belgium, reinhart.ceulemans@ua.ac.be
C. Peter Constabel Department of Biology, Centre for Forest Biology, University
of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3N5 Canada, cpc@uvic.ca
Steven P. DiFazio Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown,
WV 26506-6057, USA, stephen.difazio@mail.wvu.edu
Sophie Y. Dillen Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk,
Belgium, sophie.dillen@ua.ac.be
Carl J. Douglas Department of Botany, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada, cdouglas@interchange.ubc.ca
Brian Ellis Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z4, Canada, bee@interchange.ubc.ca; bee@msl.ubc.ca
Urs Fischer Büsgen-Institut, Forstbotanik und Baumphysiologie, Georg-August
Universität Göttingen, Büsgenweg 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany,
uﬁsche@gwdg.de
Santiago C. González-Martínez Unidad Mixta en “Gestión Forestal Sostenible”
UVa-INIA, Spain; Departamento de Sistemas y Recursos Forestales, CIFOR-INIA,
Madrid, Spain, santiago@inia.es
Andrew T. Groover Institute of Forest Genetics, Paciﬁc Southwest Research
Station, USDA Forest Service, Davis, CA 95618, USA, agroover@fs.fed.us
xi

xii
Contributors
Berthold Heinze Department of Genetics, Federal Research Centre for Forests,
Natural Hazards and Landscape (BFW), Vienna, Austria,
berthold.heinze@bfw.gv.at
Ykä Helariutta Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Institute
of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland,
yrjo.helariutta@helsinki.ﬁ
Elena Hidalgo Departamento de Producción Vegetal y Recursos Forestales, ETS
Ingenierías Agrarias, Universidad de Valladolid, Palencia; Unidad Mixta en
“Gestión Forestal Sostenible” UVa-INIA, Spain, ehidalgo@pvs.uva.es
Pär K. Ingvarsson Department of Ecology and Environmental Science, Umeå
Plant Science Centre, Umeå University, SE-90187 Umeå, Sweden,
par.ingvarsson@emg.umu.se
Stefan Jansson Department of Forest Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR 97331-5752, USA, stefan.jansson@plantphys.umu.se
Annegret Kohler UMR INRA-UHP “Interactions Arbres/Micro-Organismes”,
INRA-Nancy, 54280 Champenoux, France, kohler@nancy.inra.fr
Christian Lexer Unit of Ecology & Evolution, Department of Biology, University
of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, christian.lexer@unifr.ch
Richard L. Lindroth Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53706, USA, lindroth@entomology.wisc.edu
Shawn D. Mansﬁeld Department of Wood Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada, shawn.mansﬁeld@ubc.ca
Francis Martin UMR INRA-UHP “Interactions Arbres/Micro-Organismes”,
INRA-Nancy, 54280 Champenoux, France, fmartin@nancy.inra.fr
David B. Neale Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis,
CA 95616, USA, dbneale@ucdavis.edu
George Newcombe Department of Forest Resources, Center for Research on
Invasive Species and Small Populations, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID
83844-1133, USA, georgen@uidaho.edu
Kaisa Nieminen Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Institute
of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland,
kaisa.nieminen@helsinki.ﬁ
Gilles Pilate INRA Orléans, Avenue de la Pomme de Pin, BP 20 619 Ardon,
F-45166 Olivet Cédex, France, pilate@orleans.inra.fr
Andrea Polle Büsgen-Institut, Forstbotanik und Baumphysiologie, Georg-August
Universität Göttingen, Büsgenweg 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany, apolle@gwdg.de

Contributors
xiii
Päivi L.H. Rinne Department of Plant & Environmental Sciences, Norwegian
University of Life Sciences, N-1432 Ås, Norway, paivi.rinne@umb.no
Stewart B. Rood Department of Biological Sciences, University of Lethbridge,
4401 University Drive, Lethbridge, Alberta T1K 3M4, rood@uleth.ca
Li Shanwen GreenWood Resources, Beijing, China, david.li@gwrglobal.cn
Gancho T. Slavov Department of Biology, BioEnergy Science Center, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA, gancho.slavov@mail.wvu.edu
Brian J. Stanton GreenWood Resources, Global Tree Improvement Group,
Portland, OR 97201, USA, brian.stanton@gwrglobal.com
Steven H. Strauss Department of Forest Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR 97331-5752, USA, steve.strauss@oregonstate.edu
Nathaniel R. Street Department of Plant physiology, Umeå Plant Science Centre,
Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden, nathaniel.street@plantphys.umu.se
Chung-Jui Tsai Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of
Georgia, Athens 30602, GA, USA, cjtsai@warnell.uga.edu
Gerald A. Tuskan Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6422,
USA, tuskanga@ornl.gov
Chris van der Schoot Department of Plant & Environmental Sciences,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, N-1432 Ås, Norway,
chris.vanderschoot@umb.no
Annikki Welling Plant Biology, Department of Biological & Environmental
Sciences, University of Helsinki, FI -00014 Helsinki, Finland,
annikki.welling@helsinki.ﬁ
Peter Zhelev Department of Dendrology, University of Forestry, Soﬁa 1756,
Bulgaria, peter_zhelev@abv.bg


Author Biographies
Rishikesh P. Bhalarao is Professor at Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of
Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.
His primary research interests are auxin signaling and seasonal activity/dormancy
transitions of the cambium
Andrew Groover studies the developmental biology of forest trees, with a primary
focus on secondary growth and wood formation. He is a Geneticist and Director of
the Institute of Forest Genetics, US Forest Service, in Davis California.
Stefan Jansson is Professor at Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant
Physiology, Umeå University. He was the European coordinator during the Populus
genome sequencing initiative, and has a research focus on natural variation and
autumn senescence.
xv

Part I
Overview and an Introduction
to the Biology of Populus

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
Brian Ellis, Stefan Jansson, Steven H. Strauss, and Gerald A. Tuskan
Abstract Although Populus was not a favored experimental system for very many
plant biologists in 2000, P. trichocarpa ultimately became only the third plant
species to have its genome fully sequenced. Here we examine the many different
factors that came into play when this species was abruptly elevated to the status of
a new “model organism”.
1 Model Systems Within Biological Research
The diversity and complexity of life-forms presents an enormous challenge to biol-
ogists. However, the common evolutionary origin of all organisms implies that what
is learned about one organism can provide useful insight into its relatives. This
concept has led to the selection of a wide array of “model or reference organ-
isms” over the past 50 years, ranging from the early adoption of Escherichia coli
as the model prokaryotic microbe to a recent focus on the mouse as a model for
mammalian biology. There are few ﬁxed criteria for selection of the ideal model
organism, but the choice is typically strongly driven by the nature of the biological
question(s) to be addressed and the availability of suitable tools or approaches to
address the questions (Abzhanov et al., 2008). Thus, many aspects of prokaryotic
biology can be proﬁtably explored in E. coli, but if the question of interest involves
bacterial spore formation, Bacillus subtilis is a better model. Similarly, the adop-
tion of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model plant has allowed extraordinary progress
to be made in understanding the fundamental features of plant biology over the last
20 years. The intense concentration of research on this single species fostered the
development of powerful research tools and resources, including the ﬁrst complete
sequence of a plant genome. These resources, paired with genetic, genomic and
other approaches, have revealed insights into fundamental plant biology, including
induction and organogenesis of ﬂowering, regulation of primary meristems and leaf
B. Ellis (B)
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
e-mail: bee@interchange.ubc.ca; bee@msl.ubc.ca
3
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_1,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

4
B. Ellis et al.
development, and genes responsible for disease resistance. The list of accomplish-
ments is long and impressive but Arabidopsis differs in many important respects
from plant species of economic value such as legumes or cereals. Medicago truncat-
ula and Oryza sativa have therefore also been chosen for intensive study, in order to
explore symbiotic nitrogen ﬁxation and monocot biology, respectively. In addition,
to understand the evolutionary origins and mechanisms underlying developmen-
tal processes in seed plants necessitates the examination of similar developmental
processes in diverse taxa.
Perennial woody plants are often closely related to annual herbaceous plants, yet
woody species possess structural and lifestyle characteristics that differ dramatically
from herbaceous annuals. Arabidopsis is thus not necessarily a good model for the
study of arboreal traits, despite close taxonomic relationships with woody relatives.
In light of the ecological and commercial importance of trees across the terrestrial
landscape it has been clear for some time that, in order to address traits characteristic
of woody plants and forest trees, a suitable “model tree” should be identiﬁed, around
which key genetic and genomics resources could be developed (Fig. 1).
The primary contenders for this designation fell into two obvious classes –
gymnosperms and angiosperms. From a commercial perspective, there was no ques-
tion that conifers (Pinus, Picea, Abies, and Larix) dominated both the marketplace
and much of the temperate landscape. Signiﬁcant conifer genetic resources have
therefore – for commercial purposes – been built that would be useful also for
genomic research However, countering gymnosperms obvious utility were some
serious experimental disadvantages, such as massive genome sizes, long generation
times, inefﬁcient transformation procedures and a relatively underdeveloped bio-
logical knowledge base. Among the angiosperm tree species, those in contention
Fig. 1 Which tree is the best model species? Photo from October 21 2007, by “Ragesoss”
from Wikimedia commons (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Autumn_leaves,_Talcott_
Mountain_State_Park.jpg)

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
5
included poplar/aspen (Populus), willow (Salix), birch (Betula) and Eucalyptus,
but at the time when active debate over selection of a model tree was underway,
Populus already possessed two major advantages. One was a combination of several
desirable biological traits, such as a modest genome size, facile genetic transfor-
mation, ease of vegetative propagation, rapid growth response after experimental
treatments and a short generation time compared to most other forest trees. The
other was the considerable body of baseline research and development already
being conducted with Populus hybrids in Europe and North America (see below),
driven largely by their exceptional vigor and commercial potential for short-rotation
forestry.
2 Key Events That Led to Adoption of Populus as the Prime
Tree Model System
The experience of the plant biology community with the power of gene manip-
ulation in Arabidopsis for revealing gene function made the ability to efﬁciently
transform any model tree a particularly high priority. Transformation capability in
Populus had been examined soon after general methods for plant transformation and
regeneration were ﬁrst established in 1984–85, and the ﬁrst publication on regen-
erated transgenic poplar occurred in 1987 (Filatti et al. 1987). Leading researchers
in poplar transformation included M. Gordon and E. Nester at the University of
Washington (USA), where many of the pioneering advances in Agrobacterium
biology were made, and B. McCown in Wisconsin (USA), who had long worked
on in vitro systems for poplar regeneration. M. DeBlock and W. Boerjan (Belgium),
L. Jouanin and G. Pilate (France), A. Seguin (Quebec), and R. Meilan and S. Strauss
(Oregon) had all produced and ﬁeld tested transgenic poplars in the late 1980s and
early 1990s. These studies demonstrated convincingly that phenotypically stable
traits could be readily produced in Populus spp. using transgenic methods. The
rate of somaclonal variation has been reported to be very low, and the stability in
transgene expression very high, in transgenic Populus.
Clonal propagation of select genotypes is another important trait amongst non-
domesticated forest tree species. Many forest trees are difﬁcult to vegetatively
propagate, or show substantial “maturation effects” after propagation that confound
genetic differences. For example, many Eucalyptus species root poorly and in many
other species, rooted cuttings become increasingly difﬁcult with age of the par-
ent tree. The derived plants also often show variable degrees of maturation effects,
such as slow growth and modiﬁed wood properties. The success and uniformity in
response to micropropagation and other tissue culture methods also declines with
age. The maturation effects tend to be much smaller for Populus than for most other
taxa of forest trees, which means that trees of a variety of ages, and varying tissue
sources, can be used to establish clonal populations whose primary differences are
genetic rather than physiological in origin.
As genomics technologies became more broadly accessible to the life science
community and sequencing of more complex eukaryotic genomes gained momen-
tum in the late 1990s it became clear that producing a genome sequence for a model

6
B. Ellis et al.
plant could launch a new era in plant biology research. Publication of the 125 Mb
A. thaliana genome sequence in 2000 was indeed a landmark event in plant science,
but interestingly, part of the justiﬁcation for this ﬁrst plant genomics effort was
its potential impact on improvement of agricultural crops and forest productivity.
Given the many unique characteristics of trees, the power of having an Arabidopsis
genome sequence available only whetted the appetite of the tree biology community
for similar “global biology” resources devoted to a “model tree”, and the lobbying
began in earnest.
In the early 1990s, three different efforts began to converge on the choice of
Populus as the “model tree”. In Sweden, researchers at the Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences in Umeå were successful in genetically transforming Populus
and in 1997, the Swedish Populus genome program was launched as a collaboration
between researchers in Umeå (both at Umeå University and the Swedish University
of Agricultural Sciences) and Stockholm (the Royal Institute of Technology, KTH).
ESTs were sequenced from wood-forming tissues and other sources. Spotted DNA
microarrays were produced and, again, ﬁrst used to study wood-formation but later
many other processes, and the third generation array contained 25 k features. The
primary motivation for choosing Populus as the model tree for the Swedish effort
was purely scientiﬁc – transformability allowing for functional analysis. The geno-
type that was used for transformation (T89) is a hybrid between P. tremula and
P. tremuloides, but EST sequencing was also performed on tissue from P. trem-
ula growing naturally in the area, and also from P. trichocarpa. In total, over
100,000 ESTs were sequenced. Populus proteomics and metabolomics were also
being developed at the time, and a gene knockout project and the ﬁrst public Populus
EST database were launched. Although full genome sequencing was discussed in
Sweden, such an enterprise appeared beyond reach, considering the estimated cost
of the project.
In Canada, intense lobbying by the biomedical research community, spearheaded
by M. Smith, had ﬁnally convinced the federal government to commit some major
research funding speciﬁcally to large-scale genomics projects that would be relevant
to Canada. The vehicle for this activity was a new foundation (Genome Canada),
where funds would be awarded on a competitive basis. In the ﬁrst Genome Canada
competition, two multi-million dollar forest tree genomics projects were funded –
Treenomix (based in the University of British Columbia, Vancouver) and Arborea
(based in Laval University, Quebec), both of which incorporated some component
of Populus genomics research, as well as work on conifers. The focus on conifers in
these projects reﬂected the reality of Canadian forestry, which relies almost exclu-
sively on harvesting coniferous species. Interestingly, however, the inclusion of
Populus was justiﬁed on the grounds that it had already become the de facto “model
tree” from a genomics perspective, as attested by the recent development of the
Populus EST resource in Sweden.
In the USA in 1990 Populus was selected as a U.S. Department of Energy’s
model woody crop. Funding through this program was managed by G. Tuskan and
included research at many universities and government laboratories. At a Poplar
Genome Steering Committee meeting in Portland, Oregon, on November 14, 2001,
a sequencing strategy was presented, and bioinformatics and genetic resources

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
7
and other issues were discussed, not only by US but also Canadian and Swedish
researchers. During this period, intensive work to lay down the strategy took place,
and in 2002, as the Human Genome efforts at DOE were winding down, there was a
petition within DOE to utilize the high-throughput sequencing capacity at the Joint
Genome Institute (JGI) to address DOE-relevant missions. Populus was nominated,
reviewed by an external committee and accepted in 2002. At that time, Populus
represented the largest, most complicated genome to be sequenced, assembled and
annotated by a single facility.
3 The Populus Genome Sequencing
The Populus clone chosen for sequencing was the female clone Nisqually-1, origi-
nally collected by R. Stettler along the Nisqually River south of Seattle. This clone
had been used in control crosses, and a 10X BAC library had been created as part
of a QTL cloning effort. After being dubbed the extra-ordinary Populus genotype,
scions of this genotype are now growing replicated in several places around the
world (Fig. 2).
Sequencing began in earnest in 2003 and was met with a number of serious
challenges. Populus, like other perennial plants, is comprised of multiple genomes,
i.e., the nuclear genome, the mitochondrial genome, the chloroplast genome and
the genomes of multiple endophytes. Shotgun sequencing such a “mega-genome”
had never been attempted before. First, although DNA is found in all living tissues
within a plant, the quality and quantity of high-molecular weight DNA that can be
Fig. 2 Nisqually-1 growing in a greenhouse in Umeå Sweden (ﬂanked by two of the editors of
this volume)

8
B. Ellis et al.
extracted varies with tissue type. Young, partially expanded leaves provide the high-
est quantity of DNA per unit of volume of tissue. However, these tissues also contain
very large amounts of mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA. The ﬁrst libraries pre-
pared for the shotgun sequencing were prepared using DNA from young leaves,
and although efforts were made to reduce the amount of organellar DNA in the
preparations, these libraries contained too much organelle DNA (≈10% chloroplast
DNA) to allow for cost-efﬁcient sequencing. To reduce the amount of organellar
DNA, root tips were selected and DNA template was isolated using a sucrose gra-
dient to separate the nuclei from organelles, followed by cesium chloride gradient
centrifugation and pulsed-ﬁeld gel electrophoresis. This approach successfully elim-
inated the majority of organellar DNA, although over 40 partial putative endophyte
genomes remained in the template pool. Of these endophytes, six genomes have
subsequently been fully sequenced, assembled and annotated – M. populi BJ001,
S. maltophilia, S. proteamaculans, Enterobacter sp. 638, Burkholderia cepacia
Bu72 and P. putida W619 [ http://www.jgi.doe.gov/]
Once high-molecular weight DNA template was obtained it was used to create
three cloning libraries with 3 , 8 and 40 kb inserts that were characterized using
700 bp end-reads from a bank of capillary sequencing machines. The ﬁrst two bil-
lion high-quality bases were subjected to several rounds of assembly, each giving
more complete coverage of the genome. The ﬁrst draft assembly was completed in
November 2003 and represented 384 Mb of captured sequence, with the 100 largest
scaffolds containing ca 50% of the sequence. During the ﬁrst half of 2003 2.2 bil-
lion additional bases were sequenced and added to the assembly. In early 2004, the
ﬁnal draft assembly was completed and represented 429 Mb contained in 2447 scaf-
folds, with N50 scaffold size of 1.9 Mb and N50 scaffold number of 58. With the
aid of newly created physical and genetic maps, these sequence scaffolds were used
to create a linear combination of 19 chromosomal units.
Preparatory work for gene modeling and annotation in Populus was occurring
simultaneously with the assembly. Modeling gene structure (i.e. intron and exons,
and transcribed but untranslated regions) in a new organism requires both robust
algorithms and high-quality training sets, typically ESTs and/or full-length cDNA
sequences. In this stage of the project, the entire Populus community rallied to pro-
vide relevant EST sequences. About ten groups throughout the world that had been
creating small or large scale EST data sets provided their sequence data to create the
training set for gene-calling algorithms. With three bioinformatics groups working
on gene modeling, the strategy was to initially let each group independently perform
individual gene calls on the assembled sequence. Three ab initio gene prediction
algorithms, EUGENE, GRAIL, and FgenesH, were trained based on over 5,000
true and in silico full-length cDNAs and a pool of around 500,000 EST sequences.
Even though the EST dataset was rather extensive and the average Populus
gene shares high similarity with orthologous Arabidopsis genes, the different
algorithms – or even the same algorithm but with different settings – produced
results that were quite variable. Not surprisingly, genes with good EST support were
often identically predicted while in the absence of ESTs, results could be confusing
(Fig. 3).

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
9
Fig. 3 Which gene model to choose? Genes predicted by FgenesH, Genewise, Grail and Eugene and EST coverage at the ﬁrst 150 kb of LG I – a difﬁcult
region – in the ﬁrst version of the Populus Genome Browser. The track at the top (FM, ﬁltered models) represents the models that went on into the “Jamboree
set”

10
B. Ellis et al.
To improve the annotation, repeat libraries were identiﬁed and used to mask
repeat regions (e.g., transposable elements) prior to gene calling. These steps were
ﬁnalized in the summer of 2004. In an effort to restrain the ab initio gene calls,
a protocol was developed for collapsing the gene models from the different algo-
rithms into a “Jamboree set” of genes. Of 55,054 predicted loci, 45,500 gene models
were promoted and used to annotate the assembled genome. In September 2004,
a database containing the genome sequence was made public and a worldwide
press release was issued. Many research groups throughout the world contributed to
this step, both “at home” but in particular during the Populus Genome Annotation
Jamboree in Walnut Creek, California in December 2004. Since the release of
45,500 gene models, roughly 5,000 have been manually curated. From these efforts
it was apparent that the Populus genome contained large paralogous segments that
contained syntenic duplicated gene sets. Further analysis of the genome (e.g., the
duplication event, non-coding RNAs, expression studies and whole-genome arrays)
continued through 2005 and in April 2006 a manuscript describing the results was
Fig. 4 The cover of Science on September 15, 2006

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
11
Fig. 5 Ceremonial planting of Nisqually-1 at JGI by Jerry Tuskan and Dan Rokhsar
submitted to Science. The manuscript was accepted on August 9 and published on
September 15, 2006 (Tuskan et al. 2006, Figs. 4 and 5). The increased scientiﬁc
interest in Populus (Fig. 6) has of course been much inﬂuenced by the genome
sequencing effort.
Although the publication marked the formal end of the Populus genome
sequencing project, the work did not stop. For example, two additional Populus
genomes have recently been resequenced by JGI using the Solexa short-read plat-
form, over 2 million EST/cDNAs have been sequenced using the 454 platform,
and a BAC minimum tiling path and QTL tracks have been added to the JGI
Populus browser [http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Poptr1_1/Poptr1_1.home.html]. A sec-
ond assembly based on subcloning BACs and primer walking, as well as a second
annotation that draws upon the newly available EST set, are both scheduled for
completion in 2009.

12
B. Ellis et al.
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
320
360
400
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Year
Number of Publications
Populus named as a model for
woody plant research
Populus genome sequencing 
initiative announced
Populus genome draft 
sequence publicly released
Populus genome Science 
paper published
Fig. 6 Populus publomics
4 Populus Biotechnology and Breeding – Past and Future Visions
The ability of genomics methods to generate new DNA sequence data, and thus new
possibilities for research and breeding, is growing rapidly. This trend is likely to
continue for many years. However, the extent to which this knowledge is translated
into beneﬁts for society depends on social and economic factors that are difﬁcult to
predict. For example, the impact of transformation is extremely powerful for trees,
in contrast to annual crops, since transformation allows for the introduction of new
traits directly into elite germplasm without rounds of sexual propagation. This is
especially important in trees, where genetic gains of clones (speciﬁc combining
ability) are lost during outcrosssing. However, the ability to use transgenic traits
is at present highly restricted, even for ﬁeld research. Commercial applications are
largely restricted to China, as a result of regulation and marketplace factors, and
thus investments in applied research by government and industry sources outside
of China are limited. This restriction may even grow greater if the pressures for
living transgenic trees being incorporated into negotiations under the Cartagena
Protocol on Biodiversity continue to grow (Strauss et al. 2009). In addition, in
contrast to food crops, simply inherited and quality traits are rarely of major impor-
tance in forest tree breeding. The complex traits that are important, such as yield,
adaptability, and wood quality are far more difﬁcult to link to major genes. It is
therefore unclear to what extent the limited numbers of molecular markers that
are robustly identiﬁed in QTL and association genetics studies will be useful for
marker-aided breeding. High levels of linkage equilibrium require that very large
numbers of markers are employed to enable whole-genome marker selection, thus
challenging current genotyping platforms and economics. This is especially true for

Why and How Populus Became a “Model Tree”
13
hybrid poplar programs, which are likely to have a complex QTL structure, and for
which there is extensive genetic variation already present that can be captured by
short-term trials and cloning without the use of markers. Thus, the economic driver
for translational poplar genomic research is uncertain and reﬂects in part costs asso-
ciated with sequencing and informatics. Whether translational research will take
place with the expected growth of lignocellulosic bioenergy crops remains to be
seen; it is likely that this will be highly inﬂuenced by costs and efﬁciencies of new
sequencing and informatics technologies.
It is difﬁcult to predict what scientists working with tree genetics and genomics
will have achieved by 2020, and where future research emphasis may grow. It is,
however, safe to assume that the present stage of Populus research will look rather
primitive in 2020. The enormous advances in sequencing and proﬁling techniques
will allow for full genome sequencing not only for additional species but also of a
vast number of individuals of each species. When combined with thorough charac-
terizations of the transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, lipidome, phosphorylome,
etc. new systems-based approaches will be enabled that will more accurately model
complex, multigenic traits such as maturation and wood formation. In the past, forest
tree research has been limited by technical challenges. In the future, our understand-
ing will increasingly be limited by our ability to pose relevant biological questions,
accurately measure the phenotype of each genotype, dissect the relevant biological
processes down to the subcellular level, and understand the complexity of genetic
networks and signaling pathways in a scientiﬁc context that is related to the natural
environment, where trees and other organisms constantly interact.
As discussed above, the selection of Populus as a model forest trees was highly
inﬂuenced by practical issues. However, these considerations do not typically coin-
cide with evolutionary or taxonomic realities for trees. For example, Populus is
much more closely related to Arabidopsis and annual crop species than to conif-
erous tree species. Woodiness is possibly the ancestral state for angiosperms, and
secondary growth and wood formation may even have homologous origins in
angiosperms and gymnosperms. Increasingly, it will be vital to consider evolu-
tion of woody growth and taxonomic relationships in the study of trees. Perhaps
the greatest contribution of Populus genomics research will be to identify in detail
the basal mechanisms underlying secondary growth, wood development, maturation
and perennial habit, ultimately providing a view of the evolution and development
of perennial seed plants.
References
Abzhanov A, Extavour CG, Groover A, Hodges SA, Hoekstra HE, Kramer EM, Monteiro A (2008)
Are we there yet? Tracking the development of new model systems. Trends Plant Sci 24:
353–360.
Filatti JJ, Sellmer J, McCown B, Haissig B, Comai L (1987) Agrobacterium-mediated transforma-
tion and regeneration of Populus. Mol Gen Genet 206:192–199.
Strauss SH, Tan H, Boerjan W, Sedjo. R (2009) Strangled at birth? Forest biotech and the
convention on biological diversity. Nat Biotechnol 27:519–527.

14
B. Ellis et al.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez
D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J,
Chen GL, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Dejardin A, Depamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis S, Ehlting J,
Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger
B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones S,
Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C, Kirkpatrick R,
Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple JC, Locascio P, Lou Y, Lucas
S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O, Pereda V,
Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C, Ritland
K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui A, Sterky F, Terry
A, Tsai CJ, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas
C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D (2006) The genome of black cottonwood,
Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics,
and Genetic Variation of Populus
Gancho T. Slavov and Peter Zhelev
Abstract The genus Populus includes morphologically diverse species of decid-
uous, relatively short-lived, and fast-growing trees. Most species have wide
ranges of distribution but tend to occur primarily in riparian or mountainous
habitats. Trees from this genus are typically dioecious, ﬂower before leaf emer-
gence, and produce large amounts of wind-dispersed pollen or seeds. Seedlings
are drought- and shade-intolerant, and their establishment depends on distur-
bance and high soil moisture. Asexual reproduction is common and occurs via
root sprouting and/or rooting of shoots. Fossil records suggest that the genus
appeared in the late Paleocene or early Eocene (i.e., 50–60 million years BP).
According to one commonly used classiﬁcation, the genus is comprised of 29
species divided into six sections, but a number of phylogenetic inconsistencies
remain. Natural hybridization both within and among sections is extensive and
is believed to have played a major role in the evolution of extant species of
Populus. Both neutral molecular markers and adaptive traits reveal high levels
of genetic variation within populations. Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equi-
librium are commonly detected in molecular marker studies. These deviations
typically have small to moderate magnitudes and tend to be caused by heterozy-
gote deﬁciency, indicating the possible existence of population substructure. Genetic
differentiation among populations is much stronger for adaptive traits than for
neutral markers, which suggests that divergent selection has played a dominant
role in shaping patterns of adaptive genetic variation. Molecular and bioinfor-
matic resources are actively being developed for multiple species of Populus,
which makes this genus an excellent system for studying tree genetics and
genomics.
G.T. Slavov (B)
Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA
e-mail: gancho.slavov@mail.wvu.edu
15
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_2,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

16
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
1 Dendrological Overview
1.1 Morphology
Species of the genus Populus (commonly known as aspens, cottonwoods, and
poplars) are deciduous or, rarely, semi-evergreen trees that occur primarily in the
boreal, temperate, and subtropical zones of the northern hemisphere (Eckenwalder,
1996; Dickmann, 2001; Cronk, 2005). Trees from this genus typically have tall and
straight single trunks, with bark that tends to remain thin and smooth until more
advanced ages than in other tree species (Eckenwalder, 1996; Dickmann, 2001).
They rarely live longer than 100–200 years, but are among the fastest growing
temperate trees and can reach large sizes. A notable example is black cottonwood
(Populus trichocarpa), which can exceed 60 m in height and reach up to 3 m in
diameter (DeBell, 1990).
Leaves are alternate and simple, with pinnato-palmate venation, and petioles
are often transversally ﬂattened distally (Eckenwalder, 1996). Leaf size, shape,
and toothing are extremely variable among species, but also within a single tree
and among trees within a species (e.g., Fig. 3 in Eckenwalder, 1996; Fig. 4 in
Dickmann, 2001). Within-tree and within-species variation in leaf characteris-
tics can largely be attributed to two sources of developmental heteromorphism
(Eckenwalder, 1980). First, heteroblasty (i.e., differences in leaf characteristics
between juvenile and adult trees) is common in Populus. Second, there is substantial
seasonal heterophylly because shoots on Populus trees have both preformed leaves
(i.e., expanded from well-formed primordia that overwinter in vegetative buds) and
neoformed leaves (i.e., initiated during the current growing season). Preformed
and neoformed leaves can differ substantially (e.g., Critchﬁeld, 1960), with pre-
formed leaf characteristics typically having higher taxonomic value (Eckenwalder,
1996).
Except for P. lasiocarpa, Populus species are mostly dioecious, although
the occurrence of hermaphroditic trees has been reported in multiple species
(Rottenberg, 2000; Rowland et al., 2002; Cronk, 2005; Slavov et al., 2009). Both
male and female ﬂowers are grouped in pendent catkins. Perianths are strongly
reduced, with 5–60 stamens or 2–4 carpels borne on wide ﬂoral disks (Boes
and Strauss, 1994; Eckenwalder, 1996). After pollination, female ﬂowers develop
into capsules that, upon dehiscence, release 2–50 light seeds (>300,000 seeds/kg;
Schreiner, 1974) with cottony hairs (Boes and Strauss, 1994; Eckenwalder, 1996).
Winter twigs range from slender to moderately stout (more rarely stout), from
glabrous to lightly pubescent, and can be yellow- or greenish-brown, reddish,
or gray, typically with conspicuous lighter-colored lenticels (Seiler and Peterson,
http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/). Vegetative buds are long (0.5–2.5 cm), conical, and
sharp-pointed (Seiler and Peterson, http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/). They are cov-
ered by several bud scales, the most basal of which is oriented away from the
stem, and are often impregnated with resinous hydrophobic exudates (Eckenwalder,
1996). Reproductive buds are often found in clusters and, in some species, are

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
17
distinguishable between the sexes and from vegetative buds based on size and shape
(Stanton and Villar, 1996).
1.2 Habitat
Most species of Populus have wide native ranges, often spanning more than
20 degrees of latitude and a great diversity of climates and soils (Eckenwalder, 1996;
Dickmann, 2001). Populus trees grow in a striking variety of habitats, ranging from
hot and arid, desert-like sites in central Asia and northern and central Africa to
alpine or boreal forests in Europe and North America (e.g., Fig. 1). They are shade-
and drought-intolerant, and seed establishment typically depends on major distur-
bances, such as ﬁre, ﬂoods, or ice scours (Romme et al., 1995, 1997; Rood et al.,
2007).
Populus trees tend to occur in two general categories of habitats. First, many
species typically grow in riparian areas and wetlands characterized by seasonal
ﬂooding and high water tables, with optimal establishment conditions occurring on
fresh silt and sand, immediately following the recession of water from point bars and
gravel bars (Braatne et al., 1996; Dickmann, 2001). One example is black cotton-
wood (P. trichocarpa), which is common in riparian areas of the Paciﬁc Northwest
of North America (Fig. 1a). Some riparian species, however, are extremely phreato-
phytic (i.e., deep-rooting). Euphrates poplar (P. euphratica), for example, can grow
under remarkably hot, dry, and high-salinity conditions (e.g., Fig. 1b), with water
tables as deep as 10–13 m (Ma et al., 1997; Hukin et al., 2005; Ferreira et al.,
2006; Thevs et al., 2008). Second, aspens and some white poplars (section Populus;
Table 1) grow primarily in mountainous or upland habitats. The North-American
quaking aspen (P. tremuloides), for example, occurs at elevations up to 3,500 m (e.g.,
Fig. 1c) and grows best on well-drained, loamy soils, with water tables between 0.6
and 2.5 m, although it can also establish and grow on ash-covered soils, shallow
soils on rock outcrops, landslides, mine waste dumps, and borrow pits (Perala, 1990;
Dickmann, 2001).
1.3 Life History
1.3.1 Sexual Reproduction
Under favorable conditions, Populus trees reach reproductive maturity within
4–8 years in intensively managed plantations and within 10–15 years in natural pop-
ulations (Stanton and Villar, 1996). Reported sex ratios for natural populations of
various Populus species range from female-biased to balanced (approximately 1:1)
and male-biased (reviewed by Farmer, 1996; Braatne et al., 1996; Stanton and Villar,
1996; see also Gom and Rood, 1999; Rowland and Johnson, 2001; Hultine et al.,
2007). Although no consistent pattern has emerged, several of these studies suggest

18
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
A
B
C
A
B
C
Fig. 1 An example of the diverse habitats occupied by species of Populus. (a): P. trichocarpa
along the Willamette River in Oregon, USA (photograph courtesy of Steve DiFazio); (b) P.
euphratica south of the Taklamakan Desert, Xinjiang, China (photograph courtesy of Pavel
Sekerka); (c) P. tremuloides in the Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado, USA (photograph
courtesy of Amy Brunner)
that site-speciﬁc biases in sex ratio may be present, with female trees predominat-
ing (1) at sites with abundant moisture and nutrients and (2) at lower elevations,
whereas males may be more common at high elevations, as well as in warmer, drier,

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
19
Table 1 Classiﬁcation of Populus following Eckenwalder (1996)
Section (synonym)
Species
Distribution
Abaso Eckenwalder
Populus mexicana Wesmael
Mexico
Turanga Bunge
P. euhratica Olivier
NE Africa, Asia
P. ilicifolia (Engler) Rouleau
E Africa
P. pruinosa Schrenk
Asia
Leucoides Spach
P. glauca Haines sl a
China
P. heterophylla L.
USA
P. lasiocarpa Olivier
China
Aigeiros Duby
P. deltoides Marshall sl a
N America
P. fremontii S. Watson
USA
P. nigra L.
Eurasia, N Africa
Tacamahaca Spach
P. angustifolia James
N America
P. balsamifera L.
N America
P. ciliata Royle
Himalayas
P. laurifolia Ledebour
Eurasia
P. simonii Carrière
E Asia
P. suaveolens Fischer sl a
NE China, Japan
P. szechuanica Schneider
E Eurasia
P. trichocarpa Torrey & Gray
N America
P. yunnanensis Dode
Eurasia
Populus (Leuce Duby)
P. adenopoda Maximowicz
China
P. alba L.
Europe, N Africa,
Central Asia
P. gamblei Haines
E Eurasia
P. grandidentata Michaux
N America
P. guzmanantlensis Vazques
& Cuevas
Mexico
P. monticola Brandegee
Mexico
P. sieboldii Miquel
Japan
P. simaroa Rzedowski
Mexico
P. tremula L.
Europe, N Africa, NE Asia
P. tremuloides Michaux
N America
a Sensu lato
and more extreme environments. This biologically interesting hypothesis, however,
needs to be tested through replicated, large-scale studies that adequately account
for (1) developmental differences between the two genders (i.e., male trees in some
species may reach reproductive maturity before female trees, thus possibly skew-
ing sex ratios; Stanton and Villar, 1996) and (2) the extensive clonality which is
characteristic of many species of Populus (discussed below).
With the exception of some subtropical species, ﬂowering occurs before leaf
emergence in early spring (Braatne et al., 1996; Eckenwalder, 1996). Individual
trees ﬂower for 1–2 weeks (Stanton and Villar, 1996; G. T. Slavov and S. P. DiFazio,
unpublished data), but the pollination period in a population can exceed one or
even two months (Braatne et al., 1996). The relative timing of ﬂowering follows
a temperature-dependent progression, with populations at higher-elevations, more

20
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
northern latitudes, and more continental climates ﬂowering later (e.g., DeBell, 1990;
Perala, 1990; Zasada and Phipps, 1990; Braatne et al., 1996). Pollen is dispersed
by wind, and effective long-distance pollination can be extensive (Tabbener and
Cottrell, 2003; Lexer et al., 2005; Pospíšková and Šálková, 2006; Vanden Broeck
et al., 2006; Slavov et al., 2009). Fertilization occurs within 24 h after a viable
pollen grain has landed on a receptive stigma (Braatne et al., 1996). Capsules typ-
ically dehisce 4–6 weeks (but in some species and populations from 2–3 weeks
to 3–5 months) after fertilization, which tends to coincide with snowmelt runoff,
when microsites favoring seed establishment are most abundant (Braatne et al.,
1996; Stella et al., 2006). Seeds are produced in great numbers (>25 million per
tree per year, Braatne et al., 1996), and can potentially be dispersed over very
long distances by wind and water (Braatne et al., 1996; Karrenberg et al., 2002),
but direct empirical data on seed dispersal distances are limited (DiFazio, 2002).
Under natural conditions, seeds retain viability for only 1–2 weeks and germination
occurs within 24 h (Braatne et al., 1996; Karrenberg et al., 2002). On appropriate
microsites, seedlings establish in great numbers (e.g., up to 4,000 m–2), but mor-
tality in the ﬁrst year is typically high (i.e., up to 77–100%), primarily as a result
of desiccation, prolonged ﬂooding, and scouring (Braatne et al., 1996; Karrenberg
et al., 2002; Dixon, 2003; Dixon and Turner, 2006).
1.3.2 Asexual Reproduction
Vegetative propagation is one of the distinctive characteristics of the genus
(Dickmann, 2001). The means of asexual reproduction and the extent of clonal-
ity, however, differ dramatically among species (Braatne et al., 1996; Schweitzer
et al., 2002; Rood et al., 2003, 2007). The North-American quaking aspen (P. tremu-
loides), for example, propagates vegetatively through root sprouting (i.e., formation
of adventitious shoots on shallow lateral roots, a process also referred to as root
suckering; Perala, 1990). Because of the rare opportunities for seedling establish-
ment, root sprouting is believed to have been the primary means of reproduction
of P. tremuloides in the Rocky Mountains over the last century (Romme et al.,
1995, 1997, 2005). The existence of extremely large, and possibly ancient, quak-
ing aspen clones has been reported (Mitton and Grant, 1996), although the direct
veriﬁcation of extreme clone ages and sizes remains a technical challenge (Ally
et al., 2008; Mock et al., 2008; DeWoody et al., 2008). In other species, such as the
North-American cottonwoods P. balsamifera, P. trichocarpa, and P. angustifolia,
and the European black poplar (P. nigra), asexual reproduction occurs commonly
both through root sprouting and through rooting of shoots from broken branches or
entire tree trunks that have been toppled during storms and ﬂoods and then buried
in sediment (Braatne et al., 1996; Rood et al., 2003, 2007; Barsoum et al., 2004;
Smulders et al., 2008). In a third group, including the North-American plains cot-
tonwood (P. deltoides) and Fremont cottonwood (P. fremontii), asexual reproduction
is relatively rare and occurs primarily via rooting of shoots (Braatne et al., 1996;
Gom and Rood, 1999; Schweitzer et al., 2002; Rood et al., 2003, 2007).

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
21
2 Systematics and Evolution
2.1 Fossil Record
Fossil materials, some of which date back to the Cretaceous, have often been
missclassiﬁed as belonging to Populus (Cronk, 2005), but the most ancient undis-
puted fossil records (e.g., Manchester et al., 1986, 2006) suggest that the genus
appeared no later than the Eocene, and probably as early as the late Paleocene (about
60 million years BP). Fossil records dating from the Eocene and the Oligocene
are relatively abundant and are available in many parts of the northern hemisphere
(Manchester et al., 1986, 2006; Ramírez and Cevallos-Ferriz, 2000; Iljinskaja,
2003). Presumably, precursors of all extant sections of Populus (Table 1) were
present by the Miocene (Eckenwalder, 1996; Cronk, 2005).
2.2 Relationships to Salix and Other Families
Traditionally, Populus and its “sister” lineage, the genus Salix (willows), have been
considered the only two genera in the Salicaceae family, although some taxonomists
have included other genera, mostly from Eastern Asia (Eckenwalder, 1996). More
recently, however, the Flacourtiaceae family, the closest relative of Salicaceae, was
re-classiﬁed, and a number of genera formerly included in Flacourtiaceae are now
assigned to Salicaceae sensu lato, within the Malpighiales order of the “Eurosid I”
clade (Chase et al., 2002; Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, 2003).
The availability of molecular data and sophisticated methods of phylogenetic
analysis has revolutionized plant classiﬁcation (Soltis and Soltis, 2001; Angiosperm
Phylogeny Group, 2003; Soltis et al., 2005). Recent molecular phylogenetic studies
in Salicaceae (Leskinen and Alström-Rapaport, 1999; Hamzeh and Dayanandan,
2004; Cervera et al., 2005; Hamzeh et al., 2006) showed that Populus and Salix
clearly form two separate groups. Interestingly, in one of these studies the presum-
ably most ancient species of Populus (P. mexicana; Eckenwalder, 1996) showed
higher similarity to Salix than to any other species of Populus (Cervera et al., 2005).
While studies designed speciﬁcally to clarify the status of P. mexicana will probably
resolve this issue in the near future, identifying the common ancestor of Populus and
Salix, and establishing whether both genera are monophyletic natural groups remain
wide-open questions.
2.3 Classiﬁcation
The number of species included in the genus Populus varies among classiﬁca-
tions from as few as 22 to as many as 85 (Eckenwalder, 1996). Two reasons
for these drastic differences are the misclassiﬁcation of natural hybrids (discussed
below) as “true” species and the philosophical differences between “splitter” and
“lumper” taxonomists (Eckenwalder, 1996). One classiﬁcation that is commonly

22
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
used in recent years is that of Eckenwalder (1996), who recognized 29 species sub-
divided into six sections based on relative morphological similarity and crossability
(Table 1). A consensus cladogram from the 840 most parsimonious trees built based
on 76 morphological characters (Fig. 6 in Eckenwalder, 1996) provided evidence
that all sections except for Tacamahaca are monophyletic. Section Tacamahaca was
split into two monophyletic groups, one comprised of “typical balsam poplars” (e.g.,
P. balsamifera and P. trichocarpa) and the other one comprised of “narrow-leaved,
thin-twigged” species (e.g., P. angustifolia, P. simonii). Combining fossil records
with information from this consensus tree, Eckenwalder (1996) speculated that (1)
after the original spread of the genus from either North America or Asia in the
Paleocene, the two “primitive” subtropical sections, Abaso and Turanga were split
by a vicariance event, (2) temperate habitats were ﬁrst invaded by species from sec-
tion Leucoides, and (3) the remaining “advanced” sections evolved rapidly in the
Miocene.
More recent molecular studies provide only partial support for this evolu-
tionary scenario and clearly conﬂict with some of its aspects (Hamzeh and
Dayanandan, 2004; Cervera et al., 2005; Hamzeh et al., 2006). The most parsi-
monious tree based on 151 Ampliﬁed Fragment Length Polymorphisms (Cervera
et al., 2005), for example, suggests that section Populus (referred to as Leuce in
this study) is the most “primitive” section in the genus, which is diametrically
opposed to Eckenwalder’s interpretation based on morphological traits. A number of
inconsistencies
in
the
classiﬁcation
of
Populus
remain.
Their
successful
resolution will likely require integration of abundant molecular genetic and genomic
data with informative morphological traits and the fossil record (Soltis and Soltis,
2001; Delsuc et al., 2005).
2.4 Natural Hybridization
Hybridization is believed to have played a major role in the evolution of extant
species of Populus (Eckenwalder, 1996; Hamzeh and Dayanandan, 2004; Cervera
et al., 2005; Hamzeh et al., 2006). The existence of relict hybrids (i.e., hybrids occur-
ring far away from the current distribution of one or both of the presumed species),
and extensive contemporary hybridization both within and among sections has been
documented based on morphological traits and molecular markers (e.g., Table 2;
Eckenwalder, 1984a, b, c; Rood et al., 1986; Campbell et al., 1993; Martinsen et al.,
2001; Floate, 2004; Lexer et al., 2005; Hamzeh et al., 2007).
Hybridization plays a key role in Populus domestication (Stettler et al., 1996).
Naturally occurring hybrid zones, for example, provide a tremendous potential for
admixture mapping, which can be a powerful complement to intraspeciﬁc genetic
association studies (Lexer et al., 2004, 2007; Lexer and van Loo, 2006; Buerkle and
Lexer, 2008). Finally, zones of hybridization between species of Populus have been
among the primary study systems for the emerging ﬁeld of community genetics
(Whitham et al., 1999, 2003, 2006, 2008).

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
23
Table 2 Examples of naturally occurring hybrids of Populus
Hybrid
Scientiﬁc name
P. alba × P. adenopoda
P. × tomentosa Carrière
P. alba × P. tremula
P. × canescens (Aiton) Smith
P. angustifolia × P. balsamifera
P. × brayshawii B. Boivin
P. angustifolia × P. deltoides
P. × acuminata Rydb.
P. angustifolia × P. fremontii
P. × hinckleyana Correll
P. balsamifera × P. deltoides
P. × jackii Sargent
P. deltoides × P. nigra
P. × canadensis Moench
P. grandidentata × P. tremuloides
P. × smithii B. Boivin
P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides
P. × generosa Henry
P. trichocarpa × P. fremontii
P. × parryi Sargent
3 Genetic Variation
3.1 Molecular Markers
3.1.1 Allozymes and RFLP
As a result of their (1) obligately outcrossing mating systems, (2) relatively large
population sizes, and (3) extensive long-distance pollen and seed dispersal, species
of the genus Populus have high levels of genetic variation for neutral molecu-
lar markers. Early studies based primarily on allozyme markers and Restriction
Fragment Length Polymorphisms (RFLP) depicted several basic aspects of the
population genetics of Populus species (Table 3). First, levels of polymorphism
(as measured by the average number of alleles per locus, A) and heterozygosity
expected under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (He, also referred to as gene diversity;
Nei, 1973) in Populus are close to the mean values for long-lived woody species
(A = 1.8, He = 0.15) and are higher than those for plants in general (A = 1.5,
He = 0.11; Hamrick et al., 1992). Second, while deviations from Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium are not uncommon and can be caused by both deﬁciency and excess of
heterozygotes, the magnitudes of these deviations are typically small to moderate.
Deviations caused by heterozygote deﬁciency (i.e., positive values of FIS) are more
common, indicating the possible existence of unaccounted population substructure
(i.e., Wahlund Effect; Hedrick, 2005b). Finally, differentiation among populations
as measured by FST (Wright, 1965) is typically weak, with differences among popu-
lations accounting for only 1–7% of the genetic variation. The median value of FST
for the genus (0.047) is almost two times lower than the mean for long-lived woody
species (FST = 0.084) and nearly ﬁve times lower than that for plants in general
(FST = 0.228; Hamrick et al., 1992). The weak differentiation among populations
is in good agreement with direct studies of gene ﬂow, the ﬁndings of which suggest
that long-distance pollination can be extensive in Populus (Tabbener and Cottrell,
2003; Pospíšková and Šálková, 2006; Vanden Broeck et al., 2006; Slavov et al.,
2009).

24
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Table 3 Allozyme and RFLP diversity and differentiation in Populusa
Section
Species
Nloci
Npop
N
A
Ho
He
FIS
FST
References
Turanga
P. euphratica
20b
3
85
1.8
0.10
0.24
0.592
–
Rottenberg et al. (2000)
Aigeiros
P. deltoides
33b
9
84
1.2
0.06
–
–
–
Rajora et al. (1991)
22b
21
–
1.5
–
0.08
–
0.064
Marty (1984)
P. fremontii
36c
4
47
1.5
0.18
0.15
−0.175
0.074
Martinsen et al. (2001)
P. nigra
8b
3
146
–
–
0.16
0.113
0.063
Legionnet and Lefèvre
(1996)
Tacamahaca
P. angustifolia
36c
10
281
1.4
0.10
0.08
−0.236
0.022
Martinsen et al. (2001)
P. balsamifera
17b
5
248
–
–
0.04
0.061
0.014
Farmer et al. (1988)
P. trichocarpa
18b
10
456
1.2
–
0.09
–
0.063
Weber and Stettler (1981)
Populus
P. grandidentata 14b
–
96
1.4
0.07
0.08
0.125
–
Liu and Furnier (1993)
37c
–
75
1.8
0.12
0.13
0.077
–
Liu and Furnier (1993)
P. tremula
11b
6
233
1.7
0.15
0.17
0.153
0.014
Easton (1997)
10b
5
41
1.7
0.33
0.23
−0.427
–
Lopez-de-Heredia et al.
(2004)

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
25
Table 3 (continued)
Section
Species
Nloci
Npop
N
A
Ho
He
FIS
FST
References
P. tremuloides
26b
7
222
2.3
0.52
0.42
–0.238
–
Cheliak and Dancik (1982)
15b
8
200
2.7
0.13
0.24
0.462
0.068
Hyun et al. (1987)
10b
9
347
2.6
0.22
0.22
0.017
0.003
Lund et al. (1992)
17b
6
156
2.4
0.32
0.29
–0.102
0.030
Jelinski and Cheliak (1992)
13b
–
118
2.8
0.19
0.25
0.240
–
Liu and Furnier (1993)
41c
–
91
2.7
0.21
0.25
0.160
–
Liu and Furnier (1993)
Mediand
18
7
146
1.8
0.17
0.17
0.077
0.047
a Nloci is the number of loci used; Npop is the number of populations sampled; N is the number of genets (or trees) analyzed; A is the average number of alleles
per locus detected in each population; Ho is the observed heterozygosity; He is the expected heterozygosity (Nei, 1973); FIS is the ﬁxation index as reported
in the study or calculated as FIS = (He–Ho)/He; FST is the among-population differentiation (Wright, 1965).
b Allozyme markers.
c Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms.
d Because relatively few studies were included, medians were calculated in order to minimize the inﬂuence of extreme values.

26
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Polymorphism and heterozygosity vary substantially among species of Populus,
and even among studies in the same species (Table 3). Interestingly, however, both
the number of alleles per locus and gene diversity appear to be consistently higher
in P. tremuloides than in any other species of Populus (Table 3). Two life history
peculiarities of P. tremuloides may provide an explanation for its elevated genetic
variation.
First, this species is believed to reproduce almost exclusively asexually over
much of its range (Mitton and Grant, 1996; Romme et al., 1995; 1997, 2005).
Population genetics theory predicts that predominantly and strictly clonal organisms
will have much lower genotypic diversity (i.e., fewer unique genotypes for a given
number of individuals sampled) and (2) higher allelic diversity and heterozygosity
(i.e., as a result of accumulation of mutations known as the “Meselson effect”)
compared to organisms with similar life histories but with predominantly sexual
reproduction (Balloux et al., 2003; Halkett et al., 2005; de Meeûs et al., 2007). The
ﬁrst prediction appears to hold only partially in P. tremuloides. Aspen clones span-
ning large areas (i.e., up to 44 ha) have been discovered in the Rocky Mountains
(Mitton and Grant, 1996; Mock et al., 2008; DeWoody et al., 2008; S.P. DiFazio
et al., unpublished data). However, relatively high genotypic diversities have been
observed in most studies (Hyun et al., 1987; Jelinski and Cheliak, 1992; Lund et al.,
1992; Liu and Furnier, 1993; Yeh et al., 1995; Namroud et al., 2005; Mock et al.,
2008), suggesting that sexual reproduction may be more frequent and/or its impact
on the genetic structure of aspen populations may be more persistent than previously
assumed. The second prediction, which under certain conditions holds even for low
rates of asexual reproduction (Yonezawa, 1997; Yonezawa et al., 2004), appears to
be consistent with empirical data. The median gene diversity from six studies of P.
tremuloides (He = 0.25) is comparable to that from two studies of its “sister” species
P. tremula in Europe (He = 0.20), and is more than two times higher than that for
other species of Populus (He = 0.09). This agrees with the general trend in woody
plants (mean He = 0.25 for species with both asexual and sexual reproduction vs.
He = 0.14 for species that only reproduce sexually; Hamrick et al., 1992).
Second, the frequency of triploid aspen trees, at least in the Rocky Mountains,
may be substantially higher than previously thought (Mock et al., 2008; S.P. DiFazio
et al., unpublished data). The occurrence of triploids at high frequencies is expected
to result in (1) increased gene diversity and (2) heterozygote excess relative to
Hardy-Weinberg predictions for a population of diploids (i.e., because phenotypes
with two different alleles would occur more frequently than in a population com-
prised of strictly diploid individuals; Krieger and Keller, 1998; Ridout, 2000). As
discussed above, gene diversity estimates for P. tremuloides tend to be higher
than those for other species of Populus, but heterozygote excess (i.e., negative
FIS) was observed in only two studies. Thus, although both extensive clonality
and triploidy appear as likely explanations for the high levels of genetic varia-
tion in P. tremuloides, more deﬁnitive answers about their relative or combined
effects, as well as about the contribution of other factors (e.g., the possible role of
past hybridization, Barnes, 1967), will come from studies designed to speciﬁcally
address these questions.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
27
Table 4 Microsatellite diversity and differentiation in Populusa
Section
Species
Nloci
Npop
N
A
Ho
He
FIS
FST/RST
References
Aigeiros
P. deltoides
10
–
20
5.2
0.23
–
–
–
Rahman and
Rajora (2002)
P. fremontii
4
–
20
5.3
0.60
0.52
–0.146
–
G.T. Slavov
(unpublished
data)
P. nigra
6
22
574
–
0.78
0.73
–0.077
0.047
Imbert and
Lefèvre (2003)
12
–
60
11
0.80
0.82
0.030
–
Pospíšková and
Šálková (2006)
7
17
921
–
0.74
0.76
0.027
0.081
Smulders et al.
(2008)
Tacamahaca
P. angustifolia
4
–
28
4.3
0.45
0.44
–0.033
–
G.T. Slavov
(unpublished
data)
P. balsamifera
10
–
29
6
0.35
–
–
–
Rahman and
Rajora (2002)
P. trichocarpa
9
47
372
6.1
0.60
0.80
0.293
0.078/0.112
Ismail et al.
(2009)
10
2
282
17.5
0.71
0.77
0.058
–
Slavov et al.
(2009)
Populus
P. alba
20
2
40
–
0.38
0.39
0.021
–
Lexer et al.
(2005)
19
1
169
6.4
0.37
0.38
0.027
–
van Loo et al.
(2008)

28
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Table 4 (continued)
Section
Species
Nloci
Npop
N
A
Ho
He
FIS
FST/RST
References
P. tremula
20
2
40
–
0.47
0.50
0.055
–
Lexer et al.
(2005)
9
3
113
–
0.35
0.41
0.120
0.117
Suvanto and
Latva-
Karjanmaa
(2005)
25
12
116
–
0.50
0.62
0.197
0.015
Hall et al. (2007)
P. tremuloides
4
4
159
7.4
0.56
0.72
0.201
0.032/0.041
Wyman et al.
(2003)
16
11
189
4.9
0.41
0.45
0.093
0.045
Cole (2005)
4
–
266
8.8
0.47
0.67
0.300
–
Namroud et al.
(2005)
Medianb
10
4
116
6.1
0.47
0.62
0.055
0.047c
a Parameter designation is the same as in Table 3. RST is an analog of FST, which is based on the Stepwise Mutation Model (Slatkin, 1995).
b Because relatively few studies were included, medians were calculated in order to minimize the inﬂuence of extreme values.
c Based on FST values.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
29
3.1.2 Microsatellites
The availability of highly variable microsatellites spurred a recent wave of pop-
ulation genetic studies in Populus (Table 4). Because of the substantially higher
mutation rates of microsatellite loci, results from these studies are not directly
comparable to those based on allozyme and RFLP markers. The general trends dis-
cussed above, however, appear to hold in microsatellite-based studies. Observed
and expected heterozygosities are generally high and fall within the broad range
of values reported for other angiosperm (e.g., Dow et al., 1995; Brondani et al.,
1998; Streiff et al., 1998) and gymnosperm (e.g., Elsik et al., 2000, Table 3 in
Slavov et al., 2004) trees. Heterozygote deﬁciency is the more common cause for
departures from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and is slightly more prevalent than
for allozyme and RFLP markers, presumably because of the much higher rates
of null alleles and allele “drop-out” at microsatellite loci (Ewen et al., 2000).
Differentiation is typically weak and comparable to levels observed for allozyme
and RFLP markers, despite the constraint on FST imposed by the higher het-
erozygosities of microsatellite markers (Hedrick, 1999; Hedrick, 2005a). Unlike
for allozyme and RFLP markers (Table 3), P. tremuloides does not appear to
have higher microsatellite polymorphism and gene diversity than other species of
Populus (Table 4). It is very likely, however, that this difference exists but remains
undetected. Two of the three microsatellite studies in which polymorphism and
diversity were reported for P. tremuloides were based on the same four loci, two
of which are tri-nucleotide repeats. Tri-nucleotide microsatellites tend to be less
variable than di-nucleotide microsatellites (Chakraborty et al., 1997; Schug et al.,
1998), which were used in most other studies. The third study used 16 loci, all
of which were developed for other species of Populus. Transferring microsatel-
lites across species of Populus can be very successful (Tuskan et al., 2004) but
markers tend to be much less variable in the recipient species than in the species
in which they were developed (e.g., González-Martínez et al., 2004), presumably
because of ascertainment bias (Ellegren et al., 1995). Because of the inherently
high heterogeneity of microsatellite markers, empirical data need to be expanded
considerably before meaningful comparisons among studies and species can
be made.
3.1.3 Nucleotide Diversity
The whole-genome sequence of Populus trichocarpa (Tuskan et al., 2006), which
has been integrated with a detailed genetic map (Kelleher et al., 2007), provides
an excellent resource for understanding the population genetics of the genus.
Information on nucleotide diversity and linkage disequilibrium in Populus is still
less abundant than in other model organisms, but the growing interest in genetic
association studies (Howe et al., 2003; DiFazio, 2005; González-Martínez et al.,
2006; Neale and Ingvarsson, 2008; Ingvarsson et al., 2008; see also Chapter
“Nucleotide polymorphism, linkage disequilibrium and complex trait dissection in
Populus” by Ingvarsson in this volume) will probably create an avalanche of Single

30
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) data. Levels of nucleotide diversity appear to vary
substantially among species and genes (Ingvarsson, 2005a, b, 2008; Ingvarsson
et al., 2006; Gilchrist et al., 2006; Hall et al., 2007; Chapter “Nucleotide poly-
morphism, linkage disequilibrium and complex trait dissection in Populus” by
Ingvarsson in this volume), but are generally comparable to those in other tree
species (González-Martínez et al., 2006; Savolainen and Pyhäjärvi, 2007; Chapter
“Nucleotide polymorphism, linkage disequilibrium and complex trait dissection in
Populus” by Ingvarsson in this volume). Interestingly, nucleotide diversity in trees
does not seem to be substantially higher than in other plants, including Arabidopsis
thaliana, an annual characterized by high levels of self-fertilization. Presumably,
this is because (1) longer generation cycles in trees translate into lower neutral sub-
stitution rates per year than in plants with shorter life cycles and (2) the genomes
of many tree species, including those in the genus Populus, may still be affected by
past demographic oscillations (Savolainen and Pyhäjärvi, 2007; Ingvarsson, 2008).
3.2 Adaptive Traits
Extensive genecological studies have revealed that forest trees typically have high
levels of adaptive genetic variation both within and among populations, and Populus
is no exception (Farmer, 1996; Morgenstern, 1996; Howe et al., 2003; Savolainen
et al., 2007; Aitken et al., 2008). These studies also provided compelling indirect
evidence for the existence of local adaptation (i.e., genotypes originating from a
given habitat tend to have higher ﬁtness in that habitat than genotypes originat-
ing from other habitats; Kawecki and Ebert, 2004). First, genotype-by-environment
(GxE) interactions, a necessary condition for local adaptation, are commonly
detected (Morgenstern, 1996; White et al., 2007). Second, differentiation among
populations is generally much higher for adaptive traits than for neutral genetic
markers (Fig. 2; Merilä and Crnokrak, 2001; McKay and Latta, 2002; Howe et al.,
2003; Savolainen et al., 2007), which suggests that divergent selection has played
a dominant role in shaping adaptive genetic variation. Finally, and most impor-
tantly, genecological studies have revealed strong and repeatable correspondence
between clinal genetic variation for adaptive traits and climatic and geographic
factors believed to be important agents of natural selection (Morgenstern, 1996;
St.Clair et al., 2005; Aitken et al., 2008).
Because gene ﬂow is believed to be extensive in most forest trees, the preva-
lence of local adaptation is a paradox. This apparent contradiction can be explained
by (1) reproductive isolation by distance and phenological asynchrony between
populations growing under different climatic conditions, (2) very strong diver-
gent selection, or most likely (3) a complex interaction between these two factors.
Unraveling the relative roles of gene ﬂow and natural selection, as well as the
molecular underpinnings of adaptive genetic variation will be critical for our basic
understanding of the evolution of Populus and other forest trees, and thus for
designing adequate conservation and domestication strategies.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
31
P. angustifolia
P.balsamifera
P. trichocarpa
P.tremuloides
P. tremula
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
FST
QST
Differentiation (FST or QST)
Fig. 2 Differentiation among populations for neutral genetic markers (FST; Wright, 1965) and its
equivalent for quantitative traits (QST; Whitlock, 2008) calculated for the timing of vegetative bud
burst in ﬁve species of Populus. FST values are based on studies listed in Tables 3 and 4 (median
values were used when multiple entries were available for a species). QST values for P. balsamifera
and P. tremuloides are from Table 1 in Howe et al. (2003), those for P. tremula were reported by Hall
et al. (2007), and those for P. angustifolia and P. trichocarpa were calculated based on unpublished
data (G.T. Slavov and S.P. DiFazio) and data from Dunlap and Stettler (1996), respectively, using
Equation (1) in Howe et al. (2003)
4 Conclusions
1. Populus is comprised of morphologically and ecologically diverse species whose
peculiar life history characteristics (e.g., dioecy, disturbance-dependent estab-
lishment, natural hybridization, clonality) and extensive neutral and adaptive
genetic variation make it a unique model organism for basic and applied genetic
research.
2. The outstanding genetic and genomic resources created over the last two decades
have set the stage for a breakthrough in our understanding of the phylogenet-
ics, population genetics, and molecular underpinnings of adaptation within and
among species of Populus.
Acknowledgements GTS was supported by NSF FIBR grant 0425908 and the BioEnergy Science
Center, a U.S. Department of Energy Bioenergy Research Center (Ofﬁce of Biological and
Environmental Research in the DOE Ofﬁce of Science). We thank Steve DiFazio, Glenn Howe,
Donna Ford-Werntz, and Reinhard Stettler for their comments on an earlier version of this
manuscript.

32
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
References
Aitken SN, Yeaman S, Holliday JA, Wang T, Curtis-McLane S (2008) Adaptation, migration or
extirpation: Climate change outcomes for tree populations. Evol Appl 1:95–111.
Ally D, Ritland K, Otto SP (2008) Can clone size serve as a proxy for clone age? An exploration
using microsatellite divergence in Populus tremuloides. Mol Ecol 17:4897–4911.
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (2003) An update of the angiosperm phylogeny group classiﬁcation
for the orders and families of ﬂowering plants: APG II. Bot J Linn Soc 141:399–436.
Balloux F, Lehmann L, de Meeûs T (2003) The population genetics of clonal and partially clonal
diploids. Genetics 164:1635–1644.
Barnes BV (1967) Indications of possible mid-Cenozoic hybridization in aspens of the Columbia
plateau. Rhodora 69:70–81.
Barsoum N, Muller E, Skot L (2004) Variations in levels of clonality among Populus nigra L.
stands of different ages. Evol Ecol 18:601–624.
Boes TK, Strauss SH (1994) Floral phenology and morphology of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Salicaceae). Am J Bot 81:562–567.
Braatne JH, Rood SB, Heilman PE (1996) Life history, ecology, and reproduction of riparian cot-
tonwoods in North America. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds)
Biology of Populus and its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research
Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 57–85.
Brondani RPV, Brondani C, Tarchini R, Grattapaglia D (1998) Development, characterization and
mapping of microsatellite markers in Eucalyptus grandis and E. urophylla. Theor Appl Genet
97:816–827.
Buerkle CA, Lexer C (2008) Admixture as the basis for genetic mapping. Trends Ecol Evol
23:686–694.
Campbell JS, Mahoney JM, Rood SB (1993) A lack of heterosis in natural poplar hybrids in
southern Alberta. Can J Bot 71:37–42.
Cervera MT, Storme V, Soto A et al. (2005) Intraspeciﬁc and interspeciﬁc genetic and phylo-
genetic relationships in the genus Populus based on AFLP markers. Theor Appl Genet 111:
1440–1456.
Chakraborty R, Kimmel M, Stivers DN et al. (1997) Relative mutation rates at di-, tri-, and
tetranucleotide microsatellite loci. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:1041–1046.
Chase MW, Zmarzty S, Lledo MD et al. (2002) When in doubt put it in Flacourtiaceae: A molecular
phylogenetic analysis based on plastid rbcL DNA sequences. Kew Bull 57:141–181.
Cheliak WM, Dancik BP (1982) Genic diversity of natural populations of a clone-forming tree
Populus tremuloides. Can J Genet Cytol 24:611–616.
Cole CT (2005) Allelic and population variation of microsatellite loci in aspen (Populus tremu-
loides). New Phytol 167:155–164.
Critchﬁeld WB (1960) Leaf dimorphism in Populus trichocarpa. Am J Bot 47:699–711.
Cronk QCB (2005) Plant eco-devo: The potential of poplar as a model organism. New Phytol
166:39–48.
de Meeûs T, Prugnolle F, Agnew P (2007) Asexual reproduction: Genetics and evolutionary
aspects. Cell Mol Life Sci 64:1355–1372.
DeBell DS (1990) Populus trichocarpa Torr. & gray, black cottonwood. In: Burns RM, Honkala
BH (eds) Silvics of North America Vol. 2. Hardwoods. Agriculture Handbook 654. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, DC, pp. 570–576.
Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Philippe H (2005) Phylogenomics and the reconstruction of the tree of
life. Nat Rev Genet 6:361–375.
DeWoody J, Rowe CA, Hipkins VD, Mock KE (2008) “Pando” lives: Molecular genetic evidence
of a giant aspen clone in central Utah. West N Am Nat 68:493–497.
Dickmann DI (2001) An overview of the genus Populus. In: Dickman DI, Isebrands JG,
Eckenwalder JE, Richardson J (eds) Poplar Culture in North America. Part A. NRC Research
Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 1–42.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
33
DiFazio SP (2002) Measuring and Modeling Gene Flow from Hybrid Poplar Plantations:
Implications for Transgenic Risk Assessment. PhD Thesis, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR.
DiFazio SP (2005) A pioneer perspective on adaptation. New Phytol 165:661–664.
Dixon MD (2003) Effects of ﬂow pattern on riparian seedling recruitment on sandbars in the
Wisconsin River, Wisconsin, USA. Wetlands 23:125–139.
Dixon MD, Turner MG (2006) Simulated recruitment of riparian trees and shrubs under
natural and regulated ﬂow regimes on the Wisconsin River, USA. River Res Appl 22:
1057–1083.
Dow BD, Ashley MV, Howe HF (1995) Characterization of highly variable (GA/CT)N microsatel-
lites in the bur oak, Quercus macrocarpa. Theor Appl Genet 91:137–141.
Dunlap JM, Stettler RF (1996) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus trichocarpa and its
hybrids. IX. Phenology and Melampsora rust incidence of native black cottonwood clones from
four river valleys in Washington. For Ecol Manage 87:233–256.
Easton EP (1997) Genetic Variation and Conservation of the Native Aspen (Populus tremula L.)
Resources in Scotland. PhD Thesis. University of Edinburgh, UK.
Eckenwalder JE (1980) Foliar heteromorphism in Populus (Salicaceae). A source of confusion in
the taxonomy of tertiary leaf remains. Syst Bot 5:366–383.
Eckenwalder JE (1984a) Natural intersectional hybridization between North American species of
Populus (Salicaceae) in sections Aigeiros and Tacamahaca. I. Population studies of P. x parryi.
Can J Bot 62:317–324.
Eckenwalder JE (1984b) Natural intersectional hybridization between north American species
of Populus (Salicaceae) in sections Aigeiros and Tacamahaca. II. Taxonomy. Can J Bot 62:
325–335.
Eckenwalder JE (1984c) Natural intersectional hybridization between North American species of
Populus (Salicaceae) in sections Aigeiros and Tacamahaca. III. Paleobotany and evolution. Can
J Bot 62:336–342.
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its Implications for Management
and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 7–32.
Ellegren H, Primmer CR, Sheldon BC (1995) Microsatellite evolution – directionality or bias. Nat
Genet 11:360–362.
Elsik CG, Minihan VT, Hall SE et al. (2000) Low-copy microsatellite markers for Pinus taeda L.
Genome 43:550–555.
Ewen KR, Bahlo M, Treloar SA et al. (2000) Identiﬁcation and analysis of error types in high-
throughput genotyping. Am J Hum Genet 67:727–736.
Farmer RE (1996) The genecology of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE,
Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its Implications for Management and Conservation.
NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 33–55.
Farmer RE, Cheliak WM, Perry DJ et al. (1988) Isozyme variation in balsam poplar along a
latitudinal transect in northwestern Ontario. Can J For Res 18:1078–1081.
Ferreira S, Hjerno K, Larsen M et al. (2006) Proteome proﬁling of Populus euphratica Oliv. upon
heat stress. Ann Bot 98:361–377.
Floate KD (2004) Extent and patterns of hybridization among the three species of Populus that
constitute the riparian forest of southern Alberta, Canada. Can J Bot 82:253–264.
Gilchrist EJ, Haughn GW, Ying CC et al. (2006) Use of Ecotilling as an efﬁcient SNP discov-
ery tool to survey genetic variation in wild populations of Populus trichocarpa. Mol Ecol 15:
1367–1378.
Gom LA, Rood SB (1999) Patterns of clonal occurrence in a mature cottonwood grove along the
Oldman River, Alberta. Can J Bot 77:1095–1105.
González-Martínez SC, Robledo-Arnuncio JJ, Collada C et al. (2004) Cross-ampliﬁcation and
sequence variation of microsatellite loci in Eurasian hard pines. Theor Appl Genet 109:
103–111.

34
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
González-Martínez SC, Krutovsky KV, Neale DB (2006) Forest-tree population genomics and
adaptive evolution. New Phytol 170:227–238.
Halkett F, Simon JC, Balloux F (2005) Tackling the population genetics of clonal and partially
clonal organisms. Trends Ecol Evol 20:194–201.
Hall D, Luquez V, Garcia VM et al. (2007) Adaptive population differentiation in phenology
across a latitudinal gradient in European Aspen (Populus tremula, L.): A comparison of neutral
markers, candidate genes and phenotypic traits. Evolution 61:2849–2860.
Hamrick JL, Godt MJW, Sherman-Broyles SL (1992) Factors inﬂuencing levels of genetic diversity
in woody plant species. New For 6:95–124.
Hamzeh M, Dayanandan S (2004) Phylogeny of Populus (Salicaceae) based on nucleotide
sequences of chloroplast TRNT-TRNF region and nuclear rDNA. Am J Bot 91:1398–1408.
Hamzeh M, Perinet P, Dayanandan S (2006) Genetic relationships among species of Populus
(Salicaceae) based on nuclear genomic data. J Torrey Bot Soc 133:519–527.
Hamzeh M, Sawchyn C, Perinet P, Dayanandan S (2007) Asymmetrical natural hybridization
between Populus deltoides and P. balsamifera (Salicaceae). Can J Bot 85:1227–1232.
Hedrick PW (1999) Highly variable loci and their interpretation in evolution and conservation.
Evolution 53:313–318.
Hedrick PW (2005a) A standardized genetic differentiation measure. Evolution 59:1633–1638.
Hedrick PW (2005b) Genetics of Populations. 3rd edition, Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury, MA.
Howe GT, Aitken SN, Neale DB et al. (2003) From genotype to phenotype: Unraveling the
complexities of cold adaptation in forest trees. Can J Bot 81:1247–1266.
Hukin D, Cochard H, Dreyer E, Thiec DL, Bogeat-Triboulot MB (2005) Cavitation vulnerability
in roots and shoots: Does Populus euphratica Oliv. a poplar from arid areas of Central Asia,
differ from other poplar species? J Exp Bot 56:2003–2010.
Hultine KR, Bush SE, West AG et al. (2007) Population structure, physiology and ecohydrological
impacts of dioecious riparian tree species of western North America. Oecologia 154:85–93.
Hyun JO, Rajora OP, Zsuffa L (1987) Genetic variation in trembling aspen in Ontario based on
isozyme studies. Can J For Res 17:1134–1138.
Iljinskaja IA (2003) The geological history of the genus Populus (Salicaceae) on the territory of
the former Soviet Union. Bot Z 5:23–37.
Imbert E, Lefèvre F (2003) Dispersal and gene ﬂow of Populus nigra (Salicaceae) along a dynamic
river system. J Ecol 91:447–456.
Ingvarsson PK (2005a) Molecular population genetics of herbivore-induced protease inhibitor
genes
in
European
aspen
(Populus
tremula
L.,
Salicaceae).
Mol
Biol
Evol
22:
1802–1812.
Ingvarsson PK (2005b) Nucleotide polymorphism and linkage disequilbrium within and among
natural populations of European aspen (Populus tremula L., Salicaceae). Genetics 169:
945–953.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Hall D, Luquez V, Jansson S (2006) Clinal variation in phyB2, a can-
didate gene for day-length-induced growth cessation and bud set, across a latitudinal gradient
in European aspen (Populus tremula). Genetics 172:1845–1853.
Ingvarsson PK (2008) Multilocus patterns of nucleotide polymorphism and the demographic
history of Populus tremula. Genetics 180:329–340.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Luquez V, Hall D, Jansson S (2008) Nucleotide polymoirphism and
phenotypic associations within and around the phytochrome B2 locus in European aspen
(Populus tremula, Salicaceae). Genetics 178:2217–2226.
Ismail M, Slavov GT, Xie C-Y, El-Kassaby YA (2009) Regional and population genetic structure
of Populus trichocarpa in British Columbia. (submitted).
Jelinski DE, Cheliak WM (1992) Genetic diversity and spatial subdivision of Populus tremuloides
(Salicaceae) in a heterogeneous landscape. Am J Bot 79:728–736.
Karrenberg S, Edwards PJ, Kollmann J (2002) The life history of Salicaceae living in the active
zone of ﬂoodplains. Freshw Biol 47:733–748.
Kawecki TJ, Ebert D (2004) Conceptual issues in local adaptation. Ecol Lett 7:1225–1241.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
35
Kelleher CT, Chiu R, Shin H et al. (2007) A physical map of the highly heterozygous Populus
genome: Integration with the genome sequence and genetic map and analysis of haplotype
variation. Plant J 50:1063–1078.
Krieger MJB, Keller L (1998) Estimation of the proportion of triploids in populations with diploid
and triploid individuals. J Hered 89:275–279.
Legionnet A, Lefèvre F (1996) Genetic variation of the riparian pioneer tree species Populus nigra
L. I. Study of population structure based on isozymes. Heredity 77:629–637.
Leskinen E, Alström-Rapaport C (1999) Molecular phylogeny of Salicaceae and closely related
Flacourtiaceae: Evidence from 5.8 S, ITS 1 and ITS 2 of the rDNA. Plant Syst Evol 215:
209–227.
Lexer C, Heinze B, Alía R et al. (2004) Hybrid zones as a tool for identifying adaptive genetic
variation in outbreeding forest trees: Lessons from wild annual sunﬂowers (Helianthus spp.).
For Ecol Manage 197:49–64.
Lexer C, Fay MF, Joseph JA et al. (2005) Barrier to gene ﬂow between two ecologically divergent
Populus species, P. alba (white poplar) and P. tremula (European aspen): The role of ecology
and life history in gene introgression. Mol Ecol 14:1045–1057.
Lexer C, van Loo M (2006) Contact zones: Natural labs for studying evolutionary transitions. Curr
Biol 16:R407–R409.
Lexer C, Buerkle CA, Joseph JA et al. (2007) Admixture in European Populus hybrid zones makes
feasible the mapping of loci that contribute to reproductive isolation and trait differences.
Heredity 98:74–84.
Liu Z, Furnier GR (1993) Comparison of allozyme, RFLP, and RAPD markers for revealing genetic
variation within and between trembling aspen and bigtooth aspen. Theor Appl Genet, 87:
97–105.
Lopez-de-Heredia U, Sierra-de-Grado R, Cristóbal MD et al. (2004) A comparison of isozyme
and morphological markers to assess the within population variation in small populations of
European aspen (Populus tremula L.) in Spain. Silvae Genet 53:227–233.
Lund ST, Furnier GR, Mohn CA (1992) Isozyme variation in quaking aspen in Minnesota. Can
J For Res 22:521–529.
Ma HC, Fung L, Wang SS, Altman A, Hutterman A (1997) Photosynthetic response of Populus
euphratica to salt stress. For Ecol Manage 93:55–61.
Manchester SR, Dilcher DL, Tidwell WD (1986) Interconnected reproductive and vegetative
remains of Populus (Salicaceae) from the middle Eocene Green river formation, northeastern
Utah. Am J Bot 73:156–160.
Manchester SR, Judd WS, Handley B (2006) Foliage and fruits of early poplars (Salicaceae:
Populus) from the Eocene of Utah, Colorado, and Wyoming. Int J Plant Sci 167:
897–908.
Martinsen GD, Whitham TG, Turek RJ, Keim P (2001) Hybrid populations selectively ﬁlter gene
introgression between species. Evolution 55:1325–1335.
Marty TL (1984) Population Variability and Genetic Diversity of Eastern Cottonwood (Populus
deltoides Bartr.). MSc Thesis. University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
McKay JK, Latta RG (2002) Adaptive population divergence: Markers, QTL and traits. Trends
Ecol Evol 17:285–291.
Merilä J, Crnokrak P (2001) Comparison of genetic differentiation at marker loci and quantitative
traits. J Evol Biol 14:892–903.
Mitton JB, Grant MC (1996) Genetic variation and the natural history of quaking aspen.
BioScience 46:25–31.
Mock KE, Rowe CA, Hooten MB, DeWoody J, Hipkins VD (2008) Clonal dynamics in western
North American aspen (Populus tremuloides). Mol Ecol 17:4827–4844.
Morgenstern EK (1996) Geographic Variation in Forest Trees: Genetic Basis and Application of
Knowledge in Silviculture. UBC Press, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.
Namroud MC, Park A, Tremblay F, Bergeron Y (2005) Clonal and spatial genetic structures of
aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx). Mol Ecol 14:2969–2980.

36
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Neale DB, Ingvarsson PK (2008) Population, quantitative and comparative genomics of adaptation
in forest trees. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:149–155.
Nei M (1973) Analysis of gene diversity in subdivided populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
70:3321–3323.
Perala DA (1990) Populus tremuloides Michx., Quaking Aspen. In: Burns RM, Honkala BH, (eds)
Silvics of North America Vol. 2. Hardwoods. Agriculture Handbook 654. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, DC, pp. 1082–1115.
Pospíšková M, Šálková I (2006) Population structure and parentage analysis of black poplar along
the Morava River. Can J For Res 36:1067–1076.
Rahman MH, Rajora OP (2002) Microsatellite DNA ﬁngerprinting, differentiation, and genetic
relationships of clones, cultivars, and varieties of six poplar species from three sections of the
genus Populus. Genome 45:1083–1094.
Rajora OP, Zsuffa L, Dancik BP (1991) Allozyme and leaf morphological variation of eastern
cottonwood at the northern limits of its range in Ontario. For Sci 37:688–702.
Ramírez JL, Cevallos-Ferriz SRS (2000) Leaves of Salicaceae (Salix and Populus) from Oligocene
sediments near Tepexi de Rodríguez, Puebla, Mexico. Int J Plant Sci 161:521–534.
Ridout MS (2000) Improved estimation of the proportion of triploids in populations with diploid
and triploid individuals. J Hered 91:57–60.
Romme WH, Turner MG, Wallace LL, Walker JS (1995) Aspen, elk, and ﬁre in northern
Yellowstone National Park. Ecology 76:2097–2106.
Romme WH, Turner MG, Gardner RH et al. (1997) A rare episode of sexual reproduction in aspen
(Populus tremuloides Michx) following the 1988 Yellowstone ﬁres. Nat Areas J 17:17–25.
Romme WH, Turner MG, Tuskan GA, Reed RA (2005) Establishment, persistence, and growth of
aspen (Populus tremuloides) seedlings in Yellowstone National Park. Ecology 86:404–418.
Rood SB, Campbell JS, Despins T (1986) Natural poplar hybrids from southern Alberta. I.
Continuous variation for foliar characteristics. C J Bot 64:1382–1388.
Rood SB, Kalischuk AR, Polzin ML, Braatne JH (2003) Branch propagation, not cladopto-
sis, permits dispersive, clonal reproduction of riparian cottonwoods. For Ecol Manage 186:
227–242.
Rood SB, Goater LA, Mahoney JM, Pearce CM, Smith DG (2007) Flood, ﬁre, and ice: Disturbance
ecology of riparian cottonwoods. Can J Bot 85:1019–1032.
Rottenberg A (2000) Fertility of exceptional bisexual individuals in four dioecious plant species.
Sex Plant Reprod 12:219–221.
Rottenberg A, Nevo E, Zohary D (2000) Genetic variability in sexually dimorphic and monomor-
phic populations of Populus euphratica (Salicaceae). Can J For Res 30:482–486.
Rowland DL, Garner R, Jespersen M (2002) A rare occurrence of seed formation on male branches
of the dioecious tree, Populus deltoides. Am Midl Nat 147:185–187.
Rowland DL, Johnson NC (2001) Sexual demographics of riparian populations of Populus
deltoides: Can mortality be predicted from a change in reproductive status? Can J Bot
79:702–710.
Savolainen O, Pyhäjärvi T (2007) Genomic diversity in forest trees. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:
162–167.
Savolainen O, Pyhäjärvi T, Knürr T (2007) Gene ﬂow and local adaptation in trees. Ann Rev Ecol
Evol Syst 38:595–619.
Schreiner EJ (1974) Populus L. Poplar. In: Schopmeyer CS (ed) Seeds of Woody Plants in the
United States. Agriculture Handbook 450. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC,
pp. 645–654.
Schug MD, Hutter CM, Wetterstrand KA et al. (1998) The mutation rates of di-, tri- and
tetranucleotide repeats in Drosophila melanogaster. Mol Biol Evol 15:1751–1760.
Schweitzer JA, Martinsen GD, Whitham TG (2002) Cottonwood hybrids gain ﬁtness traits of both
parents: A mechanism for their long-term persistence? Am J Bot 89:981–990.
Seiler JR, Peterson JA. VTree ID twig key.
http://www.cnr.vt.edu/dendro/, Accessed March 8,
2009.

Salient Biological Features, Systematics, and Genetic Variation of Populus
37
Slatkin M (1995) A measure of population subdivision based on microsatellite allele frequencies.
Genetics 139:457–462.
Slavov GT, Howe GT, Yakovlev I et al. (2004) Highly variable SSR markers in Douglas-ﬁr:
Mendelian inheritance and map locations. Theor Appl Genet 108:873–880.
Slavov GT, Leonardi S, Burczyk J et al. (2009) Extensive pollen ﬂow in two ecologically
contrasting populations of Populus trichocarpa. Mol Ecol 18:357–373.
Smulders MJM, Cottrell JE, Lefèvre F et al. (2008) Structure of the genetic diversity in black poplar
(Populus nigra L.) populations across European river systems: Consequences for conservation
and restoration. For Ecol Manage 255:1388–1399.
Soltis PS, Soltis DE (2001) Molecular systematics: Assembling and using the Tree of Life. Taxon
50:663–677.
Soltis PS, Endress PK, Chase MW, Soltis DE (2005) Angiosperm Phylogeny and Evolution.
Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
St.Clair JB, Mandel NL, Vance-Borland KW (2005) Genecology of Douglas ﬁr in western Oregon
and Washington. Ann Bot 96:1199–1214.
Stanton BJ, Villar M (1996) Controlled reproduction of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its Implications for Management and
Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 113–138.
Stella JC, Battles JJ, Orr BK, McBride JR (2006) Synchrony of seed dispersal, hydrology and local
climate in a semi-arid river reach in California. Ecosystems 9:1200–1214.
Stettler RF, Zsuffa L, Wu R (1996) The role of hybridization in the genetic manipulation of
Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus
and its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada,
pp. 87–112.
Streiff R, Labbe T, Bacilieri R et al. (1998) Within-population genetic structure in Quercus robur
L. and Quercus petraea (Matt.) Liebl. assessed with isozymes and microsatellites. Mol Ecol
7:317–328.
Suvanto LI, Latva-Karjanmaa TB (2005) Clone identiﬁcation and clonal structure of the European
aspen (Populus tremula). Mol Ecol 14:2851–2860.
Tabbener HE, Cottrell JE (2003) The use of PCR based DNA markers to study the paternity of
poplar seedlings. For Ecol Manag 179:363–376.
Thevs N, Zerbe S, Schnittler M, Abdusalih N, Succow M (2008) Structure, reproduction and ﬂood-
induced dynamics of riparian Tugai forests at the Tarim River in Xinjiang, NW China. Forestry
81:45–57.
Tuskan GA, Gunter LE, Yang ZMK et al. (2004) Characterization of microsatellites revealed by
genomic sequencing of Populus trichocarpa. Can J For Res 34:85–93.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio SP, Jansson S et al. (2006) The genome of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
van Loo M, Joseph JA, Heinze B, Fay MF, Lexer C (2008) Clonality and spatial genetic structure
in Populus x canescens and its sympatric backcross parent P. alba in a Central European hybrid
zone. New Phytol 177:506–516.
Vanden Broeck A, Cottrell J, Quataert P et al. (2006) Paternity analysis of Populus nigra
L. offspring in a Belgian plantation of native and exotic poplars. Ann For Sci 63:
783–790.
Weber JC, Stettler RF (1981) Isoenzyme variation among ten riparian populations of Populus
trichocarpa Torr. et Gray in the Paciﬁc Northwest. Silvae Genet 30:82–87.
White TL, Adams WT, Neale DB (2007) Forest Genetics. CAB International, Wallingford.
Whitham TG, Martinsen GD, Floate KD et al. (1999) Plant hybrid zones affect biodiversity: Tools
for a genetic-based understanding of community structure. Ecology 80:416–428.
Whitham TG, Young WP, Martinsen GD et al. (2003) Community and ecosystem genetics: A
consequence of the extended phenotype. Ecology 84:559–573.
Whitham TG, Bailey JK, Schweitzer JA et al. (2006) A framework for community and ecosystem
genetics: From genes to ecosystems. Nat Rev Genet 7:510–523.

38
G.T. Slavov and P. Zhelev
Whitham TG, DiFazio SP, Schweitzer JA et al. (2008) Extending genomics to natural communities
and ecosystems. Science 320:492–495.
Whitlock MC (2008) Evolutionary inference from QST. Mol Ecol 17:1885–1896.
Wright S (1965) The interpretation of population structure by F-statistics with special regard to
systems of mating. Evolution 19:295–420.
Wyman J, Bruneau A, Tremblay MF (2003) Microsatellite analysis of genetic diversity in four
populations of Populus tremuloides in Quebec. Can J Bot 81:360–367.
Yeh FC, Chong DK, Yang R-C X (1995) RAPD Variation within and among natural populations
of trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) from Alberta. J Hered 86:454–460.
Yonezawa K (1997) Effective population size of plant species propagating with a mixed sexual and
asexual reproduction system. Genet Res 70:251–258.
Yonezawa K, Ishii T, Nagamine T (2004) The effective size of mixed sexually and asexually
reproducing populations. Genetics 166:1529–1539.
Zasada JC, Phipps HM (1990) Populus balsamifera L., Balsam Poplar. In: Burns RM, Honkala
BH (eds) Silvics of North America Vol. 2. Hardwoods. Agriculture Handbook 654. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, DC, pp. 1019–1043.

Growth and Physiology
Sophie Y. Dillen, Stewart B. Rood, and Reinhart Ceulemans
Abstract Populus spp. is particularly characterized by fast growth rates and by
the potential to adapt to a very wide range of environmental gradients. The vigor-
ous growth performance of Populus can be partly explained by high photosynthetic
carbon uptake, efﬁcient leaf area development, production of sylleptic branches,
appropriate seasonal coordination of growth through phenological adaptations and
regulation by phytohormones. However, the high productivity is inextricably related
to high water use which may have serious implications for the economic viability of
irrigated Populus plantations. Substantial genetic variation has been demonstrated in
growth, water use efﬁciency and several growth determinants suggesting promising
perspectives toward Populus improvement programs.
1 Growth and Biomass Production
1.1 Biomass Yields
On a global scale, water and temperature are major environmental determinants
of the natural distributions of plants, including trees (Kramer and Kozlowski,
1979). Poplars (Populus spp.) are naturally widespread throughout the Northern
Hemisphere and environmental conditions vary substantially across this broad range
of environments (Farmer, 1996). Following from this extensive environmental vari-
ation, there is considerable natural genetic diversity across Populus clones, species
and hybrids. The genus Populus has about 29 native species (Eckenwalder, 1996)
and this diversity probably reﬂects differences in ecophysiological adaptation, and
especially differing requirements for temperature, water, and nutrients (Blake et al.,
1996; Braatne et al., 1996; Rood et al., 2003; see Fig. 1). This diversity has not been
S.Y. Dillen (B)
Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium
e-mail: sophie.dillen@ua.ac.be
39
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_3,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

40
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Fig. 1 Illustration of a variety of species at different ages or stages of development. (a) Hybrid
P. deltoides × P. trichocarpa in their third year of growth at a high-density plantation in Boardman
(Oregon, USA) also showing the irrigation lines (photo S. Rood). (b) The parental genotypes for
most hybrid Populus originate as native riparian, or streamside, poplars or cottonwoods. This grove
is along the Oldman River near Lethbridge, Alberta (Canada) and is biologically diverse since three
cottonwood species overlap and naturally hybridize: P. deltoides, P. angustifolia (narrowleaf cot-
tonwood), and P. trichocarpa (photo S. Rood). (c) High-density (10,000 plants per ha) P. nigra in
its fourth year after coppice in a non-irrigated plantation in Boom (Antwerp, Belgium). The experi-
mental plantation included 17 different genotypes or clones, and P. nigra performed very well over
continuous rotation cycles. (d) Two-year-old P. deltoides × P. nigra in an irrigated short-rotation
coppice culture near Viterbo (central Italy). Canopy closes a couple of months after coppice (photo
M. Liberloo)
fully characterized and continues to represent a promising area for future research
and application (Cooke and Rood, 2007), as was previously emphasized by Stettler
and Bradshaw (1996) and Zsuffa et al. (1996). Beside their adaptation to a very
wide range of environmental gradients, the genus Populus is also characterized by
vigorous growth performance.
Due to their impressive growth rates, Populus species have become some of the
most extensively cultivated trees in temperate latitudes around the world (Fig. 2).
Ease of vegetative propagation, rapid juvenile growth, high biomass yields, good
coppice ability, and high plasticity in response to environmental changes, are the
main characteristics which have promoted Populus as superior trees for silvicul-
ture. Tree heights of 8–10 m have been reached after only two growing seasons in

Growth and Physiology
41
Fig. 2 Illustrations of high-density Populus plantations in different parts of the world. (a) Rotation
sequence of irrigated P. deltoides × P. trichocarpa hybrids in Boardman (Oregon, USA). In
the semi-arid region of eastern Oregon and eastern Washington the warm temperatures support
very rapid growth if irrigation is applied (photo S. Rood). (b) Rotation sequence of P. deltoides ×
P. trichocarpa hybrids (7th growth year) in a wetter site in the Columbia River valley near Portland
(Oregon, USA). In western Oregon and western Washington increased precipitation eliminates (or
reduces) the need for irrigation and growth rates are quite favorable with a long growth season
(photo S. Rood). (c) Irrigated high-density (10,000 plants per ha) plantation near Viterbo (central
Italy) during its ﬁrst year of the second three-year rotation. In the central part of the plantation
plants were treated with elevated atmospheric CO2 to simulate global changes. Constructions
enabled treatment and access to the crown during the entire rotation (photo M. Liberloo). (d) Three-
year-old coppiced stool with young resprouts in a high-density plantation in Boom (Antwerp,
Belgium)
carefully tended plantations (Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1997; Dillen et al., 2009),
and heights of 40 m have been recorded after less than 20 years (Bradshaw et al.,
2000). Following from their vigorous growth, several Populus species and interspe-
ciﬁc hybrids have been incorporated into managed systems including traditional,
wide-spaced plantations, and short-rotation coppice systems (SRC; Fig. 2). The
light-weighted Populus wood has been used for various commercial purposes or
as a source of carbon neutral renewable energy. The success of these commercial
wood or energy plantations generally depends on the amount of woody biomass
that is produced within a short period of time.
Under optimal conditions of climate, water and nutrient availability, dry biomass
yields were observed in the order of 20–25 Mg ha–1 year–1 (Table 1; Heilman et al.,
1994; Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1997; Liberloo et al., 2006). These values may

42
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Table 1 Average above-ground biomass yields (Mg ha–1 year–1) of different Populus species and hybrids in short-rotation coppice systems
Species or hybrid
Average
above-ground dry
biomass production
(Mg ha–1 year–1)
Age
Plant density
(ha–1)
Soil conditions
Treatments
Location
References
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides
17.0–23.4
4-year period –
1st rotation
10,000
Rich, alluvial
silt loam soil
I/WC
USA, Paciﬁc
Northwest
Heilman et al.
(1994)
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides
14–35
4-year period –
1st rotation
10,000
Rich, alluvial
silt loam soil
I/WC
USA, Paciﬁc
Northwest
Scarascia-
Mugnozza
et al. (1997)
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides
1.48–10.8
4-year period –
1st rotation
10,000
Former waste
disposal site
–
Belgium
Laureysens
et al. (2004)
P. deltoides ×
P. trichocarpa
P. trichocarpa ×
P. balsamifera
P. deltoides ×
P. nigra
P. trichocarpa
P. nigra
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides
1.6–9.7
3-year period –
2nd rotation
10,000
Former waste
disposal site
–
Belgium
Laureysens
et al. (2005)
P. deltoides ×
P. trichocarpa
P. trichocarpa ×
P. balsamifera
P. deltoides ×
P. nigra
P. trichocarpa
P. nigra

Growth and Physiology
43
Table 1 (continued)
Species or hybrid
Average
above-ground dry
biomass production
(Mg ha–1 year–1)
Age
Plant density
(ha–1)
Soil conditions
Treatments
Location
References
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides (F2)
0.04–23.7
1 year
10,000
Farmland
I/WC
Southern UK
Rae et al.
(2004)
P. maximowiczii ×
P. nigra
16.6–18.1
4-year period –
1st rotation
18,000
Farmland
–
Canada,
southern
Quebec
Labrecque and
Teodorescu
(2005)
Populus deltoides ×
P. nigra
25.4
3-year period –
2nd rotation
10,000
Farmland
I/WC
Central Italy
Liberloo et al.
(2006)
Populus alba
24.0
Populus nigra
24.7
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides (F2)
0.18–18.06
2-year period –
1st rotation
6,670
Farmland
I/WC/F
Southern UK,
central
France and
northern Italy
Rae et al.
(2008)
P. deltoides ×
P. nigra
0.70–12.82
2-year period –
1st rotation
6,670
Farmland
I/WC/F
Central France
and northern
Marron et al.
(2009)
P. deltoides ×
P. trichocarpa
0.67–15.59
Italy
P. trichocarpa ×
P. deltoides
3.5
4-year period –
1st rotation
20,000
Farmland
–
Belgium
Vande Walle
et al. (2007)
Plantation managements techniques are indicated as follows: I = irrigation; W = weed control; F = fungicides.

44
S.Y. Dillen et al.
be less achievable on a wide scale since it is unlikely that farmers and land owners
will abandon their best agricultural lands for Populus plantations (Vande Walle
et al., 2007). More realistically, yield ranges of 10–15 Mg ha–1 year–1 have been
reported in suboptimal conditions (Table 1; Laureysens et al., 2004; Labrecque
and Teodorescu, 2005). When Populus plantations are poorly managed, they may
suffer from weed competition during establishment or after coppice, from shortages
of nutrients or water, or from diseases or herbivore damage, and biomass yields
may drop (Table 1). Weed control is very important during establishment years
and under SRC conditions also every year after harvest. Weed competition may be
an especially important stress factor for the light-demanding Populus species and
can be responsible for substantial yield losses. Populus species, especially when
planted in monoclonal plantations, are prone to diseases such as leaf rust caused
by Melampsora spp., leaf spot by Marssonina spp. and stem canker by Septoria spp.
(see Chapter 12). Monoclonal plantations are also vulnerable to attacks from various
insects. The use of a wide diversity of clones and species in plantations increases
the genetic diversity and minimizes the risks from diseases and pests (Labrecque
and Teodorescu, 2005; Christersson, 2006).
Populus species could provide an even more important source of biomass in the
future. With increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations, a stimulation of woody
biomass is expected for various plant functional groups and particularly for trees
(Ainsworth and Long, 2005). In a recent European FACE experiment with Populus
(FACE: Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment), an increase in CO2 concentration to
550 ppm produced an average increase of 23% of total woody biomass (Liberloo
et al., 2006). Thus, Populus showed the ability to beneﬁt from elevated CO2 condi-
tions, provided that they are grown under favorable conditions of light, water and
fertilizer.
Populus are ecological pioneer species and are known for vigorous vegetative
propagation through root suckers (i.e. adventitious shoots that emerge from shal-
low, horizontal roots) and by coppice regrowth (i.e. shoot regrowth after shoot
harvesting). However, the suitability of different Populus species for coppicing
has been poorly documented (Herve and Ceulemans, 1996). SRCs are usually
characterized by 3- to 5-year rotations and remain viable for 15–30 years. Sims
et al. (2001) showed that biomass yields were higher in coppiced Populus than
in non-coppiced single-stem Populus since the established root systems enhance
regrowth after coppice and support higher yields in the second and subsequent rota-
tions. Coppicing reduces establishment costs since replanting is unnecessary but
it is uncertain whether yields can be maintained over longer periods of repetitive
coppicing (Tuskan, 1998; Pontailler et al., 1999).
1.2 Root Growth and Physiology
While shoot productivity is well-documented in Populus, the root system remains
the least understood plant organ. The major reason for this lack of knowledge is

Growth and Physiology
45
the limited accessibility of the below-ground plant parts. It is likely that the root
system is a key determinant in the establishment and growth of Populus trees as it
enables access to soil resources, including water and nutrients (Heilman et al., 1994;
Wu et al., 1998). Fine roots form a substantial part of the root system and are usu-
ally distinguished from larger, coarse roots based on size (diameter, Friend et al.,
1991). Although the diameter classes are somewhat arbitrarily chosen, most studies
deﬁne ‘ﬁne roots’ as roots less than 2 mm in diameter (Pregitzer and Friend, 1996).
Fine roots are characterized by high turnover rates, representing up to 40% of the
total carbon turnover of a tree, and this represents a major carbon sink (Pregitzer
et al., 1995). The rapid root turnover increases ﬂexibility to varying soil environ-
mental conditions, and particularly to varying availability of soil nitrogen and water
(Pregitzer and Friend, 1996; Al Afas et al., 2008a). Populus species are known
as rapid nutrient accumulators and this is partly induced by the demand of rapid
growth. Moreover, nutrient uptake by ﬁne roots may be enhanced when associated
with ectomycorrhizal or vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (see Chapter 12).
Root systems cannot be viewed as autonomous organs. Vigorous growth dur-
ing the establishment year is generally associated with a strong rooting capacity,
although well-rooting genotypes do not necessarily display intrinsically higher
growth rates than poorly rooting genotypes. As trees age, they can rely more on
stored reserves in permanent organs such as coarse roots and trunks (Pregitzer and
Friend, 1996). Early root growth in Populus is under fairly strong genetic control
(Wilcox and Farmer, 1968; Al Afas et al., 2008a). Large differences in root growth
were observed among Populus sections, species and genotypes. Species from sec-
tions Aigeiros and Tacamahaca, and their hybrids show the capacity to produce
adventitious roots from dormant hardwood cuttings, in contrast to species of the
aspen section (Dickmann, 2001; Zalesny et al., 2005). Among species, the rather
poor rooting ability in P. deltoides can be signiﬁcantly improved in crosses with
well-rooting species such as P. balsamifera, P. trichocarpa and P. nigra (Dickmann
and Stuart, 1983). These differences in rooting ability between sections and species
are important for the deployment of SRC since plantations are often established
with unrooted cuttings. Moderate to high values of broad-sense heritability (i.e. the
ratio of genetic variance to phenotypic variance) have been reported for root growth
traits such root number, length and dry mass in a limited number of studies (Wilcox
and Farmer, 1968; Zalesny et al., 2005). Information on the roots can be useful
in selecting trees for speciﬁc soil environmental conditions and in other aspects of
plantation management (Dickmann and Pregitzer, 1992). The emerging molecular
tools of genomics and proteomics will also be useful for characterizing root systems
of Populus genotypes (Kohler et al., 2003).
1.3 Hybridization and Heterosis
Plant growth performance results from a complex interaction between the genetic
background and the biotic and abiotic environments (Ceulemans and Deraedt,

46
S.Y. Dillen et al.
1999). To achieve maximal productivity, it is essential: (i) to know which
physiological and morphological characteristics primarily deﬁne growth, both
directly or indirectly (i.e. growth determinants); (ii) to exploit genetic variation
in growth and its determinants within or between species and hybrids; and (iii)
to improve the understanding of the genotype by environment interactions rel-
ative to these characteristics. Interspeciﬁc hybridization and clonal selection are
common techniques in Populus improvement programs. The main objectives of
hybridization are: (i) the combination of favorable parental characteristics in the
progeny; (ii) larger homeostasis (i.e. stability among environments); and (iii) het-
erosis (Stettler et al., 1996). Hybrid vigor or heterosis is a well-known phenomenon
in Populus and many other crop and tree genera, and can be deﬁned as the supe-
riority of offspring over the parents (Hayes, 1952; Stettler et al., 1996). Hybrid
vigor probably partly results from cumulative or additive effects, in which there
is dominance for speciﬁc, superior traits. For example, if there was dominance
for large leaves and independently, for many leaves, the crossing of one Populus
parent with a few, large leaves and another with many, small leaves could pro-
duce a hybrid Populus with many, large leaves and thus greater total leaf area
and potential productivity. This synergism is a beneﬁt for Populus cultivation
and has been intensively exploited by tree breeders. In Populus, heterosis val-
ues appear to vary for volume growth, from moderate values up to values of
300% for F1 P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides hybrids (Stettler et al., 1988) and
even 600% for F1 P. tremula × P. tremuloides (Li et al., 1998). In both cases,
volume was used as an index for biomass productivity and was calculated as a
product of diameter and height. This approach, however, may result in overesti-
mation of heterosis and lower values are generally found for growth traits such as
stem height and diameter (Li and Wu, 1997; Li et al., 1998; Marron et al., 2006;
Dillen et al., 2009).
1.4 Allocation Patterns
The allocation of carbon into different components such as stems, branches, foliage
and roots, partially deﬁnes the commercial value of a clone or species (Hinckley
et al., 1992). Large variability in allocation patterns has been detected within and
among Populus species (Pallardy and Kozlowski, 1979; Scarascia-Mugnozza et al.,
1997; Karacic et al., 2003). Considerable genetic gain in biomass yields could be
achieved with simultaneous selection for good growth and high harvest index (i.e.
the percentage of harvestable biomass of the total biomass). For instance, a low
root-to-shoot ratio may indicate a proportional rise in stem size and thus a higher
harvest index. Conversely, a high root-to-shoot ratio could be selected for when
rapid establishment of the root system and vigorous juvenile growth are desired
(Pallardy and Kozlowski, 1979).
Compared to agricultural crops, domestication of Populus is still in its infancy,
but is advanced as compared to other tree genera. To date, Populus improvement

Growth and Physiology
47
programs are predominantly limited to F1 hybrids (Aylott et al., 2008). In agricul-
ture, a substantial part of the yield increase of corn and soybeans came from genetic
improvement that has involved many breeding generations. Further, a major part of
the genetic gain in agricultural crops resulted from reallocation of carbon to the eco-
nomically valuable parts, such as grain or tuber (Hansen, 1991; Peng et al., 1999). In
trees, this type of reallocation will not contribute to a higher above-ground biomass
yield. Yet, for some commercial purposes such as for the production of veneer or
saw-wood, a smaller proportion of branches is preferred.
Beside the genetic background, the environment has a marked impact on allo-
cation patterns. When canopies close, strong competitive interactions occur among
Populus trees in the stand. In order to maintain vigorous growth, allocation patterns
change. Larger individuals invest more stem biomass in radial growth than in height
growth, while smaller individuals must allocate more carbon to height growth in
order to increase access to light (Wu et al., 2003). Competition between trees also
inﬂuences the canopy establishment. For example, at age seven, two Populus clones
accumulated a larger proportion of biomass in branches at the widest spacing than
did those at the lowest planting density (on average 19 and 9% at 2.0 and 0.5 m den-
sities, respectively; DeBell et al., 1996). Both clones could not fully develop their
canopies and did not attain their maximal growth capacity in denser plantations.
2 Allometric Relationships
The quantitative and qualitative estimation of tree growth is indispensable for short-
rotation and traditional forestry. To this end, different methodologies are used
depending on the speciﬁc purposes of the predictions. In many situations, general-
ized equations are adequate for biomass predictions in a wide range of environments
and for different species. Occasionally, very accurate biomass estimations are neces-
sary, such as in genetic and quantitative trait loci (QTLs) studies (Dillen et al., 2007;
Rae et al., 2008). Direct estimation of volume and biomass entails the complete
harvest of the plantation and is very time consuming. In experiments that involve
estimates of biomass and biomass increment over a series of years, indirect estima-
tion is required. Indirect methods may involve harvesting a small sample of trees
and multiplication of tree weights based on plant density or statistical regression
(Verwijst, 1991). The latter approach is based on establishing relationships between
volume or yield versus tree dimensions or canopy or leaf traits.
A trade-off exists between increasing the number of sampled trees in order to
improve the regression analysis, and the impact of destructive sampling of trees on
the quality of the long-term experiment. Decisions should be made on the model
form (linear vs. non-linear), data transformations, and the parameters included
such as stem height, diameter, and branch or leaf traits. These choices may all
affect the ﬁnal results (Ruark et al., 1987; Verwijst, 1991; Pontailler et al., 1997).
Nevertheless, biomass predictions have been successful in numerous experiments
(Tuskan and Rensema, 1992; Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1997; Rae et al., 2008).

48
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Stem diameter or circumference is probably the most reliable single index of pro-
ductivity (Monclus et al., 2006; Dillen et al., 2007). This trait is characterized by
high heritability and can be easily and accurately scored. Beside stem diameter,
stem volume or volume index (based on stem diameter and height) is frequently
used as an indicator of biomass (Pontailler et al., 1997).
Once the equations are established a difﬁculty is to know whether, and to what
degree, the derived equations can be used outside the tested environment, such as
for different species or hybrids, and over successive years. Since regression coef-
ﬁcients of a given model reﬂect the population (plantation and site characteristics)
upon which the equations were developed, application of equations under different
conditions can lead to considerable errors in the predictions (Zabek and Prescott,
2006). In a study comparing the biomass equations for ﬁve hybrid poplar families
at three contrasting sites, the family effect was larger than the site effect (Dillen
et al., 2007). Moreover, the site effect was thought to be due to a severe rust attack
by Melampsora larici-populina at one of the three studied sites, and the effects of
diseases as leaf rust on allometric relationships have previously been recognized
(Tuskan and Rensema, 1992). Pontailler et al. (1997) revealed the same trend when
studying biomass equations for several Populus clones at two different locations.
Signiﬁcant differences in regression coefﬁcients between clones were observed, but
between-site differences were rather small. Pontailler et al. (1997) concluded that
attention should be directed to the between-clone (or between-family) differences
when extrapolating general allometric relations.
In a SRC over three rotations (11 years), Al Afas et al. (2008b) investigated
whether a single allometric biomass equation could be applied yearly for all 17
Populus clones. One equation ﬁtted the different years, except for 1 year in which
leaves were heavily infected by M. larici-populina. In terms of clones, one equation
was also sufﬁcient, except for the clone Hazendans. In contrast to the other clones
in the experiment, Hazendans exhibited a leaf size distribution with smaller leaves
in the upper canopy and larger leaves in the lower canopy (Niinemets et al., 2004).
Zabek and Prescott (2006) considered different published biomass predictions on
their data set. Large discrepancies between predicted and observed biomass high-
lighted the problems arising when the regression equations were extrapolated to
different Populus populations. The use of regression coefﬁcients from their own
data set improved the predictive power of the equation, illustrating the portability of
the model form and the population-speciﬁc nature of the regression coefﬁcients.
3 Productivity Determinants
Many studies have already been devoted to Populus productivity and its deter-
minants. The overall growth performance of a tree depends on the interaction
between light interception by the canopy and the intensity of CO2 assimilation by
the leaves of this canopy. Various canopy traits are intimately related to productiv-
ity including functional or process-related components associated with phenology,

Growth and Physiology
49
Fig. 3 Schematic illustration of the main physiological growth factors in Populus that are being
presented in the present contribution. As an example a Populus tree from a short-rotation intensive
culture is being shown
leaf area growth and morphology, and leaf and whole-tree photosynthetic capacity
(Fig. 3). Relevant structural components include orientation, distribution and size of
branches and leaves.
3.1 Gas Exchange
Photosynthesis is the ultimate driving force for carbon gain and consequently, for
plant growth. The biochemical process uses light to convert atmospheric CO2 and
water into carbohydrates, the structural and maintenance components of plants.
Generally, tree photosynthesis is believed to be low; photosynthetic capacity on a
leaf area basis averages around 3–6 μmol CO2 m–2 s–1. In contrast, Populus species,
and particularly interspeciﬁc hybrids, can reach rather high photosynthetic capaci-
ties, of up to 25 μmol CO2 m–2 s–1 (Ceulemans and Saugier, 1991). A review of
numerous photosynthetic and gas exchange studies published on Populus yielded
values from 1.3 to 25 μmol CO2 m–2 s–1 illustrating the remarkably large variation
in photosynthetic rates among Populus clones, species and hybrids (Ceulemans and
Isebrands, 1996). However, the relationship between photosynthesis and biomass
yield in trees, including Populus, is not obvious. Some studies have demonstrated
positive correlations, while others have not detected signiﬁcant correlation. High

50
S.Y. Dillen et al.
photosynthetic carbon uptake is essential for fast growth but the inverse is not nec-
essarily true. The lack of a clear relationship might be due to: (i) the complexity
of photosynthesis which is under polygenic control; (ii) the consideration of instan-
taneous measurements which do not represent photosynthesis over the entire day
or season; (iii) measurements on individual leaves while growth is dependent upon
the entire canopy; and (iv) the complex allocation patterns of carbon within the tree
(Isebrands et al., 1988; Barigah et al., 1994).
In addition, the strong inﬂuence of abiotic factors including light (Liberloo et al.,
2007), temperature (Drew and Chapman, 1992), CO2 concentration (Hovenden,
2003), and nutrient availability (Ripullone et al., 2004) on net photosynthesis has
been demonstrated in Populus. Generally, insufﬁcient radiation, shortage of nutri-
ents, low temperature and drought, reduce the photosynthetic carbon uptake in
plants (Schulze, 1982). The high sensitivity of photosynthetic carbon uptake to envi-
ronmental variation affects the potential of photosynthetic capacity as a predictor of
growth and productivity. Biotic factors such as leaf age and position in the canopy
also have a signiﬁcant effect on net photosynthesis, and maximum photosynthetic
rates are usually attained just before leaf extension growth ceases (Dickmann, 1971).
3.2 Leaf Traits
Leaves are the major organs of photosynthesis in plants. The development of leaves,
and the effective display of leaf area, increase canopy light interception and sub-
sequently, carbon gain. While photosynthetic carbon uptake is sometimes poorly
correlated to growth performance, the development of leaf area may be a better
integrative predictor of growth. Leaf area, either considering individual leaf areas or
leaf area index (LAI), provides a promising productivity determinant (Ceulemans
et al., 1992; Marron et al., 2007). The superior productivity of hybrids between
P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides has been attributed to their large individual leaf
area which has been explained by the combination of larger cell numbers from
P. deltoides and the larger cell sizes from P. trichocarpa (Ridge et al., 1986).
Moreover, stem volume and stem biomass production were more closely related
to individual leaf size than to the number of leaves produced per tree in this study.
When different species or genotypes are compared, leaf area traits are rather
robust across environments and are easily monitored. Consequently, these traits are
very well suited for association with molecular markers that may be selected for in
Populus improvement programs (Bunn et al., 2004). In Populus, leaf size largely
affects stem growth, but its impact is determined by the position at which the leaves
develop (i.e. main stem, sylleptic branches or proleptic branches). Leaves on syllep-
tics appeared to contribute more to radial growth than those on proleptic branches
and the main stem in young Populus hybrids (Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1999).
Furthermore, stem height growth of 2-year-old F2 P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides
hybrids beneﬁtted more from upper canopy leaves than from lower canopy leaves
(Wu et al., 1997).

Growth and Physiology
51
Individual leaf area development of Populus is highly responsive to abiotic fac-
tors. Within a tree canopy, proﬁles of leaf characteristics follow the light proﬁle in
the canopy (Al Afas et al., 2005; Liberloo et al., 2007). The canopy exhibits a verti-
cal proﬁle with a decline in irradiance from top to bottom. Speciﬁc leaf area (SLA)
is sensitive to changes in irradiance whereby an increase of irradiance leads to a
lower SLA or denser leaves (Niinemets and Kull, 1999; Gielen et al., 2003). In the
upper canopy, leaves are larger and are supported by longer and thicker petioles as
compared to lower canopy leaves (Al Afas et al., 2005). This suggests that larger
leaves require more structural support. Together with branching architecture, peti-
oles play an important role in leaf arrangement and through modiﬁcations of either
branches or petioles, gaps between neighboring leaves could be ﬁlled (Niinemets
et al., 2006). Leaf orientation also deﬁnes the canopy architecture and may therefore
enhance growth vigor. The angle between leaf surfaces and incoming solar radiation
has a marked effect on whole-tree photosynthesis and angling may diminish the heat
load on upper canopy leaves by reducing the absorption of solar radiation during the
warmest periods of the day (Hinckley et al., 1992).
Populus leaf size typically decreases while leaf number increases from mesic to
xeric environments (i.e. from temperate moist to dry climates, respectively). Greater
leaﬁness combined with smaller leaves could be an adaptive as well as an acclima-
tion response to xeric environments (Dunlap et al., 1995; Pearce et al., 2005). In
contrast, larger and more widely spaced leaves are probably favored in the mesic,
moderate environments, where overcast days with diffuse light are frequent (Dunlap
et al., 1995).
3.3 Branching Pattern: Syllepsis versus Prolepsis
Populus species often display an indeterminate growth habit and produce sylleptic
branches (i.e. branches developed from axillary buds without undergoing a dormant
period; Remphrey and Powell, 1985), throughout the growing season. They produce
sylleptic branches during the ﬁrst growing season and 2-year-old plants produce
two types of branches, sylleptic and proleptic branches (i.e. branches developed
from axillary buds after a quiescent period; Hallé et al., 1978; see Fig. 4). Trees
producing many sylleptic branches are considered to have weak apical dominance,
whereas trees showing no syllepsis are characterized by strong apical dominance.
Sylleptic branches play a critical role for tree growth as they allocate a greater pro-
portion of carbon to the stem than proleptics, and contribute more, on a per unit
mass basis, to tree growth (Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1999). Further, leaf area pro-
duced by sylleptic branches, can be 50–100% higher than the leaf area from leaves
on the main stem (Scarascia-Mugnozza, 1991; Wu and Stettler, 1998). Sylleptic
branches show a shorter lifespan than proleptic branches, but in this short time they
play an important part in the carbon balance, providing a quick return for a rela-
tively small physiological investment. Several studies have demonstrated that clones
which had the highest number of sylleptics were often the highest yielding clones

52
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Fig. 4 Difference between sylleptic and proleptic branches: schematic illustration (right panel)
and close-up of a P. alba in its third year of growth in a high-density coppice plantation near Viterbo
(central Italy) (left panel; photo M. Liberloo). Sylleptic branches result from the development of
a newly initiated lateral axis without the apical meristem of that axis having had an intervening
rest period. In contrast proleptic branches are the result of the discontinuous development of a new
lateral axis, with its apical meristem having experienced an intervening period of rest
(Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1999; Marron et al., 2006; Rae et al., 2008; Dillen et al.,
2009). Conversely, some clones which showed superior growth performance did not
produce sylleptic branches.
Since sylleptic branches can be produced during the course of the growing
season, sylleptic branch traits are much more plastic than proleptic branch or
stem growth traits (Wu and Hinckley, 2001; Marron et al., 2006). In Europe and
the USA, clones from southern, warmer origins display more sylleptic branches
than clones from northern, colder regions (Rogers et al., 1989; Ceulemans et al.,
1992). Consistent with this response, P. deltoides, P. trichocarpa and their hybrids
produced more sylleptic branches when grown in warmer, more favorable sites
(Dickmann et al., 1990; Dunlap et al., 1995; Wu and Stettler, 1998). Wu and Stettler
(1998) found that leaf area on sylleptic branches was up to 35-fold higher in warmer,
sunnier and well-irrigated conditions than in a cooler and non-irrigated site. In
contrast, the leaf area produced by proleptic branches did not signiﬁcantly differ
between the two environments. The plasticity of sylleptic branches of some Populus
genotypes highlights the capacity to opportunistically alter the canopy architecture
in response to changes in resource availability.

Growth and Physiology
53
Considerable genetic variation in sylleptic and proleptic branching pattern has
been demonstrated for the Populus genus. Clonal differences in branching pattern,
and also in branch orientation and branch curvature, lead to striking differences in
canopy structure (Fig. 3). Branch orientation is mostly expressed in terms of angles
of origin and termination; branch curvature is calculated as the correlation between
angle of origin and angle of termination. P. trichocarpa clones from northern origin
showed wider branch angles than southern clones (Weber et al., 1985; Rogers et al.,
1989). However, the deﬁnition of a biologically meaningful variable for branch
angle is rather complex, since the angles of origin and angles of termination are
not necessarily associated (Nelson et al., 1981).
3.4 Phenology
Phenology refers to repetitive natural processes. In Populus species and other decid-
uous trees, phenology especially relates to the seasonality of catkin and leaf bud
ﬂushing in the spring, to the cessation of shoot growth and subsequent bud matura-
tion, and to leaf senescence and abscission in autumn (Boes and Strauss, 1994). The
interval between the spring ﬂushing and autumnal senescence provides the growth
season, the interval responsible for photosynthesis and biomass production, and is of
considerable interest relative to Populus productivity (Pellis et al., 2004). A longer
growth season can increase productivity, but with a subsequent hazard due to the
increasing risk of frost damage that can occur with ﬂushing prior to the end of spring
frosts, or insufﬁcient fall hardening prior to fall and winter freezing (Howe et al.,
2000). The appropriate seasonal coordination of Populus growth and development
is also important relative to seasonal patterns of precipitation vs. water demand, and
photoperiod or daylength, and also to coping with some pest and disease outbreaks
(Brunner et al., 2004).
Aspects of phenology can be especially important for Populus hybrids since the
blending of traits from different parental species can disrupt the coordination with
the seasonal environment. The consideration of phenology is also very important
relative to the production of hybrid Populus in a variety of regions and especially in
different latitudes that vary in photoperiod regime. Following from these considera-
tions there is growing interest in the nature of physiological adaptation to the growth
season and in the genetic regulation of the particular characteristics that contribute
to phenology and seasonal adaptation. There have been attempts to identify relevant
QTLs (Bradshaw and Stettler, 1995) and following the Populus genome project,
efforts to identify speciﬁc genes that contribute to Populus phenology (Brunner
et al., 2004). It is likely that some of the genes involved in the regulation of pheno-
logy are shared with other dicotyledonous plants, including Arabidopsis (Böhlenius
et al., 2006; Ingvarsson et al., 2008). Thus, comparative genomics represents a
promising strategy for the understanding and modiﬁcation of Populus phenology
(Brunner et al., 2004), see also section below.

54
S.Y. Dillen et al.
4 Water Relations and Productivity
4.1 Water Requirements
While currently grown hybrid Populus are among the highest yielding trees in tem-
perate regions, this high productivity is associated with correspondingly high water
demand (Tschaplinski et al., 1994; Blake et al., 1996). In many areas of Europe and
some areas of North America, hybrid Populus plantations are situated in river val-
ley ﬂoodplains where groundwater is shallow and abundant (Monclus et al., 2006).
With the abundant water supply, commercial clones were developed primarily based
on high productivity while water use efﬁciency (WUE), the ratio between biomass
production and water use, has seldom been a priority (Monclus et al., 2006).
However, hybrid Populus plantations are also situated in upland sites, where
soil moisture is more limited, and drought provides a major limitation to survival
and productivity (Blake et al., 1996). The solution in some regions such as the
semi-arid areas of eastern Washington and Oregon, USA, has been the implemen-
tation of irrigation, and with the added water, hybrid Populus yields in these warm
and sunny regions can be very high (Zsuffa et al., 1996). However, with increasing
water demands for population, agricultural, and industrial growth, and with climate
change diminishing water supplies in some regions, water for Populus irrigation will
become less available and more costly (Postel and Richter, 2003). In addition, ris-
ing energy costs for water pumping and increased labor costs further diminish the
economic viability of irrigated Populus plantations.
Without irrigation, drought stress is periodic in many prospective upland sites and
consequently increased drought-adaptation and higher WUE are likely to increase
in priority for hybrid Populus breeding programs (Blake et al., 1996). Although
Populus species are among the most drought-susceptible trees there is substantial
genotypic variation in the structural and biochemical characteristics that contribute
to drought adaptation (Blake et al., 1996; Monclus et al., 2006; Street et al., 2006).
Braatne et al. (1992) recognized the opportunity to develop hybrid Populus with
moderate productivity and favorable WUE, and achieving this balance would sub-
stantially expand the range of environments in which hybrid Populus could be
commercially grown without the need for costly irrigation.
Previous studies have investigated the ranges of variation in water use and
drought-response characteristics of current hybrid Populus clones (Ceulemans et al.,
1978; Harvey and van den Driessche, 1999; Monclus et al., 2006). Additionally,
studies have investigated water use in hybrid Populus families to consider aspects of
inheritance including segregation and dominance (Braatne et al., 1992; Tschaplinski
et al., 1994; Ferris et al., 2002). More recently, there have been efforts to identify
QTLs, and ultimately speciﬁc genes, which underlie water use and drought-response
characteristics in Populus (Street et al., 2006). These studies are ongoing and there
is another prospect to extend the range of WUE and drought adaptation of hybrid
Populus. This involves the expansion of the range of prospective parental genotypes
to include ecotypes and species that are naturally adapted to drier regions (Zsuffa
et al., 1996; Zhang et al., 2004; Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007).

Growth and Physiology
55
4.2 Stomata
Stomata play an important role in both CO2 uptake and water relations of trees.
Within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum the ﬁnal passage of water from the tree
to the atmosphere is through the foliar stomata and consequently, stomata provide
a primary opportunity for the Populus tree to regulate its water loss (Ceulemans
et al., 1978; Kramer and Kozlowski, 1979; Blake et al., 1984; 1996). In the short-
term, this involves stomatal closure due to the loss of turgor pressure of the guard
cells that ﬂank the stomatal pore, and in the longer-term, adaptation to particular
environments can involve changes in the size, number, and possibly distribution of
stomata (Pallardy and Kozlowski, 1981; Pearce et al., 2005). Stomatal traits vary
widely among Populus species and clones and show heritable variation (Dunlap
and Stettler, 2001; Al Afas et al., 2005; Dillen et al., 2008). While various Populus
species are characterized by amphistomatous leaves (i.e. stomata on both leaf sur-
faces), P. trichocarpa and P. balsamifera are known to have very few or no stomata
on the adaxial leaf surface (Ceulemans et al., 1988; Ferris et al., 2002; Pearce et al.,
2005). These different anatomical and morphological leaf characteristics can pro-
vide an adaptive mechanism to irradiance and water stress (Parkhurst, 1978). As the
inheritance of different stomatal traits is revealed, it should be possible to develop
Populus hybrids with particular combinations that would beneﬁt productivity and
WUE in particular environments (Blake et al., 1996; Ferris et al., 2002).
While variation in stomatal characteristics has long been recognized as a pri-
mary physiological character that inﬂuences plant water use, new research indicates
that there are also other forms of physiological regulation. Most studies of water
relations of trees and other plants have investigated shoots while the structure and
function of roots has often been neglected. Newer instruments such as the high-
pressure ﬂow meter can measure aspects of hydraulic conductivity in different
organs and particularly roots (Tyree et al., 1995). There are apparently diurnal and
phenological patterns in hydraulic conductances and this indicates a more dynamic
role of stomatal regulation than had been previously thought.
One probable group of contributors to the varying root hydraulic conductances
within Populus and other trees are aquaporins, trans-membrane water transport pro-
teins (Marjanovi´c et al., 2005). These are very abundant in Populus and other plants
and facilitate water passage across cell membranes and ultimately, across cells.
Within the root, the endodermis is a cylinder of cells that are sealed with suberins
and other substances and represents a point at which water must pass through,
rather than between, living cells. Aquaporins would facilitate this water transport
and changes in the level, type and/or distribution of aquaporins may represent an
endogenous mechanism of regulating root water ﬂux. Subsequently, the transgenic
modiﬁcation of aquaporins is a current research strategy to study aquaporin func-
tion and role and might also represent a strategy to modify water use in Populus
and other plants. The inheritance of aquaporins is largely unknown and there may
be promise to investigate variation, heritability and combinations across the multi-
ple aquaporin genes and related characteristics (Kohler et al., 2003; Schrader et al.,
2004).

56
S.Y. Dillen et al.
5 Phytohormones and Growth Regulation
Stomatal regulation and water relations are partly regulated by the phytohormone
abscisic acid (ABA) (Chen et al., 1997). Similarly, ABA and the other phyto-
hormones regulate virtually all aspects of growth and development of trees, as
in other plants (Taiz and Zeiger, 2006). There are ﬁve classic phytohormones,
with ABA and ethylene often serving as inhibitory substances that slow growth
and development, while the auxins, cytokinins and gibberellins (GA) are com-
monly promotory. Unlike the mammalian hormones the plant phytohormones are
synthesized in multiple plant tissues and generally have diverse roles. Two or more
of the phytohormones generally interact to regulate particular aspects of growth and
development (Taiz and Zeiger, 2006). For example, Populus bud ﬂushing probably
particularly involves inhibition by ABA versus promotion by GA; winter stratiﬁca-
tion and lengthening of the spring photoperiod change the biosynthetic capacities
and responsivities for these two antagonistic phytohormones (Olsen et al., 1997).
See also sections below.
Following from the fundamental roles of phytohormones to regulate plant
growth, the exogenous or external application of phytohormones has been attempted
as a means of deliberately modifying crops and trees. Plant growth regulators are
chemicals that are commercially applied to alter plant growth or development and
there are numerous commercial applications for ﬁeld and fruit crops but these
have seldom provided beneﬁt in tree plantations. Application of phytohormones
to promote root development of young plants or cuttings is of use in Populus
cultivation.
In Populus and other trees, the deliberate modiﬁcation of growth form and stature
is a primary goal and thus, there is considerable interest in the alteration of phyto-
hormones, especially of GA. Transgenic stimulation of GA 20-oxidase did elevate
the levels of endogenous GAs, and this was associated with increased biomass pro-
duction and increased ﬁber length (Eriksson et al., 2000). Other transgenic strategies
have also demonstrated that the modiﬁcation of GA biosynthesis or action can dra-
matically alter Populus growth form (Busov et al., 2003, 2006; Israelsson et al.,
2004). It has also been found that transgenic alteration of phytochrome can inﬂuence
phytohormone metabolism and balance, and that this is also related to photoperi-
odic response (Olsen et al., 1997). These results demonstrate promise for breeding
through either classical crosses or through transgenic manipulation with respect to
the modiﬁcation of phytohormones and growth form and rate.
The possible transgenic modiﬁcation of trees has prompted considerable resis-
tance by some environmental groups as well as by some scientists. The alteration
of phytohormone biosynthesis or response would represent a change in the balance
of a naturally-occurring regulatory substance and would not involve the insertion of
a new biochemical capacity. It is also likely that the coarse modiﬁcation of phyto-
hormones would not improve the tree’s adaptation to native environments and thus
expansion out of a plantation setting may be unlikely. However, there are real and
perceived concerns about transgenic trees and this should invite care prior to release
into uncontained sites (Pilate et al., 2002; van Frankenhuyzen and Beardmore,
2004).

Growth and Physiology
57
6 Conclusion
Being pioneer trees Populus species are characterized by fast growth rates and
high levels of productivity. Intensive gas exchange rates, both photosynthesis and
water loss, partly explain this high growth performance. Other ecophysiological
characteristics that signiﬁcantly contribute to the fast growth include the efﬁcient
leaf area development (both individual leaf area as well as total tree leaf area), the
potential to produce sylleptic branches and thus to expose more leaf area to capture
solar radiation, opportunistic use of the length of the growing season through phe-
nological adaptations and efﬁcient ways of communication through phytohormonal
mechanisms. The high water use of Populus is of particular relevance toward envi-
ronmental implications, both in longer, wide-spaced plantations as well as under
short-rotation coppice cultures. All of these ecophysiological traits have shown
very large genetic variation and moderate to high heritability. These can be tapped
in selection and breeding programs, either through traditional breeding or through
genetically engineered improvement programs.
References
Ainsworth EA, Long SP (2005) What have we learned from 15 years of free-air CO2 enrichment
(FACE)? A meta-analytic review of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and
plant production to rising CO2. New Phytol 165:351–372.
Al Afas N, Marron N, Ceulemans R (2005) Clonal variation in stomatal characteristics related to
biomass production of 12 poplar (Populus) clones in a short rotation coppice culture. Env Exp
Bot 58:279–286.
Al Afas N, Marron N, Zavalloni C, Ceulemans R (2008a) Growth and production of a short-rotation
coppice culture of poplar. IV. Fine root characteristics of ﬁve poplar clones. Biomass Bioenerg
32:494–502.
Al Afas N, Marron N, Van Dongen S, Laureysens I, Ceulemans R (2008b) Dynamics of biomass
production in a poplar coppice culture over three rotation (11 years). For Ecol Manage
255:1883–1891.
Aylott MJ, Casella E, Tubby I, Street NR, Smith P, Taylor G (2008) Yield and spatial supply of
bioenergy poplar and willow short-rotation coppice in the UK. New Phytol 178:358–370.
Barigah TS, Saugier B, Mousseau M, Guittet J, Ceulemans R (1994) Photosynthesis, leaf area and
productivity of 5 poplar clones during their establishment year. Ann For Sci 51:613–625.
Blake TJ, Tschaplinski TJ, Eastham A (1984) Stomatal control of water use efﬁciency in poplar
clones and hybrids. Can J Bot 62:1344–1351.
Blake TJ, Sperry JS, Tschaplinski TJ, Wang SS (1996) Water relations. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw
HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for
Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Boes TK, Strauss SH (1994) Floral phenology and morphology of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Salicaceae). Am J Bot 81:562–567.
Bogeat-Triboulot MB, Brosché M, Renaut J, Jouve L, Le Thiec D, Fayyaz P, Vinocur B, Witters
E, Laukens K, Teichmann T, Altman A, Hausman J-F, Polle A, Kangasjärvi J, Dreyer E (2007)
Gradual soil water depletion results in reversible changes of gene expression, protein pro-
ﬁles, ecophysiology, and growth performance in Populus euphratica, a poplar growing in arid
regions. Plant Physiol 143:876–892.
Böhlenius H, Huang T, Charbonnel-Campaa L, Brunner AM, Jansson S, Strauss SH, Nilsson O
(2006) CO/FT regulatory module controls timing of ﬂowering and seasonal growth cessation
in trees. Science 312:1040–1043.

58
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Braatne JH, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF (1992) Inﬂuence of soil water on the physiological and
morphological components of plant water balance in Populus trichocarpa, Populus deltoides
and their F1 hybrids. Tree Physiol 11:325–339.
Braatne JH, Rood SB, Heilman PE (1996) Life history, ecology, and conservation of riparian cot-
tonwoods in North America. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds)
Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research
Press, Ottawa.
Bradshaw HD Jr, Stettler RF (1995) Molecular genetics of growth and development in Populus.
IV. Mapping QTLs with large effects on growth, form, and phenology traits in a forest tree.
Genetics 139:963–973.
Bradshaw HD Jr, Ceulemans R, Davis J, Stettler R (2000) Emerging model systems in plant
biology: Poplar (Populus) as model forest tree. J Plant Growth Regul 19:306–313.
Brunner AM, Busov VC, Strauss SH (2004) Poplar genome sequence: Functional genomics in an
ecologically dominant plant species. Trends Plant Sci 9:49–56.
Bunn SM, Rae AM, Herbert CS, Taylor G (2004) Leaf-level productivity traits in Populus grown
in short rotation coppice for biomass energy. Forestry 77:307–323.
Busov VB, Meilan R, Pearce DW, Ma C, Rood SB, Strauss SH (2003) Activation tagging of a
dominant gibberellin catabolism gene (GA 2-oxidase) from poplar that regulates tree stature.
Plant Physiol 132:1283–1291.
Busov VR, Meilan R, Pearce DW, Rood SB, Ma C, Tschaplinski T, Strauss S (2006) Transgenic
modiﬁcation of gai or rgl1 causes dwarﬁng and alters gibberellins, root growth, and metabolite
proﬁles in Populus. Planta 224:288–299.
Ceulemans R, Deraedt W (1999) Production physiology and growth potential of poplars under
short-rotation forestry culture. For Ecol Manage 121:9–23.
Ceulemans R, Isebrands JG (1996) Carbon acquisition and allocation. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw
HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for
Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Ceulemans R, Saugier B (1991) Photosynthesis. In: Raghavendra AS (ed) Physiology of Trees.
Wiley, New York.
Ceulemans R, Impens I, Lemeur R, Moermans R, Samsuddin Z (1978) Water movement in the soil-
poplar-atmosphere system. I. Comparative study of stomatal morphology and anatomy, and the
inﬂuence of stomatal density and dimensions on the leaf diffusion characteristics in different
poplar clones. Oecol Plant 13:1–12.
Ceulemans R, Impens I, Steenackers V (1988) Genetic variation in aspects of leaf growth of
Populus clones, using the leaf plastochron index. Can J For Res 18:1069–1077.
Ceulemans R, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, Wiard BM, Braatne JH, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF (1992)
Production physiology and morphology of Populus species and their hybrids grown under short
rotation. I. Clonal comparisons of 4-year growth and phenology. Can J For Res 22:1937–1948.
Chen S, Wang S, Altman A, Hüttermann A (1997) Genotypic variation in drought tolerance on
poplar in relation to abscisic acid. Tree Physiol 17:797–803.
Christersson L (2006) Biomass production of intensively grown poplars in the southernmost part
of Sweden: Observations of characters, traits and growth potential. Biomass Bioenerg 30:
497–508.
Cooke JEK, Rood SB (2007) Trees of the people: The growing science of poplars in Canada and
worldwide. Can J Bot 85:1103–1110.
DeBell DS, Clendenen GW, Harrington CA, Zasada JC (1996) Tree growth and stand development
in short-rotation Populus plantings: 7-year results for two clones at three spacings. Biomass
Bioenerg 11:253–269.
Dickmann DI (1971) Photosynthesis and respiration by developing leaves of cottonwood (Populus
deltoides Bartr.). Bot Gaz 132:253–259.
Dickmann DI (2001) An overview of the genus Populus. In: Dickmann DI, Isebrands JG,
Eckenwalder JE, Richardson J (eds) Poplar Culture in North America. NRC Research Press,
Ottawa.

Growth and Physiology
59
Dickmann DI, Pregitzer KS (1992) The structure and dynamics of woody plant root systems. In:
Mitchell CP, Ford-Robertson JB, Hinckley TM, Sennerby-Forsse L (eds) Ecophysiology of
Short Rotation Forest Crops. Elsevier, New York.
Dickmann DI, Stuart KW (1983) The Culture of Poplars is Eastern North America. Michigan State
University Publications, East Lansing, MI.
Dickmann DI, Michael DA, Isebrands JG, Westin S (1990) Effects of leaf display on light inter-
ceptions and apparent photosynthesis in two contrasting Populus cultivars during their second
growing season. Tree Physiol 7:7–20.
Dillen SY, Marron N, Bastien C, Ricciotti L, Salani F, Sabatti M, Pinel MPC, Rae AM, Taylor
G, Ceulemans R (2007) Effects of environment and progeny on biomass estimations of ﬁve
hybrid poplar families grown at three contrasting sites across Europe. For Ecol Manage 252:
12–23.
Dillen SY, Marron N, Koch B, Ceulemans R (2008) Genetic variation of stomatal traits and car-
bon isotope discrimination in two hybrid poplar families (Populus deltoides ‘S9-2’ × P. nigra
‘Ghoy’ and P. deltoides ‘S9-2’ × P. trichocarpa ‘V24’). Ann Bot 102:399–407.
Dillen SY, Storme V, Marron N, Bastien C, Neyrinck S, Steenackers M, Ceulemans R, Boerjan W
(2009) Genomic regions involved in productivity of two interspeciﬁc poplar families in Europe.
1. Stem height, circumference and volume. Tree Genet Genome 5:147–164.
Drew AP, Chapman JA (1992) Inheritance of temperature adaptation in intra- and inter-speciﬁc
Populus crosses. Can J For Res 22:62–67.
Dunlap JM, Stettler RF (2001) Variation in leaf epidermal and stomatal traits of Populus
trichocarpa from two transects across the Washington Cascades. Can J Bot 79:528–536.
Dunlap JM, Heilman PE, Stettler RF (1995) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus tri-
chocarpa and its hybrids. VIII. Leaf and crown morphology of native P. trichocarpa clones
from four river valleys in Washington. Can J For Res 25:1710–1724.
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and
Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Eriksson ME, Israelsson M, Olsson O, Moritz T (2000) Increased gibberellin biosynthesis in
transgenic trees promotes growth, biomass production and xylem ﬁber length. Nat Biotechnol
18:784–788.
Farmer RE (1996) The genecology of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE,
Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and Conservation.
NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Ferris R, Long L, Bunn SM, Robinson KM, Bradshaw HD Jr, Rae AM, Taylor G (2002) Leaf
stomatal and epidermal cell development: Identiﬁcation of putative quantitative trait loci in
relation to elevated carbon dioxide in poplar. Tree Physiol 22:633–640.
Friend AL, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, Isebrands JG, Heilman PE (1991) Quantiﬁcation of two-year-
old hybrid poplar root systems: Morphology, biomass, and (14)C distribution. Tree Physiol
8:109–119.
Gielen B, Liberloo M, Bogaert J, Calfapietra C, De Angelis P, Miglietta F, Scarascia-Mugnozza
G, Ceulemans R (2003) Three years of free-air CO2 enrichment (POPFACE) only slightly
affect proﬁles of light and leaf characteristics in closed canopies of Populus. Glob Change Biol
9:1022–1037.
Hallé F, Oldeman RA, Tomlinson PB (1978) Tropical Trees and Forests. An Architectural
Analysis. Springer, Berlin.
Hansen EA (1991) Poplar woody biomass yields: A look to the future. Biomass Bioenerg 1:1–7.
Harvey HP, van den Driessche R (1999) Nitrogen and potassium effects on xylem cavitation and
water-use efﬁciency in poplars. Tree Physiol 19:943–950.
Hayes HK (1952) Development of the heterosis concept. In: Gowen JW (ed) Heterosis. Iowa State
University College Press, Ames, IA.
Heilman PE, Ekuan G, Fogle D (1994) Above- and below-ground biomass and ﬁne roots of 4-year-
old hybrids of Populus trichocarpa × Populus deltoides and parental species in short-rotation
culture. Can J For Res 24:1186–1192.

60
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Herve C, Ceulemans R (1996) Short-rotation coppiced vs non-coppiced poplar: A comparative
study at two different ﬁeld sites. Biomass Bioenerg 11:139–150.
Hinckley TM, Braatne J, Ceulemans R, Clum P, Dunlap J, Newman D, Smit B, Scarascia-
Mugnozza G, Van Volkenburgh E (1992) Growth dynamics and canopy structure. In: Mitchell
CP, Ford-Robertson JB, Hinckley TM, Sennerby-Forsse L (eds) Ecophysiology of Short
Rotation Forest Crops. Elsevier, London.
Hovenden MJ (2003) Photosynthesis of coppicing poplar clones in a free-air CO2 enrichment
(FACE) experiment in a short-rotation forest. Funct Plant Biol 30:391–400.
Howe GT, Saruul J, Davis J, Chen THH (2000) Quantitative genetics of bud phenology, frost
damage, and winter survival in an F2 family of hybrid poplars. Theor Appl Genet 101:
632–642.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Luquez V, Hall D, Jansson S (2008) Nucleotide polymorphism and
phenotypic associations within and around the phytochrome B2 locus in European aspen
(Populus tremula, Salicaceae). Genetics 178:2217–2226.
Isebrands JG, Ceulemans R, Wiard B (1988) Genetic variation in photosynthetic traits among
Populus clones in relation to yield. Plant Physiol Biochem 26:427–437.
Israelsson M, Mellerowicz E, Chono M, Gullberg J, Moritz T (2004) Cloning and overproduc-
tion of giberellin 3-oxidase in hybrid aspen trees – Effects on giberellin homeostasis and
development. Plant Physiol 135:221–230.
Karacic A, Verwijst T, Weih M (2003) Above-ground woody biomass production of short-rotation
Populus plantations on agricultural land in Sweden. Scand J For Res 18:427–437.
Kohler A, Delaruelle C, Martin D, Encelot N, Martin F (2003) The poplar root transcriptome:
Analysis of 7000 expressed sequence tags. FEBS Lett 542:37–41.
Kramer PJ, Kozlowski TT (1979) Physiology of Woody Plants. Academic Press, New York.
Labrecque M, Teodorescu TI (2005) Field performance and biomass production of 12 willow
and poplar clones in short-rotation coppice in southern Quebec (Canada). Biomass Bioenerg
29:1–9.
Laureysens I, Bogaert J, Blust R, Ceulemans R (2004) Biomass production of 17 poplar clones in
a short rotation culture on a waste disposal site and its relation to soil characteristics. For Ecol
Manage 187:295–309.
Laureysens I, Pellis A, Willems J, Ceulemans R (2005) Growth and production of a short rotation
coppice culture of poplar. III. Second rotation results. Biomass Bioenerg 29:10–21.
Li B, Wu R (1997) Heterosis and genotype × environment interactions of juvenile aspens in two
contrasting sites. Can J For Res 27:1525–1537.
Li B, Howe GT, Wu R (1998) Developmental factors responsible for heterosis in aspen hybrids
(Populus tremuloides × P. tremula). Tree Physiol 18:29–36.
Liberloo M, Calfapietra C, Lukac M, Godbold D, Luo ZB, Polle A, Hoosbeek MR, Kull O,
Marek M, Raines C, Rubino M, Taylor G, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, Ceulemans R (2006) Woody
biomass production during the second rotation of a bio-energy Populus plantation increases in
a future high CO2 world. Glob Change Biol 12:1094–1106.
Liberloo M, Tulva I, Raïm O, Kull O, Ceulemans R (2007) Photosynthetic stimulation under
long-term CO2 enrichment and fertilization is sustained across a closed Populus canopy proﬁle
(EUROFACE). New Phytol 173:537–549.
Marjanovi´c Z, Uehlein N, Kaldenhoff R, Zwiazek JJ, Weiß M, Hampp R, Nehls U (2005)
Aquaporins in poplar: What a difference a symbiont makes! Planta 222:258–268.
Marron N, Bastien C, Sabatti M, Taylor G, Ceulemans R (2006) Plasticity of growth and sylleptic
branchiness in two poplar families grown at three contrasting sites across Europe. Tree Physiol
26:935–946.
Marron N, Dillen SY, Ceulemans R (2007) Evaluation of leaf traits for indirect selection of high
yielding poplar hybrids. Env Exp Bot 61:103–116.
Marron N, Storme V, Dillen SY, Bastien C, Ricciotti L, Salani F, Pinel MPC, Ceulemans R, Boerjan
W (2009) Genomic regions involved in productivity of two interspeciﬁc poplar families in
Europe. 2. Biomass production and its relationships with tree architecture and phenology. Tree
Genet Genome, accepted.

Growth and Physiology
61
Monclus R, Dreyer E, Villar M, Delmotte FM, Delay D, Petit JM, Barbaroux C, Le Thiec D,
Bréchet C, Brignolas F (2006) Impact of drought on productivity and water use efﬁciency in
29 genotypes of Populus deltoides × Populus nigra. New Phytol 169:765–777.
Nelson ND, Burk T, Isebrands JG (1981) Crown architecture of short-rotation, intensively cultured
Populus. I. Effects of clone and spacing on ﬁrst-order branch characteristics. Can J For Res
11:73–81.
Niinemets Ü, Kull O (1999) Biomass investment in leaf lamina versus lamina support in relation
to growth irradiance and leaf size in temperate deciduous trees. Tree Physiol 19:349–358.
Niinemets Ü, Al Afas N, Cescatti A, Pellis A, Ceulemans R (2004) Petiole length and biomass
investment in support modify light-interception efﬁciency in dense poplar plantations. Tree
Physiol 24:141–154.
Niinemets Ü, Portsmuth A, Tobias M (2006) Leaf size modiﬁes support biomass distribution
among stems, petioles and mid-ribs in temperate plants. New Phytol 171:91–104.
Olsen JE, Junttila O, Nilsen J, Eriksson ME, Martinussen I, Olsson O, Sandberg G, Moritz T (1997)
Ectopic expression of oat phytochrome A in hybrid aspen changes critical daylength for growth
and prevents cold acclimatization. Plant J 12:1339–1350.
Pallardy SG, Kozlowski TT (1979) Early root and shoot growth of Populus clones. Silvae Genet
28:153–156.
Pallardy SG, Kozlowski TT (1981) Water relations in Populus clones. Ecology 62:159–169.
Parkhurst DF (1978) The adaptive signiﬁcance of stomatal occurance on one or both surfaces of
leaves. J Ecol 66:367–383.
Pearce DW, Millard S, Bray DF, Rood SB (2005) Stomatal characteristics of riparian poplar species
in a semi-arid environment. Tree Physiol 26:211–218.
Pellis A, Laureysens I, Ceulemans R (2004) Genetic variation of the bud and leaf phenology of
seventeen poplar clones in a short rotation coppice culture. Plant Biol 6:38–46.
Peng J, Richards DE, Hartley NM, Murphy GP, Devos KM, Flintham JE, Beales J, Fish LJ,
Worland AJ, Pelica F, Sudhakar D, Christou P, Snape JW, Gale MD, Harberd NP (1999) ‘Green
revolution’ genes encode mutant giberellin response modulators. Nature 400:256–261.
Pilate G, Guiney E, Holt K, Petit-Conil M, Lapierre C, Leplé JC, Pollet B, Mila I, Webster EA,
Marstorp HG, Hopkins DW, Jouanin L, Boerjan W, Schuch W, Cornu D, Halpin C (2002)
Field and pulping performances of transgenic trees with altered ligniﬁcation. Nat Biotechnol
20:607–612.
Pontailler JY, Ceulemans R, Guittet J, Mau F (1997) Linear and non-linear functions of volume
index to estimate woody biomass in high density young poplar stands. Ann Sci For 54:335–345.
Pontailler JY, Ceulemans R, Guittet J (1999) Biomass yield of poplar after ﬁve 2-year coppice
rotations. Forestry 72:157–163.
Postel S, Richter B (2003) Rivers for Life: Managing Water for People and Nature. Island Press,
Washington, DC.
Pregitzer KS, Friend AL (1996) The structure and function of Populus root systems. In: Stettler
RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications
for Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Pregitzer KS, Zak DR, Curtis PS, Kubiske ME, Teeri JA, Vogel CS (1995) Atmospheric CO2, soil
nitrogen and turnover of ﬁne roots. New Phytol 129:579–585.
Rae AM, Robinson KM, Street NR, Taylor G (2004) Morphological and physiological traits
inﬂuencing biomass productivity in short-rotation coppice poplar. Can J For Res 34:1488–1498.
Rae AM, Pinel MPC, Bastien C, Sabatti M, Street NR, Tucker J, Dixon C, Marron N, Dillen SY,
Taylor G (2008) QTL for yield in bioenergy Populus: Identifying G × E interactions from
growth at three contrasting sites. Tree Genet Genome 4:97–112.
Remphrey WR, Powell GR (1985) Crown architecture of Larix laricina saplings: Sylleptic
branching on the main stem. Can J Bot 63:1296–1302.
Ridge CR, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF, Van Volkenburgh E (1986) Leaf growth characteristics of
fast growing poplar hybrids Populus trichocarpa × P. deltoides. Tree Physiol 1:209–216.

62
S.Y. Dillen et al.
Ripullone F, Lauteri M, Grassi G, Amato M, Borghetti M (2004) Variation in nitrogen sup-
ply changes water-use efﬁciency of Pseudotsuga menziesii and Populus × euroamericana; a
comparison of three approaches to determine water-use efﬁciency. Tree Physiol 24:671–679.
Rogers DL, Stettler RF, Heilman PE (1989) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus tri-
chocarpa and its hybrids. III. Structure and pattern of variation in a 3-year ﬁeld test. Can J For
Res 19:372–377.
Rood SB, Braatne JH, Hughes FMR (2003) Ecophysiology of riparian cottonwoods: Streamﬂow
dependence, water relations, and restoration. Tree Physiol 23:1113–1124.
Ruark GA, Martin L, Bockheim G (1987) Comparison of constant and variable allometric relations
for estimating Populus tremuloides biomass. For Sci 33:249–300.
Scarascia-Mugnozza GE (1991) Physiological and Morphological Determinants of Yield in
Intensively Cultured Poplar (Populus spp.). PhD Thesis, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA.
Scarascia-Mugnozza GE, Ceulemans R, Heilman PE, Isebrands JG, Stettler RF, Hinckley TM
(1997) Production physiology and morphology of Populus species and their hybrids grown
under short rotation. II. Biomass components and harvest index of hybrid and parental species
clones. Can J For Res 27:285–294.
Scarascia-Mugnozza GE, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF, Heilman PE, Isebrands JG (1999) Production
physiology and morphology of Populus species and their hybrids grown under short rotation.
III. Seasonal carbon allocation patterns from branches. Can J For Res 29:1419–1432.
Schrader J, Nilsson J, Mellerowicz E, Berglund A, Nilsson P, Hertzberg M, Sandberg G (2004)
A high-resolution transcript proﬁle across the wood-forming meristem of poplar identiﬁes
potential regulators of cambial stem cell identity. Plant Cell 16:2278–2292.
Schulze ED (1982) Plant life forms and their carbon, water and nutrient relations. In: Lange OL,
Nobel PS, Osmond CB, Ziegler H (eds) Encyclopedia of Plant Physiology 12B. Springer,
Berlin.
Sims REH, Maiava TG, Bullock BT (2001) Short rotation coppice tree species selection for woody
biomass production in New Zealand. Biomass Bioenerg 20:329–335.
Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr (1996) Evolution, genetics, and genetic manipulation. Overview. In:
Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its
Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Stettler RF, Fenn RC, Heilman PE, Stanton BJ (1988) Populus trichocarpa × Populus deltoides
hybrids for short rotation culture: Variation patterns and 4-year ﬁeld performance. Can J For
Res 18:745–753.
Stettler RF, Zsuffa L, Wu R (1996) The role of hybridization in the genetic manipulation of
Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus
and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa.
Street NR, Skogström O, Sjödin A, Tucker J, Rodríguez-Acosta M, Nilsson P, Jansson S, Taylor G
(2006) The genetics and genomics of the drought response in Populus. Plant J 48:321–341.
Taiz L, Zeiger E (2006) Plant Physiology. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Tschaplinkski TJ, Tuskan GA, Gunderson CA (1994) Water-stress tolerance of black and eastern
cottonwood clones and four hybrid progeny. I. Growth, water relations, and gas exchange. Can
J For Res 24:364–371.
Tuskan GA (1998) Short-rotation woody crop supply systems in the United States: What do we
know and what do we need to know? Biomass Bioenerg 14:307–315.
Tuskan GA, Rensema TR (1992) Clonal differences in biomass characteristics, coppice ability, and
biomass prediction equations among four Populus clones grown in eastern North Dakota. Can
J For Res 22:348–354.
Tyree MT, Patino S, Bennink J, Alexander J (1995) Dynamic measurements of roots hydraulic
conductance using a high-pressure ﬂowmeter in the laboratory and ﬁeld. J Exp Bot 46:83–94.
Vande Walle I, Van Camp N, Van de Casteele L, Verheyen K, Lemeur R (2007) Short-rotation
forestry of birch, maple, poplar and willow in Flanders (Belgium) I. Biomass production after
4 years of tree growth. Biomass Bioenerg 31:276–283.

Growth and Physiology
63
van Frankenhuyzen K, Beardmore T (2004) Current status and environmental impact of transgenic
forest trees. Can J For Res 34:1163–1180.
Verwijst T (1991) Logarithmic transformations in biomass estimation procedures: Violation of the
linearity assumption in regression analysis. Biomass Bioenerg 1:245–250.
Weber JC, Stettler RF, Heilman PE (1985) Genetic variation in productivity of Populus trichocarpa
and its hybrids. I. Morphology and phenology of 50 native clones. Can J For Res 15:376–383.
Wilcox JR, Farmer RE Jr (1968) Heritability and C effects in early root growth of eastern
cottonwood cuttings. Heredity 23:239–245.
Wu R, Hinckley TM (2001) Phenotypic plasticity of sylleptic branching: Genetic design of tree
architecture. Crit Rev Plant Sci 20:467–485.
Wu R, Stettler RF (1998) Quantitative genetics of growth and development in Populus. III.
Phenotypic plasticity of crown structure and function. Heredity 81:124–134.
Wu R, Bradshaw HD Jr, Stettler RF (1997) Molecular genetics of growth and development in
Populus (Salicaceae). V. Mapping quantitative trait loci affecting leaf variation. Am J Bot
84:143–153.
Wu R, Bradshaw HD Jr, Stettler RF (1998) Developmental quantitative genetics of growth in
Populus. Theor Appl Genet 97:1110–1119.
Wu R, Ma CX, Yang MCK, Chang M, Littell RC, Santra U, Wu SS, Yin T, Huang M, Wang M,
Casella G (2003) Quantitative trait loci for growth trajectories in Populus. Gen Res 81:51–64.
Zabek LM, Prescott CE (2006) Biomass equations and carbon content of aboveground leaﬂess
biomass of hybrid poplar in Coastal British Columbia. For Ecol Manage 223:291–302.
Zalesny RS, Riemenschneider DE, Hall RB (2005) Early rooting of dormant hardwood cuttings of
Populus: Analysis of quantitative genetics and genotype × environment interactions. Can J For
Res 35:918–929.
Zhang X, Zang R, Li C (2004) Population differences in physiological and morphological adap-
tations of Populus davidiana seedlings in response to progressive drought stress. Plant Sci
166:791–797.
Zsuffa L, Giordano E, Pryor LD, Stettler RF (1996) Trends in poplar culture: Some global and
regional perspectives. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds)
Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research
Press, Ottawa.

Part II
Populus Genetics and Genomics

The Populus Genome and Comparative
Genomics
Carl J. Douglas and Stephen P. DiFazio
Abstract Populus was the ﬁrst tree genome, and one of the ﬁrst plant genomes,
to be sequenced. The sequencing project and subsequent annotation was a col-
laborative, international effort, with the bulk of the sequencing carried out by
the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute. Due to the high degree
of sequence coverage, the hybrid BAC library-whole genome shotgun approach
employed, excellent EST and full-length cDNA sequence collections, and an
engaged Populus research community, the sequence is of high quality and set a
standard for subsequent genome sequencing projects. In this chapter, we provide
background information on the Populus sequencing project, the genome sequence
was obtained and annotated, data on Populus genome structure, uses of the genome
sequence, and examples of comparative genomics studies enabled by the Populus
genome sequence.
1 Overview
1.1 Signiﬁcance of the Populus Genome Sequence
The sequencing and analysis of the Populus trichocarpa genome (Tuskan et al.,
2006) was a milestone not only for tree biology but also for plant biology in general.
As the ﬁrst tree and third plant with a complete genome sequence (after Arabidopsis
thaliana, Arabidopsis and Oryza sativa, rice), the impact of the P. trichocarpa
genome sequence has been felt in different ways. In this chapter, we provide back-
ground information on the Populus sequencing project, how the genome sequence
C.J. Douglas (B)
Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
e-mail: cdouglas@interchange.ubc.ca
67
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_4,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

68
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
was obtained and annotated, data on Populus genome structure, uses of the genome
sequence, and examples of comparative genomics studies enabled by the Populus
genome sequence.
The availability of the Populus trichocarpa Nisqually-1 sequence as a reference
genome sequence has catalyzed new research on genetic approaches for example,
powerful forward genetics approaches such as association genetics (e.g., Ingvarsson,
2008) and QTL mapping (e.g. Rae et al., 2007). Related to these approaches, the
Nisqually-1 sequence provides a reference for large-scale, genome-wide discovery
of nucleotide diversity (for example single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs and
insertion/deletions, indels). Indeed, the sequencing and physical mapping (Kelleher
et al., 2007) of P. trichocarpa has already revealed a wealth of genetic polymor-
phisms in this single individual. While approaches such as Eco-TILLING (Gilchrist
et al., 2006) have made use of Nisqually-1 genome data for SNP discovery, next
generation sequencing platforms and whole genome level resequencing approaches
can be combined with the reference genome sequence to allow unprecedented
exploration of nucleotide and genetic diversity. These issues are addressed in more
detail in other chapters of this volume.
The availability of the P. trichocarpa genome sequence also opened the door
to comparative genomics studies based on whole genome data from multiple lin-
eages. As the second eudicot genome sequence available, three way comparisons
between the genomes of Populus and Arabidopsis as representative eudicots, and
rice, as a monocot, were possible. Subsequently, the Vitis vinifea (grapevine) whole
genome sequence (Jaillon et al., 2007; Velasco et al., 2007) the sequence of the moss
Physcomitrella patens genome (Rensing et al., 2008) and partial genome sequences
from other plants, has further enriched the data available for plant comparative
genomics. Questions regarding the evolution of gene families that are potentially
important for tree and woody plant biology, and the degree of synteny between
Populus and other angiosperm plants can now be addressed, and a wealth of reports
in these areas have been published since the public release the genome sequence.
While sequencing of whole tree genomes is in its infancy, efforts towards com-
pleting a Eucalyptus genome sequence are well underway (Novaes et al., 2008),
and information from this and other tree genome sequences will further enable
comparative genomics between diverse tree taxa in the future.
1.2 Background to the Genome Sequencing Effort
As discussed at length by others (Cronk, 2005, Jansson and Douglas, 2007, Chapters
1, 2, and 3 in this volume), the biology of Populus species as a woody peren-
nial, obligate outcrossing, and largely undomesticated plant, relative to herbaceous,
weedy, inbreeding life history of Arabidopsis made it attractive as an alternative
model system for genome sequencing. Furthermore, as mentioned in Chapter 1
Populus began to emerge as the primary angiosperm tree model system in the 1990s
for several reasons that were also important in the choice of Populus for the ﬁrst tree

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
69
genome sequence. Populus genetics became well established during that time, lead-
ing to the generation of relatively high-density linkage maps (Yin et al., 2002) for
several species and hybrids. Simultaneously, numerous groups began to explore the
molecular biology of Populus, and the structures of several important gene families
began to be illuminated. These included, for example, those encoding enzymes of
phenylpropanoid metabolism, important for lignin deposition during wood forma-
tion, genes encoding transcription factors such as those of the MYB class and genes
involved in hormone signaling. As well, transformation systems for functional anal-
ysis of Populus genes came into widespread use (Chapter 6). The relatively small
genome size (around 500 Mb), and interests in Populus as a source of biomass as
well as its ecological importance (Brunner et al., 2004) both contributed to the
decision to in 2001 to sequence the Populus genome. However, one of the most
compelling reasons for sequencing the genome was the rapid development of tools
for Populus genomic and functional genomics, as described in detail by Jansson and
Douglas (2007).
2 Summary of Whole Genome Shotgun Results
2.1 Sequencing Strategy
The sequencing of the Populus genome was accomplished using a hybrid strat-
egy that combined whole genome shotgun sequencing with a BAC physical map
and a genetic map. The physical map was produced by ﬁngerprinting and end-
sequencing a Populus BAC library. In parallel, whole genome shotgun sequencing
was performed for the same genotype that was used for the physical map.
2.2 Selection of a Populus Genotype for Sequencing
The genotype selected for sequencing was a black cottonwood tree (Populus tri-
chocarpa Torr. & Gray). Toby Bradshaw, one of the pioneers of Populus genomics,
originally collected the selected genotype (also known as clone number 383-
2499) along the Nisqually River in Washington State. This clone, commonly
called “Nisqually-1,” was the maternal parent for the largest pedigree produced for
Populus, a cross with P. deltoides clone ILL-101 to produce a family of 2,028 F1
progeny. The purpose of this generating this pedigree was to isolate a major gene
conferring resistance to a hybrid leaf pathogen, Melamspora x columbiana 3, which
segregates at a 1:1 ratio in this pedigree (Stirling et al., 2001). For this purpose, a
9.5X BAC library was also prepared for this pedigree by partially digesting high
molecular weight genomic DNA with HindIII (Stirling et al., 2001). The existence
of the large pedigree and the BAC library, coupled with the availability of abundant
material in clone banks at the University of Washington and elsewhere, was enough
to tip the balance in favor of this genotype.

70
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
The selection of this genotype was somewhat controversial, because most of the
model transformation clones were derived from aspens (Populus tremula, P. tremu-
loides, or P. alba), and the majority of ESTs were also from that section of the genus.
However, the cottonwoods are much more important commercially in the United
States, and cottonwood hybrids were the leading candidates for high-yield planta-
tions for bioenergy and carbon sequestration (Perlack et al., 2005, Tuskan, 1998).
Furthermore, most genetic maps and pedigrees were for cottonwoods (Bradshaw
et al., 1994; Cervera et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2008, 2004b), and the existing BAC
libraries were also from cottonwoods (Lescot et al., 2004; Stirling et al., 2001), so
the most relevant resources for genome sequencing and assembly were already in
hand.
There are several ironies about the Nisqually-1 genotype: (1) the disease resis-
tance gene that originally piqued interest in this genotype still has not been isolated,
due in part to high complexity of this genomic region, which may be linked to sup-
pression of recombination in the large pedigree, thereby making map-based cloning
nearly impossible (Stirling et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2004a) (2) the original ortet has
since been destroyed by ﬂooding in its native habitat along the Nisqually River;
and (3) Nisqually-1 has proven to be somewhat difﬁcult to handle in tissue culture.
Even though transformation protocols have been successfully developed (Ma et al.,
2004; Song et al., 2006), the relative difﬁculty and inefﬁciency of transformation
suggest that this clone is unlikely to supplant aspen hybrids as the model of choice
for functional genomics in Populus (Busov et al., 2005).
2.3 Preparation of Sequencing Template and Shotgun Sequencing
Nisqually-1 genomic DNA was initially extracted from surface-sterilized leaves
using a CTAB-based protocol. This template was used to construct 3-kb and 8-kb
libraries that yielded most of the sequence data. When it became clear that this
template was heavily contaminated with chloroplast and mitochondrial DNA (see
below), a second set of templates was prepared from root tissue grown in hydropon-
ics and tissue culture. This DNA extraction protocol involved a nuclei isolation step
using a sucrose gradient followed by a cesium chloride gradient centrifugation step.
This DNA, which was virtually free of plastid contamination, was used to construct
the fosmid libraries.
A total of 7.65 million sequence reads were generated from these libraries, with
4.4 million reads coming from 3 kb libraries and 2.5 million reads from 8 kb
libraries, and 650,000 reads from fosmid libraries. In addition, 81,904 end sequences
were obtained from BAC clones that averaged 100 kb in size (Kelleher et al., 2007).
This resulted in a theoretical sequence coverage of the genome of nearly 10X (i.e.,
an average of 10 sequences representing each nucleotide position), and an expected
clone coverage of nearly 70X (i.e., the average number of clone inserts covering
each position in the genome, though only the ends of the clones are represented by
actual sequence).

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
71
2.4 Sequence Assembly
The shotgun sequences were initially assembled based on homology and paired
end read information using the JAZZ assembler (Aparicio et al., 2002). The assem-
bly process began with identiﬁcation and masking of reads derived from repetitive
regions of the genome. This was accomplished by counting the number of occur-
rences of all 16mer “words” in the entire set of 7.65 million sequences. This “word”
length was chosen because words of this length are not expected to occur in a
genome of the expected size of Populus. The distribution of 16mer words was exam-
ined, and it was determined that a discontinuity occurred around 34 occurrences.
Therefore, 16mers that occurred more than this were masked from the sequence
reads prior to assembly. This resulted in removal of entire reads from the assembly
process and mitigated the confounding effects of repetitive DNA on shotgun assem-
bly (Green, 2001). Pairwise alignments of all sequences were then performed, and
contigs were constructed by converting pairwise relationships to a graph topology
and ﬁnding the most direct route through the graph. Sequence contigs were joined
using similar methodology, taking advantage of linkage information contained in
paired end-read information.
The initial assembly utilized 4.8 million of the sequence reads to form approxi-
mately 45,970 sequence contigs of at least 1 kb in length, resulting in approximately
427 Mb of assembled genome sequence contigs, excluding gaps. These contigs were
grouped together using paired clone end information into 22,136 sequence scaffolds
that covered 464 Mb of assembled sequence and “captured” sequence gaps (the
size of which was estimated based on average clone insert size). The approximately
3.6 Gb of sequence assembled to an average depth of 7.4X, resulting in an overall
genome size estimate of approximately 485 Mb, which is in rough agreement with
estimates based on ﬂow cytometry (Bradshaw and Stettler, 1993). It is remarkable
that the assembled sequence size matches the predicted size so closely, suggesting
that misassembly is a relatively small problem, and that gaps and incorrectly split
haplotypes approximately balance one another.
2.5 Contamination of the Sequencing Template
Nearly 2.85 million of the original sequence reads were not included in the ﬁnal
whole genome shotgun assembly. Approximately 750,000 of these were simply low-
quality or chimeric sequences that were excluded by the JAZZ assembler. However,
2.1 million were high quality sequences that otherwise should have assembled. The
leaf-derived sequences failed to assemble at a higher rate (34%) than the root-
derived sequences (24%), suggesting that the DNA extraction method was related
to this problem. Two sets of sequences with unusual sequence depth (954X and
60X, respectively) were removed and assembled into putative chloroplast and mito-
chondrial genomes, respectively. These accounted for approximately 300,000 of
the unassembled sequences. Another 613,000 sequences corresponded to Populus

72
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
repeat elements, as determined by high 16mer composition and comparison to
Populus repeat libraries using WU-BLASTN (see below). The remaining 1.1 mil-
lion unassembled sequences were compared to the NCBI nonredundant nucleotide
database using WU-BLASTN searches. Approximately 600,000 of these sequences
showed no homology to known sequences, and are therefore of unknown origin.
An additional 482,199 had signiﬁcant hits to known, non-Populus sequences. Of
these, the vast majority had hits (E < 1e–10) to other plants, and likely represent
inexplicably unassembled portions of the Populus genome. However, nearly 25,000
of the remaining sequences had hits to fungi, bacteria, and viruses that were likely
endophytic or pathogenic contaminants of the sequencing template, despite the fact
that the leaves and roots were surface-sterilized prior to extraction. Similar trends
were seen for small scaffolds from the sequencing dataset, where nearly 300 of the
scaffolds <10 kb in size were apparently of microbial origin.
2.6 BAC-Based Physical Map
The generation of a 48,000 – member bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC) library,
constructed from the P. trichocarpa Nisqually-1 genotype (Kelleher et al., 2007)
was critical in generating the whole genome sequence, and in assembly of sequence
scaffolds. Map assembly was based on the restriction enzyme digestion of over
46,000 clones, which were assembled into ﬁngerprinted contigs (FPC) (Kelleher
et al., 2007). An important part of the effort was to obtain BAC end sequences (BES)
for a large fraction of the BAC clones. In total, almost 82,000 BES were obtained,
with an average read length of 500 bp, corresponding to 41 Mb of P. trichocarpa
Nisqually-1 genome sequence. These sequence reads, the majority of them paired
end reads, were integrated into the whole genome shotgun sequence, and aided in
effective assembly of sequence contigs on a large scale. Furthermore, the BES facil-
itated anchoring of the physical map to the genome sequence assembly, resulting
in the generation of a combined genetic map-physical map-genome sequence for a
large fraction of the genome (Kelleher et al., 2007).
An interesting observation from the physical map study was the rather frequent
occurrence of BAC FPCs that appeared distinct due to distinct restriction frag-
ment patterns, suggesting that they were from different genomic regions, yet which
mapped to identical regions LG locations based on ﬁnal analysis of the genome
assembly. Figure 1 shows and example of this unexpected ﬁnding from a portion of
LG_ II. The explanation for the phenomenon is that, like the genome sequence,
the ﬁngerprinted BAC library derived from a highly heterozygous individual,
P. trichocarpa Nisqually-l, and thus largely represents a combination of two dis-
tinct haploid genomes. Genetic mapping of representative overlapping contigs such
as those shown in Fig. 1, using SNP markers, showed that they co-localized to the
same genetic locations as predicted from this interpretation (Kelleher et al., 2007).
Thus, the sequences of overlapping BAC contigs representing distinct Nisqually-1
haploid genotypes, and this allowed insights into the nature of haploid diversity to

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
73
Fig. 1 A section of the LG_II genome assembly showing overlapping BAC ﬁnger print contigs
(FPC) that map to the same site. Arrow indicates and example of such contigs (blue and green),
that represent distinct haploid genomes in the Nisqually-1 genotype. BAC FPCs anchored to the
genome assembly and genetic map (outer ring) are indicated in alternating color schemes; each
color represents a different FPC. See Kelleher et al. (2007) for more details
be made by targeted sequencing of BAC clones representing the two haploid geno-
types. Based on this analysis, numerous SNP polymorphisms (roughly 1 per 100 bp)
were evident, as well as indels that ranged from a few bases up to 11 kb in size
(Kelleher et al., 2007).
Comparison of the sequences of BAC clones representing alternative Nisqually-1
haploid genotypes to the genome assembly revealed, as expected, that the assem-
bled genome sequence is a mosaic of the two Nisqually-1 haploid genotypes
(Fig. 1 and Kelleher et al., 2007). Interestingly, in this example, an 11-kb indel

74
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
present in BAC T0068B19 is absent in the genome assembly. While there was
no evidence for expressed genes in this region, this does raise the possibility of
alternative gene content in different P. trichocarpa haploid genotypes. It should
be noted that, due to the extremely rapid decay of linkage disequilibrium (LD)
in Populus (LD in both P. trichocarpa and P. tremula decays over a few hun-
dred bp; Chapter 5), large haplotype blocks are unlikely to exist in over the bulk
of the Populus genome. That is, loci along the LGs are disrupted by extensive
recombination precluding the inheritance of even closely linked loci as haplotype
blocks in P. trichocarpa populations. One important exception to this is localized
to LG_XIX, where a region of suppressed recombination appears to contain haplo-
types that could contribute to speciﬁcation of gender (Yin et al., 2008), as discussed
below.
An important part of the sequencing and annotation effort was the use of EST
and full-length (FL) cDNA information. While extensive EST information provided
good tools for annotating expressed genes, a collection of 4,664 FL cDNAs, largely
from the P. trichocarpa Nisqually-1 genotype (Ralph et al., 2008) was instrumental
in training the gene prediction software for the annotation phase of the genome
project (Tuskan et al., 2006).
2.7 Map-Based Assembly
The large number of scaffolds in both the sequence assembly and the physical
map posed substantial challenges for the analysis and application of the genome
sequence. We therefore anchored sequence contigs onto a genetic map represent-
ing the 19 Populus chromosomes (Yin et al., 2008, 2004b). This was accomplished
using sequence tags provided by PCR primers for 356 simple sequence repeat (SSR)
markers that could be placed unambiguously in the sequence, as well as on the
genetic map. The location of the primer sequences in the sequence scaffolds was
determined based on BLASTN hits that occurred for forward and reverse primers,
separated by approximately the expected SSR product size. This resulted in linking
155 major sequence scaffolds and 335 Mb of sequence into chromosomal linkage
groups (LGs) (Fig. 2). The chromosome with the smallest number of assembled
scaffolds, LG_IX, was covered by two scaffolds containing 12.5 Mb of sequence.
This large scaffold seems to contain a large rearrangement of the sequence assem-
bly compared to the genetic map, which was derived from a different genotype
(Yin et al., 2004b). In contrast, the largest chromosome, LG_I, contained 21 scaf-
folds representing 35.5 Mb of sequence, with no major rearrangements between the
genetic map and sequence (Fig. 2).
Some caveats are in order regarding the map-based assembly. First, the vast
majority of the markers used for genome assembly were mapped with only 44
progeny, so the resolution of the map is quite low, and small sequence scaffolds

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
75
Fig. 2 Representation a portion of a recent map-based assembly of the Populus genome. Black
bars represent chromosomal linkage groups derived from genetic mapping, and grey bars repre-
sent sequence scaffolds from the sequence-based assembly. Positions of microsatellite markers are
indicated by lines connecting the linkage groups to the sequence scaffolds. LG_I is the largest
assembled linkage group, being more than twice as large as each of the other linkage groups.
LG_IX has the fewest scaffolds assembled, and is dominated by one scaffold which seems to have
a rearrangement between the genetic and physical maps. LG_XIX shows evidence of strong hap-
lotypic divergence at its distal end (top), which contributed to a complex map-based assembly of
small sequence scaffolds

76
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
are not always positioned or oriented accurately. Orientation is also unknown
for the 75 scaffolds that are mapped with a single marker. Second, the low
resolution of the map can also lead to tandem assembly of scaffolds repre-
senting different haploid copies of the Nisqually-1 genome that should actually
be assembled to the same position. This type of misassembly can easily be
misinterpreted as large-scale tandem or segmental duplications. It is extremely
difﬁcult to distinguish between misassemblies of this type and true duplication
events.
One example of a problematic region of the assembly is the peritelomeric
(top) portion of LG_XIX (Fig. 2). This chromosome has been investigated in
some detail, and demonstrated by intensive mapping to have very strong hap-
lotypic divergence in the misassembled region, as discussed above (Yin et al.,
2008). This region also shows strong suppression of recombination in mul-
tiple mapping pedigrees (Cervera et al., 2001; Woolbright et al., 2008, Yin
et al., 2004b). Interestingly, sex determination also maps to this region in mul-
tiple pedigrees (Gaudet et al., 2008; Markussen et al., 2007; Yin et al., 2008).
Haplotypic divergence and reduced recombination are both expectations for chro-
mosomes that are in the early stages of evolving into a sex chromosome (Ming
and Moore, 2007), so the Populus genome sequence has potentially led to the
discovery of a previously unrecognized incipient sex chromosome (Yin et al.,
2008).
3 Populus Genome Structure
3.1 Overview
Assembly of the Populus genome and corresponding gene content to linkage
groups made it possible to investigate the gross structure of the genome at a
chromosomal scale. This revealed the striking existence of two whole genome dupli-
cation events. This was accomplished by making pairwise comparisons among all
Populus genes using double-afﬁne Smith-Waterman alignments. This revealed the
presence of large syntenic blocks of genes on different linkage groups that had
approximately concordant genetic distances (Fig. 3). Blocks of these syntenic genes
were deﬁned based on the existence of two or more genes aligning on different chro-
mosomes, with fewer than 10 intervening, nonaligning genes. The genetic distance
between these aligning genes was calculated based on the number of transversion
substitutions at four-fold degenerate nucleotide sites (4DTV), which is a conser-
vative estimate of genetic divergence that should be less susceptible to multiple
substitutions than more commonly-occurring synonymous substitutions (Comeron,
1995). Comparison of the size of the syntenic blocks versus the mean 4DTV value
for those blocks revealed two clear groups of blocks that were of approximately
uniform age (Fig. 4). The group of larger blocks centered at 4DTV = 0.068 rep-
resents the most recent whole genome duplication in Populus, while the group of

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
77
Fig. 3 Comparison of genes
with signiﬁcant alignments
between two linkage groups,
chromosome X (left) and
Chromosome VIII (right).
Genes are represented by
black lines connecting the
heavy lines representing the
chromosomes. Position on the
linkage group is given in
Megabases to the side of each
group. Genetic distances
between genes in these large
syntenic blocks are highly
concordant, indicating that
these syntenic chromosome
blocks originated from whole
genome duplication events
smaller blocks at 4DTV = 0.31 represents a more ancient duplication event (Sterck
et al., 2005). Dating of these events is difﬁcult, because the Populus genome is
evolving considerably slower than genomes that have previously been used to cal-
ibrate the angiosperm molecular clock. Using the molecular clock as calibrated
by fossil records for the Brassicaceae, for example, the most recent duplication
dates to 8 million years ago (Sterck et al., 2005). However, the Populus genus
has been in existence for at least 50 million years (Eckenwalder et al., 1996),
and the genome duplication is shared by many species in the genus (Sterck et al.,
2005), so the Populus genome is clearly evolving at a much slower rate than herba-
ceous angiosperms, which is to be expected based on generation time (Bell et al.,
2005).
The Arabidopsis genome also shows evidence of at least two whole-genome
duplication events (Blanc et al., 2003), but following these events the genome has

78
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
Fig. 4 Observed number of genes aligned in approximately syntenic blocks between chromo-
somes vs. the genetic distance between genes, as measured by the rate of transversions at four-fold
degenerate nucleotide sites (4DTV). Peaks corresponding to the putative Salicoid and Eurosid
whole-genome duplication events are indicated as peaks at the centers of clusters of similar
4DTV values, indicating the existence of large numbers of duplicated blocks of approximately the
same age
become substantially rearranged, making it difﬁcult to reconstruct the older events
(Blanc et al., 2003). A similar rearrangement has occurred in Populus, but much
less severe (see data in Tuskan et al., 2006). Extensive rearrangements following
genome doubling is a common component of the diploidization process (Adams
and Wendel, 2004; Semon and Wolfe, 2007). The structural complexity of these
two genomes, coupled with the high rates of gene evolution in Arabidopsis, make
it particularly difﬁcult to establish orthology and determine whether the ancient
duplication event in Populus is shared with Arabidopsis. The timing of the event
is similar to the timing of the split of the Arabidopsis and Populus lineages, as
determined by pairwise comparisons of genetic distances between Populus dupli-
cated genes, Arabidopsis duplicated genes, and between putative Arabidopsis and
Populus orthologs. Given the close timing of these events, it is tempting to speculate
that the genome duplication was a primary driver of the diversiﬁcation of the rosids
(Lynch and Conery, 2003).
3.2 Comparison of the Populus and Grape Genomes
After the publication of the Populus genome the genome of wine grape (Vitus)
became available (Jaillon et al., 2007; Velasco et al., 2007) allowing the struc-
tures of three fully sequenced eudicot genomes to be compared. In contrast to
Populus and Arabidopsis, the grape genome has been comparatively quiescent, with
minimal rearrangements, and equivocal evidence of a single whole genome dupli-
cation that could be shared with Populus and Arabidopsis (Jaillon et al., 2007;
Velasco et al., 2007). This structural simplicity has allowed reconstruction of the
truly ancient whole genome duplication event that is shared by all angiosperms. It

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
79
appears that this event resulted in hexaploidy in the ancient angiosperm progen-
itor, as suggested by the presence of three syntenic blocks in rice, Populus, and
Arabidopsis for every one block in grape (Jaillon et al., 2007). However, evidence
for this event is still weak, because the genetic distance is too great to allow relative
dating with nucleotide substitution rates, and it is possible to confound two differ-
ent duplication events that occurred at very different times, followed by massive
rearrangement and gene loss. This same analysis (Jaillon et al., 2007) suggested
that only one duplication event had occurred in the Populus genome, despite the
existence of virtually unequivocal evidence for two events when relative levels of
divergence are taken into account (Fig. 4). Part of the problem is the confusion about
the proper relationship of grape to the Rosids. If grape is taken as on outgroup, then
a clear model that incorporates both Populus duplications can be accommodated
(Velasco et al., 2007). However, if grape is assumed to be closer to Populus than
Arabidopsis, as sequence similarity suggests, then grape would have to share the
duplication event that occurred near the time of the split with Populus. However, this
event was not detected in grape or Populus, based on an analysis using reciprocal
BLASTP hits, without regard to degree of divergence of putative orthologs (Jaillon
et al., 2007). Fortunately, many more plant genomes are currently in sequencing
pipelines, so the duplication history of the angiosperms will soon become much
clearer.
3.3 Repeat Composition Compared to Other Sequenced Genomes
Repeated portions of the Populus genome are relatively poorly represented in the
genome assembly due to the difﬁculty of assembling repetitive portions of the
genome. As described above, repeat elements were ﬁrst masked out of the assem-
bly based on word frequency in the raw sequence reads. This word frequency also
provides a convenient estimate of the repeat composition of the assembled genome.
Approximately 41% of the assembled genome was repetitive based on 16mer counts
greater than 34, and the frequency of 16mers was negatively correlated with the
number of gaps in sequence scaffolds and the size of sequence scaffolds (P = 0.02;
Fig. 5a). Furthermore, at the whole chromosome scale, the proportion of the link-
age group that is composed of repeats is positively correlated with the proportion
composed of sequence gaps (Fig. 5b), and negatively correlated with the proportion
composed of predicted exons (Fig. 5c).
A more formal characterization of repeat composition reveals some interesting
patterns in the Populus genome compared to other sequenced plants. We identi-
ﬁed repeats by performing TBLASTN searches of the assembled genome using
conserved portions of known plant repetitive elements. We also identiﬁed repeated
sequences by performing all-vs.-all BLASTN searches of the assembled genome,
followed by delineation of conserved repetitive elements using the RECON program
(Bao and Eddy, 2002), followed by provisional annotation of the elements based on
best BLASTN hits versus plant repeat databases from The Institute for Genomic

80
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
Proportion Repetitive
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Proportion Gaps
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
B
R2=0.46
R2 = 0.72
Proportion Repetitive
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Proportion Exons
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIIIIX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
C
A
Fig. 5 Relationships between repetitive DNA and aspects of genome assembly and content. (a)
Relationship between the proportion of a sequence scaffold that consisted of repetitive DNA (as
indexed by 16mer word counts > 34) and size of the sequence scaffold. (b) Relationship between
the proportion of a linkage group consisting of sequence gaps and the proportion of repetitive
DNA, and (c) Proportion of the linkage group consisting of exons vs. proportion repetitive
Research. Conserved elements were then incorporated into a RepeatMasker library
and the entire genome was masked using the WU-BLAST option. Individual ele-
ments were quantiﬁed by merging overlapping hits, and the relative abundance
of each major class of transposable elements was quantiﬁed. In total, 181 Mb of
the Populus genome was identiﬁed as repetitive using these methods, and over
12,000 individual repetitive elements were identiﬁed. The most abundant classes
are Long Terminal Repeat (LTR) Gypsy, covering 23.9 Mb, CACTA elements, cov-
ering 5.5 Mb, and Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements (LINEs), covering 2.3 Mb.
All known plant transposable element families were detected in Populus, but the
relative abundances differed compared to other plants (Fig. 6). In particular, Type
I elements (those that have an RNA intermediate for transposition) seem to be
over-represented in Populus compared to other sequenced plants, with LINEs and
Ty3/Gypsy elements particularly standing out. In contrast, Type II elements, espe-
cially the Mutator-Like Elements (MULEs) seem to be under-represented in Populus
compared to Arabidopsis, Lotus, and Brassica. The LINEs in Populus are particu-
larly interesting because there is some evidence of recent expansion, as revealed by
large numbers of elements with short branch distances in Neighbor-Joining trees
(Fig. 7).

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
81
Fig. 6 Relative number of transposable elements detected in the genomes of Populus trichocarpa,
Lotus japonicus (Holligan et al., 2006), Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica oleracea (Zhang and
Wessler, 2004) using methods described in Holligan et al. (2006)
 scaffold 156 9667696676 97116
 scaffold 257 9494194941 95363
 scaffold 13609 508508 948
 LG XIII 90084339008433 9008858
 scaffold 160 333567333567 334001
 scaffold 304 8331983319 83759
 LG XIX 33085803308580 3309020
 scaffold 6334 11081108 1548
 scaffold 173 9832298322 98762
 scaffold 213 105304105304 105744
 scaffold 137 395531395531 395971
 scaffold 159 3065130651 31091
 scaffold 213 110711110711 111151
 LG XIX 33101893310189 3310593
 scaffold 160 369228369228 369656
 scaffold 219 100609100609 101049
 scaffold 119 361362361362 361802
 scaffold 156 294178294178 294618
 scaffold 153 3090230902 31336
 scaffold 244 155671155671 156111
 scaffold 173 264905264905 265345
 LG XIII 89659698965969 8966409
 LG IV 96077609607760 9608200
 scaffold 226 6693166931 67371
 scaffold 159 1365913659 14099
 scaffold 160 241265241265 241705
 scaffold 206 9746497464 97904
 scaffold 4366 17261726 2166
 LG XIII 91564309156430 9156870
 LG XII 67971636797163 6797603
 LG XIV 1431664914316649 14317089
 scaffold 156 353397353397 353837
 scaffold 172 191148191148 191588
 scaffold 192 6356163561 64001
 LG XIII 91537699153769 9154206
 scaffold 160 232851232851 233291
 scaffold 192 170959170959 171399
 scaffold 227 1031110311 10751
 scaffold 247 107911107911 108351
 scaffold 3198 6767 507
 scaffold 233 105727105727 106167
 scaffold 86 11914131191413 1191832
 LG I 754892754892 755332
 LG I 1099385810993858 10994292
 LG XVI 1264709312647093 12647539
 scaffold 44 129860129860 130291
 LG XII 43770644377064 4377492
 LG I 1259892312598923 12599363
 LG I 1274576112745761 12746198
 LG XI 117930117930 118340
 LG IX 258055258055 258486
 scaffold 41 989708989708 990148
 LG III 69511936951193 6951636
 LG I 1777059317770593 17771030
 LG XII 15321761532176 1532610
 scaffold 19044 614614 1015
 LG XVI 1155352111553521 11553946
 LG XIII 72217447221744 7222184
 LG XII 26790282679028 2679468
 LG IV 1527283315272833 15273273
 LG VI 1086172910861729 10862169
 LG I 1083117510831175 10831615
 LG VI 1179192811791928 11792368
 scaffold 573 2455324553 24993
 scaffold 843 1336513365 13805
 LG VI 1624841416248414 16248848
 scaffold 1497 48794879 5313
 LG XIX 1198733611987336 11987776
 LG VII 29279472927947 2928387
 scaffold 235 264264 704
 scaffold 66 19274111927411 1927851
 LG I 1029995910299959 10300399
 LG I 1290555412905554 12905994
 LG I 1539875215398752 15399186
 scaffold 6011 371371 811
 LG XIII 80294038029403 8029843
 scaffold 993 1070210702 11142
 LG XVII 14381071438107 1438547
 LG VIII 1076535810765358 10765774
 scaffold 614 1578715787 16227
 scaffold 7292 423423 863
 LG VII 41940984194098 4194508
 LG IV 1056716910567169 10567576
 LG I 2893508428935084 28935533
 scaffold 44 916253916253 916648
 LG VII 62048686204868 6205314
 LG I 1949737319497373 19497822
 LG IV 1244963112449631 12450059
 LG XVIII 77935917793591 7794034
 scaffold 134 104691104691 105134
 LG XIV 1174680111746801 11747244
 scaffold 196 227146227146 227553
 scaffold 1248 469469 876
 scaffold 88 333711333711 334154
 scaffold 576 2503525035 25478
 LG XIV 1178230311782303 11782743
 scaffold 1029 20522052 2492
 LG XI 52628365262836 5263279
 scaffold 1842 60636063 6506
 scaffold 196 107438107438 107842
 scaffold 3594 39983998 4441
 LG XIV 1177663511776635 11777078
 LG XIV 1180232511802325 11802765
 scaffold 1043 1441914419 14859
 scaffold 172 149015149015 149446
 scaffold 172 128748128748 129188
 scaffold 44 14519661451966 1452370
 scaffold 783 2002920029 20457
 LG III 351182351182 351628
 scaffold 156 263490263490 263924
 scaffold 14691 124124 567
 scaffold 1842 27182718 3161
 scaffold 456 1824518245 18688
 scaffold 5674 11421142 1585
 LG XV 49410904941090 4941521
 scaffold 1777 13131313 1756
 scaffold 87 928956928956 929393
 scaffold 1306 1052710527 10970
 LG XIII 1052382610523826 10524269
 LG XVI 91620139162013 9162456
 scaffold 77 10552551055255 1055698
 LG XVIII 77236527723652 7724095
 scaffold 802 30493049 3492
 LG XIV 1173564511735645 11736088
 scaffold 9617 136136 540
 scaffold 196 9933599335 99778
 scaffold 226 196230196230 196673
 LG V 1793434217934342 17934722
 LG VI 23235592323559 2324020
 LG XII 64176286417628 6418068
 scaffold 9706 811811 1251
 scaffold 177 449460449460 449876
 LG XIX 33304113330411 3330851
 scaffold 219 210117210117 210560
 LG XIII 86472378647237 8647677
 scaffold 941 479479 889
 scaffold 172 368749368749 369189
 scaffold 207 131538131538 131978
 scaffold 251 7820978209 78649
 LG XVIII 12796371279637 1280077
 scaffold 213 8112881128 81568
 scaffold 247 118492118492 118932
 LG XII 68484026848402 6848842
 scaffold 219 185733185733 186173
 scaffold 818 41214121 4561
 scaffold 169 433978433978 434418
 LG XIII 1091809610918096 10918536
 scaffold 192 139807139807 140247
 LG XIII 1094310210943102 10943542
 LG XII 72641027264102 7264542
 scaffold 153 39943994 4434
 scaffold 172 131234131234 131674
 scaffold 203 139330139330 139770
 scaffold 251 5221852218 52649
 scaffold 177 422402422402 422842
 scaffold 18883 131131 571
 LG XVIII 29265172926517 2926957
 scaffold 160 150690150690 151130
 scaffold 207 4123241232 41672
 scaffold 160 471838471838 472278
 scaffold 6912 16911691 2131
 scaffold 336 1671316713 17138
 scaffold 119 8913689136 89714
 scaffold 159 300237300237 300677
 LG XIII 83761168376116 8376556
 LG XIII 84802758480275 8480709
 scaffold 169 308398308398 308838
 scaffold 169 212807212807 213247
 scaffold 169 233176233176 233616
 LG I 1461403714614037 14614471
 LG VII 73428087342808 7343233
 LG XIX 74741757474175 7474615
 LG X 40948424094842 4095231
 scaffold 150 1379913799 14239
 scaffold 3853 19581958 2401
 LG VI 2761927619 28059
 LG X 88238823 9260
 scaffold 41 25463852546385 2546828
 LG X 31563156 3596
 scaffold 150 1975019750 20190
 LG VI 3533935339 35776
 LG VIII 48644864 5307
 scaffold 150 22172217 2654
 LG III 1836723318367233 18367673
 LG VIII 91229122 9559
 scaffold 150 83278327 8767
 LG XIII 1118677711186777 11187211
 LG III 1775192117751921 17752346
 LG X 73375877337587 7338021
 LG XI 85876148587614 8588024
 LG IX 1122233311222333 11222773
 LG X 35954373595437 3595877
 LG I 1560554115605541 15605972
 LG XII 1326949713269497 13269946
 LG I 2249448322494483 22494923
 LG XIV 1354330613543306 13543746
 scaffold 11093 670670 1110
 scaffold 20151 213213 653
 LG I 35329483532948 3533388
 scaffold 117 333977333977 334417
 LG VI 1207206712072067 12072507
 scaffold 14920 750750 1190
 LG XIX 26398252639825 2640265
 LG X 51289365128936 5129376
 scaffold 367 10851085 1525
 scaffold 4669 31813181 3621
 LG II 2085371420853714 20854106
 LG I 73746947374694 7375134
 scaffold 5583 532532 972
 LG I 1556401715564017 15564457
 scaffold 3508 25422542 2982
 LG XV 97152769715276 9715686
 LG XVI 1205304612053046 12053444
 scaffold 12207 784784 1227
 scaffold 155 584874584874 585311
 scaffold 401 1476014760 15197
 LG XIII 63000936300093 6300524
 scaffold 210 277688277688 278131
 scaffold 166 519487519487 519927
 LG VII 1280322812803228 12803665
 scaffold 166 512681512681 513118
 scaffold 490 48114811 5260
 LG XVI 96963239696323 9696769
 LG XVI 40290434029043 4029501
 LG IV 56973805697380 5697808
 LG XI 1125926511259265 11259687
 scaffold 8918 11221122 1550
 LG II 1406714067 14474
 LG VII 42464394246439 4246888
 LG VII 42550054255005 4255454
 LG XIV 1218653112186531 12186974
 scaffold 146 605601605601 606044
 scaffold 2228 8889988899 89342
 LG I 2868174928681749 28682132
 LG XII 80337298033729 8034169
 scaffold 190 260902260902 261345
 scaffold 1150 59945994 6437
 scaffold 853 1029610296 10739
 LG XIV 1203577612035776 12036219
 scaffold 196 119392119392 119835
 scaffold 1029 68596859 7302
 LG XII 85567038556703 8557146
 scaffold 196 128040128040 128483
 scaffold 196 223590223590 224030
 LG XIX 1070182710701827 10702270
 scaffold 214 6840168401 68844
 LG VI 1250132512501325 12501768
 scaffold 77 205624205624 206067
 scaffold 41 22042712204271 2204714
 scaffold 44 10443931044393 1044827
 LG XVI 98747929874792 9875235
 scaffold 1150 1291512915 13358
 scaffold 693 94679467 9910
 scaffold 196 5997559975 60418
 scaffold 214 7141271412 71855
 scaffold 1163 30153015 3458
 scaffold 1717 97379737 10180
 scaffold 157 205240205240 205683
 scaffold 190 352243352243 352686
 LG XVIII 507485507485 507928
 scaffold 1073 53865386 5829
 LG V 83104178310417 8310857
 LG II 1744371617443716 17444156
 scaffold 214 193146193146 193583
 LG I 3132811731328117 31328554
 LG XIX 61505056150505 6150945
 LG XII 96823699682369 9682812
 LG II 1723586517235865 17236278
 scaffold 77 15895381589538 1589981
 scaffold 162 5581555815 56258
 scaffold 196 169126169126 169569
 scaffold 810 7602076020 76463
 LG XII 33543763354376 3354822
 scaffold 40 27309072730907 2731353
0.1
Fig. 7 Neighbor-joining tree depicting relationships among reverse transcriptase domains of
LINEs in the Populus trichocarpa genome. Note the clusters with very short genetic distances
(highlighted by dashed lines), suggesting recent large-scale activity in these LINE families
4 Gene Content and Comparative Genomics
4.1 Overview of Gene Prediction Methods and Gene Content
A total of 45,555 nuclear gene models (“Reference” set) were predicted in
the genome assembly, and are given on the JGI P. trichocarpa v. 1.1 genome
browser (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Poptr1_1/Poptr1_1.home.html) (Tuskan et al.,
2006). Automated gene calling predictions were based on based on ab initio,
homology-based, and EST-based methods, including FgenesH Genewise, EuGène,
and GrailExp6 (Birney and Durbin, 2000; Salamov and Solovyev, 2000; Xu and
Uberbacher, 1997) were used independently by three different annotation groups
we employed different methods. Details of the results from each method are given
in Tuskan et al. (2006) Supplementary Data. As mentioned above, the annotation
process was aided by the use of almost, 200,000 high quality EST sequences con-
tributed by the Populus research community, and over 4,000 FL cDNA sequences

82
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
from enriched cDNA libraries prepared from Nisqually-1 that were used in train-
ing the gene-calling algorithms. Of the 45,555 genes promoted to the reference set,
4,286 models were manually annotated at a community “Jamboree”. Subsequent
to the publication of the genome paper (Tuskan et al., 2006) and development of
the JGI v.1.1 P. trichocarpa genome browser, further manual annotation, genome
sequencing, and sequence assembly has been carried out.
Almost 90% of the predicted Populus genes have similarity to Arabidopsis
(Tuskan et al., 2006), and in many cases putative orthologs of Populus genes can
be readily identiﬁed in Arabidopsis as discussed below. However, a set of almost
5,000 Populus genes was identiﬁed, many with evidence of expression, that do not
have signiﬁcant sequence similarity to any Arabidopsis gene (Tuskan et al., 2006).
Analysis of the predicted complete gene sets from Populus and Arabidopsis
produced over 9,000 groups of inparalogs representing 14,837 Populus genes
and 12,618 Arabidopsis genes (Tuskan et al., 2006), and the average Populus to
Arabidopsis ratio across all orthologous groups is 1.33. However, there is great
variation in the gene-to-gene ratio between the two taxa for different gene fam-
ilies. Paired genes at a ratio of 1:1 Populus to Arabidopsis, represented by over
4,600 gene pairs, is most frequent ratio, and the next most frequent ratio is 2:1.
However, extreme ratios illustrate selective and large scale expansions of some gene
families in both species were reported, for example F-box domain proteins have
ratio of 1:40 Populus to Arabidopsis, while a zinc ﬁnger (B-box type) family pro-
tein/salt tolerance-like protein family has a ratio of 20:1 Populus to Arabidopsis
(Tuskan et al., 2006). More recent analysis of the F-box protein families in Populus,
grapevine, and papaya relative to those in Arabidopsis and rice, support the dif-
ferential expansion of F-box encoding genes in herbaceous plants (Yang et al.,
2008).
4.2 Retention of Duplicate Genes
In order to determine if there has been any selectivity in the retention of dupli-
cated genes following the two recognizable whole genome duplication events in the
Populus lineage (the Eurosid duplication and Salicoid duplication; Tuskan et al.,
2006), we examined retention of genes that arose from these events, according
the GoSLim (http://www.geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtm) gene ontology category
(Fig. 8). Interestingly, genes in the transcription factor activity, DNA or RNA
binding, and nuclear localized GoSLim categories were much more likely to
have been retained (observed/expected retention much greater than 0), and there
was a low likelihood that no duplicated genes in these categories were retained
(observed/expected retention much lesser than 0). In contrast, this bias was not
observed for genes in several other GoSLim categories, in which opposite trends
were observed. These data suggest that selection for retention of duplicated genes
potentially involved in gene regulation has helped shape the Populus genome,
perhaps allowing new regulatory pathways important in Populus life history and
morphology to evolve.

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
83
Fig. 8 Retention of duplicated Populus genes accoriding to functional category. GoSLim
(http://www.geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtm) gene ontology categories that showed signiﬁcant
deviations from expected rates of loss (blue bars) or retention following Eurosid (maroon) and
Salicoid (yellow bars) whole genome duplications are shown. Signiﬁcance was determined based
on Chi-squared tests
4.3 Synteny with Other Species
Availability of the Populus genome sequence has allowed in silico testing of the
presence and degree of microsynteny (retention of gene order over multiple genes,
but not large portions of chromosomes) between Populus and other species, such as
Arabidopsis, for which genome sequence information is available.
Kalluri et al. (2007), when annotating and describing the Populus gene fami-
lies encoding Auxin Response Factor (AFR) transcription factors, and their cognate
AUX/IAA interacting proteins, noted signiﬁcant microsynteny between the Populus
and Arabidopsis regions surrounding orthologous genes. In one of the more detailed
studies on microsynteny between Populus and Arabidopsis, Johnson and Douglas
(2007) examined the comparative structure of the genomic regions surrounding the
two duplicated ARF5 (MONOPTOROS) genes in Populus, relative to the single
ARF5/MP gene in Arabidopsis. As expected based on the salicoid genome dupli-
cation, each Populus ARF5/MP locus and surrounding loci show a high degree of
synteny with each other over 300–400 Mb regions on LG_II and LG_V. However,
tandemly duplicated cytochrome P450 (CYP, or P450) genes are found within the
syntynous block on one LG, and not the other. A high degree of synteny of both
Populus regions to loci within a >100 Mb region surrounding the Arabidopsis
ARF5/MP gene was also documented, illustrating conservation of this contiguous
block of genes since the divergence of the two lineages (Johnson and Douglas,
2007). However, some rearrangements (an inversion, gene loss/gain) had occurred,
illustrating some of the events leading to the disruption of synteny as the two
genomes evolve independently.

84
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
Rapid advances it the generation of BAC-based physical maps has also allowed
testing of synteny between non-sequenced plant genomes and that of Populus. For
example, based on the localization of a sample of eight paired BAC end sequences to
speciﬁc LG coordinates in the Populus genome, (Han and Korban, 2008) concluded
that apple (Malus) shares signiﬁcant microsynenty with Populus, consistent with
the relatively close phylogenetic relationship of the two genera within the Eurosid
I clade. Similar approaches taken in tomato (Datema et al., 2008) and papaya (Lai
et al., 2006), which again revealed intriguing snapshots of microsynteny between
these genomes and the Populus genome. Completion of a draft genome sequence of
papaya (Ming et al., 2008), and the analysis of synteny between papaya sequence
scaffolds and the genomes of Arabidopsis, Populus and grape provides strong sup-
port for retention of syntenic blocks, ranging in size from 181 to 19 genes, within
all four eudicot lineages (Ming et al., 2008). Clearly, with the advent of numerous
sequenced plant and tree genomes in the future, such comparisons well become rou-
tine at the whole genome level, and tools for carrying out such analyses of synteny
to the Populus and to any other fully sequenced genome are being developed (Lyons
and Freeling, 2008).
4.4 Comparison of Select Gene Family Composition Between
Sequenced Genomes
Based on the availability of the Populus genome, comparative studies of gene family
evolution in Populus relative to other fully sequenced genomes have been published
at an increasing rate. Comparisons have been primarily to Arabidopsis and in some
cases to rice, with more recent studies also exploiting full genomes of grape, papaya,
and the moss Physcomitrella patens. These studies are too numerous to fully review
in this context, but some selected examples are given below. When fully sequenced
genomes of trees such as Eucalyptus, peach, apple, and others become available, it
will be interesting to search for any similarities in gene family structure that may
be common to the woody perennial growth habit, which has evolved multiple times.
Unfortunately, due to the large phylogenetic distance between Populus and conifer
trees such as pine and spruce, and the relative paucity of conifer complete open
reading frame data it is difﬁcult at present to carry out meaningful comparative
genomics between conifer trees and Populus.
Two major studies, in addition to those in the Populus genome paper (Tuskan
et al., 2006) have surveyed the diversity of genes encoding phenylpropanoid
enzymes, including those leading via branch pathways to lignin and ﬂavonoid
biosynthesis, in Populus relative to Arabidopsis and other fully sequenced genomes
(Hamberger et al., 2007; Tsai et al., 2006). Most phenylpropanoid enzymes are
encoded by multi-gene families in plants, although some, in particular P450
enzymes, are encoded by single genes in Arabidopsis and other plants. A major
ﬁnding of these studies is that a core of set of phenylpropanoid and lignin biosyn-
thetic genes is mostly conserved in the lineages examined, but that duplicated

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
85
genes encoding key phenylpropanoid P450 enzymes in Populus involved in mono-
lignol biosynthesis have been retained, and that Populus contains overall more
lignin biosynthetic genes (Tuskan et al., 2006; Hamberger et al., 2007), perhaps
related to greater metabolic commitment lignin and soluble phenolic biosynthesis.
Interestingly, the genome of papaya, a “semi-woody giant herb” (Ming et al., 2008),
has a set of lignin biosynthetic genes intermediate in size between Populus and
Arabidopsis.
Strikingly, however, a diversiﬁcation of genes encoding enzymes in ﬂavonoid
branch pathways has occurred in Populus (Tsai et al., 2006), consistent with its
wealth of ﬂavonoids including condensed tannins. Genes encoding enzymes related
to, but likely distinct in function from, true phenylpropanoid enzymes, are well
known from the Arabidopsis genome. Hamberger et al. (2007), as well as de
Azevedo Souza et al. (2008) compared structures of such “phenylpropanoid-like”
genes in Populus, Arabidopsis and rice. Most phenylpropanoid-like clades are
conserved in all three lineages, and in some cases Physcomitrella, suggesting con-
servation of metabolic function. However, clear lineage-speciﬁc ampliﬁcation of
certain families in each of the three lineages was observed, suggesting the evolution
of lineage-speciﬁc metabolism.
Transcription factors are an attractive target for comparative genomics, since they
are encoded by multi-gene families, some of which have expanded dramatically
plants based on their abundance in Arabidopsis, and they are relatively easy to anno-
tate, based on presence of conserved DNA binding domains that deﬁne families.
Lineage-speciﬁc evolution of gene families has the potential to underlie changes in
gene expression that may in turn underlie evolution of different developmental, life
history, and adaptive traits in plants. Examples of comparative studies on transcrip-
tion factor families are those on AFR and AUX/IAA regulators (Kalluri et al., 2007);
MADS box transcription factors (Leseberg et al., 2006) and AP/ERF transcription
factors (Zhuang et al., 2008).
In general, duplicated members of transcription factor gene families have tended
to be retained in Populus following the eurosid and salicoid whole genome dupli-
cation (see Fig. 8). For example, the ARF and AP/ERF transcription factor families
are about 1.5-fold larger in Populus than Arabidopsis (Kalluri et al., 2007; Zhuang
et al., 2008). In other cases, Populus-speciﬁc expansion of transcription factor clades
has occurred. For example, expansion of three ARF subgroups is evident in Populus
(Kalluri et al., 2007). Expansion in numbers certain MADS box homologs is cor-
related with functions in root growth, control of ﬂowering, and cambial activity
(Leseberg et al., 2006). Clearly, functional genomic approaches will be required to
sort out the functions of such Populus paralogs.
A preliminary comparative analysis of genes encoding transporters in Populus
and Arabidopsis has been carried out (Tuskan et al., 2006; Supplemental Data).
Overall, the total number of annotated transporters in Populus is about 1.7-fold
higher than in Arabidopsis (1722 vs., 959; Tuskan et al., 2006). Some transporter
families have undergone striking expansion in Populus relative to Arabidopsis, for
example the ATP-dependent ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) class of transporters con-
tains 226 members in Populus relative to 117 in Arabidopsis, while the smaller

86
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
Sulfate Permease (SulP) family consists of 22 members in Populus relative to 12 in
Arabidopsis, and the Auxin Efﬂux Carrier family has 31 Populus members relative
to 8 in Arabidopsis.
These and other studies, while tantalizing, offer only the ﬁrst glimpses into the
comparative genomics of gene family evolution in Populus relative to other plants
and trees. In silico analyses based on gene content, gene orthology, and gene expres-
sion across a wide variety of plants and trees in the coming years will provide
important information as to potential functions of speciﬁc gene family members.
However, targeted and genome-informed experimental studies in Populus and other
species will be necessary to provide deﬁnitive interpretations of genomic data, and
will be one of the ultimate legacies of the plant and tree genome era, ushered in to a
large extent by the sequencing of the Populus genome.
Acknowledgements We thank members of the Populus Genome Consortium for their many con-
tributions to the work described in this chapter. This work was supported by the U.S Department
of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Biological and Environmental Research, NSF FIBR, the NSF Plant
Genome Research Program, Genome Canada (Treenomix I project), Genome British Columbia
(Applied Genomics Innovation Program), and an NSERC Discovery Grant (to CJD).
References
Adams KL, Wendel JF (2004) Exploring the genomic mysteries of polyploidy in cotton. Biol J
Linn Soc 82:573–581.
Aparicio S, Chapman J, Stupka E, Putnam N, Chia J, Dehal P, Christoffels A, Rash S, Hoon S,
Smit A, Gelpke MDS, Roach J, Oh T, Ho IY, Wong M, Detter C, Verhoef F, Predki P, Tay A,
Lucas S, Richardson P, Smith SF, Clark MS, Edwards YJK, Doggett N, Zharkikh A, Tavtigian
SV, Pruss D, Barnstead M, Evans C, Baden H, Powell J, Glusman G, Rowen L, Hood L, Tan
YH, Elgar G, Hawkins T, Venkatesh B, Rokhsar D, Brenner S (2002) Whole-genome shotgun
assembly and analysis of the genome of Fugu rubripes. Science 297:1301–1310.
Bao ZR, Eddy SR (2002) Automated de novo identiﬁcation of repeat sequence families in
sequenced genomes. Genome Res 12:1269–1276.
Bell CD, Soltis DE, Soltis PS (2005) The age of the angiosperms: A molecular timescale without
a clock. Evolution 59:1245–1258.
Birney E, Durbin R (2000) Using genewise in the Drosophila annotation experiment. Genome Res
10:547–548.
Blanc G, Hokamp K, Wolfe KH (2003) A recent polyploidy superimposed on older large-scale
duplications in the Arabidopsis genome. Genome Res 13:137–144.
Bradshaw HD Jr., Stettler RF (1993) Molecular genetics of growth and development in Populus. I.
Triploidy in hybrid poplars. Theor Appl Genet 86:301–307.
Bradshaw HD, Villar M, Watson BD, Otto KG, Stewart S, Stettler RF (1994) Molecular-genetics
of growth and development in Populus. 3. A genetic-linkage map of a hybrid poplar composed
of RFLP, STS, and RAPD markers. Theor Appl Genet 89:167–178.
Brunner AM, Busov VB, Strauss SH (2004) Poplar genome sequence: Functional genomics in an
ecologically dominant plant species. Trends Plant Sci 9:49–56.
Busov VB, Brunner AM, Meilan R, Filichkin S, Ganio L, Gandhi S, Strauss SH (2005) Genetic
transformation: A powerful tool for dissection of adaptive traits in trees. New Phytol 167:
9–18.
Cervera MT, Storme V, Ivens B, Gusmao J, Liu BH, Hostyn V, Slycken Jv, Montagu Mv,
Boerjan W (2001) Dense genetic linkage maps of three populus species (Populus deltoides,

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
87
P. nigra and P. trichocarpa) based on AFLP and microsatellite markers. Genetics 158:
787–809.
Comeron JM (1995) A method for estimating the numbers of synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitutions per site. J Mol Evol 41:1152–1159.
Cronk QCB (2005) Plant eco-devo: The potential of poplar as a model organism. New Phytol
166:39–48.
Datema E, Mueller LA, Buels R, Giovannoni JJ, Visser RG, Stiekema WJ, van Ham RC (2008)
Comparative BAC end sequence analysis of tomato and potato reveals overrepresentation of
speciﬁc gene families in potato. BMC Plant Biol 8:34.
Eckenwalder JE, Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr., Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (1996) Systematics
and Evolution of Populus . In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds)
Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research
Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 7–32.
de Azevedo Souza C, Barbazuk B, Ralph SG, Bohlmann J, Hamberger B, Douglas CJ (2008)
Genome-wide analysis of a land plant-speciﬁc acyl: Coenzyme A synthetase (ACS) gene family
in Arabidopsis, poplar, rice and Physcomitrella. New Phytol 179:987–1003.
Gaudet M, Jorge V, Paolucci I, Beritognolo I, Mugnozza GS, Sabatti M (2008) Genetic linkage
maps of Populus nigra L. including AFLPs, SSRs, SNPs, and sex trait. Tree Genet Genomes
4:25–36.
Gilchrist EJ, Haughn GW, Ying CC, Otto SP, Zhuang J, Cheung D, Hamberger B, Aboutorabi F,
Kalynyak T, Johnson L, Bohlmann J, Ellis BE, Douglas CJ, Cronk QC (2006) Use of Ecotilling
as an efﬁcient SNP discovery tool to survey genetic variation in wild populations of Populus
trichocarpa. Mol Ecol 15:1367–1378.
Green ED (2001) Strategies for the systematic sequencing of complex genomes. Nat Rev Genet
2:573–583.
Hamberger B, Ellis M, Friedmann M, Souza CDA, Barbazuk B, Douglas CJ (2007) Genome-wide
analyses of phenylpropanoid-related genes in Populus trichocarpa, Arabidopsis thaliana, and
Oryza sativa: The Populus lignin toolbox and conservation and diversiﬁcation of angiosperm
gene families. Can J Bot 85:1182–1201.
Han YP, Korban SS (2008) An overview of the apple genome through BAC end sequence analysis.
Plant Mol Biol 67:581–588.
Holligan D, Zhang XY, Jiang N, Pritham EJ, Wessler SR (2006) The transposable element
landscape of the model legume Lotus japonicus. Genetics 174:2215–2228.
Ingvarsson PK (2008) Multilocus patterns of nucleotide polymorphism and the demographic
history of Populus tremula. Genetics 180:329–340.
Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B, Policriti A, Clepet C, Casagrande A, Choisne N, Aubourg S, Vitulo
N, Jubin C, Vezzi A, Legeai F, Hugueney P, Dasilva C, Horner D, Mica E, Jublot D, Poulain J,
Bruyere C, Billault A, Segurens B, Gouyvenoux M, Ugarte E, Cattonaro F, Anthouard V, Vico
V, Del Fabbro C, Alaux M, Di Gaspero G, Dumas V, Felice N, Paillard S, Juman I, Moroldo
M, Scalabrin S, Canaguier A, Le Clainche I, Malacrida G, Durand E, Pesole G, Laucou V,
Chatelet P, Merdinoglu D, Delledonne M, Pezzotti M, Lecharny A, Scarpelli C, Artiguenave
F, Pe ME, Valle G, Morgante M, Caboche M, Adam-Blondon AF, Weissenbach J, Quetier F,
Wincker P (2007) The grapevine genome sequence suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major
angiosperm phyla. Nature 449:463–464U465.
Jansson S, Douglas CJ (2007) Populus: A model system for plant biology. Annu Rev Plant Biol
58:435–458.
Johnson LA, Douglas CJ (2007) Populus trichocarpa MONOPTEROS/AUXIN RESPONSE
FACTOR5
(ARF5)
genes:
Comparative
structure,
subfunctionalization,
and
Populus
Arabidopsis microsynteny. Can J Bot 85:1058–1070.
Kalluri UC, DiFazio SP, Brunner AM, Tuskan GA (2007) Genome-wide analysis of Aux/IAA and
ARF gene families in Populus trichocarpa. BMC Plant Biol 7:59.
Kelleher CT, Chiu R, Shin H, Bosdet IE, Krzywinski MI, Fjell CD, Wilkin J, Yin T, DiFazio SP, Ali
J, Asano JK, Chan S, Cloutier A, Girn N, Leach S, Lee D, Mathewson CA, Olson T, O’Connor
K, Prabhu AL, Smailus DE, Stott JM, Tsai M, Wye NH, Yang GS, Zhuang J, Holt RA, Putnam

88
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
NH, Vrebalov J, Giovannoni JJ, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Rokhsar D, Jones SJ, Marra MA,
Tuskan GA, Bohlmann J, Ellis BE, Ritland K, Douglas CJ, Schein JE (2007) A physical map
of the highly heterozygous Populus genome: Integration with the genome sequence and genetic
map and analysis of haplotype variation. Plant J 50:1063–1078.
Lai CWJ, Yu QY, Hou SB, Skelton RL, Jones MR, Lewis KLT, Murray J, Eustice M, Guan PZ,
Agbayani R, Moore PH, Ming R, Presting GG (2006) Analysis of papaya BAC end sequences
reveals ﬁrst insights into the organization of a fruit tree genome. Mol Genet Genomics 276:
1–12.
Lescot M, Rombauts S, Zhang J, Aubourg S, Mathe C, Jansson S, Rouze P, Boerjan W (2004)
Annotation of a 95-kb Populus deltoides genomic sequence reveals a disease resistance gene
cluster and novel class I and class II transposable elements. Theor Appl Genet 109:10–22.
Leseberg CH, Li AL, Kang H, Duvall M, Mao L (2006) Genome-wide analysis of the MADS-box
gene family in Populus trichocarpa. Gene 378:84–94.
Lynch M, Conery JS (2003) The evolutionary demography of duplicate genes. J Struct Func
Genomics 3:35–44.
Lyons E, Freeling M (2008) How to usefully compare homologous plant genes and chromosomes
as DNA sequences. Plant J 53:661–673.
Ma C, Strauss SH, Meilan R (2004) Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of the genome-
sequenced poplar clone, Nisqually-1 (Populus trichocarpa). Plant Mol Biol Rep 22:311–312.
Markussen T, Pakull B, Fladung M (2007) Positioning of sex-correlated markers for Populus in
a AFLP- and SSR-Marker based genetic map of Populus tremula x tremuloides. Silvae Genet
56:180–184.
Ming R, Hou SB, Feng Y, Yu QY, Dionne-Laporte A, Saw JH, Senin P, Wang W, Ly BV, Lewis
KLT, Salzberg SL, Feng L, Jones MR, Skelton RL, Murray JE, Chen CX, Qian WB, Shen
JG, Du P, Eustice M, Tong E, Tang HB, Lyons E, Paull RE, Michael TP, Wall K, Rice DW,
Albert H, Wang ML, Zhu YJ, Schatz M, Nagarajan N, Acob RA, Guan PZ, Blas A, Wai CM,
Ackerman CM, Ren Y, Liu C, Wang JM, Wang JP, Na JK, Shakirov EV, Haas B, Thimmapuram
J, Nelson D, Wang XY, Bowers JE, Gschwend AR, Delcher AL, Singh R, Suzuki JY, Tripathi S,
Neupane K, Wei HR, Irikura B, Paidi M, Jiang N, Zhang WL, Presting G, Windsor A, Navajas-
Perez R, Torres MJ, Feltus FA, Porter B, Li YJ, Burroughs AM, Luo MC, Liu L, Christopher
DA, Mount SM, Moore PH, Sugimura T, Jiang JM, Schuler MA, Friedman V, Mitchell-Olds
T, Shippen DE, dePamphilis CW, Palmer JD, Freeling M, Paterson AH, Gonsalves D, Wang L,
Alam M (2008) The draft genome of the transgenic tropical fruit tree papaya (Carica papaya
Linnaeus). Nature 452:991–U997.
Ming R, Moore PH (2007) Genomics of sex chromosomes. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:123–130.
Novaes E, Drost DR, Farmerie WG, Pappas GJ Jr., Grattapaglia D, Sederoff RR, Kirst M (2008)
High-throughput gene and SNP discovery in Eucalyptus grandis, an uncharacterized genome.
BMC Genomics 9:312.
Perlack RD, Wright LL, Turhollow AF, Graham RL, Stokes BJ, Erbach DC (2005) Biomass as
Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-ton
Annual Supply Oak Ridge. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN.
Rae AM, Tricker PJ, Bunn SM, Taylor G (2007) Adaptation of tree growth to elevated CO2:
Quantitative trait loci for biomass in Populus. New Phytol 175:59–69.
Ralph SG, Chun HJ, Cooper D, Kirkpatrick R, Kolosova N, Gunter L, Tuskan GA, Douglas CJ,
Holt RA, Jones SJ, Marra MA, Bohlmann J (2008) Analysis of 4,664 high-quality sequence-
ﬁnished poplar full-length cDNA clones and their utility for the discovery of genes responding
to insect feeding. BMC Genomics 9:57.
Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H, Nishiyama T, Perroud PF,
Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, Tanahashi T, Sakakibara K, Fujita T, Oishi K, Shin IT, Kuroki Y,
Toyoda A, Suzuki Y, Hashimoto S, Yamaguchi K, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A, Anterola
A, Aoki S, Ashton N, Barbazuk WB, Barker E, Bennetzen JL, Blankenship R, Cho SH, Dutcher
SK, Estelle M, Fawcett JA, Gundlach H, Hanada K, Heyl A, Hicks KA, Hughes J, Lohr
M, Mayer K, Melkozernov A, Murata T, Nelson DR, Pils B, Prigge M, Reiss B, Renner T,
Rombauts S, Rushton PJ, Sanderfoot A, Schween G, Shiu SH, Stueber K, Theodoulou FL,
Tu H, Van de Peer Y, Verrier PJ, Waters E, Wood A, Yang L, Cove D, Cuming AC, Hasebe M,

The Populus Genome and Comparative Genomics
89
Lucas S, Mishler BD, Reski R, Grigoriev IV, Quatrano RS, Boore JL (2008) The Physcomitrella
genome reveals evolutionary insights into the conquest of land by plants. Science 319:64–69.
Salamov AA, Solovyev VV (2000) Ab initio gene ﬁnding in Drosophila genomic DNA. Genome
Res 10:516–522.
Semon M, Wolfe KH (2007) Consequences of genome duplication. Curr Op Genet Dev 17:
505–512.
Song JY, Lu SF, Chen ZZ, Lourenco R, Chiang VL (2006) Genetic transformation of Populus
trichocarpa genotype Nisqually-1: A functional genomic tool for woody plants. Plant Cell
Physiol 47:1582–1589.
Sterck L, Rombauts S, Jansson S, Sterky F, Rouze P, Van de Peer Y (2005) EST data suggest that
poplar is an ancient polyploid. New Phytol 167:165–170.
Stirling B, Newcombe G, Vrebalov J, Bosdet I, Bradshaw HD (2001) Suppressed recombination
around the MXC3 locus, a major gene for resistance to poplar leaf rust. Theor Appl Genet
103:1129–1137.
Tsai C-J, Harding S, Tschaplinski T, Lindroth R, Yuan. Y (2006) Genome-wide analysis of
the structural genes regulating defense phenylpropanoid metabolism in Populus. New Phytol
172:47–62.
Tuskan GA (1998) Short-rotation woody crop supply systems in the United States: What do we
know and what do we need to know? Biomass Bioenergy 14:307–315.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez
D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J,
Chen GL, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Dejardin A, Depamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis S, Ehlting J,
Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger
B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones S,
Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C, Kirkpatrick R,
Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple JC, Locascio P, Lou Y, Lucas
S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O, Pereda V,
Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C, Ritland
K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui A, Sterky F, Terry
A, Tsai CJ, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas
C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D (2006) The genome of black cottonwood,
Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
Velasco R, Zharkikh A, Troggio M, Cartwright DA, Cestaro A, Pruss D, Pindo M, Fitzgerald LM,
Vezzulli S, Reid J, Malacarne G, Iliev D, Coppola G, Wardell B, Micheletti D, Macalma T,
Facci M, Mitchell JT, Perazzolli M, Eldredge G, Gatto P, Oyzerski R, Moretto M, Gutin N,
Stefanini M, Chen Y, Segala C, Davenport C, Dematte L, Mraz A, Battilana J, Stormo K, Costa
F, Tao Q, Si-Ammour A, Harkins T, Lackey A, Perbost C, Taillon B, Stella A, Solovyev V,
Fawcett JA, Sterck L, Vandepoele K, Grando SM, Toppo S, Moser C, Lanchbury J, Bogden R,
Skolnick M, Sgaramella V, Bhatnagar SK, Fontana P, Gutin A, Van de Peer Y, Salamini F, Viola
R (2007) A high quality draft consensus sequence of the genome of a heterozygous grapevine
variety. PLoS ONE 2:e1326.
Woolbright SA, DiFazio SP, Yin T, Martinsen GD, Zhang X, Allan GJ, Whitham TG, Keim
P (2008) A dense linkage map of hybrid cottonwood (Populus fremontii × P. angustifolia)
contributes to long-term ecological research and comparison mapping in a model forest tree.
Heredity 100:59–70.
Xu Y, Uberbacher EC (1997) Automated gene identiﬁcation in large-scale genomic sequences. J
Comput Biol 4:325–338.
Yang X, Kalluri UC, Jawdy S, Gunter LE, Yin T, Tschaplinski TJ, Weston DJ, Ranjan P, Tuskan
GA (2008) The F-box gene family is expanded in herbaceous annual plants relative to woody
perennial plants. Plant Physiol 148:1189–1200.
Yin T, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Zhang X, Sewell MM, Woolbright SA, Allan GJ, Kelleher CT,
Douglas CJ, Wang M, Tuskan GA (2008) Genome structure and emerging evidence of an
incipient sex chromosome in Populus. Genome Res 18:422–430.

90
C.J. Douglas and S.P. DiFazio
Yin T, Zhang X, Huang M, Wang M, Zhuge Q, Tu S, Zhu LH, Wu R (2002) Molecular linkage
maps of the Populus genome. Genome 45:541–555.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Jawdy SS, Boerjan W, Tuskan GA (2004a) Genetic and phys-
ical mapping of Melampsora rust resistance genes in Populus and characterization of linkage
disequilibrium and ﬂanking genomic sequence. New Phytol 164:95–105.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Riemenschneider D, Tuskan GA (2004b) Large-scale heterospe-
ciﬁc segregation distortion in Populus revealed by a dense genetic map. Theor Appl Genet
109:451–463.
Zhang XY, Wessler SR (2004) Genome-wide comparative analysis of the transposable elements
in the related species Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica oleracea. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
101:5589–5594.
Zhuang J, Cai B, Peng RH, Zhu B, Jin XF, Xue Y, Gao F, Fu XY, Tian YS, Zhao W, Qiao YS,
Zhang Z, Xiong AS, Yao QH (2008) Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF gene family in
Populus trichocarpa. Biochem Biophys Res Com 371:468–474.

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage
Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
in Populus
Pär K. Ingvarson
Abstract Poplars and aspens often have very wide geographic distributions, large
population sizes and are often highly outcrossing. These life history traits should
promote the maintenance of abundant levels of genetic variation in trees and early
data based on allozyme diversities also conﬁrm these expectations. However, inves-
tigation of variation at the nucleotide level has only recently begun in Populus.
Surveys of nucleotide polymorphism in Populus have shown relatively high lev-
els of synonymous diversity, between 0.5–1%. Levels of linkage disequilibrium is
also relatively low in Populus, although there seems to be large differences between
species. The observations of low levels of LD in Populus are so far conﬁned to cod-
ing regions and levels of LD non-genic regions is still uncharacterized. Nevertheless,
these features suggest that very ﬁne scale mapping is possible in Populus. In princi-
ple using recently developed methods in association mapping it should therefore be
possible to map quantitative trait variation down to single causal nucleotide changes
in Populus.
1 Genetic Diversity in Populus
Many forest trees have very wide geographic distributions and large population
sizes. Forest trees are also often highly outcrossing, have long generation times
and in many cases have extensive gene ﬂow through both pollen and seeds. Taken
together these life history traits should promote the maintenance of abundant lev-
els of genetic variation in trees. Early data based on allozyme diversities in a large
number of plant species also conﬁrm these expectations; long-lived, woody peren-
nial plants with wide geographic ranges, particularly those with a boreal-temperate
distribution, generally had high levels of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) and a
P.K. Ingvarson (B)
Department of Ecology and Environmental Science, Umeå Plant Science Centre, Umeå University,
SE-90187 Umeå, Sweden
email: par.ingvarsson@emg.umu.se
91
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_5,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

92
P.K. Ingvarson
large fraction of polymorphic loci with many alleles per locus (Hamrick and Godt,
1990).
Despite the popularity of allozyme studies in plant genetics, relatively few studies
have used allozymes to study variation in natural population of Populus, but the few
studies in Populus do support the predictions of high levels of genetic variation.
For instance, allozyme surveys in the North America species P. tremuloides have
shown that it contain among the highest levels of genetic diversity observed in plants
(Cheliak and Dancik, 1982; Jelinski and Cheliak, 1992; Liu and Furnier, 1993),
despite the presumed high occurrence of clonal growth in this species (Kemperman
and Barnes, 1976; Grant et al., 1992). A more comprehensive review of allozyme
studies of genetic diversity in Populus can be found in Farmer (1996).
Recently the attention has shifted to the use of Single Sequence Repeats (SSRs),
also known as microsatellites, for screening genetic variation in Populus. SSRs usu-
ally have mutation rates that are several orders of magnitude greater than base-pair
substitutions that are the underlying cause of allozyme variation (μ = 10–2–10–4)
and SSRs are therefore usually highly variable (Estoup and Cournet, 1999). SSR
markers also evolve in a step-wise manner and ancestral alleles can therefore be
identiﬁed (Estoup and Cournet, 1999). Because of this SSR markers typically con-
tain much more information per marker than other types of genetic markers do
(Estoup and Cournet, 1999). These studies have shown that levels of variation at
SSR loci is also high in Populus (Cole, 2005; Hall et al., 2007; Smulders et al.,
2008). Cole (2005) compiled data from allozyme and SSR variation and showed
that, as expected, levels of genetic diversity are substantially higher at SSR loci
across a number of species of Populus.
These data also show that Populus species generally have low levels of population
structure (Cole, 2005; Hall et al., 2007). In P. tremuloides genetic differentiation
among eleven sites in Wisconsin, measured using FST, averaged 0.045, with a range
of 0.006–0.046 across 16 SSR loci. Similarly, genetic differentiation among twelve
populations of P. tremula sampled from across Sweden averaged FST = 0.015, with
a range of –0.031–0.064 across 25 SSR loci. These data are entirely consistent with
expectations based on the wide-spread geographic distributions of most species of
Populus and the great dispersal capabilities of pollen and seeds, which are both
wind-dispersed.
2 Nucleotide Polymorphism in Populus
Under the simpliﬁed scenario of a Wright-Fisher population (Ewens, 2004),
expected levels of polymorphism at the nucleotide level are proportional to the
effective population size, and to the mutation rate, μ. For diploid species nucleotide
polymorphism is proportional to
θ = 4Neμ
(1)

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
93
What has become apparent from the P. trichocarpa genome project is that the
per nucleotide mutation rate is rather low in Populus. Tuskan et al. (2006) estimate
the mutation rate in Populus to be six-fold lower than in Arabidopsis. Koch et al.
(2000) estimate the mutation rate per year in Arabidopsis to 1.5 × 10–8 suggesting
that the mutation rate in Populus is roughly 2.5 × 10–9, which is low compared to
most Angiosperms (Wolfe et al., 1987; Muse, 2000). This is the mutation rate per
year; however, what matters for determining levels of intraspeciﬁc polymorphism
from Equation (1) it is the mutation rate per generation. Since the generation time
in Populus is at least 15 years, the per generation mutation rate is likely on par or
even higher than in most Angiosperms.
The other important parameter determining standing levels of genetic variation
in a species is the effective population size, Ne. The effective population size has tra-
ditionally been used to rescale a given population genetic model so that it behaves
as a standard Wright-Fisher model of constant size (Ewens, 2004). There are several
ways of deﬁning an effective population size for a given population model; some-
times these deﬁnitions produce similar Nes whereas in other cases they do not and
in yet other cases the effective population size may not even exist (Ewens, 2004).
The concept of an effective population size is useful because it captures complex
demographic patterns and reduce them to the standard Wright-Fisher model, thereby
highlighting how these demographic patters affect rates of genetic drift (Ewens,
2004). Theory predicts that as long as the actual population size remains not too
large (Ne < 109 or so), effective population size should scale well with actual
population size (Gillespie, 1999).
Given the relatively high mutation rate, the expectation of a large effective pop-
ulation size, and based on the life history characteristics listed in the Introduction,
population genetics theory suggest that Populus should contain abundant levels of
nucleotide polymorphism. At a ﬁrst glance this appears to be true, at least in P. trem-
ula, where silent site nucleotide diversity average πsyn = 0.012 across 77 short gene
fragments (Ingvarsson, 2005, 2008b). However, the stochastic nature of the coales-
cent process generates signiﬁcant variation in nucleotide polymorphism among loci,
as illustrated by Fig. 1 which documents variation in polymorphism among 131 loci
from P. tremula.
In many other species of Populus, like the North American species P. tri-
chocarpa, P. balsamifera and P. deltoides, levels of silent site nucleotide poly-
morphism appear to be substantially lower than P. tremula (Table 1). Based on
Ecotilling, Gilchrist et al. (2006) estimate the silent site nucleotide diversity of
π = 0.0029 across nine genes in P. trichocarpa, where as re-sequencing of ten
genes by Ismail et al. (unpublished) estimate silent site diversity in P. trichocarpa to
be π = 0.0049. Furthermore, silent site diversity estimated from the diploid genome
sequence of P. trichocarpa averages πsyn = 0.0035 (Tuskan et al., 2006). Data from
silent sites is thus in agreement with a four to ﬁve-fold greater effective population
size in P. tremula compared to P. trichocarpa or P. balsamifera.
Black poplar (P. nigra), on the other hand, harbor similar levels of nucleotide
polymorphism as P. tremula do, with synonymous site diversity averaging
π = 0.0107 across a sample of ten genes (Chu et al., 2009) and has levels of

94
P.K. Ingvarson
Silent site diversity, πsil
Frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
10
20
30
40
Replacement site diversity, πrepl
Frequency
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0
20
40
60
80
Fig. 1 The distribution of polymorphism at silent and replacement sites for 131 loci from
P. tremula. Note that the scale of x-axis differs between the two ﬁgures. Arrows denote the mean
polymorphism for silent and replacement sites
Table 1 Summary of surveys of nucleotide polymorphism in Populus
Polymorphism
Species
Loci
Total
Synonymous
Non-synonymous
Citation
P. trichocarpa
10
0.0037
0.0040
0.0023
Ismail et al. (unpublished)
P. trichocarpa
8
0.0018
0.0029
na
Gilchrist et al. (2006)
P. tremula
77
0.0042
0.0120
0.0017
Ingvarsson (2008b)
P. nigra
9
0.0107
0.0107
0.0046
Chu et al. (2009)
P. balsamifera
3
0.0030
0.0030
0.0023
Breen et al. (2009)
P. deltoides
2
0.0021
0.0058
0.0011
Breen et al. (2009)
non-synonymous diversity that is actually substantially higher than what is observed
in P. tremula (Table 1). The genes surveyed by Chu et al. (2009) were selected based
on the putative importance for growth, so it is possible that these genes are targets
of local selection resulting in enhanced levels of non-synonymous polymorphism
(Ingvarsson et al., 2006; Chu et al., 2009).
Compared to many other plants levels of nucleotide polymorphism observed in
different species of Populus are not unusually high; if anything it is lower than
in many annual and short-lived perennial plants (see Savolainen and Pyhäjärvi,
2007). Interestingly, several other forest trees, such as Pinus and Picea also show
rather modest levels of nucleotide polymorphism (Savolainen and Pyhäjärvi, 2007).
This lead (Savolainen and Pyhäjärvi 2007) to suggest that many tree species have
not reached equilibrium levels of genetic diversity because historical changes in
population size reduced nucleotide diversity an a genome-wide scale (Savolainen
and Pyhäjärvi, 2007). Interestingly, several recent studies have documented histor-
ical reductions in the effective population size of many forest trees. For instance,

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
95
Heuertz et al. (2006) and Pyhäjarvi et al. (2007) both found evidence for histori-
cal bottlenecks in Norway spruce and Scots Pine, respectively. Ingvarsson (2008b)
used Approximate Bayesian Computation to estimate the timing and extent of
past demographic events in P. tremula. Several different demographic models were
ﬁt to nucleotide polymorphism data from 77 short (∼500 bp) fragments and the
results unequivocally indicate that P. tremula has gone through one (or more) bot-
tleneck(s) in the recent past. The rather limited sequence data set used prevents a
precise timing of the inferred bottleneck, but the data is consistent with a bottle-
neck occurring between 244 and 730 thousand years ago (KYA). Interestingly, the
upper value of this estimate is close to the period in the early Quaternary (∼700
KYA) that marks the beginning of the period of the strong climatic ﬂuctuations
that have continued until the present (Comes and Kadereit, 1998). It is also notable
that the lower bound is substantially older than the initiation of the last full glacial
period, which commenced ∼100 KYA and lasted until about 10 KYA. This sug-
gest that the demographic modelling in P. tremula captures the combined effects
of repeated bottlenecks that have occurred during multiple glacial cycles of the
Quaternary. It is thus likely that P. tremula has gone through repeated population size
contractions and expansions over the last millennia and that periods of alternating
range expansions and contractions have involved periods of population subdivision
into glacial refugia, as have been shown in many other plant species (Webb and
Bartlein, 1992).
The historical reductions in population size also appear to have resulted in a
reduction of nucleotide diversity in P. tremula. The silent-site estimate of θ is 0.0129
whereas the genome-wide estimate of θ from the ABC analysis is 0.0177, suggest-
ing that polymorphism levels in P. tremula have been reduced by about 30% as
a result of historical bottlenecks (Ingvarsson, 2008b). Using an estimate of θ =
0.0177 and a per generation mutation rate of 3.75 × 10–8 (see above) Ingvarsson
(2008b) estimate the effective population size of P. tremula to be roughly Ne =
118.000 individuals, an estimate that seem low given the large geographic distribu-
tion of P. tremula. An interesting perspective on the apparent discrepancy between
observed and expected levels of nucleotide polymorphism in Populus and many
other forest trees is offered by recent theoretical work by Eldon and Wakeley (2006).
Eldon and Wakeley (2006) show that species, for species with overlapping genera-
tions and variation in reproductive success among individuals greatly exceeding that
expected by the standard coalescent, there is a much weaker connection between
actual population size N and effective population size. Overlapping generations and
large variation in reproductive success are life history characteristics that describe
many trees where reproductive output increase by orders of magnitude over the life
span of a single tree. Interestingly, this model also predicts very different patters of
linkage disequilibrium than in the standard coalescent (Eldon and Wakeley, 2008),
with the possibilities of low levels of LD even if recombination rates are low (see
below). The model proposed by Eldon and Wakeley (2006) captures many interest-
ing aspects of the life history of forest trees and if this model should turn out to be a
better descriptor of coalescent processes in trees than the standard coalescent, many
of the inferences drawn based on the standard coalescent may be inaccurate.

96
P.K. Ingvarson
3 Linkage Disequilibrium in Populus
Linkage disequilibrium (LD), or the non-random association of alleles, has received
a great deal of attention in recent years. The primary reason is the recent advances in
genomics that have enabled possibility for directly study of statistical associations
between genetic markers and complex traits in natural populations, so called linkage
disequilibrium mapping of association mapping (Nordborg and Tavaré (2002), see
also below). Association mapping holds great promise for ﬁne-mapping genes and
variants that contribute to a trait of interest. Importantly, the utility and power of
association mapping is largely dependent on genome-wide levels of LD (Nordborg
and Tavaré, 2002) and this has led to the characterization of genome-wide levels of
LD in a number of plant species.
Levels of LD are affected by historical demography and other evolution-
ary processes that affect, in a manner similar to nucleotide polymorphism. For
instance, population admixture or population structure tend to increase LD just as
natural selection also increase LD around a target site (Nordborg and Tavaré, 2002).
Naturally LD also depends on rates recombination and even modest recombination
rates are effective in rapidly (on an evolutionary timescale) eroding LD generated
by natural selection or demographic processes. So far, LD has only been character-
ized to any great extent in European aspen (P. tremula) and Black poplar (P. nigra)
(Ingvarsson, 2005, 2008b; Chu et al., 2009). Data from almost a hundred short gene
fragments show a very rapid decay of LD, with LD declining to negligible levels in
less than 300 bps (Ingvarsson, 2005, 2008b) and similar results was found in a small
set of ten genes from P. nigra (Chu et al., 2009). This is not entirely unexpected. The
dioecious nature of Populus, combined with large population sizes and little popu-
lation structure due to efﬁcient gene ﬂow, means that there is ample of opportunities
for recombination.
It is important to remember that studies of LD in Populus have so far only
focused on exons and intervening introns. Data from other species, particularly from
maize, have shown that recombination preferentially occur within genes because of
large structural differences in intergenic regions (Fu et al., 2002; Fu and Dooner,
2002). The extent of structural variation in intergenic regions in Populus is currently
unknown, but data from the physical mapping of BAC clones and comparisons
with the genome sequence of P. trichocarpa indicate that structural variation could
also be signiﬁcant in Populus (Yin et al., 2004a; Kelleher et al., 2007). A signif-
icant fraction of the Populus genome sequence has been assembled into contigs
smaller than one megabase, which is largely caused by hemizygosity of the diploid
individual from which the genome sequence is derived (Yin et al., 2004a; Tuskan
et al., 2006). Furthermore, detailed sequencing of BAC clones that co-localize
to the same genome region show that the publicly available genome sequence
is actually a chimeric assembly of the two different haplotypes (Kelleher et al.,
2007). Also, mapping studies have identiﬁed genomic regions showing signiﬁ-
cant recombination suppression (Yin et al., 2004b, a, 2008). For instance, a region
on chromosome IV shows signiﬁcant recombination suppression extending across
almost the entire chromosome (Stirling et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2004a) and another

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
97
region on chromosome XIX show recombination suppression across at least one
third of the chromosome (Yin et al., 2004a). Interestingly, both of these regions
contain major disease resistance loci; chromosome IV harbors the MXC3 locus that
confers resistance to the poplar leaf rust Melampsora × columbiana while chromo-
some XIX harbors the MER locus that confers resistance to M. larici-populina (Yin
et al., 2004a). The limited recombination observed in these regions are not limited
to a particular cross; LD extends across at least 34 kb around the MXC3 resistance
locus on chromosome IV in a sample of 82 wild-collected P. trichocarpa genotypes.
This led Yin et al. (2004a) to suggest that the MCX3 locus is located in a major hap-
lotype block which experiences little or no recombination. Furthermore, Kelleher
et al. (2007) found that multiple BAC contigs showed co-localization across all 19
linkage groups in Populus, suggesting that these represent heterozygous regions car-
rying haplotype-speciﬁc sequence diversity. Kelleher et al. (2007) sequenced four
pairs of random BACs showing putative haplotype differences and revealed a large
number of both SNPs and indels differentiating the allelic regions. Indel size ranged
from a single base pair to over 11 kb and between 0.5 and 14.8% of the four
BAC-pairs were made up of alignment gaps between the putative allelic copies
(Kelleher et al., 2007). While these structural differences does not match those seen
in maize, where even gene content differ between allelic regions (Wang and Dooner,
2006), it suggest that structural differences exist in intergenic regions and that this
could affect the possibilities for recombination in these regions.
The region associated with the MER locus on chromosome XIX show exten-
sive haplotype differences and is associated with both a large cluster of NBS-LLR
resistance genes and a putative sex-determining locus in several species of Populus
(Gaudet et al., 2008; Yin et al., 2008). Yin et al. (2008) found large differences in
gene content between two scaffolds mapping to the same region on chromosome
XIX, with over 70 unique genes on the two different contigs. These large-scale
sequence differences between putative allelic regions are also associated with a
suppression of recombination, an increase in levels of linkage disequilibrium and
high levels of segregation distortion (Yin et al., 2008). The co-localization of a sex-
determining locus with a large region showing extensive haplotype diversity and
suppression of recombination led Yin et al. (2008) to suggest that this region may
constitute an incipient sex-chromosome in Populus. This idea is intriguing because
suppression of recombination and extensive sequence divergence are expected at the
initial stages of sex-chromosome evolution (Charlesworth et al., 2005b). However,
the interpretation is complicated by the fact that several other studies have show that
recombination is suppressed in the vicinity of resistance gene clusters (e.g. Noel
et al., 1999; Wei et al., 1999; Kuang et al., 2004) and that the genome organization
of resistance gene clusters can be very complex. For instance, tandem duplications
have resulted in large differences in gene content between different accession at the
RGC2 locus in lettuce (Lactuca sativa) with gene copy numbers ranging from 12 to
32 between different haplotypes (Kuang et al., 2004).
The observations of low levels of LD in Populus are so far conﬁned to cod-
ing regions (Ingvarsson, 2005, 2008b), and the conclusions of low levels of LD in
Populus must so far be regarded as tentative as virtually nothing is known about LD

98
P.K. Ingvarson
in intergenic region. The results from the large regions of chromosome IV and XIX
suggest that recombination rates can vary extensively, both across the genome but
also between coding and intergenic regions. These results demonstrate how little we
in fact know about genome-wide patters of LD in Populus and highlights the need
for more research on how LD vary over both short and large scales in the Populus
genome. The scale of LD across the genome will have important implications for
future studies that use associations between alleles to map complex trait variation
(see below).
4 Patterns of Sequence Divergence in Populus
The genus Populus is a relatively young plant genera, with the earliest fossil
records dating back to the Eocene some 55 Myr ago (Eckenwalder, 1996). However,
judging by the fossil record, the major radiation of the genus Populus appears to be
quite recent and most likely occurred within the last 10 Myr (Eckenwalder, 1996).
The recent radiation of the genus, combined with relatively large effective pop-
ulation sizes and long generation times, enhanced by clonal reproduction where
individual genets may reach ages exceeding 1 Myr (Grant et al., 1992), suggests
that a substantial fraction of the genetic variation present in present day species
of Populus could be retained from a common ancestral species (Charlesworth
et al., 2005a). Using data on intraspeciﬁc polymorphism and interspeciﬁc diver-
gence it is possible to estimate the expected fraction of ancestral polymorphisms
that two related species share because of their divergence from a common ancestor
(Charlesworth et al., 2005a). Using polymorphism data from P. tremula (Ingvarsson,
2008b) and data on divergence from either P. alba or P. trichocarpa (P. K. Ingvarsson
unpubl.) the estimated proportion of ancestral polymorphisms shared between these
species is 10.5 and 3.9%, respectively. A substantial fraction of all segregating muta-
tion could thus shared between even distantly related species in Populus simply
because of their relatively recent divergence from a common ancestor. Because
hybridization among different species, and even between different sections, of
Populus are quite common (Eckenwalder, 1996), the fraction of shared polymor-
phism between species could be even higher than expected based on common
ancestry alone. As data on nucleotide polymorphism accumulates from more species
of Populus, it will be interesting to see how these predictions hold up.
Figure 2 show rates of sequence divergence at synonymous sites across ﬁve
species of Populus based on 158 putative one-to-one orthologous genes. This
tree topology is largely consistent with earlier phylogenetic studies of the genus
Populus and the Salicaceae family using both morphological data (Eckenwalder,
1996) or cpDNA and ITS data (Leskinen and Alström-Rapaport, 1999; Hamzeh
and Dayanandan, 2004) with the possible placement of P. euphratica which ear-
lier phylogenetic studies regarded as more ancestral in the genus. However, because
of the low levels of sequence divergence among the different species of Populus
and the stochastic nature of the coalescent, it is possible that phylogenies generated
from different genome segments are not congruent. In other words, individual

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
99
Fig. 2 Unrooted tree representing the phylogenetic relationship between six species of Populus.
ML estimates of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rates (dN/dS ratios) are shown above
each branch and are calculated from a concatenated data set of 158 genes. Branch lengths of
the phylogenetic tree are proportional to synonymous substitution rates. All branches have 100%
bootstrap support
gene trees do not necessarily agree with the species tree (Pamilo and Nei, 1988;
Rosenberg, 2002). Using arguments from coalescent theory it is possible to calcu-
late the expected probability of topological congruence or incongruence between
individual gene trees and the species tree (Pamilo and Nei, 1988; Rosenberg, 2002).
For the case of three species the probability of topological congruence between a
gene tree and the species tree is given by:
p = 1 −(2/3)e−T
(2)
where T is the time between speciation events in units of 2Ne generations(Pamilo
and Nei, 1988). These probabilities of topological congruence and incongruence are
plotted in Fig. 3. It is clear from Fig. 3 that for species in the early stages of diver-
gence (T ≤2Ne generations) there is a substantial probability for incongruence

100
P.K. Ingvarson
0
1
4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time between speciation events
Probability
Congruence
Incongruence
2
3
Fig. 3 The pobabilities of congruence (dotted line) and incongruence (solid line) between
individual gene trees and the species tree for the case of three taxa (Pamilo and Nei, 1988)
between gene and species trees. For four or more species, the probability of con-
gruence depends on all speciation times in the phylogeny (Pamilo and Nei, 1988).
The internal branches in Fig. 2 are relatively short, indicating that there the dif-
ferent speciation events in Populus all occurred within a short period of time, thus
increasing the likelihood of topological incongruences between gene and species
trees.
Phylogenetic trees estimated for the 158 genes separately show that about 57%
of the genes have phylogenetic trees that are congruent with the tree in Fig. 2. In
Drosophila trees with incongruent topologies are often clustered across the genome,
leading Pollard et al. (2006) to suggest incomplete lineage sorting as the likely cause
for these observations. Whether this is true also in Populus is not clear at this time
but the results suggest that incomplete lineage sorting could be a common phe-
nomenon in the genus. This is not surprising given the recent radiation of the genus
and is in line with the presence of a substantial fraction of shared ancestral polymor-
phisms between species. There is also evidence for signiﬁcant rate heterogeneity
in mutation rates across the branches in the phylogenetic tree depicted in Fig. 2
(Ingvarsson, 2008a). This demonstrates that the molecular clock hypothesis with
constant substitution rates does not hold across the genus Populus. A close inspec-
tion of the tree in Fig. 2 show a clear increase in the synonymous substitution rate
in P. tremula and P. euphratica, corresponding to the sections Populus and Turanga
(Eckenwalder, 1996). It is not clear what is causing the observed heterogeneities
in substitution rates across the genus, but differences in effective population size
among species could be one potential explanation (Ingvarsson, 2008a). It is clear
that these interesting patterns deserve further attention.

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
101
5 Complex Trait Dissection in Populus
5.1 Linkage Mapping and Genome Dynamics in Populus
The progress of dissecting of complex traits, that is traits controlled by more than
a few genes, have been slow forest trees (Neale and Savolainen, 2004) and Populus
is no exception. This can of course largely be traced to the fact that progress in
elucidating the genetic architecture of complex traits using traditional quantitative
genetic is slowed down by the long generation times of forest trees. The long time
to maturity means that it can take a decade or longer to establish segregating map-
ping populations in Populus. While F2 mapping populations have been established
in Populus, the development of more advanced mapping populations, like RILs or
NILs, is virtually precluded by long generation times. This has resulted in a lack
of progress of positional cloning of genes in Populus through the traditional route
from a mapped QTL to a gene underlying trait variation. An additional obstacle fac-
ing traditional QTL studies is the limited genetic variation between parental lines
used to create segregating mapping population. The natural way to overcome lack of
genetic diversity in mapping populations is to repeat QTL analyses in many differ-
ent mapping populations. However, this approach is clearly not feasible in Populus
because of the limited number of advanced generation mapping populations that are
available. Nevertheless, the establishment of or mapping populations has yielded
insights into the architecture of complex traits in Populus. The mapping popula-
tions have been used to investigate the genetic basis of a number of traits of both
ecological and economic value such as bud phenology (Howe et al., 2000; Frewen
et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2002), drought response (Street et al., 2006), response to
elevated CO2 levels (Rae et al., 2006), biomass production (Rae et al., 2007, 2008)
and pathogen resistance (Stirling et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2004a; Jorge et al., 2005).
Linkage maps have been constructed for a number of different species using
a variety of different techniques. Most of these maps are based on interspeciﬁc
crosses and have been constructed using various pseudo-testcross strategies that
utilize information from two heterozygous parents to establish two separate maps
for the two species involved (Liu, 1998). However the are examples of more
advanced-generation mapping populations that include parents, F1 and F2 individu-
als (Frewen et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2002). Mapping studies indicate a large degree
of map co-linearity between different species of Populus and with a total map length
of around 2500 cM (see Table 2 in Woolbright et al., 2008). Interestingly, large-scale
synteny extends also to the sister genus Salix (Hanley et al., 2006) suggesting that
genomic resources derived from Populus could be transferred to Salix.
One thing that has become apparent from the various linkage maps that have been
constructed in Populus is that most crosses show varying degrees of segregation dis-
tortion (Bradshaw and Stettler, 1994; Yin et al., 2004b; Woolbright et al., 2008; Yin
et al., 2008). Segregation distortion is usually though to result from associations
between markers and recessive deleterious alleles that are present at low frequen-
cies in outcrossing species. For instance, Bradshaw and Stettler (1994) identiﬁed

102
P.K. Ingvarson
a recessive, lethal allele affecting embryo development as the cause for signiﬁ-
cant segregation distortion in a P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides mapping population.
In addition, most mapping populations in Populus are derived from interspeciﬁc
and often intersectional crosses which increase the likelihood of observing segre-
gation distortion due to negative epistatic interactions between alleles from the two
different species (Burke and Arnold, 2001; Lowry et al., 2008).
When segregation distortion occurs against heterospeciﬁc alleles this generally
affects only a small chromosomal region (Rieseberg et al., 1996; Burke and Arnold,
2001). However in many Populus crosses the incidence of segregation distortion
is not evenly spread across the genome. One region showing evidence of signif-
icant segregation distortion in a number of mapping populations is the region at
the top of linkage group XIX which contains both one or more sex determining
loci and a large cluster of disease resistance genes. There are several other chro-
mosomal regions which show signiﬁcant segregation distortion and which harbors
disease resistance loci (Cervera et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2004b). For instance, Yin
et al. (2004b) observed extensive segregation distortion covering almost the entire
length of likage group IV in an interspeciﬁc backcross between an P. trichocarpa
×P. deltoides hybrid female and a pure P. deltoides male. Yin et al. (2004b) detected
signiﬁcant segregation distorting favoring heterospeciﬁc alleles, arguing against
negative epistatic interactions or meiotic drive as a likely cause of the observed
distortion. Interestingly, Woolbright et al. (2008) also detected signiﬁcant segrega-
tion distortion across large regions on linkage groups IV and XIX in a P. fremonti
×P. angustifolia, demonstrating that these genome regions show segregation distor-
tion in independent crosses involving completely different species.
These results highlight the involvement of regions containing clusters of dis-
ease resistance genes in hybrid incompatibilities and hybrid breakdown (Bomblies
and Weigel, 2007), suggesting that these genome regions are rapidly evolving and
are also associated with complex patterns of sequence evolution, including large
structural differences among haplotypes (Leister, 2004).
5.2 Association Mapping and the Dissection of Complex Traits
in Populus
Because of the slow progress of elucidating complex trait architecture using tra-
ditional quantitative genetic methods in Populus, hopes have been raised that the
current genomics revolution will provide methods that can be used to more efﬁ-
ciently study the genetic basis of complex traits in Populus and other trees (Neale
and Savolainen, 2004; Neale and Ingvarsson, 2008). The wealth of molecular mark-
ers developed over the last decade have opened up the possibility to directly study
associations between markers and adaptive traits in natural populations, so called
linkage disequilibrium mapping or association mapping (AM) (Balding, 2006). The
utility of AM depends on genome-wide levels of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and
in species like Populus, where LD is generally low (see Section 3) candidate gene
approaches are usually adopted. A candidate gene approach relies on the application

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
103
of AM to genes that are known or suspected to be of importance for the trait(s) of
interest. These can be candidate genes identiﬁed in reverse or forward genetic stud-
ies in other model plants (such as Arabidopsis) or candidate genes identiﬁed though
QTL mapping experiments (Neale and Savolainen, 2004). A clear drawback of the
candidate gene approach is that it is limited by the availability of suitable candidate
genes. On the other hand, very ﬁne scale mapping is usually possible because of
the limited extent of LD. In a species like Populus, it is possible to map quantita-
tive trait variation down to single causal nucleotide changes, so called Quantitative
Trait Nucleotides or QTNs (Neale and Ingvarsson, 2008). The ﬁrst studies applying
association mapping to forest trees have started to appear in the literature and so far
the results appear promising (Thumma et al., 2005; González-Martínez et al., 2007;
Ingvarsson et al., 2008).
Hopes have also been raised that an investigation of the genetic basis of com-
plex traits will also provide insights in to how different evolutionary forces that have
shaped both the complex traits themselves and also the underlying genes controlling
these traits. Methods are now being developed that allow for direct inference of both
the action of natural selection and the effects of historical demography from multi-
locus DNA sequence data (Thornton et al., 2007). The combination of association
genetics to dissect complex traits with population genetics methods that test for nat-
ural selection could result in diagnostic markers that could, for instance, be readily
implemented in on-going breeding programs (Neale, 2007; Neale and Ingvarsson,
2008). Besides the importance in directed breeding programs, genomic information
will increasingly be of value for predicting how current tree populations will respond
to climate change. Such information will likely be vital for devising future man-
agement policies and programs that promote a sustainable use of forest resources
(Neale, 2007).
6 Genetic Control of Bud Phenology and Dormancy
The initiation of growth cessation and dormancy represents a critical ecological and
evolutionary trade-off between survival and growth in most forest trees (Howe et al.,
2003; Horvath et al., 2003). Dormancy is an important adaptive strategy that enable
plants to persist during periods of stressful winter conditions, and the ability to
correctly time the development of dormancy determines whether perennial plants
will survive winter and early spring without damage to shoot and ﬂower buds. The
developmental processes leading up to complete endodormancy takes several weeks
to complete, thereby reducing the length of the season during which active growth
can take place (Howe et al., 2003; Horvath et al., 2003). Evidence suggests that the
most important environmental cues regulating the initiation of dormancy in peren-
nial plants is a shortening of the photoperiod and exposure to extended periods of
low, non-freezing temperatures (Horvath et al., 2003).
The genetic basis of bud phenology have been extensively studied and serves
as a good model for how information from traditional QTL mapping experiments
can be utilized and combined with association mapping approaches. A number of

104
P.K. Ingvarson
QTL mapping experiments have performed with the aim of studying the genetic
basis of bud phenology and dormancy in Populus (Frewen et al., 2000; Howe et al.,
2000; Chen et al., 2002). The basis for these studies are two related mapping popu-
lations. This ﬁrst mapping population was initially derived from a cross between a
P. trichocarpa female from western Washington (48◦N) and a P. deltoides male from
Texas (31◦N). Two offspring from this cross were subsequently crossed to yield a
segregating mapping population (family 882). A second population was established
using the same P. trichocarpa mother as in Family 822 but with a male from central
Illinois (39◦N). Again, two offspring from this cross were subsequently crossed to
yield a segregating mapping population (family 331).
These populations have been clonally replicated and planted in a number of
common gardens and phenotypic traits related to dormancy and winter survival
have been scored. The results indicate show that bud ﬂush and bud set are under
moderate to strong genetic control, with clone mean heritabilities in the range
0.68–0.91 whereas winter survival and frost damage showed slightly lower heri-
tabilities ranging from 0.52 to 0.68 (Howe et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2002). There are
also strong genetic correlations between several of these traits. For instance, bud set
was positively correlated with frost damage and negatively correlated with winter
survival, indicating that trees setting bud late in the season suffered greater frost
damage and had lower winter survival (Howe et al., 2000).
QTL mapping experiments in these populations have identiﬁed between 2 and
6 chromosome regions that inﬂuence these traits (Frewen et al., 2000; Chen et al.,
2002). These experiments also show that there is a large degree of coincidence of the
map positions of QTLs affecting different traits, primarily QTLs affecting bud set
and bud ﬂush (Frewen et al., 2000). For instance, Frewen et al. (2000) found that the
three QTLs identiﬁed as inﬂuencing bud set had QTLs for bud ﬂush that co-located
to the same genome region, suggesting that these chromosome regions may harbor
genes with pleiotropic effects on bud phenology. In an attempt to further elucidate
the genetic basis of QTLs affecting bud phenology, Frewen et al. (2000) and Chen
et al. (2002) also mapped candidate genes thought to be involved in regulating bud
phenology. Two loci, phyB2 and ABI1B were shown to map to the same intervals
as QTLs for bud ﬂush and/or bud phenology and were therefore regarded as strong
candidate genes for regulating bud phenology (Frewen et al., 2000).
Luquez et al. (2008) found that bud set was also under strong genetic control in
P. tremula, with broad-sense heritabilities of H2 = 0.61 and H2 = 0.72 at a southern
and northern common garden site, respectively. However, the heritabilities for bud
ﬂush were substantially lower, with estimates of H2 = 0.44 and H2 = 0.56, respec-
tively. Bud set showed signiﬁcant differences among populations and showed strong
clinal variation with latitude where as no such observations were made for bud ﬂush
(Luquez et al., 2008). There appears to be a substantially weaker genetic basis for
bud ﬂush in P. tremula compared to the interspecifc crosses of P. trichocarpa and P.
deltoides (Frewen et al., 2000). However, the P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides mapping
populations were established by interspeciﬁc crosses with the aim of maximizing
segregating variation for dormancy-related traits (Chen et al., 2002). It is therefore
possible that the experimental design inﬂated estimates of genetic contribution to

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
105
these traits because there is either more variation segregating in these populations
or because genetic variation segregating in the mapping populations represents vari-
ation that is normally ﬁxed between the two species and that hence would not be
found segregating within a single species.
Ingvarsson et al. (2006) set out to evaluate the utility of association mapping
in Populus in general and for dissecting naturally occurring variation in bud phe-
nology in European aspen in particular (P. tremula). Based partly on data from
Frewen et al. (2000) they choose phyB2 as the most likely candidate for regulating
dormancy-related traits in P. tremula. To further elucidate the genetic basis of bud
phenology and its role in adaptation to the length of the growing season in Populus,
Ingvarsson et al. (2006) characterized patterns of nucleotide polymorphism at the
phyB2 locus in samples from four populations of P. tremula sampled from Sweden,
France and Austria. Using a sliding window approach across a 7 kb fragment
including the phyB2 gene they identiﬁed six regions showing higher than expected
levels of genetic differentiation among populations. Since spatially variable selec-
tion is expected to yield peaks in the between-population component of genetic
diversity, located at or close to the sites(s) that are under local selection, the iden-
tiﬁcation of such regions in the phyB2 gene are indicative of diversifying selection
acting on this locus. Ingvarsson et al. (2006) also identiﬁed nine single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that were subsequently scored in an expanded set of pop-
ulations collected along a latitudinal gradient in Sweden (Luquez et al., 2008).
Population frequencies at three of these SNPs showed signiﬁcant clinal variation
with latitude thus reinforcing the notion that diversifying natural selection has
acted at or in the vicinity of the phyB2 locus (Ingvarsson et al., 2006). A subse-
quent association mapping study, using 41 SNPs within and around the phyB2 gene
demonstrated that two of the phyB2 SNPs showing clinal variation were also sig-
niﬁcantly associated with naturally occurring variation in bud set (Ingvarsson et al.,
2008). Interestingly, these two mutations appear to be independently associated with
bud set and there is no evidence that these associations are caused by linkage dis-
equilibrium between the two mutations (Ingvarsson et al., 2008). All SNPs were
also tested for associations with natural variation in bud ﬂush to determine whether
the putative causal polymorphisms we identiﬁed above were speciﬁc to bud set or
whether they are generally involved in regulating bud phenology. However, none of
the SNPs showed signiﬁcant associations with bud ﬂush. This is perhaps surprising
since the phyB2-associated QTL identiﬁed by Frewen et al. (2000) actually explain
about 50% more of the variation in bud ﬂush than the co-locating QTL for bud set.
The study by Ingvarsson et al. (2008) demonstrated that association mapping is
not only a theoretical possibility in Populus but that it also works well in practice.
The association mapping population used by Ingvarsson et al. (2008) was only 116
individuals but the small size did not preclude the identiﬁcation of the two phyB2
SNPs that were associated with bud set. However, Ingvarsson et al. (2008) used
simulations to estimate the power to detect associations in mapping population con-
sisting of c. 120 trees. They showed that less than 40% of mutations with modest
effects, that is mutations explaining less than 5% of the phenotypic variation which
is typical for genes inﬂuencing complex traits, will be identiﬁed in this population

106
P.K. Ingvarson
(Ingvarsson et al., 2008). Furthermore, the small size of the mapping population has
consequences for estimating the effect sizes of the mutations identiﬁed. Estimating
the phenotypic effects of mutations from the same data that were used to establish an
association leads to an ascertainment bias where the SNPs showing signiﬁcant asso-
ciations are also the ones that tend to be associated with the strongest phenotypic
differences among genotypes (sometimes termed the “Beavis effect” (Xu, 2003)
or the “winner’s curse” (Zöllner and Pritchard, 2007) and this ascertainment bias
is greater in small mapping populations (Ingvarsson et al., 2008). The two phyB2
SNPs individually explain between 9.0 and 8.3% of the variation bud set. However,
simulations show that these estimates are upwardly biased by 250 and 140%, respec-
tively. This means that the true proportion of variation in bud set explained by these
mutations is more likely 1.4 and 5.9%, respectively. This demonstrates the need
for large mapping populations, both to have reasonable power to detect mutations
with small effects and to provide relatively unbiased estimates of the effect of these
mutations (Long and Langley, 1999).
Several association mapping studies are in progress in a number of different
species (D. Neale, personal communication, M. Olson, personal communication,
El-Kassaby, personal communication). These studies should give us more detailed
insights into the utility of association mapping in Populus and provide a number
of interesting candidate mutations for traits of both ecological importance and of
economic value.
7 Perspective
Species of Populus often have very wide geographic distributions and are ecologi-
cally dominant species in many ecosystems (Brunner et al., 2004). Because of their
perennial nature and because of the large geographic range, different species of
poplars and aspens have evolved ﬁne-tuned annual growth cycles that promote long-
term survival and growth. Genetic variation among trees have also been shown to
have cascading effects on the species composition of phytophagous insects, explain-
ing up to 60% of the variation in insect diversity among different trees (Wimp
et al., 2005; Shuster et al., 2006). The ecological importance of Populus make it
an interesting model system for studying ecological and evolutionary functional
genomics.
By identifying genes underlying ecologically and/or economically important
traits it should be able to address many important questions regarding the genetic
architecture of quantitative variation. For instance, what does the distribution of
effects of mutations affecting complex trait variation look like? Theoretical results
suggest that the distribution of effects of adaptive mutations ﬁxed in a species
should be roughly exponential (Orr, 1998) and data from QTL mapping experi-
ments seem to ﬁt this distribution (Kearsey and Farquhar, 1998). Another interesting
question is whether adaptive mutations arise from de novo mutations or if they
are derived from standing genetic variation. It has become clear that adaptation
from standing genetic variation produce radically different patterns of nucleotide

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
107
polymorphism and linkage disequilibrium than adaptation from de novo mutations
(Kim and Stephan, 2002; Przeworski et al., 2005; Hermisson and Pennings, 2005;
Pennings and Hermisson, 2006). For instance, the allele frequency clines in phyB2
found by Ingvarsson et al. (2006) must have been established within the last 7,000
years, following the post-glacial colonization of Northern Europe. If these sites
were de novo mutations the rapid increase in frequency should leave a clear sig-
nature in the surrounding genome regions (Kim and Stephan, 2002) yet linked
sites, separated by as little as a few base pairs, do not show clinal variation or a
reduction in nucleotide polymorphism (Ingvarsson et al., 2006). This suggest that
the phyB2 sites involved in adaptation to photoperiod were derived from a hetero-
geneous “population” of alleles which in turn suggest that these mutations have
been maintained within the species for a long time. Finally, one important ques-
tion is to what degree parallel adaptations in different species are due to mutations
in the same set of genes? With the availability of abundant genomic resources, an
interesting ecology and abundant genetic variation, Populus is a promising model
system for ecological and evolutionary functional genomics and have a great poten-
tial for providing interesting answers to these and many other important biological
questions.
Acknowledgments I am grateful to the Swedish Research Council (VR) for funding and to
S. Jansson and A. Groover for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript.
References
Balding DJ (2006) A tutorial on statistical methods for population association methods. Nat Rev
Genet 7:781–791.
Bomblies K, Weigel D (2007) Hybrid necrosis: Autoimmunity as a potential gene-ﬂow barrier in
plant species. Nat Rev Genet 8:382–393.
Bradshaw HD, Stettler RF (1994) Molecular-genetics of growth and development in Populus II.
Segregation distortion due to genetic load. Theor Appl Genet 89:551–558.
Breen AL, Glenn E, Yeager A, Olson MS (2009) Nucleotide diversity among natural populations
of a North American poplar (Populus balsamifera, Salicaceae). New Phytol 182(3):763–773.
Brunner AM, Busov VB, Strauss SH (2004) Poplar genome sequence: Functional genomics in an
ecologically dominant plant species. Trends Plant Sci 9:49–56.
Burke JM, Arnold ML (2001) Genetics and the ﬁtness of hybrids. Ann Rev Genet 35:31–52.
Cervera MT, Storme V, Ivens B, Gusmao J, Liu BH, Hostyn V, Van Slycken J, Van Montagu
M, Boerjan W (2001) Dense genetic linkage maps of three Populus species (Populus deltoides,
P. nigra and P. trichocarpa) based on AFLP and microsatellite markers. Genetics 158:787–809.
Charlesworth B, Bartolome C, Noel V (2005a) The detection of shared and ancestral polymor-
phisms. Genet Res 86:149–157.
Charlesworth D, Charlesworth B, Marais G (2005b) Steps in the evolution of heteromorphic sex
chromosomes. Heredity 95:118–128.
Cheliak WM, Dancik BP (1982) Genic diversity of natural populations of a clone forming tree
Populus tremuloides. Can J Genet Cytol 24:611–616.
Chen THH, Howe GT, Bradshaw HD (2002) Molecular genetic analysis of dormancy-related traits
in poplars. Weed Sci 50:232–240.
Chu Y, Su X, Huang Q, Zhang X (2009) Patterns of DNA sequence variation at candidate gene loci
in black poplar (Populus nigra L.) as revealed by single nucleotide polymorphisms. Genetica,
10.1007/s10809-009-9371-1.

108
P.K. Ingvarson
Cole CT (2005) Allelic and population variation of microsatellite loci in aspen (Populus tremu-
loides). New Phytol 167:155–164.
Comes HP, Kadereit JW (1998) The effect of Quartenary climatic changes on plant distributions
and evolution. Trends Plant Sci 3:432–438.
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Managements
and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 7–32.
Eldon B, Wakeley J (2006) Coalescent processes when the distribution of offspring number among
individuals is highly skewed. Genetics 172:2621–2633.
Eldon B, Wakeley J (2008) Linkage disequilibrium under skewed offspring distribution among
individuals in a population. Genetics 178:1517–1532.
Estoup A, Cournet JM (1999) Microsatellite evolution: Inferences from population data. In:
Goldstein DB, Schlötterer C (eds) Microsatellites: Evolution and Applications. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 49–65.
Ewens WJ (2004) Mathematical Population Genetics. 2nd edition, Springer, NY.
Farmer RE Jr (1996) The genecology of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman
PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Managements and
Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 7–32.
Frewen BE, Chen THH, Howe GT, Davis J, Rhode A, Boerjan W, Bradshaw HD Jr (2000)
Quantitative trait loci and candidate gene mapping of budset and bud ﬂush in Populus. Genetics
154:837–845.
Fu H, Dooner HK (2002) Intraspeciﬁc violation of genetic colinearity and its implications in maize.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:9573–9578.
Fu H, Zheng Z, Dooner HK (2002) Recombination rates between adjacent genic and retro-
transposon regions in maize vary by 2 orders of magnitude. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
99:1082–1087.
Gaudet M, Jorge V, Paolucci I, Beritognolo I, Mugnozza GS, Sabatti M (2008) Genetic linkage
maps of Populus nigra L. including AFLPs, SSRs, SNPs, and sex trait. Tree Genet Genomes
4:25–36.
Gilchrist EJ, Haughn GW, Ying CC, Otto SP, Zhuang J, Cheung D, Hamberger B, Aboutorabi
F, Kalynyak T, Johnson L, Bohlmann J, Ellis BE, Douglas CJ, Cronk QCB (2006) Use of
Ecotilling as an efﬁcient SNP discovery tool to survey genetic variation in wild populations of
Populus trichocarpa. Mol Ecol 15:1367–1378.
Gillespie JH (1999) The role of population size in molecular evolution. Theor Pop Biol 55:
145–156.
González-Martínez SC, Wheeler NC, Ersoz E, Nelson CD, Neale DB (2007) Association genetics
in Pinus taeda I. Wood property traits. Genetics 175:399–409.
Grant MC, Mitton JB, Linhart YB (1992) Even larger organisms. Nature 360:216.
Hall D, Luquez V, Garcia MV, St Onge KR, Jansson S, Ingvarsson PK (2007) Adaptive population
differentiation in phenology across a latitudinal gradient in European aspen (Populus trem-
ula, L.): A comparison of neutral markers, candidate genes and phenotypic traits. Evolution
61:2849–2860.
Hamrick JL, Godt MJW (1990) Allozyme diversity in plant species. In: Brown AHD, Clegg MT,
Kahler AL, Weir BS (eds) Plant Population Genetics, Breeding and Genetic Resources. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, MA, pp. 43–63.
Hamzeh M, Dayanandan S (2004) Phylogeny of Populus (Salicaceae) based on nucleotide
sequences
of
chloroplast
trnT-trnF
region
and
nuclear
rDNA.
Am
J
Bot
91:
1398–1408.
Hanley SJ, Mallot MD, Karp A (2006) Alignment of a Salix linkage map to the Populus genomic
sequence reveal macrosynteny between willow and poplar genomes. Tree Genet Genomes
3:35–48.
Hermisson J, Pennings PS (2005) Soft sweeps: Molecular population genetics of adaptation from
standing genetic variation. Genetics 169:2335–2352.

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
109
Heuertz M, De Paoli E, Kallman T, Larsson H, Jurman I, Morgante M, Lascoux M, Gyllenstrand
N (2006) Multilocus patterns of nucleotide diversity, linkage disequilibrium and demographic
history of Norway spruce [Picea abies (L.) Karst]. Genetics 174:2095–2105.
Horvath DP, Anderson JV, Chao WS, Foley ME (2003) Knowing when to grow: Signals regulating
bud dormancy. Trends Plant Sci 8:534–540.
Howe GT, Saruul P, Davis J, Chen THH (2000) Quantitative genetics of bud phenology, frost
damage and winter survival in an F family of hybrid poplars. Theor Appl Genet 101:
632–642.
Howe GT, Aitken SN, Neale DB, Jermstad KD, Wheeler NC, Chen THH (2003) From genotype
to phenotype: Unraveling the complexities of cold adaptation in forest trees. Can J Bot 81:
1247–1266.
Ingvarsson PK (2005) Nucleotide polymorphism and linkage disequilbrium within and among
natural populations of European aspen (Populus tremula L., Salicaceae). Genetics 169:
945–953.
Ingvarsson PK (2008a) Molecular evolution of synonymous codon usage in Populus. BMC Evol
Biol 8:307, doi:10.1186/1471-2148-8-307.
Ingvarsson PK (2008b) Multilocus patterns of nucleotide polymorphism and the demographic
history of Populus tremula. Genetics 180:329–340.
Ingvarsson
PK,
Garcia
MV,
Hall
D,
Luquez
V,
Jansson
S
(2006)
Clinal
variation
in phyB2, a candidate gene for day-length-induced growth cessation and bud set,
across
a
latitudinal
gradient
in
European
aspen
(Populus
tremula).
Genetics
172:
1845–1853.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Luquez V, Hall D, Jansson S (2008) Nucleotide polymorphism
and phenotypic associations within and around the phytochromeB2 locus in European aspen
(Populus tremula, Salicaceae). Genetics 178:2217–2226.
Jelinski DE, Cheliak WM (1992) Genetic diversity and spatial subdivision of Populus tremuloides
(Salicaceae) in a heterogeneous landscape. Am J Bot 79:728–736.
Jorge V, Dowkiw A, Faivre-Rampant P, Bastien C (2005) Genetic architecture of qualitative and
quantitative Melampsora larici-populina leaf rust resistance in hybrid poplar: Genetic mapping
and QTL detection. New Phytol 167:113–127.
Kearsey GL, Farquhar MJ (1998) QTL analysis in plants; Where are we now? Heredity 80:
137–142.
Kelleher CT, Chiu R, Shin H et al. (2007) A physical map of the highly heterozygous Populus
genome: Integration with the genome sequence and genetic map and analysis of haplotype
variation. Plant J 50:1063–1078.
Kemperman JA, Barnes BV (1976) Clone size in American aspens. Can J Bot 54:2603–2607.
Kim Y, Stephan W (2002) Detecting a local signature of genetic hitchhiking along a recombining
chromosome. Genetics 160:765–777.
Koch MA, Haubold B, Mitchell-Olds T (2000) Comparative evolutionary analysis of chalcone syn-
thase and alcohol dehydrogenase loci in Arabidopsis, Arabis, and related genera (Brassicaceae).
Mol Biol Evol 17:1483–1498.
Kuang H, Woo SS, Meyers BC, Nevo E, Michelmore RW (2004) Multiple genetic processes result
in heterogeneous rates of evolution within the major cluster disease resistance genes in lettuce.
Plant Cell 16:2870–2894.
Leister D (2004) Tandem and segmental gene duplication and recombination in the evolution of
plant disease resistance genes. Trends Genet 20:116–122.
Leskinen E, Alström-Rapaport C (1999) Molecular phylogeny of Salicaceae and closely related
Flacourtiaceae: Evidence from 5.8S, ITS1 and ITS2 or the rDNA. Pl Syst Evol 215:209–227.
Liu HL (1998) Statistical Genomics. Linkage, Mapping and QTL Analysis. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL.
Liu Z, Furnier GR (1993) Comparison of allozyme, RFLP, and RAPD markers for revealing
genetic variation within and between trembling aspen and bigtooth aspen. Theor Appl Genet 87:
97–105.

110
P.K. Ingvarson
Long AD, Langley CH (1999) The power of association studies to detect the contribution of
candidate genetic loci to variation in complex traits. Genome Res 9:720–731.
Lowry DB, Modliszewski JL, Wright KM, Wu CA, Willis JH (2008) The strength and genetic
basis of reproductive isolating barriers in ﬂowering plants. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 363:
3009–3021.
Luquez V, Hall D, Albrectsen B, Karlsson J, Ingvarsson PK, Jansson S (2008) Natural phenologi-
cal variation in aspen (Populus tremula): The Swedish aspen collection. Tree Genet Genomes
4:279–292.
Muse S (2000) Examining rates and patterns of nucleotide substitution in plants. Plant Mol Biol
42:25–43.
Neale DB (2007) Genomics to tree breeding and forest health. Curr Opin Genet Dev 17:539–544.
Neale DB, Ingvarsson PK (2008) Population, quantitative and comparative genomics of adaptation
in forest trees. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:149–155.
Neale DB, Savolainen O (2004) Association genetics of complex traits in conifers. Trends Plant
Sci 9:325–330.
Noel L, Moores TL, van der Biezen EA, Parniske M, Daniels MJ, Parker JE, Jones JDG (1999)
Pronounced intraspeciﬁc haplotype divergence at the RPP5 complex disease resistance locus
of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 11:2099–2112.
Nordborg M, Tavaré S (2002) Linkage disequilibrium: What history has to tell us. Trends Genet
18:83–90.
Orr HA (1998) The population genetics of adaptation: The distribution of factors ﬁxed during
adaptive evolution. Evolution 52:935–949.
Pamilo P, Nei M (1988) Relationships between gene trees and species trees. Mol Biol Evol 5:
568–583.
Pennings PS, Hermisson J (2006) Soft sweeps II: Molecular population genetics of adaptation from
recurrent mutation or migration. Mol Biol Evol 23:1076–1084.
Pollard DA, Iyer VN, Moses AM, Eisen MB (2006) Widespread discordance of gene trees with
species tree in Drosophila: Evidence for incomplete lineage sorting. PLoS Genet 2:e173.
Przeworski M, Coop G, Wall JD (2005) The signature of positive selection on standing genetic
variation. Evolution 59:2312–2323.
Pyhäjarvi T, Garcia-Gil MR, Knurr T, Mikkonen M, Wachowiak W, Savolainen O (2007)
Demographic history has inﬂuenced nucleotide diversity in European Pinus sylvestris popu-
lations. Genetics 177:1713–1724.
Rae AM, Ferris R, Tallis MJ, Taylor G (2006) Elucidating genomic regions determining enhanced
leaf growth and delayed senescence in elevated CO. Plant Cell Env 29:1730–1741.
Rae AM, Tricker PJ, Bunn SM, Taylor G (2007) Adaptation of tree growth to elevated CO:
Quantitative trait loci for biomass in Populus. New Phytol 175:59–69.
Rae AM, Pinel MP, Bastien C, Sabatti M, Street NR, Tucker J, Dixon C, Marron N, Dillen SY,
Taylor G (2008) QTL for yield in bioenergy Populus: Identifying G×E interactions from
growth at three contrasting sites. Tree Genet Genomes 4:97–112.
Rieseberg LH, Sinervo B, Linder CR, Ungerer MC, Arias DM (1996) Role of gene interactions in
hybrid speciation: Evidence from ancient and experimental hybrids. Science 272:741–745.
Rosenberg NA (2002) The probability of topological concordance of gene trees and species trees.
Theor Pop Biol 61:225–247.
Savolainen O, Pyhäjärvi T (2007) Genomic diversity in forest trees. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:
162–167.
Shuster SM, Lonsdorf EV, Wimp GM, Bailey JK, Whitham TG (2006) Community heritability
measures the evolutionary consequences of indirect genetic effects on community structure.
Evolution 60:991–1003.
Smulders MJ, Cottrell JE, Lefevre F et al. (2008) Structure of the genetic diversity in black poplar
(Populus nigra L.) populations across European river systems: Consequences for conservation
and restoration. For Ecol Manag 255:1388–1399.

Nucleotide Polymorphism, Linkage Disequilibrium and Complex Trait Dissection
111
Stirling B, Newcombe G, Vrebalov J, Bosdet I, Bradshaw HD (2001) Suppressed recombination
around the MXC3 locus, a major gene for resistance to poplar leaf rust. Theor Appl Genet
103:1129–1137.
Street NR, Skogstrom O, Sjödin A, Tucker J, Rodriguez-Acosta M, Nilsson P, Jansson S, Taylor G
(2006) The genetics and genomics of the drought response in Populus. Plant J 48:321–341.
Thornton KR, Jensen JD, Becquet C, Andolfatto P (2007) Progress and prospects in mapping
recent selection in the genome. Heredity 98:340–348.
Thumma BR, Nolan MF, Evans R, Moran GF (2005) Polymorphisms in Cinnamoyl CoA Reductase
(CCR) are associated with variation in microﬁbril angle in Eucalyptys spp. Genetics 171:1257–
1265.
Tuskan G, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlman J et al. (2006) The genome of Black cottonwood Populus
trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
Wang Q, Dooner HK (2006) Remarkable variation in maize genome structure inferred from
haplotype diversity at the bz locus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:17644–17649.
Webb TIII, Bartlein PJ (1992) Global changes during the last 3 million years: Climatic controls
and biotic response. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 23:141–173.
Wei F, Gobelman-Werner K, Morroll SM, Kurth J, Mao L, Wing R, Leister D, Schulze-Lefert
P, Wise RP (1999) The Mla (Powdery Mildew) resistance cluster is associated with three
NBS-LRR gene families and suppressed recombination within a 240-kb DNA interval on
chromosome 5S (1HS) of Barley. Genetics 153:1929–1948.
Wimp GM, Martinsen GD, Floate KD, Bangert RK, Whitham TG (2005) Plant genetic determi-
nants of arthropod community structure and diversity. Evolution 59:61–69.
Wolfe KH, Li WH, Sharp PM (1987) Rates of nucleotide substitution vary greatly among plant
mitochondrial, chloroplast, and nuclear DNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:9054–9058.
Woolbright SA, DiFazio SP, Yin T, Martinsen GD, Zhang X, Allan GJ, Whitham TG, Keim
P (2008) A dense linkage map of hybrid cottonwood (Populus fremontii × P. angustifolia)
contributes to long-term ecological research and comparison mapping in a model forest tree.
Heredity 100:59–70.
Xu S (2003) The theoretical basis of the Beavis effect. Genetics 165:2259–2268.
Yin T, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Zhang X, Sewell MM, Woolbright SA, Allan GJ, Kelleher CT,
Douglas CJ, Wang M, Tuskan GA (2008) Genome structure and emerging evidence of an
incipient sex chromosome in Populus. Genome Res 18:422–430.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Jawdy SS, Boerjan W, Tuskan GA (2004a) Genetic and phys-
ical mapping of Melampsora rust resistance genes in Populus and characterization of linkage
disequilibrium and ﬂanking genomic sequences. New Phytol 164:95–105.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Riemenschneider D, Tuskan GA (2004b) Large-scale heterospe-
ciﬁc segregation distortion in Populus revealed by a dense genetic map. Theor Appl Genet
109:451–463.
Zöllner S, Pritchard JK (2007) Overcoming the winner’s curse: Estimating prenetrance parameters
from case-control data. Am J Hum Genet 80:605–615.

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis
in Populus
Victor B. Busov, Steven H. Strauss, and Gilles Pilate
Abstract We summarize the outlook for using transformation as a genetic tool
in Populus. Transformation approaches avoid the major obstacle to performing
genetics experiments in trees – namely long generation cycles and the difﬁculty
of inbreeding to reveal loss of function alleles. Dominant transgenic alleles allow
modiﬁcations in gene function to be readily observed in primary transformants.
Although transformation has been mainly used for reverse genetics (where the gene
sequence of interest is known), transgenic mutagenesis approaches such as acti-
vation tagging and gene/enhancer traps have also been shown to enable forward
genetics (where the phenotype, not the gene, is known). We outline challenges and
needs for more efﬁcient use of transformation tools. These include expansion of the
transformation toolbox (e.g., promoters, vectors, targeting), and improved ability
to conduct ﬁeld trials to study gene function in native and plantation environments
(in spite of regulatory obstacles). Because of the power of transformation, it will
remain a major genetic research tool for dissection of gene function in Populus for
many years to come. It is the key biological attribute that makes poplar the most
powerful model organism for genetic analysis of woody plant growth, adaptation,
and development.
1 Introduction
Following the development of gene transfer technology for plants approximately
two decades ago (De Block et al., 1984), genetic transformation has become
an indispensable tool for dissection of gene function. It is used extensively in
Arabidopsis, rice, tomato, and many other model herbaceous plant species. Its main
uses are for insertional mutagenesis, complementation, ectopic gene expression and
V.B. Busov (B)
School of Forest Resources and Environmental Science, Michigan Technological University,
Houghton, MI 49931, USA
e-mail: vbusov@mtu.edu
113
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_6,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

114
V.B. Busov et al.
gene silencing. Here we review the role of transformation as a tool for functional
dissection and gene discovery in Populus – the model taxon for woody perennial
development.
Trees dominate many kinds of terrestrial ecosystems, and have a number of exag-
gerated developmental features that are poorly expressed in herbaceous species.
These include extensive secondary meristem development, long delayed onset of
reproduction, and annual cycles of dormancy acquisition and release. Despite trees’
economic, ecological, and biological importance, the genetic and physiological con-
trol of these important traits remains poorly understood. This is in no small part
due to the difﬁculties of standard genetic approaches in studying gene function.
Although natural mutants have been identiﬁed for some traits (e.g. Gill et al., 2003),
routine genetic segregation and inheritance studies are problematic in trees due to
their long generation time and strong inbreeding depression.
Knock-out or knock-down manipulation of gene activity is widely accepted as
the “gold standard” method for studying gene function. The two major approaches
taken for altering gene expression are generalized mutagenesis and gene-directed
transgenesis. Transformation, because it inserts DNA in an approximately random
manner into euchromatic portions of the genome, is useful for both approaches.
Genes can be speciﬁcally knocked-out or -down by delivering speciﬁc transgenes
that trigger one or more forms of RNA interference, which act in trans to their
gene targets (e.g., antisense, RNAi, synthetic microRNAs). T-DNA can also act as
a random mutagen because, when inserted in the sequence of a gene, it generates
lesions that usually result in a loss-of-function allele. The known sequence of the
T-DNA, now present in the mutated gene, facilitates gene isolation – a method gen-
erally known as gene tagging (Parinov and Sundaresan, 2000; Sessions et al., 2002;
An et al., 2005). The importance of T-DNA tagging for genetic research in model
organisms is demonstrated by the generation of many collections that reach near to
genome saturation (Alonso et al., 2003).
2 Value of Transformation as a Genetic Tool
Reviews of both approaches for mutagenesis that focus on trees have been pub-
lished elsewhere (Fladung et al., 2004; Busov et al., 2005a, b). We will therefore
only brieﬂy highlight how transformation mitigates some of the major obstacles
to performing genetics experiments in trees. A key element of these approaches
is the use of transgenic methods that impart, or employ, dominant alleles. This is
critical because it allows modiﬁcations in gene function to be observed in primary
transformants. In contrast, most classical mutations have their manifestations via
loss-of-function mechanisms, and thus show recessive inheritance. They require
strong inbreeding, usually selﬁng, to produce homozygotes that express a phys-
iological effect from the lesion. This makes the process of mutational analysis
impractical in most tree species. Efforts to trigger precocious ﬂowering to shorten
generation cycle via transgenic approaches are underway (Bohlenius et al., 2006;
Hsu et al., 2006; Flachowsky et al., 2009) (Fig. 3c, d). However, they have not led

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
115
to the production of viable gametes and seeds in many tree species tested, including
poplar.
Most trees, including poplars, are largely undomesticated and carry large genetic
loads (Bradshaw and Strauss 2001; Bradshaw et al., 2001). Inbreeding to reveal
recessive mutations is therefore poorly tolerated, and the expression of this load
among progeny would make it difﬁcult to distinguish the effects of speciﬁc gene
lesions from the large number of additional loci whose mutant alleles will also be
expressed. In addition, most poplar species are dioecious, thus producing homozy-
gous plants via inbreeding requires at least two generations of close sibling mating.
This would require a decade or more for a single mutagenesis experiment.
Finally, genetic redundancy is a major problem in all plant species. Plant
genomes, including Populus, have very large number of repeated, functional genes.
The genome of the model Arabidopsis plant is signiﬁcantly duplicated (Vision et al.,
2000), and poplar has an additional ∼30% more duplicated genes (Tuskan et al.,
2006). Therefore single loss-of-function mutations often do not have obvious phe-
notypic effects in most experimental environments. In Arabidopsis, this problem
can be circumvented by identiﬁcation of individuals carrying mutations in individ-
ual genes, followed by controlled crosses bringing two or more mutations in related
genes together in one individual. This strategy, which is not a trivial undertaking
in Arabidopsis, is impractical in trees. Multiple gene knock-downs therefore can be
only addressed by transgenic approaches (discussion below).
3 Postgenomic Challenges and Opportunities
Recent sequencing and annotation of the poplar genome sequence identiﬁed more
than 45,000 gene models (Tuskan et al., 2006). Understanding even a signiﬁcant
fraction of these putative genes in the context of woody plant development and
adaptation presents a daunting challenge. Sequence comparisons have identiﬁed a
substantial number or putative homologs of previously described genes from herba-
ceous model systems. However the in silico predictions for many genes warrant
veriﬁcation as they are based on limited domain homologies. Moreover, an even
larger part of the poplar gene space encodes unknown, hypothetical or putative pro-
teins, as well as RNA regulatory molecules like microRNAs. There are also likely
to be many genes, or presumed pseudogenes, that were not identiﬁed, have incor-
rect gene models, or have important splicing variants that were misannotated. It is
therefore highly desirable that a high throughput functional transformation pipeline
be developed that can evaluate the roles of the many uncharacterized, hypothetical
genes in poplar.
In developing a functional genomics pipeline, the list of genes could be priori-
tized based on expected functions in woody plant processes, tissue level expression
databases, scientiﬁc novelty, or other criteria. Genes can be fed into the pipeline
efﬁciently through the use of recombination-based cloning systems optimized
for plant expression/suppression vectors (Hilson, 2006). Among others, Gateway
cloning technology allows the development of such resources (see for example

116
V.B. Busov et al.
Dubin et al., 2008). The goals may include over/ectopic expresssion, RNAi,
promoter studies, localization studies (GFP fusions) or in planta bimolecular ﬂu-
orescence complementation (Karimi et al., 2002; Weiste et al., 2007; Dubin et al.,
2008). Fusion proteins with GFP can be use to study precise protein localization and
co-localization of potentially interacting proteins (Koroleva et al., 2005). An alterna-
tive strategy is to insert in bulk whole cDNA libraries in RNAi or ectopic expression
binary vectors, transform and screen for phenotypic alterations in traits of inter-
est. The use of normalized, full-length cDNAs libraries would help to minimize
redundancy (Ichikawa et al., 2006; Weiste et al., 2007).
4 Transformation and Poplars
Populus was the ﬁrst woody plant to be transformed (Parsons et al., 1986), and
several genotypes – particularly in section Populus – can be transformed at high
rates (Confalonieri et al., 2003). For transformation to be a useful tool for func-
tional gene dissection it must be reasonably rapid, produce transgenic plants with
stable transgene expression, and not induce a high frequency of transformation-
associated mutation. These requirements are largely met for Populus (Strauss et al.,
2001; Brunner et al., 2007; Li et al., 2007).
The transformation procedure, from inoculation to rooted transgenic plants
carrying the transgene (see for details below), can be accomplished within 4–8
months depending on the genotype, skill of personnel and transgene used in the
study. Approximately 20 independent transformation events per transgene can be
generated within this period in a typical experiment.
Stable transgene expression and RNAi silencing is important if transgenic phe-
notypes are to be expressed over the months and years needed for phenotypic
evaluation in Populus. Several studies have reported highly stable transgene expres-
sion in Populus (reviewed in Brunner et al., 2007). In a study of 40 independent
transgenic hybrid cottonwood (P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides) plants that expressed
herbicide resistance and GUS reporter genes and were monitored for four years
under ﬁeld conditions, only one showed instability of the transgene expression
(Meilan et al., 2002). Similar results were obtained in a study of 20 transgenic
events that expressed the GUS reporter gene under 35S and xylem-speciﬁc pro-
moters (Hawkins et al., 2003). In the same study stable transgene expression was
found under in vitro, greenhouse and ﬁeld conditions and the expression was not
affected by stress treatments. Although studies on efﬁciency and stability of gene
suppression approaches in Populus are still scarce, in a recent study of 56 indepen-
dent events, RNAi-induced gene suppression was found to be stable over 2 years and
during the annual growth cycle. This occurred despite the use of an rbcS promoter,
whose activity varied widely during transitions from active growth to dormancy,
driving the RNAi transgene (Li et al., 2007). Similarly, antisense gene suppression
appears also to be stable over time in transgenic Populus with silenced cinnamyl
alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) or caffeate/5-hydroxy-ferulate O-methyltransferase
(COMT) genes (Pilate et al., 2002).

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
117
For genetic studies in species where sexual inheritance is required, single trans-
genic loci are greatly preferred as they give simple inheritance patterns. They are
also usually less prone to co-suppression, may produce stronger gene suppression,
and are less likely to cause unintended gene disruptions than multicopy insertions.
However, in poplar gene copy number has no association with level of RNAi sup-
pression (Li et al., 2007), no relationship with instability, and a positive association
with level gene expression (Li et al., 2008a). Nonetheless, it is easy to recover sin-
gle copy transformants in poplar. Agrobacterium-mediated transformation typically
produces 1–2 insertions (Li et al., 2008a, b). A study of 45 independent events
produced a mean of 1.5 insertions (Groover et al., 2004). Similarly among 53 inde-
pendent poplar transgenic events with RNAi transgenes, 45 contained a single copy,
5 had two copies, and 3 harbored three copies (Li et al., 2007).
Morphological abnormalities induced by transgene insertion are rare for Populus.
A main reason for this is likely that Populus is diploid, and gene disruption during
transformation would typically allow the second allele to cover the mutation. In
a large number of transgenics, morphological abnormalities were observed in only
three events (∼0.06%) among several thousands studied (Strauss et al., 2004). Other
studies appear to have observed higher levels of somaclonal variation where highly
sensitive reporter genes are employed (Wang et al., 1996; Kumar and Fladung,
2001). However, none appear to be so high as to pose a signiﬁcant constraint on
functional genomics studies (where several events are studied for each experimental
treatment).
5 Approaches for Transgenic Modiﬁcations of Gene Function
Transgenic modiﬁcations can involve both gain- and loss-of-function like modi-
ﬁcations. Gain-of-function is generally studied via ectopic gene expression, and
usually imparts abnormal but physiologically informative phenotypic changes.
Ectopic approaches are especially important in functional dissection of gene fami-
lies, where functional redundancy often obscures the phenotypic effects of speciﬁc
gene knock-outs.
Transgenic loss-of-function like modiﬁcations are usually achieved via post-
transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS), targeting speciﬁc RNAs for degradation
(Brodersen and Voinnet, 2006). PTGS is triggered by double stranded RNA
(dsRNA) produced when an enzyme known as Dicer (with a RNase III domain)
recognizes and cleaves the dsRNA into short 21–26-nucleotides. These fragments,
termed siRNAs for “short interfering RNAs,” remain in double stranded duplexes
and act as templates for the RNA induced silencing complex (RISC) that targets
and destroys the homologous mRNA messages. Historically, antisense technology,
which represents one of the ﬁrst used forms of PTGS, was successfully used in
poplar to study several key enzymes in the lignin biosynthetic pathway (Baucher
et al., 1996) and genes involved in control of dormancy (Rohde et al., 2002).
Because of the relatively low efﬁciency and inability to discriminate between
closely-related paralogs, antisense-mediated gene suppression as a tool for gene

118
V.B. Busov et al.
suppression is rapidly being replaced by RNA interference (RNAi) (Matthew, 2004),
a more potent inducer of gene silencing. Studies in plants and other eukaryotic
organisms have shown that inverted-repeat transgenes (especially if they are sep-
arated by an intron) provide a reliable and highly efﬁcient means for suppression of
gene expression (Chuang and Meyerowitz, 2000; Smith et al., 2000).
The substantial gene redundancy in many plant gene families poses speciﬁc
challenges to dissecting individual gene function(s) using RNAi approaches. An
alternate approach is generation of “dominant negative” mutations. Typically domi-
nant negative mutation involves modiﬁcations in the coding sequence of the protein
(reviewed in Veitia, 2007). The modiﬁed gene encodes mutant polypeptides that
when over-expressed will disrupt the activity of the wild-type protein. For example,
mutation in proteins that oligomerize can lead to inhibition of the protein com-
plex. Many cell surface receptors typically form di- or multimers upon binding an
extracellular ligand. The dimerization leads to activation of a cytoplasmic domain
(e.g., kinase). Expression of protein that lacks the cytoplasmic domain reduces or
typically abolishes signal transduction by sequestering native WT proteins from
productive complexes. Similarly, dominant negative mutations in the Arabidopsis
actin 2 gene impaired the oligomerization of the actin ﬁber and allowed func-
tional characterization of the gene with respect to growth of root and aerial organs
(Nishimura et al., 2003). Another example of a dominant negative mutation is pro-
duction of transcription factors with truncated activation but fully functional DNA
binding domains. Such truncated proteins compete for the same DNA binding sites
with WT proteins, thus reducing the activation/repression of the target gene(s)
(Veitia, 2007). This strategy can also produce less severe phenotypes for regulatory
genes, where loss-of-function can be lethal.
6 Other Approaches for Generation of Knock-Down Gene
Modiﬁcations
Several novel approaches that show promise for generation of loss-of-function gene
modiﬁcations have been recently developed. Although their utility in poplar is
untested, they have been applied successfully to other non-model plants. Therefore
we brieﬂy review the technologies and their potential applications in poplar.
6.1 Artiﬁcial miRNAs and Overexpression of siRNAs
Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding small (∼20–28nt) RNA molecules that
negatively regulate gene function via transcriptional or translational repression
(Jones-Rhoades et al., 2006). They represent a native regulatory mechanism widely-
distributed among eukaryotic organisms (Zamore et al., 2000). The mode of action
and regulatory function of miRNAs very much resembles the siRNAs generated dur-
ing the process of RNAi-mediated gene suppression (described above). However in
contrast to RNAi, where multiple 20nt siRNAs are produced from approximately

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
119
200–300 bp sequence, miRNA biogenesis results in only one 20nt regulatory frag-
ment. This is possible because a precursor RNA molecule forming a hairpin loop
structure with a speciﬁc sequence and secondary structure features are recognized
and processed by specialized recognition and nuclease machinery. The progress in
identiﬁcation of many precursor RNA molecules allowed generation of a “designed”
miRNA precursors, now known as artiﬁcial or synthetic miRNAs (Ossowski et al.,
2008).
Artiﬁcial miRNAs act in a similar manner as to RNAi molecules in causing
post transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS), but are highly gene-speciﬁc – thus
allowing discrimination of closely related gene family members. Genome-wide
microarray analysis showed that like the native miRNAs, amiRNAs are similarly
highly gene speciﬁc (Schwab et al., 2006). The utility of this approach was demon-
strated in Arabidopsis, rice, tomato and tobacco (Alvarez et al., 2006; Warthmann
et al., 2008). Initial reports indicate a high rate of silencing, similar to that of
RNAi (∼90%.), and expression of amiRNAs can be driven by any pol II promoter
(Ossowski et al., 2008). An interesting feature of amiRNAs is that the level of
expression conferred by the promoter corresponds to the level of gene suppres-
sion (Schwab et al., 2006; Alvarez et al., 2006). Thus it is possible to generate
quantitative knockouts that differ in the degree of gene suppression.
Artiﬁcial miRNAs use a functional precursor miRNA as a backbone, but the
native miRNA sequence is replaced with a user-deﬁned 20nt targeting sequence
(Alvarez et al., 2006). Selection of the 20nt is important for the efﬁciency and speci-
ﬁcity of gene silencing, and must follow speciﬁc guidelines to be properly processed
and function (Ossowski et al., 2008). The selection of miRNAs has been auto-
mated in a web-based application that helps ensure speciﬁcity to the desired target
gene and adherence to guidelines for functionality (http://wmd2.weigelworld.org/
cgi-bin/mirnatools.pl). The engineering of the selected 20nt into the precursor can
be accomplished by overlap PCR where the endogenous miRNA is replaced by the
selected 20nt and the resulting ampliﬁed fragment is cloned into a vector of choice.
Although heterologous precursor miRNA backbones have been successfully used, to
ensure correct processing it is preferable to use a native pre-miRNA (Ossowski et al.,
2008). Several poplar pre-miRNAs have been already found and their processing
experimentally veriﬁed (Lu et al., 2005) (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1 Secondary structure produced by poplar premiR171. Sequence was ampliﬁed using RT-
PCR and secondary structure generated using MFOLD The miR171 sequence is highlighted in
green. Graph courtesy of Rewati Potkar, Michigan Technological University
Small RNAs have also been used to induce transcriptional gene silencing (TGS)
(Aufsatz et al., 2002). In this case, a sequence homologous to the promoter of a
gene is employed in the hairpin loop structure. The derived siRNAs cause DNA

120
V.B. Busov et al.
methylation and chromatin modiﬁcations. Li et al. (2007) reported a much lower rate
of gene silencing with dsRNA directed at transgene promoter compared to coding
sequences in poplar. We know of no systematic studies of the success rate of PGS
vs. TGS in any plant species.
6.2 Zinc-Finger Nucleases (ZFN)
ZFNs have been developed to: (i) increase the extremely low rate of homologous
gene targeting (GT) in plants and most mammalian systems (excluding mice) and
(ii) introduce mutations in a target locus by the imperfect repair of the cleaved tar-
get DNA by the ZFNs (Durai et al., 2005). ZFNs are synthetic proteins that can
introduce double-stranded breaks (DSB) in DNA. The protein consist of a DNA
binding domain (DBD) composed of 3–4 (Cis2-His2) zinc ﬁngers fused to the
DNA-cleavage domain of a FokI restriction endonuclease (Durai et al., 2005). The
zinc ﬁngers provide targeting and binding to a particular speciﬁc sequence, and the
cleavage domain introduces a DSB. The break can be repaired by either the process
of homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) (Ray
and Langer, 2002). The HR is precise and requires extensive homology between the
repaired strands. In contrast, NHEJ does not require extensive homology and the
repair often results in a mutation at the repaired site. In plants NHEJ is the predom-
inant repair mechanism, thus DSBs introduced by the ZFNs result in a high rate of
mutations at the target locus (Lloyd et al., 2005).
A ZFN that will introduce DSBs in a target locus requires design of a combi-
nation of ﬁngers that will recognize and bind to both strands of a target sequence.
Each ﬁnger consists of 30aa that recognize a 3 bp nucleotide sequence. The pro-
cess of matching ﬁnger-to-sequence is still imperfect, and two approaches are
widely used. One is based on a selection process, where different zinc ﬁnger
combinations are screened for afﬁnity to target sequence via library (phage or
bacterial two-hybrid system) screening procedures (Durai et al., 2005). An alter-
native strategy is using computer-generated matches that use a domain library
(http://www.scripps.edu/mb/barbas/zfdesign/zfdesignhome.php). Delivery of ZFNs
can be accomplished via genetic transformation under an inducible promoter. This
strategy was demonstrated in Arabidopsis using a heat shock promoter (Lloyd
et al., 2005). Alternatively, in tobacco the DNA encoding a ZFN was successfully
delivered into protoplast cells via electroporation (Wright et al., 2005).
6.3 Virus Induced Gene Silencing (VIGS)
VIGS has been developed to alleviate some of the problems associated with the
time required for traditional mutagenesis and transgenic approaches. By inducing
gene silencing in regenerated plants, it can also bypass the problem of lethality
during embryonic development (Robertson, 2004; Burch-Smith et al., 2004). VIGS
provides for the rapid reduction, but not elimination, of gene expression by taking

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
121
advantage of natural PTGS mechanisms used for viral defense. It is thus fundamen-
tally similar to RNAi technologies (Ossowski et al., 2008). Typically, VIGS vectors
include the bulk of the viral genome, but where a sequence of the gene that is the
target for silencing has been inserted (Robertson 2004; Burch-Smith et al., 2004).
Inoculation with the recombinant virus triggers the plants’ silencing machinery, to
suppress both the virus and the mRNA of the gene corresponding to the inserted
fragment. The silencing signal spreads systemically in RNA viruses, imparting a
phenotype similar to what would have been caused by PTGS for the target gene
(Robertson, 2004).
Several VIGS vectors have been developed and their utility proven in functional
analyses of genes involved in diverse processes (reviewed in Robertson, 2004). The
tobacco rattle virus (TRV) vector is of wide applicability in the Solanaceae, as it
has a wide host range, high rate of silencing, mild viral symptoms, and acts within
meristematic tissues (Ratcliff et al., 2001). In poplar, the best candidate for devel-
opment of a VIGS vector is the poplar mosaic virus (PopMV). PopMV is a RNA
carlavirus that naturally infects species and hybrids in the genus Populus. Recently
a VIGS vector based on the genome sequence of PopMV (Smith and Campbell,
2004) was developed (Naylor et al., 2005) and successfully tested in Nicotiana ben-
thamiana for suppression of a GFP reporter gene. Information on effectiveness of
this vector on transgene suppression in poplar, however, is unavailable.
Delivery of VIGS vectors to plants can be accomplished in several ways (Burch-
Smith et al., 2004). In vitro transcribed RNA (most VIGS vectors are RNA) or
DNA can be rubbed into the leaves (Ratcliff et al., 2001). This method is labor and
time intensive but yields high infections. Alternatively, the vector sequence can be
cloned into a binary vector and delivered by injection of Agrobacterium cultures
into parenchyma cells (Schob et al., 1997). Microprojectile bombardment has also
been successfully used for DNA-based vectors (Redinbaugh et al., 2001).
7 Transformation Methods in Populus
A variety of transformation methods have been successfully used in Populus,
including biolistic approaches (McCown et al., 1991) electroporation of proto-
plasts (Chupeau et al., 1994), and cocultivation with Agrobacterium. Protoplast
transformation is very rarely used, and biolistics is mainly used in specialized appli-
cations such as for rapid assessment of promoter::reporter expression in different
tissues, transformation of highly recalcitrant genotypes, and transformation of plas-
tids. For routine nuclear transformation using organogenic systems – the prevalent
means for poplar transformation – Agrobacterium is by far the most widely used
method. Although many poplar species have been transformed at least once (dis-
cussed below), each species and genotype tends to require detailed customization
of regeneration procedures for successful and efﬁcient transformation. The reasons
for the extraordinary genotype speciﬁcity of regeneration and transformation proce-
dures remains unknown, but imposes a major obstacle to efﬁcient transformation of
all plants.

122
V.B. Busov et al.
Fig. 2 Transformation in Populus. Explants preparation (a–d); co-cultivation (e, f); callus and
shoot induction (g, h); shoot rooting (i–l). Photos courtesy of Cathleen Ma, Oregon State University
Most of transformation procedures using A. tumefaciens follow a classical pro-
tocol upon which there are many variations (e.g., Leple et al., 1992; Han et al.,
2000; Confalonieri et al., 2003) (Fig. 2). These protocols involve the following
steps in chronological order: (1) Co-cultivation of native or pre-induced tissues with
Agrobacterium carrying the T-DNA of interest; (2) Callus induction if indirect shoot
regeneration is employed, in the presence of a selective agent such as an antibi-
otic; (3) Shoot induction also in the presence of a selective agent; and (4) Rooting
in the presence of a selective agent. Selective agents can be used in many ways
and concentrations; they can be employed immediately after cocultivation, or their
use delayed until after shoots have regenerated. Preculturing of explants before co-
cultivation activates cell division, and can thus increase cell competence for T-DNA
integration. Three major factors determine the success of transformation procedure –
genotype of the host plant, Agrobacterium strain, and the regeneration procedure
(plant physiological state, in vitro medium composition, environment, selection, and
hormone treatments). We will brieﬂy discuss each of these three factors below.
Successful transformation has been reported for many poplar species, with the
majority from section Populus (reviewed in Confalonieri et al., 2003). For example,
transformation protocols have been developed for P. alba (Okumura et al., 2006),
P. tremula (Fladung et al., 1997; Tzﬁra et al., 1997), P. tremuloides (Cseke et al.,
2007), P. tremula × P. alba (Leple et al., 1992), P. tremula × P. tremuloides (Fladung
et al., 1997), Populus canescens × P. grandidentada and P. tremuloides × P. david-
iana (Dai et al., 2003). Successful transformation have been reported for species
and hybrids from sections Aigeiros (cottonwood) and Tacamahaca (balsam poplar)
including P. deltoides, P. trichocarpa “Nisqually-1” (Ma et al., 2004; Song et al.,

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
123
2006), P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides (De Block, 1990; Han et al., 2000), P. del-
toides × P. nigra (Heuchelin et al., 1997), P. alba × P. grandidentata (Fillatti et al.,
1987) and P. nigra × P. trichocarpa (McCown et al., 1991), P. sieboldii × P. gran-
didentata (Matsunaga et al., 2002), P. nigra “Italica” (Nishiguchi et al., 2006) and
P. ciliata (Thakur et al., 2005). The most widely used transformation “laboratory
rat,” has been the Populus tremula × alba hybrid clone known as INRA 717-1B4
(Leple et al., 1992).
As the main vehicle for delivering the transgene, selection of an appropriate
Agrobacterium strain is essential. Although both Agrobacterium tumefaciens and
Agrobacterium rhizogenes have been successfully employed for poplar transfor-
mation, A. tumefaciens is the species of choice. The interest in A. rhizogenes
transformation has been driven by the ease of production of transformed hairy roots,
which self-select and regenerate, and those provide for more rapid generation of
transgenic tissues (Cseke et al., 2007). Nopaline strains of Agrobacterium tumefa-
ciens often have a higher transformation efﬁciency in tree species including poplars
(Fladung et al., 1997). However, exceptions to that rule have been reported where
octopine strains like EHA105 are more successful than nopaline strains C58 and
LBA4404 (e.g., of two Populus trichocarpa x Populus deltoides clones: Han et al.,
2000). Because knock-down RNAi manipulations often include sequence repeats
that are prone to recombination, use of recombinant-deﬁcient strains like AGL1 can
help to avoid rearrangements during storage and transformation. AGL1 is also a
hypervirulent strain and thus is believed to provide a higher level of transformation
efﬁciency.
Most protocols in poplar transformation use direct or indirect in vitro shoot
organogenesis, followed by rooting. One of the main determining factors affect-
ing transformation efﬁciency is the origin and physiological condition of the
explants. Although explants from leaves, petioles and stems have been successfully
employed, the success rate with different types is highly variable and species-
dependent. For example, transformation efﬁciencies with aspen are highest when
leaf explants are used. In contrast petioles and stems seem to produce best results for
cottonwood hybrids (Han et al., 2000). In vitro grown plants are generally used as a
source for explants because they do not require sterilization prior to co-cultivation,
however, protocols involving non-sterile greenhouse/growth chamber-grown plants
have also been successfully used, and are sometimes found to be superior to in vitro
materials (Song et al., 2006).
Co-cultivation conditions also affect transformation efﬁciencies. Optimum
Agrobacterium concentration, precise timing, media and light conditions can affect
the success of the T-DNA transfer. Callus induction usually requires presence of
auxin (e.g., 2,4-D, NAA or IBA) and is performed under dark or very low-light-
intensity conditions. The propensity of different types of explants (e.g., leaf, stem
or petiole) to produce calli is highly genotype-speciﬁc. The callus induction step is
necessary in some genotypes but not in others, and should be omitted whenever pos-
sible to reduce the risk of somaclonal variation and shorten the transformation cycle.
Direct or indirect shoot organogenesis requires high levels of cytokinins such as BA,
zeatin, thidiazuron (TDZ) and others. The presence of auxin in combination with

124
V.B. Busov et al.
cytokinins has also proved beneﬁcial in some species. Rooting is accomplished in
auxin-dominant media and is generally a non-limiting step in poplar transformation
and regeneration.
8 Using Transformation for Mutagenesis
As discussed above, insertional mutagenesis using T-DNA is widely used in plant
biology to create recessive mutations revealed in homozygous individuals (Parinov
and Sundaresan 2000; Sessions et al., 2002; Jeong et al., 2002; Alonso et al., 2003;
An et al., 2005), but is impractical to apply in trees. However, methods that cause
dominant mutations are applicable to trees. For example, activation tagging vectors
allow generation of gain-of-function mutations via upregulation of genes positioned
in the proximity of the insertion (Weigel et al., 2000). This is accomplished by
cloning an array of strong enhancers near one of the T-DNA borders. The presence
of the enhancers can cause upregulation of genes proximal to the insertion site, and
thus a dominant mutation. In the majority of the cases the native expression of the
gene is retained but at a higher expression level – giving a mild but clear and easily
regenerated mutant phenotype. Speciﬁc gene upregulation also avoids the problem
of gene redundancy that can obscure loss of function mutations.
Results from two pilot studies in Populus have demonstrated the effectiveness
of activation tagging (Busov et al., 2003; Harrison et al., 2007). A population of
627 events was used to identify the ﬁrst tagged gene in a tree (Busov et al., 2003).
This population is under further investigation and results to date indicate a high rate
(∼7%) of mutant discovery based on (1) morphological inspection; (2) successful
positioning of the tag in the genome for several dozen events; (3) activation of prox-
imal genes up to 10 kbp; and (4) numerous successful recapitulations of the original
phenotypes when the candidates are re-inserted under the control of a strong pro-
moter. In the study reported by Harrison et al. (2007), a similar mutant discovery
rate was found and different types of mutations were identiﬁed. In both cases, the
majority of tagged genes are functionally novel to science, and many affect traits of
particular interest for tree biology (e.g., wood quality, frost hardiness, phenology).
Enhancer and gene traps insert reporter genes that indicate the expression
patterns of nearby genes. They provide high resolution (cell/tissue type) level infor-
mation about the expression patterns of tagged genes (reviewed in Springer, 2000).
Different reporter genes have been used in gene and enhancer traps, including the
widely used GUS system. Reporters that allow imaging of live plants such as GFP
(green ﬂuorescent protein) and luciferase have also been employed (Szabados et al.,
2002; Yamamoto et al., 2003). In the enhancer traps the reporter gene is preceded
by a minimal promoter, which typically contains basal sequences required for tran-
scription and translation, but is not sufﬁcient to drive expression of the reporter gene.
Insertion of the enhancer trap sequence proximal to a gene results in an activation of
the reporter gene by neighboring regulatory enhancer cis-elements. Gene traps are
variations of the enhancer traps; the reporter gene coding sequence is preceded by
a splice acceptor sequence (SA). When the T-DNA sequence carrying the gene trap

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
125
inserts in the coding region of a gene, a novel splice variant between the native and
reporter gene is produced that encodes a fusion protein that serves as marker of the
expression pattern of the tagged gene. Enhancer/gene traps are useful in isolation of
promoters and regulatory elements, as well as the identiﬁcation of candidate genes
that can be further manipulated by gene-silencing or ectopic expression approaches.
Studies demonstrating the utility of this approach have been performed in Populus
(Johansson et al., 2003; Groover et al., 2004; Filichkin et al., 2006b).
9 Future Prospects and Challenges
Transformation is a major tool for genetic research in poplar that, based on its
frequency of use in scientiﬁc publications, is unequaled by any other taxon of
trees. This valuable tool for leveraging the genome sequence, and for linking
physiology to gene function, will continue to empower poplar research for many
decades to come. However, there remain some substantial obstacles to the broader
use of transformation and transgenic trees to improve biological research.
First, transformation remains a costly and slow procedure, requiring a laboratory
with well developed means for in vitro culture, growth chambers, greenhouses, and
generally more than a year from cocultivation to physiological analysis. Although
there has been some progress on ex vitro methods for transformation in poplar –
such as the development of a method that allows generation of transformed somatic
cambium sectors (van Beveren et al., 2006) – there are no general methods that are
widely used or reliable. The development of in planta methods, as have revolution-
ized Arabidopsis research, would be highly beneﬁcial in poplar. The long, costly and
facility intensive process emphasizes the need for centralized transformation facil-
ities, as well as investment in the generation and maintenance of large transgenic
collections that have broad value to the research community.
Second, transformation in poplar and many other species remains highly idiosyn-
cratic, with its efﬁciency varying widely between tissues, genotypes, and species.
Even in Arabidopsis, most of transgenic research is performed in a single variety
(Columbia) that is highly amenable to transformation. The identiﬁcation of a single
reference genotype for poplar transformation would be highly desirable as it would
allow more direct comparison of results across different laboratories. Advances in
resequencing technologies allow near complete genome sequences for one or more
standard genotypes to be readily produced. Nevertheless, in the near term the slow
rate of molecular evolution, and thus the high sequence conservation found in both
coding and non-coding sequences in poplar (Tuskan et al., 2006), will allow gene
constructs based on the Nisqually-1 genome sequence to be productively analyzed
in a variety of transformed poplar genotypes. Unfortunately, although transforma-
tion procedures have been reported for Nisqually-1 (Ma et al., 2004; Song et al.,
2006) a robust technique is still not available.
In the long term, in addition to sequencing one or more transgenic models, it will
be necessary to develop methods that are effective on a wide variety of genotypes
chosen for their importance based on biological or breeding criteria. Breakthroughs

126
V.B. Busov et al.
are needed that employ genes, such as the rol gene cassette from Agrobacterium
rhizogenes, which promote the regeneration of transgenic cells (Arias et al., 2006).
These genes could then be removed via methods such as recombinase mediated exci-
sion to produce normal plant phenotypes. A prototype was developed some years
ago (e.g., Matsunaga et al., 2002), but does not appear to have been developed into
a broadly effective method. Much more work along these lines is needed, perhaps
exploring a much wider variety of types of regeneration-inducing genes.
Third, because poplar is an emerging model species, the transgenic “toolkit” is
still very limited. There are only a few promoters whose tissue and cell-speciﬁc
expression properties have been demonstrated in transgenic plants (e.g. Wu et al.,
2000; Johansson et al., 2003; Hao et al. 2005; Filichkin et al., 2006b). Although gene
excision has been used in poplar, most notably as part of the MAT system (Ebinuma
et al., 1997; Matsunaga et al 2002; Zelasco et al., 2007), a number of other useful
and well studied excision systems such as CRE/LOX (Marjanac et al., 2008) and
FLP/FRT (Sonti et al., 1995) have not, to our knowledge, ever been characterized for
their effectiveness in poplar. Nevertheless, technological advance in other species
seem to be transferable to poplar (Fig. 3) (Filichkin et al., 2006a).
Fig. 3 Inducible expression in poplar. Photos on left and right panels represent explants and plants
before and after induction respectively. Top: Induction of a GUS reporter gene under the control of
the ecdysone induction system (construct provided by Metabolix Co. and based on the construct
used in (Kourtz et al., 2007)) (a, b). Photo courtesy of Cathleen Ma, Oregon State University.
Heat induction to induce ﬂowering in poplar. Bottom: Plants were heat shocked by placing them
in a growth chamber at 37
◦C for 1 h/day (2–4 weeks). Flowers were observed after 2 weeks from
the initiation of the treatment. Transgenic male poplar (P. tremula × P. tremuloides, INRA 353-
53) containing the Arabidopsis FT gene under the control of the soy heat shock promoter were
employed. Photos courtesy of Huanling Zhang, Oregon State University

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
127
Fourth, the capacity for forward genetics is limited in poplars. A worldwide, pub-
lic investment in high quality QTL/association mapping resources that can identify
speciﬁc causative genes or polymorphisms, and a much larger investment in gene
tagging populations such as the activation tagging populations discussed above,
would seem to be logical avenues for progress. Such a systematic gene discovery
effort for traits important to woody species is likely to identify genes that would
have been entirely missed based on selective reverse genetics approaches – as work
to date for activation tagging has suggested (discussed above). The high costs of
phenotyping in such programs, and the lack of capacity for maintenance/sharing
of these collections without costly in vitro or cryogenic facilities, are the main
limitations to progress (reviewed in Tsai and Hubscher, 2004).
Fifth, the inability to efﬁciently target genes for mutagenesis, and the associated
“position effect” variation in transgenic populations associated with individual gene
insertion events, remain major obstacles to efﬁcient dissection of gene function in
poplar and all other plant species. Recent advances in zinc-ﬁnger nucleases and
related technologies appear to hold signiﬁcant promise (Tovkach et al., 2009), but
to our knowledge have not yet been studied in poplar.
Finally, a major deterrent of using transformation as a research tool is the difﬁcult
regulatory requirements for planting of genetically modiﬁed organisms (Strauss,
2003). Tree phenotypes must ultimately be studied in the ﬁeld if they are to be
relevant to normal physiology and breeding. However, the wide potential dispersal
of pollen and seeds pose large obstacles to ﬁeld trial approval in most countries.
Flowering is problematic as most research plots are within the range of wild or feral
species, and the female test trees themselves could produce progeny that establish in
the ﬁeld as they are not fully domesticated (though some hybrids and triploids have
very low fertility). However, if fully sterile trees could be produced using transgen-
esis or other means, and the stability of the sterility trait veriﬁed over a number of
years, these genotypes might serve as hosts within which a wide variety of genes
could be tested over a normal rotation length. Transgenic research toward this end
will clearly take many years, but a number of strong genome-enabled options exist
for producing robust sterility systems (Brunner et al., 2007). The main limitation
is the regulatory system itself, which even in the USA does not allow the disper-
sal of genes from small research plots even if their only effect is to reduce fertility,
though this would appear to pose no signiﬁcant environmental risk (controls and
some transgenics will not be perfectly sterile during the research phase, and it is
practically very difﬁcult to remove all ﬂowers/fruits from large ﬂowering trees).
Unfortunately, there are no established means to accelerate the normal ﬂowering of
poplars in the greenhouse to provide an effective ﬁrst screen; as discussed above
the FT and LEAFY genes only appear capable of producing abnormal, partially
functional ﬂowers. We know of no public research programs anywhere that are ade-
quately organized and funded to be able to deal with this purely regulatory hurdle
to ﬂowering and biosafety research.
Despite these challenges, transformation in its current form will clearly
remain the major genetic research tool for dissection of gene function in poplar
for many years to come. The natural amenability to transformation in many

128
V.B. Busov et al.
genotypes remains the key biological attribute that makes poplar the most pow-
erful model organism for genetic analysis of woody plant growth, adaptation, and
development.
References
Alonso JM, Stepanova AN, Leisse TJ, Kim CJ, Chen H, Shinn P, Stevenson DK, Zimmerman J,
Barajas P, Cheuk R, Gadrinab C, Heller C, Jeske A, Koesema E, Meyers CC, Parker H, Prednis
L, Ansari Y, Choy N, Deen H, Geralt M, Hazari N, Hom E, Karnes M, Mulholland C, Ndubaku
R, Schmidt I, Guzman P, Henonin L, Schmid M, Weigel D, Carter DE, Marchand T, Risseeuw
E, Brogden D, Zeko A, Crosby WL, Berry CC, Ecker JR (2003) Genome-wide insertional
mutagenesis of Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 301:653–657.
Alvarez JP, Pekker I, Goldshmidt A, Blum E, Amsellem Z, Eshed Y (2006) Endogenous and syn-
thetic microRNAs stimulate simultaneous, efﬁcient, and localized regulation of multiple targets
in diverse species. Plant Cell 18:1134–1151.
An G, Lee S, Kim SH, Kim SR (2005) Molecular genetics using T-DNA in rice. Plant Cell Physiol
46:14–22.
Arias RS, Filichkin SA, Strauss SH (2006) Divide and conquer: Development and cell cycle genes
in plant transformation. Trends Biotechnol 24:267–273.
Aufsatz W, Mette MF, van der Winden J, Matzke AJ, Matzke M (2002) RNA-directed DNA methy-
lation in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99(Suppl 4):16499–16506, Epub@2002 Aug
8: 16499–16506.
Baucher M, Chabbert B, Pilate G, Doorsselaere Jv, Tollier MT, Petit-Conil M, Cornu D, Monties B,
Montagu Mv, Inze D, Jouanin L, Boerjan W (1996) Red xylem and higher lignin extractability
by down-regulating a cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase in poplar. Plant Physiol 112:1479–1490.
Bohlenius H, Huang T, Charbonnel-Campaa L, Brunner AM, Jansson S, Strauss SH, Nilsson O
(2006) CO/FT regulatory module controls timing of ﬂowering and seasonal growth cessation
in trees. Science 312:1040–1043.
Bradshaw HD, Ceulemans R, Davis J, Stettler R (2001) Emerging model systems in plant biology:
Poplar (Populus) as a model forest tree. J Plant Growth Regul 19:306–313.
Bradshaw HD, Strauss SH (2001) Breeding strategies for the 21st century: Domestication of poplar.
In: DI Dickman, JG Isebrands, JE Eckenwalder, J Richardson, (eds) Poplar Culture in North
America. Part B. NRC Research Press. Ottawa, pp. 383–394.
Brodersen P, Voinnet O (2006) The diversity of RNA silencing pathways in plants. Trends Genet
22:268–280.
Brunner AM, Li J, DiFazio SP, Shevchenko O, Montgomery BE, Mohamed R, Wei H, Ma C, Elias
AA, VanWormer K, Strauss SH (2007) Genetic containment of forest plantations. Tree Genet
Genomes 3:75–100.
Burch-Smith TM, Anderson JC, Martin GB, Kumar SP (2004) Applications and advantages of
virus-induced gene silencing for gene function studies in plants. Plant J 39:734–746.
Busov VB, Brunner AM, Meilan R, Filichkin S, Ganio L, Gandhi S, Strauss SH (2005a) Genetic
transformation: A powerful tool for dissection of adaptive traits in trees. New Phytol 167:9–18.
Busov VB, Fladung M, Groover A, Strauss SH (2005b) Insertional mutagenesis in Populus:
Relevance and feasibility. Tree Genet Genomes 1:135–142.
Busov VB, Meilan R, Pearce DW, Ma C, Rood SB, Strauss SH (2003) Activation tagging of a
dominant gibberellin catabolism gene (GA 2-oxidase) from poplar that regulates tree stature.
Plant Physiol 132:1283–1291.
Chuang CF, Meyerowitz EM (2000) Speciﬁc and heritable genetic interference by double stranded
RNA in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:4985–4990.
Chupeau MC, Pautot V, Chupeau Y (1994) Recovery of transgenic trees after electroporation of
poplar protoplasts. Transgenic Res 3:13–19.

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
129
Confalonieri M, Balestrazzi A, BisofﬁS, Carbonera D (2003) In vitro culture and genetic engi-
neering of Populus spp.: Synergy for forest tree improvement. Plant Cell Tiss Org Cult
72:109–138.
Cseke LJ, Cseke SB, Podila GK (2007) High efﬁciency poplar transformation. Plant Cell Rep
26:1529–1538.
Dai W, Cheng ZM, Sargent W (2003) Plant regeneration and Agrobacterium-mediated transfor-
mation of two elite aspen hybrid clones from in vitro leaf tissues. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Plant
39:6–11.
De Block M (1990) Factors inﬂuencing the tissue culture and the Agrobacterium tumefaciens-
mediated transformation of hybrid Aspen and Poplar clones. Plant Physiol 93:1110–1116.
De Block M, Herrera-Estrella L van Montagu M, Schell J, Zambryski P (1984) Expression of
foreign genes in regenerated plants and in their progeny. EMBO J 3:1681–1689.
Dubin M, Bowler C, Benvenuto G (2008) A modiﬁed Gateway cloning strategy for overexpressing
tagged proteins in plants. Plant Meth 4:3.
Durai S, Mani M, Kandavelou K, Wu J, Porteus MH, Chandrasegaran S (2005) Zinc ﬁnger nucle-
ases: Custom-designed molecular scissors for genome engineering of plant and mammalian
cells. Nucleic Acids Res 33:5978–5990.
Ebinuma H, Sugita K, Matsunaga E, Yamakado M (1997) Selection of marker-free transgenic
plants using the isopentenyl transferase gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:2117–2121.
Filichkin SA, Meilan R, Busov VB, Ma C, Brunner AM, Strauss SH (2006a) Alcohol-inducible
gene expression in transgenic Populus. Plant Cell Rep 25:660–667.
Filichkin SE, Qian W, Busov VB, Meilan R, Lanz-Garcia C, Groover A, Goldgarb B, Ma C,
Dharmawardhana P, Brunner A, Strauss S (2006b) Enhancer trapping in woody plants: Isolation
of the ET304 gene encoding a putative AT-hook motif transcription factor and characterization
of the expression patterns conferred by its promoter in transgenic Populus and Arabidopsis.
Plant Sci 17:206–216.
Fillatti JJ, Sellmer J, McCown B, Haissig B, Comai L (1987) Agrobacterium-mediated transfor-
mation and regeneration of Populus. Mol Gen Genet 206:192–199.
Flachowsky H, Hanke M-V, Peil A, Strauss SH, Fladung M (2009) A review on transgenic
approaches to accelerate breeding of woody plants. Plant Breed 128:217–226.
Fladung M, Deutsch F, Honicka H, Kumar S (2004) T-DNA and transposon tagging in aspen. Plant
Biol (Stuttg) 6:5–11.
Fladung M, Kumar S, Ahuja MR (1997) Genetic transformation of Populus genotypes with differ-
ent chimaeric gene constructs: Transformation efﬁciency and molecular analysis. Transgenic
Res 6:111–121.
Gill G, Brown G, Neale D (2003) A sequence mutation in the cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase
gene associated with altered ligniﬁcation in loblolly pine. Plant Biotechnol J 1:253–258.
Groover A, Fontana J, Dupper G, Ma C, Martienssen R, Strauss S, Meilan R (2004) Gene
and enhancer trap tagging of vascular-expressed genes in poplar trees. Plant Physiol 134:
1742–1751.
Han KH, Meilan R, Ma C, Strauss SH (2000) An Agrobacterium tumefaciens transforma-
tion protocol effective on a variety of cottonwood hybrids (genus Populus). Plant Cell Rep
19:315–320.
Hao W, Meilan R, Brunner AM, Skinner JS, Ma C, Strauss SH (2005) Transgenic sterility in
Populus: Expression properties of the poplar PTLF, Agrobacterium NOS, and two minimal
35S promoters in vegetative tissues. Tree Physiol 26:401–410.
Harrison EJ, Bush M, Plett JM, Mcphee DP, Vitez R, O’Malley B, Sharma V, Bosnich W, Seguin
A, MacKay J, Regan S (2007) Diverse developmental mutants revealed in an activation-tagged
population of poplar. Can J Botany-Revue Canadienne de Botanique 85:1071–1081.
Hawkins S, Leple JC, Cornu L, Jouanin L, Pilate G (2003) Stability od transgene expression in
poplar: A model tree species. Ann For Sci 60:427–438.
Heuchelin SA, McNabb HS, Klopfenstein NB (1997) Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of
Populus × euramericana “Ogy” using the chimeric CaMV 35S pin2 gene fusion. Can J For
Res Revue Canadienne de Recherche Forestiere 27:1041–1048.

130
V.B. Busov et al.
Hilson P (2006) Cloned sequence repertoires for small- and large-scale biology. Trends Plant Sci
11:133–141.
Hsu CY, Liu Y, Luthe DS, Yuceer C (2006) Poplar FT2 shortens the juvenile phase and promotes
seasonal ﬂowering. Plant Cell 18:1846–1861.
Ichikawa T, Nakazawa M, Kawashima M, Iizumi H, Kuroda H, Kondou Y, Tsuhara Y, Suzuki
K, Ishikawa A, Seki M, Fujita M, Motohashi R, Nagata N, Takagi T, Shinozaki K, Matsui M
(2006) The FOX hunting system: An alternative gain-of-function gene hunting technique. Plant
J 48:974–985.
Jeong DH, An S, Kang HG, Moon S, Han JJ, Park S, Lee HS, An K, An G (2002) T-DNA
insertional mutagenesis for activation tagging in rice. Plant Physiol 130:1636–1644.
Johansson AM, Wang CY, Stenberg A, Hertzberg M, Little CHA, Olsson O (2003)
Characterization of a PttRPS18 promoter active in the vascular cambium region of hybrid
aspen. Plant Mol Biol 52:317–329.
Jones-Rhoades MW, Bartel DP, Bartel B (2006) MicroRNAs and their regulatory roles in plants.
Annu Rev Plant Biol 57:19–53.
Karimi M, Inze D, Depicker A (2002) GATEWAY vectors for Agrobacterium-mediated plant
transformation. Trends Plant Sci 7:193–195.
Koroleva OA, Tomlinson ML, Leader D, Shaw P, Doonan JH (2005) High-throughput protein
localization in Arabidopsis using Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression of GFP-ORF
fusions. Plant J 41:162–174.
Kourtz L, Dillon K, Daughtry S, Peoples OP, Snell KD (2007) Chemically inducible expression of
the PHB biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis. Transgenic Res 16:759–769.
Kumar S, Allen GC, Thompson WF (2006) Gene targeting in plants: Fingers on the move. Trends
Plant Sci 11:159–161.
Kumar S, Fladung M (2001) Gene stability in transgenic aspen (Populus). II. Molecular char-
acterization of variable expression of transgene in wild and hybrid aspen. Planta 213:
731–740.
Leple JC, Brasileiro ACM, Michel MF, Delmotte F, Jouanin L (1992) Transgenic poplars:
Expression of chimeric genes using four different constructs. Plant Cell Rep 11:137–141.
Li J, Brunner AM, Meilan R, Strauss SH (2008a) Matrix attachment region elements have
small and variable effects on transgene expression and stability in ﬁeld-grown Populus. Plant
Biotechnol J 6(9):887–896.
Li J, Brunner AM, Shevchenko O, Meilan R, Ma C, Skinner JS, Strauss SH (2007) Efﬁcient and
stable transgene suppression via RNAi in ﬁeld-grown poplars. Transgenic Res 17:679–694.
Li JY, Brunner AM, Meilan R, Strauss SH (2009) Stability of transgenes in trees: Expression of
two reporter genes in poplar over three ﬁeld seasons. Tree Physiol 29:299–312.
Lloyd A, Plaisier CL, Carroll D, Drews GN (2005) Targeted mutagenesis using zinc-ﬁnger
nucleases in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:2232–2237.
Lu S, Sun YH, Shi R, Clark C, Li L, Chiang VL (2005) Novel and mechanical stress-responsive
MicroRNAs in Populus trichocarpa that are absent from Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:2186–2203.
Ma C, Strauss SH, Meilan R (2004) Agrobacterium-Mediated Transformation of the Genome-
Sequenced Poplar Clone, Nisqually-1 (Populus trichocarpa). Plant Mol Biol Rep 22:311–312.
Marjanac G, De PA, Peck I, Jacobs A, De BS, Depicker A (2008) Evaluation of CRE-mediated
excision approaches in Arabidopsis thaliana. Transgenic Res 17:239–250.
Matsunaga E, Sugita K, Ebinuma H (2002) Asexual production of selectable marker-free trans-
genic woody plants, vegetatively propagated species. Mol Breed 10:95–106.
Matthew L (2004) RNAi for plant functional genomics. Comp Func Genomics 5:240–244.
McCown BH, McCabe DE, Russell DR, Robison DJ, Barton KA (1991) Stable transformation of
Populus and incorporation of pest resistance by electric discharge particule acceleration. Plant
Cell Rep 9:590–594.
Meilan R, Auerbach DJ, Ma C, DiFazio SP, Strauss SH (2002) Stability of herbicide resistance and
GUS expression in transgenic hybrid poplars (Populus sp.) during several years of ﬁeld trials
and vegetative propagation. HortScience 37:1–4.

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
131
Naylor M, Reeves J, Cooper JI, Edwards ML, Wang H (2005) Construction and properties of
a gene-silencing vector based on Poplar mosaic virus (genus Carlavirus). J Virol Meth 124:
27–36.
Nishiguchi M, Yoshida K, Mohri T, Igasaki T, Shinohara K (2006) An improved transformation
system for Lombardy poplar (Populus nigra var. italica). J For Res 11:175–180.
Nishimura T, Yokota E, Wada T, Shimmen T, Okada K (2003) An Arabidopsis ACT2 dominant-
negative mutation, which disturbs F-actin polymerization, reveals its distinctive function in root
development. Plant Cell Physiol 44:1131–1140.
Okumura S, Sawada M, Park Y, Hayashi T, Shimamura M, Takase H, Tomizawa KI (2006)
Transformation of poplar (Populus alba) plastids and expression of foreign proteins in tree
chloroplasts. Transgenic Res 15:637–646.
Ossowski S, Schwab R, Weigel D (2008) Gene silencing in plants using artiﬁcial microRNAs and
other small RNAs. Plant J 53:674–690.
Parinov S, Sundaresan V (2000) Functional genomics in Arabidopsis: Large-scale insertional
mutagenesis complements the genome sequencing project. Curr Opin Biotechnol 11:157–161.
Parsons TJ, Sinkar VP, Stettler RF, Nester EW, Gordon MP (1986) Transformation of poplar by
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Nat Biotech 4:533–536.
Pilate G, Guiney E, Holt K, Petit-Conil M, Lapierre C, Leple JC, Pollet B, Mila I, Webster EA,
Marstorp HG, Hopkins DW, Jouanin L, Boerjan W, Schuch W, Cornu D, Halpin C (2002)
Field and pulping performances of transgenic trees with altered lingiﬁcation. Nat Biotechnol
20:607–612.
Ratcliff F, Martin-Hernandez AM, Baulcombe DC (2001) Technical Advance. Tobacco rattle virus
as a vector for analysis of gene function by silencing. Plant J 25:237–245.
Ray A, Langer M (2002) Homologous recombination: Ends as the means. Trends Plant Sci 7:
435–440.
Redinbaugh MG, Louie R, Ngwira P, Edema R, Gordon DT, Bisaro DM (2001) Transmission
of viral RNA and DNA to maize kernels by vascular puncture inoculation. J Virol Meth 98:
135–143.
Robertson D (2004) VIGS vectors for gene silencing: Many targets, many tools. Annu Rev Plant
Biol 55:495–519.
Rohde A, Prinsen E, De RR, Engler G van Montagu M, Boerjan W (2002) PtABI3 impinges
on the growth and differentiation of embryonic leaves during bud set in poplar. Plant Cell
14:1885–1901.
Schob H, Kunz C, Meins F Jr. (1997) Silencing of transgenes introduced into leaves by agroin-
ﬁltration: A simple, rapid method for investigating sequence requirements for gene silencing.
Mol Gen Genet 256:581–585.
Schwab R, Ossowski S, Riester M, Warthmann N, Weigel D (2006) Highly speciﬁc gene silencing
by artiﬁcial microRNAs in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18:1121–1133.
Sessions A, Burke E, Presting G, Aux G, McElver J, Patton D, Dietrich B, Ho P, Bacwaden J,
Ko C, Clarke JD, Cotton D, Bullis D, Snell J, Miguel T, Hutchison D, Kimmerly B, Mitzel
T, Katagiri F, Glazebrook J, Law M, Goff SA (2002) A high-throughput Arabidopsis reverse
genetics system. Plant Cell 14:2985–2994.
Smith CM, Campbell MM (2004) Complete nucleotide sequence of the genomic RNA of poplar
mosaic virus (Genus Carlavirus). Arch Virol 149:1831–1841.
Smith NA, Surinder SP, Wand MB, Stoutjesdijk PA, Green AG, Waterhouse PM (2000) Total
silencing by intron-spliced hairpin RNAs. Nature 407:319–320.
Song J, Lu S, Chen ZZ, Lourenco R, Chiang VL (2006) Genetic transformation of Populus tri-
chocarpa genotype Nisqually-1: A functional genomic tool for woody plants. Plant Cell Physiol
47:1582–1589.
Sonti RV, Tissier AF, Wong D, Viret JF, Signer ER (1995) Activity of the yeast FLP recombinase
in Arabidopsis. Plant Mol Biol 28:1127–1132.
Springer PS (2000) Gene traps: Tools for plant development and genomics. Plant Cell 12:
1007–1020.

132
V.B. Busov et al.
Strauss SH (2003) Genetic technologies. Genomics, genetic engineering, and domestication of
crops. Science 300:61–62.
Strauss SH, Brunner AM, Ma C, Busov VB, Meilan R (2004) Ten lessons from 15 years of
transgenic Populus research. J For 77:455–465.
Strauss SH, DiFazio SP, Meilan R (2001) Genetically modiﬁed poplars in context. Forest Chron
77:271–279.
Szabados L, Kovacs I, Oberschall A, Abraham E, Kerekes I, Zsigmond L, Nagy R, Alvarado M,
Krasovskaja I, Gal M, Berente A, Redei GP, Haim AB, Koncz C (2002) Distribution of 1000
sequenced T-DNA tags in the Arabidopsis genome. Plant J 32:233–242.
Thakur AK, Sharma S, Srivastava DK (2005) Plant regeneration and genetic transformation studies
in petiole tissue of Himalayan poplar (Populus ciliata Wall.). Curr Sci 89:664–668.
Tovkach A, Zeevi V, Tzﬁra T (2009) A toolbox and procedural notes for characterizing novel zinc
ﬁnger nucleases for genome editing in plant cells. Plant J 57:747–757.
Tsai CJ, Hubscher SL (2004) Cryopreservation in Populus functional genomics. New Phytol
164:73–81.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez
D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J,
Chen GL, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Dejardin A, Depamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis S, Ehlting J,
Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger
B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones S,
Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C, Kirkpatrick R,
Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple JC, Locascio P, Lou Y, Lucas
S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O, Pereda V,
Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C, Ritland
K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui A, Sterky F, Terry
A, Tsai CJ, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas
C, Marra M, Sandberg G, van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D (2006) The genome of black cottonwood,
Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
Tzﬁra T, Jensen CS, Vainstein A, Altman A (1997) Transformation and regeneration of transgenic
aspen plants via shoot formation from stem explants. Physiol Plant 99:554–561.
van Beveren KS, Spokevicius AV, Tibbits J, Wang Q, Bossinger G (2006) Transformation of cam-
bial tissue in vivo provides an efﬁcient means for induced somatic sector analysis and gene
testing in stems of woody plant species. Func Plant Biol 33:629–638.
Veitia RA (2007) Exploring the molecular etiology of dominant-negative mutations. Plant Cell
19:3843–3851.
Vision TJ, Brown DG, Tanksley SD (2000) The origins of genomic duplications in Arabidopsis.
Science 290:2114–2117.
Wang G, Castiglione S, Chen Y, Li L, Han Y, Tian Y, Gabriel DW, Han Y, Mang K, Sala F
(1996) Poplar (Populus nigra L.) plants transformed with a Bacillus thuringiensis toxin gene:
Insecticidal activity and genomic analysis. Transgenic Res 5:289–301.
Warthmann N, Chen H, Ossowski S, Weigel D, Herve P (2008) Highly speciﬁc gene silencing by
artiﬁcial miRNAs in rice. PLoS ONE 3:e1829.
Weigel D, Ahn JH, Blazquez J, Borevitz CSK, Frankhauser C, Ferrandiz C, Kardailsky I, Neff
MM, Nguyen JT, Sato S, Wang Z, Xia Y, Dixon RA, Harrison MJ, Lab C, Yanofsky MF, Chory
J (2000) Activation tagging in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 122:1003–1013.
Weiste C, Iven T, Fischer U, Oñate-Sánchez L, Dröge-Laser W (2007) In planta ORFeome analy-
sis by large-scale over-expression of GATEWAY-compatible cDNA clones: Screening of ERF
transcription factors involved in abiotic stress defense. Plant J 52:382–390.
Wright DA, Townsend JA, Winfrey RJ Jr, Irwin PA, Rajagopal J, Lonosky PM, Hall BD, Jondle
MD, Voytas DF (2005) High-frequency homologous recombination in plants mediated by zinc-
ﬁnger nucleases. Plant J 44:693–705.

Transformation as a Tool for Genetic Analysis in Populus
133
Wu L, Joshi CP, Chiang VL (2000) A xylem-speciﬁc cellulose synthase gene from aspen (Populus
tremuloides) is responsive to mechanical stress. Plant J 22:495–502.
Yamamoto YY, Tsuhara Y, Gohda K, Suzuki K, Matsui M (2003) Gene trapping of the Arabidopsis
genome with a ﬁreﬂy luciferase reporter. Plant J 35:273–283.
Zamore PD, Tuschl T, Sharp PA, Bartel DP (2000) RNAi: Double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-
dependent cleavage of mRNA at 21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell 101:25–33.
Zelasco S, Ressegotti V, Confalonieri M, Carbonera D, Calligari P, Bonadei M, BisofﬁS, Yamada
K, Balestrazzi A (2007) Evaluation of MAT-vector system in white poplar (Populus alba L.)
and production of ipt marker-free transgenic plants by a single-step transformation. Plant Cell
Tiss Org Cult 91:61–72.

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
Nathaniel R. Street and Chung-Jui Tsai
Abstract As a model system, Populus offers the opportunity to study biological
questions pertinent to perennial growth habits such as lignocellulosic cell wall bio-
genesis and dormancy cycles. In the past years, much has been learnt about the
transcriptional control of such processes and there is an ever-growing resource of
publicly available transcriptomics data and EST sequences available.
More recently greater emphasis has been placed on the study of metabolomic
data and particularly in linking metabolic changes to both development and ecosys-
tem functioning. Populus represents an ideal model system in which genetic and
genomic studies can be conducted in a ecological key-stone species as well in a
commercially important forest tree crop.
To facilitate biological understanding a number of bioinformatics resources have
become available for Populus alongside greater integration of the species in cen-
tralized sequence data sources such as NCBI and Interpro. These developments are
rapidly advancing the ability to use Populus as a model system for the study of
developmental, ecological and comparative genomics questions.
Here we overview the current state of bioinformatics resources available for stud-
ies involving Populus as well as detailing the genetic material available to conduct
studies on.
Since the emergence of Populus as the model tree species, there has been a steady
and rapid development of resources enabling the use of new technologies and
approaches for answering biological questions. The Populus genomics resources
have been, and will continue to be, instrumental in addressing biological questions
pertinent to perennial growth habits (e.g., lignocellulosic cell wall biogenesis and
dormancy cycles). Increasingly, genomics tools are also being incorporated into eco-
logical investigations due to the keystone role of Populus species in many riparian
ecosystems.
N.R. Street (B)
Department of Plant physiology, Umeå Plant Science Centre, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå,
Sweden
e-mail: nathaniel.street@plantphys.umu.se
135
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_7,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

136
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
One strength of Populus as a model is our collective interest on not a single
species but the entire genus. As a result, genomics resources have been developed
from species covering a wide range of geographic distributions and phenotypic
diversity. Building on the rich natural variations within the genus, the growing
Populus genomics resources should facilitate investigations into mechanisms that
underscore cross-species variation (Harding et al., 2005; Street et al., 2006; Quesada
et al., 2008) with either economical or ecological signiﬁcance. Currently, the use
of microarrays has received the greatest attention. Transcriptomics studies have
provided insight into a range of developmental processes including senescence
(Andersson et al., 2004; Sjödin et al., 2008a), leaf development (Matsubara et al.,
2006), wood formation (Hertzberg et al., 2001; Schrader et al., 2004a; Moreau et al.,
2005) and seasonal dormancy (Schrader et al., 2004b; Druart et al., 2007; Ruttink
et al., 2007). There have also been studies examining abiotic stress response and
adaptation to climate change (Gupta et al., 2005; Taylor et al., 2005; Brosche et al.,
2005; Druart et al., 2006; Street et al., 2006; Bogeat-Triboulet et al., 2007; Fluch
et al., 2008), biotic stress response (Smith et al., 2004; Ralph et al., 2006; Miranda
et al., 2007; Rinaldi et al., 2007; Frost et al., 2008) and the effects of genetic manip-
ulation (Groover et al., 2006). Two experiments have been performed to proﬁle gene
expression in different tissue types (Qeusada et al., 2008; Sjödin et al., 2008b) with
the results being compared to those of similar experiments in Arabidopsis (for exam-
ple Schmid et al., 2005). These two experiments conﬁrm the general conclusion of
comparisons to Arabidopsis from other published microarray data; transcriptional
control in response to environmental perturbation, biotic infection or challenge, and
during tissue development is predominantly the same (i.e. evolutionarily conserved)
across species. However, the Populus experiments have resulted in some unique
results that could not easily have been obtained using Arabidopsis. Importantly,
they have provided insight into many commercially and functionally important traits
speciﬁc to perennial species, including winter dormancy.
1 The Populus Genome
The genome sequence of the female Populus trichocarpa “Nisqually-1” clone was
published in Tuskan et al. (2006). The genome was sequenced to ∼7.5 X depth
using a shotgun approach (Tuskan et al., 2006, see also Sections 1.1and 2.1 of this
volume) with assembly being supported through the use of both genetic and physical
maps. The assembled genome contains 450 Mb and the current annotation release
contains 45,555 gene model predictions. Just under 90% of predicted gene models
show homology to sequences hosted at NCBI, with ∼12% showing no homology
to genes in Arabidopsis thaliana, which raises the interesting possibility that these
may represent “tree-speciﬁc” genes. Additional gap-closing sequencing has been
completed and efforts are under-way for a second round of assembly, including
re-training of gene-calling algorithms (based on the ∼1% manually curated gene
models from release v 1.1) to improve the quality of the predicted gene models. It

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
137
is important to mention that a signiﬁcant fraction of the gene models in the v 1.1
release are incorrect, for example truncated, fused or in some cases true genes are
simply missing. This is not surprising since it is the ﬁrst version of the genome but
it has to be kept in mind when the genome is analysed.
1.1 Genome Databases and Browsers
The Joint Genomes Initiative (JGI) web resource (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/poplar)
includes a genome browser, BLAST and BLAT search tools, gene search tools,
ontology browsing and a public ftp site that hosts a range of data for download
(ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/JGI_data/Poplar). In addition to the JGI genome browser,
four other genome browsers are available, including the NCBI Populus Genome
Viewer and the Plant Genome Database’s Populus Genome Browser (described
below). The extensive GRAMENE resource (http://www.gramene.org) includes
a Populus genome browser, as does the Populus Integrative Genome Browser
(PopGenIE, www.popgenie.db.umu.se, Sjödin et al., 2008b). PopGenIE additionally
includes two dedicated synteny browsers to visualise conserved syntenic regions
between a number of model plant genomes. BLAST and BLAT search tools are
also provided as well as sequence and annotation extraction tools and an ftp site.
GRAMENE and PopGenIE both provide a BioMart service (www.biomart.org),
including
web
interfaces
for
the
rapid
downloading
of
bulk
annotation
information.
1.2 Expressed Sequence Tags
Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) collections were of ﬁrst and foremost importance
to the success of establishing Populus as a model system in the ﬁeld of for-
est genomics. Large-scale Populus EST collections have been a rich resource for
qualitative and quantitative assessment of gene expression, offering snap shots of
tissue- or developmental-speciﬁc gene expression (e.g., Sterky et al., 2004; Déjardin
et al., 2004; Kohler et al., 2003). EST collections from seven Populus species
were analyzed by Sterck et al. (2005) to provide evidence for a genome-wide
duplication event shared by Populus species, but not by Arabidopsis. ESTs have
been used for examining codon usage bias (Ingvarsson, 2007). Perhaps the most
important outcome of EST sequencing projects was the development of cDNA
microarrays, which subsequently provided a ﬁrst insight into many developmental
processes, including wood formation (e.g., Hertzberg et al., 2001). The cumulative
EST resources, including full-length cDNA collections (Nanjo et al., 2004; Ralph
et al., 2008) later played an instrumental role in gene-calling algorithm training and
annotation of the genome sequence (Tuskan et al., 2006). In the post-genomics era,
EST support (especially full-length cDNAs) remains an essential tool for assess-
ing the quality of computational gene model predictions. Segerman et al. (2007)

138
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
show that the ESTs sequences generated from different species/hybrids contained
in PopulusDB (www.populus.db.umu.se, Sterky et al., 2004) vary between species
by ∼2–3% on average. To date, there has not been an extensive examination of
whether there is any bias in sequence homology variation between genes to identify
those that may be under constrained or more rapid evolutionary change.
1.3 EST Databases
Two distinct types of databases containing Populus ESTs exist: those holding orig-
inal EST sequences and those collating ESTs from multiple sources for secondary
purposes, such as unigene prediction. The largest database with original EST col-
lections is the PopulusDB, which offers extensive search and query tools, including
“electronic Northern” analysis (i.e. display of EST frequency in the various tissue
sources). Table 1 details other signiﬁcant EST collections.
Table 1 Populus databases
Database
# ESTs
Website address
Key references
EST databases
Populusdb
121,495
www.populus.db.umu.se/
Sterky et al. (2004)
PoplarDB
20,005
http://mycor.nancy.inra.fr/
PoplarDB/
Kohler et al. (2003),
Brosche et al. (2005)
AspenDB
16,718
http://aspendb.uga.edu/
Ranjan et al. (2004)
Arborea
11,591
http://www.arborea.ulaval.
ca/research_results/est_
sequencing_in_poplar/
Plant Gene Database
399,405
http://www.plantgdb.org/
Dong et al. (2004)
DFCI Poplar Gene
Index
420,252
http://compbio.dfci.harvard.
edu/
TIGR Plant
Transcript
Assemblies
354,784
http://plantta.tigr.org/
Childs et al. (2007)
NCBI
425,599
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Transcription factors
DPTF
2,576
http://dptf.cbi.pku.edu.cn/
Zhu et al. (2007)
PTFD
2,723
http://poplartfdb.bio.uni-
potsdam.de/v2.0/
Riano-Pachon et al.
(2007)
DBD
1,957
www.transcriptionfactor.org
Wilson et al. (2008)
DATFAP
3,196
http://www.daimi.au.dk/cgi-
chili/datfap/frontdoor.py
miRNA
miRBase
234
http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/
Grifﬁths-Jones et al.
(2008)
miPlantBrowser
2,728
http://miserver.binf.ku.dk/
100/main.pl
Lindow et al. (2007)

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
139
In addition to these individual project databases, there are currently four major
resources containing collations of Populus ESTs. All four databases make avail-
able independent unigene predictions. NCBI serves as the ofﬁcial repository
for all ESTs and, at the time of writing, contains > 425,000 Populus ESTs.
NCBI use the raw sequences to construct per-species (or hybrid) UniGene pre-
dictions, which include qualitative tissue distribution information, visualisation
and annotation based on maximum homology to other sequences held at NCBI.
There is also an NCBI Populus trichocarpa genome viewer that displays align-
ments of ESTs and UniGenes, but only those originated from P. trichocarpa
are included at the present time. The Poplar Gene Index (PplGI), hosted by
DFCI (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/) uses EST sequences to construct cross-
species unigene predictions (termed Tentative Consensus sequences) and includes
an annotation pipeline providing EST and TC level annotation and assignment
within the Gene Ontology (GO) hierarchy (www.geneontology.org/, Ashburner
et al., 2000). The J. Craig Venter Institute (formerly the Institute for Genome
Research, TIGR) Plant Transcript Assemblies (http://plantta.tigr.org/) provides
per-species unigene predictions (termed Transcript Assembly) and annotation.
Finally, the Plant Genome Database project also houses a Populus database
(http://plantgdb.org/PtGDB/) that includes species-speciﬁc unigene predictions
(termed Putative Unique Transcripts) and annotation information. Its genome
browser displays aligned ESTs, PUTs and homolgous genes from other model
plants, JGI Populus gene models and in-house predicted splice variants. This cur-
rently represents the most extensive collated EST resource for Populus other than
NCBI and provides data in a highly-accessible format.
1.4 Transcription Factor Databases
Four databases (Table 1) contain predicted Populus transcription factors (TFs), with
the number ranging from 3196 (DATFAP) to 1957 (DBD). All of the databases
make predictions based on the genome sequence, except for DATFAP which utilises
consensus EST information and a range of secondary external database sources.
DPTF and DBD use hidden Markov Models (HMMs) of pfam (pfam.sanger.ac.uk/)
domains to assign predicted transcription factor category, with DBD also using
HMMs from the SUPERFAMILY (http://supfam.org/SUPERFAMILY/) database.
PTFD assigns predicted transcription factor class on the basis of domain presence.
DATFAP uses a largely annotation-based approach to identify transcription factors
and can therefore be considered as less stringent than the other three databases, and
likely to contain a higher number of false-positive entries.
1.5 Promoter Motif Analysis
The Diurnal project (http://diurnal.cgrb.oregonstate.edu/) contains a number of
interrelated databases to facilitate analysis and data mining of circadian/diurnal

140
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
gene expression in Arabidopsis, rice and Populus, using both experimental and
computational approaches. Experimentally-determined co-regulation patterns can
be explored with the DIURNAL database, and a set of co-regulated genes can
be used to query the ELEMENT database to identify over-represented pro-
moter motifs. The site also provides pre-fetched promoter sequences of various
lengths (500 bp–3 kb) from several sequenced plant species in downloadable
format for promoter analysis. Using the promoter sequence ﬁles available from
ELEMENT, a number of other motif ﬁnding tools can be used with minimal effort.
For example, CLOVER (http://zlab.bu.edu/clover/, Frith et al., 2004), TOUCAN
(http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/∼saerts/software/toucan.php, Aerts et al., 2005) and
the standalone tools that constitute various TOUCAN functions can easily be used.
1.6 Ortholog Prediction
A number of ortholog predictions are available, including those at the
Phytozome
resource
(http://www.phytozome.net),
the
PopArray
database
(http://popgenome.ag.utk.edu/mdb), the Orthomap database (http://orthomap.cgrb.
oregonstate.edu), the OrthologID database (http://nypg.bio.nyu.edu/orthologid),
and the GRAMENE resource (www.gramene.org). A related PlantTribes database
(http://fgp.bio.psu.edu/tribedb) offers objective classiﬁcation of plant gene families
using a graph-based clustering procedure (Wall et al., 2007). The database contains
genes from ﬁve sequenced plant genomes (Arabidopsis, rice, Populus, Medicago
and papaya), plus the TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies (unigene sets) derived
from ∼4 million sequences from >200 species. It is a powerful resource for com-
parative genomics analysis, and can also facilitate identiﬁcation of species-speciﬁc
gene families.
1.7 miRNA Databases
Two databases host information on Populus miRNAs (Table 1). miRBase
(http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/)
is
the
ofﬁcial
repository
for
experimentally-
conﬁrmed miRNA sequences. A second database, miPlantBrowser (http://
miserver.binf.ku.dk/100/), contains the miRNAs from miRBase in addition to com-
putationally predicted miRNAs and their predicted targets (Lindow et al., 2007).
Somewhat unfortunately, the target predictions provided at miPlantBrowser are
based on an older version (JGI v 1.0) of predicted gene models (although other
resources, e.g. PopARRAY provide cross-referencing tools to overcome this prob-
lem). Ultra-high throughput (e.g., 454/Solexa/SOLiD) sequencing technologies are
expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to identifying the total miRNA and sRNAs
population, as demonstrate by Barakat et al. (2007).

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
141
1.8 QTL Databases and Browsers
The
University
of
Tennessee
(UT)
Populus
CMap
resource
available
at
http://popgenome.ag.utk.edu/cmap/ includes QTL from two P. deltoides × P.
trichocarpa populations. QTL are displayed on a genetic map of the female
P. trichocarpa, mother of both populations. All QTL stored in this database are also
displayed in the JGI genome browser, allowing easy visualisation of QTL-candidate
gene co-location. There is a QTL browser available at the PopGenIE resource, which
provides the majority of published QTL from the P. deltoids × P. trichocarpa inbred
F2 population, Family 331 (Wu et al., 1998; Bradshaw et al., 1994) and also includes
all QTL available at the UT CMap resource. At PopGenIE, QTL are also displayed
in the genome browser. Both QTL resources enable generation of gene lists within
QTL conﬁdence intervals. There are additionally two Populus genetic maps avail-
able at the TreeGenes database (http://dendrome.ucdavis.edu/treegenes/, Wegrzyn
et al., 2008). Additional CMap resources are currently in development (G. Taylor,
M. Morgante, personal communication).
2 “Omics” Methods
Methods and resources now exist for the high throughput quantiﬁcation of
molecules at all levels of the central dogma. First among these was the
development of microarrays for the rapid quantiﬁcation of gene expression at a
global scale, initially using high-density EST arrays and later with whole-genome
oligo arrays. Microarrays are somewhat different to other high throughput measure-
ment techniques in that they require the development of a species (or perhaps genus)
speciﬁc measurement assay and these will therefore be discussed in greater detail.
2.1 Transcriptomics
Several microarray platforms are available for Populus, including spotted cDNA
arrays and in situ synthesized whole-genome oligo arrays (Table 2). While cDNA
arrays have been the predominant platform for Populus transcriptomic analysis
in the past decade, their use will likely diminish following the introduction of
whole-genome oligo arrays. All three major commercial oligo array platforms
(i.e., Affymetrix, Agilent and Nimblegen) are available for Populus. The transcrip-
tome coverage ranges from ∼43,600 predicted nuclear gene models in the Agilent
array to ∼56,000 in the Affymetrix and NimbleGen platforms. The Affymetrix and
NimbleGen platforms also contain probes derived from EST sequences, while the
Agilent and NimbleGen arrays include mitochondrial and chloroplast gene models
as well. A detailed comparison of the three platforms has been discussed elsewhere
(Tsai et al., 2009).

142
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
Table 2 Array platforms
Array
Type
Unique
probes
Web link
Agilent
oligo (60mer)
43,795
www.agilent.com
Nimblegen oligo (60mer)
65,911
www.nimblegen.com
Affymetrix oligo (25mer)
61,251
www.affymetrix.com/
UPSC-
POP2
cDNA
20,390
www.populus.db.umu.se/
PICME
cDNA
26,915
www.picme.at/
UBC
cDNA
15,496
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL5921
MTU
cDNA
6,705
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL6992
Cross-platform comparison of experimental data is likely to be challenging,
because of the inherent differences in probe design and properties among the var-
ious (whole-genome or EST) array platforms. Although not ideal, the PopArray
database provides tools to cross-reference between probe identiﬁers of the three
whole-genome microarrays and JGI gene model ID. Cross-species utility of these
arrays remains a concern due to the diversity of Populus species and hybrids used
in various research. Both Agilent and NimbleGen arrays are produced via maskless
in situ oligo synthesis, and therefore are more ﬂexible platforms to accommodate
future probe design change needs. The Agilent system, in particular, offers a user-
friendly eArray portal for custom editing of probes, and this may prove to be a
highly ﬂexible platform for working with a range of Populus species.
There is currently one Populus-speciﬁc public database (UPSC-BASE) host-
ing microarray data from cDNA microarrays produced at the Umeå Plant Science
Centre. The database can be accessed at http://www.upscbase.db.umu.se/ and is
detailed in Sjödin et al. (2006). Two other public databases contain Populus expres-
sion data, the ArrayExpress database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray-as/ae/) with
additional cDNA microarray data, and the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
repository (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). The GEO repository is by far the most
utilised resource for storing public microarray data, with nearly all Populus array
platforms represented.
Until recently, microarrays were most typically used to identify genes or gene
networks involved in the control of a developmental process or response to an exter-
nal stimulus. Experiments of this type typically concentrate on a single genotype,
and are powerful for identifying targets for functional characterisation using reverse
genetics. Microarrays have also been used to study gene expression between species
or genotypes (e.g., Harding et al., 2005), although data interpretation in these cases
may be complicated, especially if oligo arrays are used, due to potential sequence
divergence. There are now well established statistical methods for identifying dif-
ferentially expressed genes and/or co-regulation gene clusters between experimental
conditions or tissues, or along a temporal or spatial gradient of interest.

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
143
Advanced microarray analyses often include pathway mapping or testing for
functional enrichment within identiﬁed gene sets. In the case of Populus, how-
ever, the supporting resources or databases for such analyses are not yet as
well developed as for other model organisms. The gene ontology (GO) database
is the most extensive and supported hierarchy for the classiﬁcation of genes
on the basis of gene function (either experimentally conﬁrmed/identiﬁed or
through homology evidence). JGI provides assignment of predicted gene mod-
els to GO classes, with this information available for download on their ftp site.
http://www.geneontology.org/GO.evidence.shtmlOthers have taken the approach of
assigning Populus genes to GO classes on the basis of homology to Arabidopsis
genes, as Arabidopsis has by far the most advanced GO annotation of any
plant. This approach has the obvious limitation in that it assumes the conserva-
tion of gene function and is dependent on the accuracy of ortholog assignment.
A Populus GO structure obtained by this approach can be queried using the GO
TermFinder tool at the PopGenIE resource. Finally the BLAST2GO web resource
(http://www.blast2go.de/) provides GO assignment of predicted gene models and
ESTs using their annotation pipeline. The PopGenIE resource additionally provides
a tool (CatFisher) for identifying over-represented KEGG or KOG categories and
InterPro domains. The same tool can be used to test for over-representation of
transcription factor families or miRNA family target sites within a gene list.
Comparison across multiple experiments for individual genes, gene families or
genes within a regulon can also provide valuable insight. The eFP browser (Winter
et al., 2007), which displays gene expression data as easily-interpretable pictographs
is a highly accessible route to utilising microarray data. The system requires no
end-user ability to handle extensive datasets or to perform often complex analysis.
Two eFP browsers are now available for Populus. The ﬁrst displays results from
whole-genome
Affymetrix
expression
arrays
and
is
hosted
at
http://bar.
utoronto.ca/efppop. The second displays dual-colour ratio results from cDNA
microarrays and is part of the PopGenIE resource. Such pictographs are a power-
ful and highly-intuitive means of displaying cross-experiment gene expression data
for the inference of gene function. Both Populus eFP browsers offer Arabidopsis
ortholog links for easy inspection of the conservation of expression patterns. In addi-
tion to the eFP browser, the PopGenIE resource includes visualisation of expression
data as expression proﬁle plots and the generation of electronic Northerns.
2.2 High Throughput Sequencing
Massively parallel sequencing offers great potential for re-sequencing projects, gene
expression proﬁling and miRNA/sRNA proﬁling. The use of re-sequencing data will
prove particularly important for discovering functionally-relevant polymorphisms
that show evidence of selection. Sequencing can be performed using genomic DNA
or cDNA. Sequencing methods can be further adapted to understand the role of

144
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
methylation (Taylor et al., 2007) and nucleosome assembly (Schones et al., 2008)
in the control of gene expression. As the cost of high-throughput sequencing con-
tinues to fall, genomic comparisons between multiple species or clones has become
possible and this will prove to be an important future source of data for uncovering
genetic mechanisms underlying natural variation.
New sequence capture technology couples high-density oligo arrays with mas-
sively parallel sequencing to target and sequence selected regions of the genome
with unprecedented enrichment, coverage and accuracy (Albert et al., 2007). The
technology can capture either contiguous or dispersed regions in one single experi-
ment, producing sequence coverage up to the megabase range. For species as diverse
as Populus, this offers a powerful and cost-effective alternative to re-sequencing.
2.3 Metabolomics and Proteomics
Methods for quantifying metabolites and proteins and for sequencing DNA are
species independent, but subsequently rely heavily on the quality of database
resources for identiﬁcation and annotation of measured compounds. In the case of
proteomics, this is relatively (or comparatively) simple as the task is to determine
the amino acid sequence represented by a set of peptide fragments. The recon-
structed sequence can then be identiﬁed by comparison to the genome sequence.
There are currently few examples of proteomics analysis in Populus but key publi-
cations include Renaut et al., (2004), Juan et al. (2006), Ferreira et al., (2006) and
particularly Plomion et al. (2006).
In the case of metabolomics, the task is far more complex as the ability to iden-
tify a compound is entirely dependent on its inclusion in a reference database, such
as the NIST mass spectral library, or the availability of an authentic standard for
veriﬁcation. Populus species, in particular, produce a staggering diversity of sec-
ondary metabolites (Tsai et al., 2006), many of which are species-speciﬁc and
poorly represented in public chemical databases. This challenge is also platform-
speciﬁc. For instance, compound matching against a public database is applicable
largely for GC-MS-based approaches where retention index and mass spectral char-
acteristics are less variable between laboratories. The chromatographic behaviour
and associated characteristics of compounds separated by LC-MS-based approaches
are less reproducible between instruments, making in-house reference library con-
struction an essential requirement in LC-MS-based metabolomics efforts. Overall,
metabolomics data processing pipelines, such as compound matching algorithms,
data analysis and visualisation, have not been advanced as much as those of other
omics to handle the large volumes of data generated from proﬁling analyses.
To date, there is no public database of Populus metabolites, although a number
of groups have developed their own in-house databases that may become public
in the near future (T. Moritz, T. Tschaplinski, S. Harding, W. Boerjan, personal
communication).
Metabolomics is rapidly gaining interest as it represents the terminal link
between genotype and environment/community, and the metabolite snapshot is a

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
145
key determinant of physiological state and plant-plant and plant-pathogen/herbivore
interactions. Morreel et al. (2006) used metabolite (ﬂavonoid) proﬁling in an inter-
speciﬁc mapping population to identify signiﬁcant metabolite QTL (mQTL) and
were able to map candidate genes associated with ﬂavonoid regulation. The avail-
ability of a public metabolite repository and improved metabolomics resources will
be essential to the success of the systems biology approach, which will rely heavily
on meta-analysis of public data. Systems biology will also require the integrated
analysis of data from all omics ﬁeld. Bylesjö et al. (2008) provide a ﬁrst example of
such an integrated analysis approach.
3 Germplasm
Although a large number of phenotypically diverse Populus species and hybrids
are widely used by researchers to answer a range of biological questions across
multiple disciplines, no central germplasm resource has yet been established. As
such, obtaining plant material for experiment establishment requires personal con-
tact with those holding germplasm of interest. One key difference when compared
to many other model systems is the unsuitability of Populus seeds as a propagation
method. From a practical point of view, this is because Populus seeds do not store
and require effectively immediate germination. From an experimental point of view,
the heterozygous, out-crossing nature of Populus means that seedling-derived mate-
rials would be genetically heterozygous and therefore inherently variable. Luckily,
the majority of Populus species are easily propagated as hardwood (or in the case of
aspens, root) cuttings, and can be regenerated from tissue culture. The ease of propa-
gation combined with the strikingly rapid plant growth in a glasshouse or controlled
environment make rapid establishment of large, replicated experiments highly fea-
sible. However, clonal germplasm distribution is more complicated, as cutting
material for propagation requires storage in carefully controlled, chilled and humid
conditions to maintain viability. Long-term maintenance of primary germplasm col-
lections in ﬁeld or common garden settings remains a challenge (see discussion
in Tsai and Hubscher, 2004). Cryopreservation-based germplasm preservation has
been reported for Populus as a potentially long-term storage option (Jokipii, 2004;
Tsai and Hubscher, 2004). However, it also requires signiﬁcant upfront investment.
Although no germplasm stock centre resource exists, there are a number of
key groups around the world who hold their own genetic stocks that may be
available upon request. The majority of these collections were developed to sup-
ply breeding programs or for the production of QTL mapping populations. More
recently, there has been a shift towards developing and extending collections of
natural clones across a species range for association studies. A number of these
are detailed in Table 3 and we recommend contacting the authors of relevant col-
lections/publications for availability of material of interest. These collections of
material represent a fascinating diversity of phenotypes and include clones with

146
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
Table 3 Germplasm contacts
Material
Contact name
Contact institution
Email addresss
EU
P. nigra, P. trichocarpa, P. deltoids,
hybrids and breeding material. F1 TD.
Mark Villar
INRA Orleans
marc.villar@orleans.inra.fr
F2 TD, access to UK breeding material
incl. IEA collection.
Gail Taylor
University of Southamtpon
g.taylor@soton.ac.uk
P. nigra and breeding material.
Marijke Steenackers
Ministry of the Flemish
Community Institute for
Forestry and Game Management
marijke.steenackers@lin.vlaanderen.be
F1 DN and DT
Wout Boerjan
VIB
wout.boerjan@psb.ugent.be
P. alba, P. nigra inc. Intra-speciﬁc F1 and
F2 populations. Contact advice for
commercial material.
Maurizio Sabatti
University of Tuscia
sabatti@unitus.it
P. tremula
Stefan Jansson
Umeå Plant Science Centre
stefan.jansson@plantphys.umu.se
North America
P. balsamifera
William Schroeder
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
schroederb@agr.gc.ca
P. fremontii x P. angustifolia
Thomas Whitham
Northern Arizona University
thomas.whitham@nau.edu
P. trichorcapa, P. maximowiczii, TD and
DM hybrids
Brian Stanton
Greenwood Resources
info@gwrglobal.com
P. deltoides, DM hybrids
Bill Berguson
Natural Resources Research
Institute
http://www.nrri.umn.edu/
P.deltoides, P. nigra and P. maximowiczii
hybrids
Don
Riemenschneider
USDA Forest Service
driemenschneider@fs.fed.us
P. tremuloides
Karen Mock
Utah State University
karen. mock@usu.edu
Activation tagged lines
Steve Strauss
Oregon State University
steve.strauss@oregonstate.edu
Enhancer and gene-trap collection
Andrew Groover
USDA Forest Service
agroover@fs.fed.us
Activation tagged lines
Sharon Regon
Queens University
regans@biology.queensu.ca

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
147
highly variable apical dormancy, rooting ability, root architecture, cold tolerance,
secondary chemistry and associated insect herbivores, volatile compound emissions,
abiotic and biotic stress tolerance, as well as P. trichocarpa clones that have per-
manently open stomata and altered ABA insensitivity. The collections of material
cover both intra- and inter-species variation, and represent a rich resource for com-
parative genomics and association genetics research. Another important germplasm
resource is the collections of transgenic mutants, especially those derived from
various insertional mutagenesis approaches (Busov et al., 2005).
Unlike the prevalence of standard, reference genotypes used by the Arabidopsis
community, there is no clear standard genotype or even species used by the Populus
community. Most typically, individual researchers select the Populus species, hybrid
or clone most suited to answering the biological question at hand, or most suited to
a particular experimental system. As tree improvement is often the ultimate goal
in forest genomics and biotechnology research, it is not surprising that hybrids
derived from breeding programs are among the most widely used experimental
species. Two hybrid clones have been particularly commonly used for transforma-
tion studies (P. tremula × P. tremuloides “T89” and P. tremula × P. alba “INRA 717
1-B”). Potential epistatic interactions are of concern and may complicate the results,
although the extent will likely vary depending on the biological process/pathway
under investigation.
4 Future Directions
Considerable resources have now been developed by the Populus community.
However signiﬁcant challenges remain to ensure that maximal beneﬁt can be made
of Populus as a model system. This is particularly true for the use of genomics
data in systems biology and ecological studies. The Populus community currently
lacks a Model Organism Database (MOD). Such a MOD would serve to improve
community coordination as well as offering a single-access portal to the range of
genetic and omics data available for Populus. The establishment of such a resource
will be essential as meta-analysis approaches (such as those employed within a sys-
tems biology context) become increasingly important. Many best-practice examples
exist for other model systems and the Populus community can use these to guide the
development of a central repository and access resource.
Although a signiﬁcant genomics resource has already been established using
cDNA arrays, future use of whole-genome oligo arrays that can speciﬁcally proﬁle
members of gene families, and in some cases differentiate paralogs, will become
an important resource for reﬁning gene annotations and assigning genes within
a robust Populus-speciﬁc Gene Ontology and Plant Ontology context. The use of
transcriptomics data for such purposes requires the establishment of efﬁcient data
submission, curation and automated analysis pipelines. A considerable gap remains
in developing comparable bioinformatics tools for metabolomics data mining and
their integration with transcriptomics data. Such efforts, coupled with increasingly

148
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
sophisticated phenotyping approaches at cellular, tissue or whole-plant levels will be
an essential requirement for meaningful functional interpretation of systems biology
analyses.
Populus offers great potential for extending genomics beyond the single tree to
the population and ecosystem level: Although much has been learnt at the level
of the individual and the ecology of insect-plant interactions, understanding of the
interaction between genomes within a community is still extremely limited (Zheng
and Dicke, 2008; Whitham et al., 2008), but is a fascinating area of research that
will begin to form functional connections between these fairly distant biological
levels. High throughput proﬁling techniques can be used to proﬁle individuals within
and between natural populations in order to identify metabolites, genes or regulons
associated with the ecological trait of interest, such as insect herbivore preference.
Combining the use of next generation sequencing methods (Wheat, 2008), differ-
ential proﬁling analysis, regulatory network (co-correlation) analysis and linkage or
linkage disequilibrium mapping has great potential to uncover the functional mech-
anisms underlying adaptive natural trait variation and evolutionary interactions that
serve as selective pressures inﬂuencing speciation.
There are many examples of important interactions that involve complex links
between populations of genomes of different species, including mycorrhiza (Martin
et al., 2008), endophyte association and plant-insect interactions. For example Evans
et al. (2008) showed that genetic interactions between a specialist mite and their host
hybrid P. angustifolia × P. fremontii trees drive population structure, local adapta-
tion, and host race formation. Extension of such ﬁndings to include genetic mapping
and omics proﬁling offers the potential of uncovering genes in trees that are driv-
ing speciation and population structure at higher trophic levels. Populus is ideally
suited as a model system for studying such interactions. There will be many practical
challenges along the way, especially as two currently disparate ﬁelds (ecology and
genomics) discover the need to store data in a way that allows cross-communication
and integration (Jones et al., 2006).
References
Aerts S, Van Loo P, Thijs G, Mayer H, de Martin R, Moreau Y, de Moor B (2005) TOUCAN 2:
The all-inclusive open source workbench for regulatory sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res
33:W393–W396, doi: 10.1093/nar/gki354.
Albert TJ, Molla MN, Muzny DM, Nazareth L, Wheeler D, Song X, Richmond TA, Middle CM,
Rodesch MJ, Packard CJ, Weinstock GM, Gibbs RA (2007) Direct selection of human genomic
loci by microarray hybridization. Nat Meth 4:903–905.
Andersson A, Keskitalo J, Sjödin A, Bhalerao R, Sterky F, Wissel K, Tandre K, Aspeborg H,
Moyle R, Ohmiya Y, Bhalerao R, Brunner A, Gustafsson P, Karlsson J, Lundeberg J, Nilsson
O, Sandberg G, Strauss S, Sundberg B, Uhlen M, Jansson S, Nilsson P (2004) A transcriptional
timetable of autumn senescence. Genome Biol 5:R24.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight
SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson
JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G (2000) Gene ontology: Tool for the uniﬁcation of
biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 25:25–29.

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
149
Barakat A, Wall KP, Diloretto S, Depamphilis CW, Carlson JE (2007) Conservation and divergence
of microRNAs in Populus. BMC Genomics 8:481.
Bogeat-Triboulot MB, Brosche M, Renaut J, Jouve L, Le Thiec D, Fayyaz P, Vinocur B, Witters E,
Laukens K, Teichmann T, Altman A, Hausman JF, Polle A, Kangasjarvi J, Dreyer E (2007)
Gradual soil water depletion results in reversible changes of gene expression, protein pro-
ﬁles, ecophysiology, and growth performance in Populus euphratica, a poplar growing in arid
regions. Plant Physiol 143:876–892.
Bradshaw HD, Villar M, Watson BD, Otto KG, Stewart S, Stettler RF (1994) Molecular-genetics
of growth and development in Populus. 3. A genetic-linkage map of a hybrid Poplar composed
of Rﬂp, Sts, and Rapd markers. Theor Appl Genet 89:167–178.
Brosche M, Vinocur B, Alatalo E, Lamminmaki A, Teichmann T, Ottow E, Djilianov D, Aﬁf D,
Marie A, Polle A, Dreyer E, Rudd S, Paulin L, Auvinen P, Kangasjarvi J (2005) Gene expres-
sion and metabolite proﬁling of Populus euphratica growing in the Negev desert. Genome Biol
6:R101+.
Busov VB, Brunner AM, Meilan R, Filichkin S, Ganio L, Gandhi S, Strauss SH (2005) Genetic
transformation: A powerful tool for dissection of adaptive traits in trees. New Phytol 167:
9–18.
Bylesjo M, Eriksson D, Kusano M, Moritz T, Trygg J (2008) Data integration in plant biology:
The O2PLS method for combined modelling of transcript and metabolite data. Plant J, doi:
10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03293.x.
Childs K, Hamilton L, John P, Zhu W, Ly E, Cheung F, Wu H, Rabinowicz P, Town D, Chris
D, Buell R, Chan C, Agnes P (2007) The TIGR plant transcript assemblies database. Nucleic
Acids Res 35:D846–D851.
Déjardin A, Leplé JC, Lesage-Descauses MC, Costa G, Pilate G (2004) Expressed sequence tags
from poplar wood tissues – a comparative analysis from multiple libraries. Plant Biol 6:55–64.
Dong Q, Schlueter SD, Brendel V (2004) PlantGDB, plant genome database and analysis tools.
Nucleic Acids Res 32:D354–D359.
Druart N, Johansson A, Baba K, Schrader J, Sjödin A, Bhalerao RR, Resman L, Trygg J, Moritz T,
Bhalerao RP (2007) Environmental and hormonal regulation of the activity/dormancy cycle
in the cambial meristem involves stage-speciﬁc modulation of transcriptional and metabolic
networks. Plant J 50:557–573.
Druart N, Buey RM, Gafford BG, Sjödin A, Bhalerao R, Hurry V (2006) Molecular targets of
elevated [CO2] in leaves and stems of Populus deltoides: Implications for future tree growth
and carbon sequestration. Func Plant Biol 33:121–131.
Evans LMM, Allan GJJ, Shuster SMM, Woolbright SAA, Whitham TGG (2008) Tree hybridiza-
tion and genotypic variation drive cryptic speciation of a specialist mite herbivore. Evolution,
doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00497.x.
Ferreira S, Hjerno K, Larsen M, Wingsle G, Larsen P, Fey S, Roepstorff P, Salome M
(2006) Proteome Proﬁling of Populus euphratica Oliv. upon heat stress. Ann Bot 98:
361–377.
Fluch S, Olmo C, Tauber S, Stierschneider M, Kopecky D, Reichenauer T, Matusíková I (2008)
Transcriptomic changes in wind-exposed poplar leaves are dependent on developmental stage.
Planta, doi: 10.1007/s00425-008-0777-2.
Frith MC, Fu Y, Yu L, Chen J, Hansen U, Weng Z (2004) Detection of functional DNA motifs via
statistical over-representation. Nucleic Acids Res 32:1372–1381.
Frost CJ, Mescher MC, Dervinis C, Davis JM, Carlson JE, De Moraes CM (2008) Priming defense
genes and metabolites in hybrid poplar by the green leaf volatile cis-3-hexenyl acetate. New
Phytol 9999 180(3):722–734.
Grifﬁths-Jones S, Saini HK, van Dongen S, Enright AJ (2008) miRBase: Tools for microRNA
genomics. Nucl Acids Res 36(Database edition):D140–D144.
Groover A, Mansﬁeld S, DiFazio S, Dupper G, Fontana J, Millar R, Wang Y (2006) The Populus
homeobox gene ARBORKNOX1 reveals overlapping mechanisms regulating the shoot apical
meristem and the vascular cambium. Plant Mol Biol 61:917–932.

150
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
Gupta P, Duplessis S, White H, Karnosky DF, Martin F, Podila GK (2005) Gene expression pat-
terns of trembling aspen trees following long-term exposure to interacting elevated CO2 and
tropospheric O3. New Phytol 167:129–142.
Harding SA, Jiang H, Jeong ML, Casado FL, Lin HW, Tsai CJ (2005) Functional genomics analy-
sis of foliar condensed tannin and phenolic glycoside regulation in natural cottonwood hybrids.
Tree Physiol 25:1475–1486.
Hertzberg M, Aspeborg H, Schrader J, Andersson A, Erlandsson R, Blomqvist K, Bhalerao R,
Uhlen M, Teeri TT, Lundeberg J, Sundberg B, Nilsson P, Sandberg G (2001) A transcriptional
roadmap to wood formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 98:14732–14737.
Ingvarsson PK (2007) Gene expression and protein length inﬂuence codon usage and rates of
sequence evolution in Populus tremula. Mol Biol Evol 24:836–844.
Jokipii S (2004) A cryopreservation method maintaining the genetic ﬁdelity of a model forest tree,
Populus tremula L. × Populus tremuloides Michx. Plant Sci 166:799–806.
Jones MB, Schildhauer MP, Reichman OJ, Bowers S (2006) The new bioinformatics: Integrating
ecological data from the gene to the biosphere. Ann Rev Ecol Evol Syst 37:519–544.
Juan D, Hong-Li X, De-Qiang Z, Xin-Qiang H, Min-Jie W, Ying-Zhang L, Ke-Ming C, Meng-
Zhu L (2006) Regeneration of the secondary vascular system in poplar as a novel system to
investigate gene expression by a proteomic approach. Proteomics 6:881–895.
Kohler A, Delaruelle C, Martin D, Encelot N, Martin F (2003) The poplar root transcriptome:
Analysis of 7000 expressed sequence tags. FEBS Lett 542:37–41.
Lindow M, Jacobsen A, Nygaard S, Mang Y, Krogh A (2007) Intragenomic matching reveals a
huge potential for miRNA-mediated regulation in plants. PLoS Comput Biol 3:e238.
Martin F, Aerts A, Ahren D, Brun A, Danchin EGJ, Duchaussoy F, Gibon J, Kohler A, Lindquist E,
Pereda V, Salamov A, Shapiro HJ, Wuyts J, Blaudez D, Buee M, Brokstein P, Canback B,
Cohen D, Courty PE, Coutinho PM, Delaruelle C, Detter JC, Deveau A, DiFazio S, Duplessis S,
Fraissinet-Tachet L, Lucic E, Frey-Klett P, Fourrey C, Feussner I, Gay G, Grimwood J,
Hoegger PJ, Jain P, Kilaru S, Labbe J, Lin YC, Legue V, Le Tacon F, Marmeisse R, Melayah D,
Montanini B, Muratet M, Nehls U, Niculita-Hirzel H, Secq OMP, Peter M, Quesneville H,
Rajashekar B, Reich M, Rouhier N, Schmutz J, Yin T, Chalot M, Henrissat B, Kues U, Lucas S,
van de Peer Y, Podila GK, Polle A, Pukkila PJ, Richardson PM, Rouze P, Sanders IR, Stajich JE,
Tunlid A, Tuskan G, Grigoriev IV (2008) The genome of Laccaria bicolor provides insights
into mycorrhizal symbiosis. Nature 452:88–92.
Matsubara S, Hurry V, Druart N, Benedict C, Janzik I, Chavarría-Krauser A, Walter A, Schurr U
(2006) Nocturnal changes in leaf growth of Populus deltoides are controlled by cytoplasmic
growth. Planta 223:1315–1328.
Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R, White R, Heath MC, Bohlmann J, Constabel CP (2007) The
transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus trichocarpa x P. deltoides) to infection by
Melampsora medusae leaf rust involves induction of ﬂavonoid pathway genes leading to the
accumulation of proanthocyanidins. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 20:816–831.
Moreau C, Aksenov N, Lorenzo M, Segerman B, Funk C, Nilsson P, Jansson S, Tuominen H (2005)
A genomic approach to investigate developmental cell death in woody tissues of Populus trees.
Genome Biol 6:R34.
Morreel K, Goeminne G, Storme V, Sterck L, Ralph J, Coppieters W, Breyne P, Steenackers M,
Georges M, Messens E, Boerjan W (2006) Genetical metabolomics of ﬂavonoid biosynthesis
in Populus: A case study. Plant J 47:224–237.
Nanjo T, Futamura N, Nishiguchi M, Igasaki T, Shinozaki K, Shinohara K (2004) Characterization
of full-length enriched expressed sequence tags of stress-treated poplar leaves. Plant Cell
Physiol 45:1738–1748.
Plomion C, Lalanne C, Claverol S, Meddour H, Kohler A, Bogeat-Triboulot MB, Barre A, Le
Provost G, Dumazet H, Jacob D, Bastien C, Dreyer E, de Daruvar A, Guehl JM, Schmitter JM,
Martin F, Bonneu M (2006) Mapping the proteome of poplar and application to the discovery
of drought-stress responsive proteins. Proteomics 6:6509–6527.
Quesada T, Li Z, Dervinis C, Li Y, Bocock PN, Tuskan GA, Casella G, Davis JM, Kirst M (2008)
Comparative analysis of the transcriptomes of Populus trichocarpa and Arabidopsis thaliana

Populus Resources and Bioinformatics
151
suggests extensive evolution of gene expression regulation in angiosperms. New Phytol, doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02586.x.
Ralph S, Oddy C, Cooper D, Yueh H, Jancsik S, Kolosova N, Philippe RN, Aeschliman D, White R,
Huber D, Ritland CE, Benoit F, Rigby T, Nantel A, Butterﬁeld YSN, Kirkpatrick R, Chun E,
Liu J, Palmquist D, Wynhoven B, Stott J, Yang G, Barber S, Holt RA, Siddiqui A, Jones
SJM, Marra MA, Ellis BE, Douglas CJ, Ritland K, Bohlmann J (2006) Genomics of hybrid
poplar (Populus trichocarpa x deltoides) interacting with forest tent caterpillars (Malacosoma
disstria): Normalized and full-length cDNA libraries, expressed sequence tags, and a cDNA
microarray for the study of insect-induced defences in poplar. Mol Ecol 15:1275–1297.
Ralph S, Oddy C, Cooper D, Yueh H, Jancsik S, Kolosova N, Philippe RN, Aeschliman D, White
R, Huber D, Ritland CE, Benoit F, Rigby T, Nantel A, Butterﬁeld YS, Kirkpatrick R, Chun E,
Liu J, Palmquist D, Wynhoven B, Stott J, Yang G, Barber S, Holt RA, Siddiqui A, Jones SJ,
Marra MA, Ellis BE, Douglas CJ, Ritland K, Bohlmann J (2008) Genomics of hybrid poplar
(Populus trichocarpax deltoides) interacting with forest tent caterpillars (Malacosoma disstria):
Normalized and full-length cDNA libraries, expressed sequence tags, and a cDNA microarray
for the study of insect-induced defences in poplar. Mol Ecol 15:1275–1297.
Ranjan P, Kao Y, Jiang H, Joshi CP, Harding SA, Tsai C (2004) Suppression subtractive
hybridization-mediated transcriptome analysis from multiple tissues of aspen (Populus tremu-
loides) altered in phenylpropanoid metabolism. Planta 219:694–704.
Renaut J, Lutts S, Hoffmann L, Hausman JF (2004) Responses of poplar to chilling temperatures:
Proteomic and physiological aspects. Plant Biol 6:81–90.
Riano-Pachon DM, Ruzicic S, Dreyer I, Mueller-Roeber B (2007) PlnTFDB: An integrative plant
transcription factor database. BMC Bioinformatics 8:42.
Rinaldi C, Kohler A, Frey P, Duchaussoy F, Ningre N, Couloux A, Wincker P, Le Thiec D,
Fluch S, Martin F, Duplessis S (2007) Transcript Proﬁling of Poplar Leaves upon Infection
with Compatible and Incompatible Strains of the Foliar Rust Melampsora larici-populina. Plant
Physiol 144:347–366.
Ruttink T, Arend M, Morreel K, Storme V, Rombauts S, Fromm J, Bhalerao RPP, Boerjan W,
Rohde A (2007) A Molecular Timetable for Apical Bud Formation and Dormancy Induction in
Poplar. Plant Cell 19:2370–2390.
Schmid M, Davison TS, Henz SR, Pape UJ, Demar M, Vingron M, Schclkopf B, Weigel D,
Lohmann JU (2005) A gene expression map of Arabidopsis thaliana development. Nat Genet
37:501–506.
Schones DE, Cui K, Cuddapah S, Roh T, Barski A, Wang Z, Wei G, Zhao K (2008) Dynamic
regulation of nucleosome positioning in the human genome. Cell 132:887–898.
Schrader J, Moyle R, Bhalerao R, Hertzberg M, Lundeberg J, Nilsson P, Bhalerao RP (2004a)
Cambial meristem dormancy in trees involves extensive remodelling of the transcriptome. Plant
J 40:173–187.
Schrader J, Nilsson J, Mellerowicz E, Berglund A, Nilsson P, Hertzberg M, Sandberg G (2004b)
A high-resolution transcript proﬁle across the wood-forming meristem of Poplar identiﬁes
potential regulators of Cambial stem cell identity. Plant Cell 16:2278–2292.
Segerman B, Jansson S, Karlsson J (2007) Characterization of genes with tissue-speciﬁc differen-
tial expression patterns in Populus. Tree Genet Genomes 3:351–362.
Sjödin A, Bylesjo M, Skogstrom O, Eriksson D, Nilsson P, Ryden P, Jansson S, Karlsson J (2006)
UPSC-BASE Populus transcriptomics online. Plant J 48:806–817.
Sjödin A, Wissel K, Bylesjo M, Trygg J, Jansson S (2008a) Global expression proﬁling in leaves
of free-growing aspen. BMC Plant Biol 8:61.
Sjödin A, Street NR, Sandberg G, Gustafsson P, Jansson S (2009) The populus genome inte-
grative explorer (popgenie): A new resource for exploring the populus genome. New Phytol
182(4):1013–1025.
Smith CM, Buey MR, Karlsson J, Campbell MM (2004) The response of the poplar transcriptome
to wounding and subsequent infection by a viral pathogen. New Phytol 164:123–136.
Sterck L, Rombauts S, Jansson S, Sterky F, Rouze P, Van de Peer Y (2005) EST data suggest that
poplar is an ancient polyploid. New Phytol 167:165–170.

152
N.R. Street and C.-J. Tsai
Sterky F, Bhalerao RR, Unneberg P, Segerman B, Nilsson P, Brunner AM, Campaa CL, Lindvall JJ,
Tandre K, Strauss SH, Sundberg B, Gustafsson P, Uhlen M, Bhalerao RP, Nilsson O, Sandberg
G, Karlsson J, Lundeberg J, Jansson S (2004) A Populus EST resource for plant functional
genomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:13951–13956.
Street NR, Skogstrom O, Sjödin A, Tucker J, Acosta MR, Nilsson P, Jansson S, Taylor G (2006)
The genetics and genomics of the drought response in Populus. Plant J 48:321–341.
Taylor G, Street NR, Tricker PJ, Sjödin A, Graham L, Skogstrom O, Calfapietra C, Mugnozza
GS, Jansson S (2005) The transcriptome of Populus in elevated CO2. New Phytol 167:
143–154.
Taylor KH, Kramer RS, Davis WJ, Guo J, Duff DJ, Xu D, Caldwell CW, Shi H (2007) Ultradeep
bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of DNA methylation patterns in multiple gene promoters by 454
sequencing. Cancer Res 67:8511–8518.
Tsai C-J, Harding SA, Tschaplinski TJ, Lindroth RL, Yuan Y (2006) Genome-wide analysis of
the structural genes regulating defense phenylpropanoid metabolism in Populus. New Phytol
172:47–62.
Tsai C, Hubscher SL (2004) Cryopreservation in Populus functional genomics. New Phytol
164:73–81.
Tsai CJ, Ranjan P, DiFazio SP, Tuskan GA, Johnson V, Joshi CP (2009) Poplar genome microar-
rays. In: Joshi CP, DiFazio SP (eds) Genetics, Genomics and Breeding of Crop Plants: Poplar.
Science Publishers, Enﬁeld, New Hampshire.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez D,
Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman
J, Chen GL, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R,
Davis J, Degroeve S, Dejardin A, Depamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis
S, Ehlting J, Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L,
Hamberger B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi
N, Jones S, Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C,
Kirkpatrick R, Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple JC, Locascio
P, Lou Y, Lucas S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K,
Nilsson O, Pereda V, Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson
P, Rinaldi C, Ritland K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H,
Siddiqui A, Sterky F, Terry A, Tsai CJ, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler
S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D (2006) The
genome of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
Wall KP, Leebens-Mack J, Muller KF, Field D, Altman NS, Depamphilis CW (2007) PlantTribes:
A gene and gene family resource for comparative genomics in plants. Nucleic Acids Res, D970-
6 doi:10.1093/nar/gkm972.
Wegrzyn JL, Lee JM, Tearse BR, Neale DB (2008) TreeGenes: A forest tree genome database. Int
J Plant Genomics, doi: 10.1155/2008/412875.
Wheat C (2008) Rapidly developing functional genomics in ecological model systems via 454
transcriptome sequencing. Genetica, doi: 10.1007/s10709-008-9326-y.
Whitham TG, DiFazio SP, Schweitzer JA, Shuster SM, Allan GJ, Bailey JK, Woolbright SA (2008)
Extending genomics to natural communities and ecosystems. Science 320:492–495.
Wilson D, Charoensawan V, Kummerfeld SK, Teichmann SA (2008) DBD – taxonomically broad
transcription factor predictions: New content and functionality. Nucleic Acids Res 36:88–92.
Winter D, Vinegar B, Nahal H, Ammar R, Wilson GV, Provart NJ (2007) An “electronic ﬂuorescent
pictograph” browser for exploring and analyzing large-scale biological data sets. PLoS ONE
2:e718.
Wu R, Bradshaw HD, Stettler RF (1998) Developmental quantitative genetics of growth in Populus.
Theor Appl Genet 97:1110–1119.
Zheng S, Dicke M (2008) Ecological genomics of plant-insect interactions: From gene to
community. Plant Physiol 146:812–817.
Zhu Q, Guo A, Gao G, Zhong Y, Xu M, Huang M, Luo J (2007) DPTF: A database of poplar
transcription factors. Bioinformatics 23:1307–1308.

Part III
Genetics and Genomics of Key
Populus Traits

Reproductive Development in Populus
Amy M. Brunner
Abstract Flowering is a multistage process that includes acquiring the competency
to ﬂower, the transition to ﬂowering in response to environmental and endogenous
signals, and the development of ﬂoral organs. A non-ﬂowering juvenile phase of
several years is typical for Populus and most trees, and in adult Populus, the sea-
sonally recurrent transition to ﬂowering and ﬂower development take nearly a year
to complete. This chapter reviews the biology of Populus ﬂowering and discuss the
regulation of Populus ﬂowering in a comparative context to Arabidopsis thaliana
and other angiosperms.
1 Introduction
Due in large part to the central importance of ﬂowering to plant ﬁtness and
crop yield, ﬂowering is one of the best studied plant developmental processes.
Particularly for the model annual plant Arabidopsis, there is now detailed knowl-
edge of the regulatory pathways and molecular mechanisms regulating ﬂowering
(reviewed in Mutasa-Gottgens and Hedden, 2009; Michaels, 2009; Turck et al.,
2008; Farrona et al., 2008). The Populus genome sequence has revealed the presence
of orthologs of nearly all of the major genes regulating ﬂowering in Arabidopsis
(Yuceer et al., 2009; De Bodt et al., 2006; Brunner and Nilsson, 2004). Moreover,
gene expression and a limited number of functional studies in Populus suggest
that ﬂowering regulatory pathways are broadly conserved between Arabidopsis
and Populus (e.g., Rottmann et al., 2000; Hsu et al., 2006). The network con-
trolling ﬂowering in Arabidopsis is highly complex, involving a large number of
genes and mechanisms. Thus, a key challenge for Populus researchers is uncovering
A.M. Brunner (B)
Department of Forest Resources and Environmental Conservation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24060-0324, USA
e-mail: abrunner@vt.edu
155
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_8,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

156
A.M. Brunner
the differences in regulatory interactions that underlie the dramatically different
ﬂowering habits of a tree and an annual plant.
A comprehensive understanding of the genes and regulatory interactions con-
trolling initiation of ﬂowering and ﬂower organogenesis in Populus could enable
development of reliable methods to manipulate ﬂowering in this important genus
and perhaps more generally for trees. This could enhance genetic improvement
and plantation productivity both directly and indirectly. There are multiple aspects
of ﬂowering that would be desirable to alter temporarily or permanently, depend-
ing on the application. These features include the several year-long juvenile period
when trees are incompetent to ﬂower that greatly slows progress in tree breeding.
Although dioecy facilitates controlled outcrossing, it prevents the development of
inbred Populus genotypes for experimental uses or advanced breeding methods.
From a production standpoint, it would be beneﬁcial to prevent or delay the ini-
tiation of ﬂowering in plantation trees in order to maximize wood growth and yield.
Because of the potential for long distance gene ﬂow by pollen and sometimes seed,
and the frequent proximity of plantations to interfertile wild populations, repro-
ductive sterility is the most effective method for genetic containment of forest tree
plantations. Containment of highly domesticated, exotic or transgenic tree plan-
tations may be desirable to minimize the risk of unintended ecological impacts,
and may also be required by law or marketplace constraints (Brunner et al., 2007).
Deciphering the genetic regulation of ﬂowering would also improve our understand-
ing of how climate change and other environmental factors affect ﬂowering time and
pollen, fruit and seed production in natural populations. Knowledge of the genes and
mechanisms regulating ﬂowering would provide an inroad to discover the nature of
adaptive variation in ﬂowering traits that could ultimately improve our ability to
maintain healthy populations.
This chapter provides an overview of the biology of Populus ﬂowering induction
and organogenesis, including our current knowledge of the genetic regulation of
Populus ﬂowering.
2 Initiation of Flowering
As sessile organisms, plant reproductive success relies on mechanisms that enable
plants to respond to both endogenous and environmental cues that facilitate ﬂower-
ing at an appropriate time in their development and at a favorable seasonal time. For
a postembryonic plant to ﬂower, it must pass through at least two developmental
phase transitions (reviewed in Poethig, 2003; Baurle and Dean, 2006). Vegetative
phase change, commonly referred to as maturation in trees, is the transition from
the juvenile to the adult growth phase in which a plant becomes competent to
ﬂower. Changes in vegetative morphology and physiology that occur during mat-
uration vary between species and may be prominent or subtle and gradual or
discrete. When a plant has reached the adult vegetative phase, it is capable of
responding to ﬂoral inductive signals and transitioning to reproductive development.
Studies in Arabidopsis, maize and other plants indicate that juvenile-to-adult and
ﬂoral transitions are largely independently regulated but are coordinated and share

Reproductive Development in Populus
157
some common regulatory elements (Willmann and Poethig, 2005; Baurle and Dean,
2006). Gibberellic acid (GA), vernalization and some genes appear to regulate both
transitions, but many genes affect one but not the other. However, the relationships
between vegetative phase change and ﬂowering in Populus are largely unknown.
In annuals, biennials, and many perennials, both vegetative phase change and the
ﬂoral transition occur within a single growing season or by the second growing sea-
son (e.g., biennials require the vernalization treatment winter provides to ﬂower).
In contrast, Populus does not reach maturity for several years and then ﬂoral ini-
tiation occurs at a particular seasonal time in adult trees. Although an adult tree
is deﬁned as reproductively competent, it is unknown whether an adult Populus is
continuously capable of responding to ﬂoral inductive signals. In other words, the
reproductive competency of meristems may be reset seasonally in adult trees and
mechanisms related to juvenility may act locally to maintain some meristems as
vegetative (Battey and Tooke, 2002).
2.1 Juvenility/Maturity
For perennial plants there generally appears to be a positive correlation between
length of the juvenile period and lifespan (Harper and White, 1974). Age and size
tend to be strongly correlated during the juvenile phase, and size rather than age
appears to be the best predictor of ﬂowering onset in many biennials and peren-
nials (Lacey, 1986). Size appears to be the best predictor of ﬂowering in Populus,
though this has not been subject to robust quantitative study. North American cot-
tonwoods typically reach reproductive maturity at 5–10 years at heights of 8–15 m
(Braatne et al., 1996). Elite cottonwood hybrids grown in plantations reach these
sizes at a younger age, and ﬂowering at age four is common and sometimes has
been observed as early as the second growing season. In some cottonwoods, branch
segments from mature trees root easily and then newly formed lateral organs have
juvenile characteristics (Brunner et al., 2004).
Because of the polar nature of shoot growth, within-plant maturation gradients
are often evident. Kearsley and Whitham (1997) studied within tree developmental
changes in mature narrow leaf cottonwoods (P. angustifolia) that had branches dis-
tributed vertically throughout the bole. In addition to the ratio of reproductive buds
to vegetative buds, they measured relative blade width (width/length) and relative
petiole length (petiole length/blade length). Changes in all these traits were signif-
icantly correlated with a distance measure that incorporated vertical position of a
branch on the trunk and position out on a branch. As distance from the root crown
increased, leaves became wider, petioles longer, and more reproductive buds were
produced. Unfortunately, not all Populus species and hybrids display such strik-
ing changes in leaf size/shape and maturation in vegetative characteristics, and how
vegetative traits change in relation to reproduction has not been adequately studied
in Populus. This is especially needed for aspen species and hybrids that are typi-
cally used for transgenic studies. In Arabidopsis and maize, leaf traits, such as the
presence/location of trichomes distinguish the juvenile and adult phase and enable
the identiﬁcation of mutants that affect the juvenile-to-adult vegetative transition

158
A.M. Brunner
but not ﬂowering time, ﬂowering but not vegetative phase change or both transi-
tions. Without easily measured, unambiguous markers for vegetative phase change,
we are limited to identifying genes that affect reproductive competency in Populus.
Temporal, spatial or both spatial and temporal signals could measure develop-
mental time. The correlation with distance from the roots suggests the possibility
of a spatial signal in Populus. However, studies in Arabidopsis and maize have
led to models for temporal regulation of vegetative phase change (e.g., Poethig,
2003; Hunter et al., 2006). In Arabidopsis and maize, RNA silencing pathways have
a key role in regulating vegetative phase change, with some components of these
pathways also affecting ﬂowering time (reviewed in Chuck et al., 2009; Willmann
and Poethig, 2007). Mutations in several genes involved in biogenesis of miRNAs
or siRNAs affect phase change, and speciﬁc small RNAs and their gene targets have
been shown to regulate developmental transitions. In Arabidopsis, mutations dis-
rupting the repression of the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) family members,
ETTIN and ARF4 by the trans-acting (ta) siRNA, tasiR-ARF accelerate the juvenile-
to-adult transition, but do not affect the length of the transition zone or the total
number of leaves produced by the shoot (Hunter et al., 2006). Moreover, levels of
tasi-ARF and its targets do not change during vegetative development, suggesting
that tasi-ARF establishes the threshold at which leaf primordia respond to a temporal
signal.
In both Arabidopsis and maize, the temporal signal appears to involve MIR156
and MIR172, that have reciprocal temporal expression patterns and opposite effects.
MIR156 targets members of the SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-
LIKE (SPB) family of transcription factors and constitutive expression prolongs
juvenile vegetative traits and delays ﬂowering (Wu and Poethig, 2006; Chuck et al.,
2007). In contrast, MIR172 targets APETALA2 (AP2) transcription factors and pro-
motes transition to the adult vegetative phase in maize (Lauter et al., 2005) and the
transition to ﬂowering in Arabidopsis (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003). Taken together,
these studies suggest that the relative amounts of these two miRNAs may have a key
role in determining the precise timing of phase transitions. Intriguingly, both miR-
NAs are present in the phloem sap of Brassica napus (Buhtz et al., 2008), suggesting
the possibility that they may regulate developmental transitions via long-distance
signaling. Given the extensive regulatory conservation between a monocot and eudi-
cot, it seems probable that small RNAs are involved in regulating maturation in
Populus, but this remains to be determined. The proposed model for Arabidopsis
that includes the setting of threshold to respond to a signal from the developmental
clock would seem to offer evolutionary ﬂexibility. For example, if the threshold-
setting mechanism was spatially regulated (e.g., ability to respond to a temporal
signal increased with distance from the root) in Populus, this could help establish
the prolonged, seemingly size-related maturation in Populus.
Various environmental and mechanical treatments can accelerate the ﬁrst onset
of ﬂowering in some tree species, but have generally not been successful in Populus
(Meilan, 1997). A combination of the GA inhibitor paclobutrazol, root pruning,
and water stress did induce ﬂoral bud formation on three month old rooted-cuttings
from mature P. deltoides trees, but similar treatment was not successful in inducing
ﬂowering in one-year-old rooted cuttings from juvenile trees (Yuceer et al., 2003b).

Reproductive Development in Populus
159
Epigenetic mechanisms have long been hypothesized to regulate tree phases and in
some tree species, rooted cuttings from mature trees retain mature traits (Greenwood
and Hutchinson, 1993; Hackett and Murray, 1993). Although rooted cuttings from
mature Populus trees generally appear to revert to juvenility, that they were respon-
sive to treatments that juvenile cuttings were not (Yuceer et al., 2003b), suggests
that full reversion does not occur immediately. A genotype of P. alba that ﬂowered
in its ﬁrst growing season was discovered in a common garden study and hardwood
cuttings taken from this clone ﬂowered in the greenhouse (Meilan et al., 2004).
However, subsequent in vitro propagules did not ﬂower under greenhouse condi-
tions, but a combination of root chilling, followed by short-day (SD) treatment to
induce bud set, and chilling to release dormancy did induce ﬂowering. These stud-
ies suggest that the acquisition of reproductive competency may be composed of
a number of stages that could occur over years as well as within each seasonal
cycle.
Many ﬂowering pathway genes when ectopically overexpressed induce early
ﬂowering in Arabidopsis and other annual plants, but only a few have been shown
to promote an earlier onset of ﬂowering in Populus. The CONSTANS/FLOWERING
LOCUS T (CO/FT) module is central in the photoperiodic promotion pathway
in Arabidopsis, and FT also integrates signaling from the vernalization and
autonomous pathways (reviewed in Turck et al., 2008; Michaels, 2009; Kobayashi
and Weigel, 2007). CO encodes a B-box-type zinc ﬁnger domain protein and
FT belongs to the phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein (PEBP)/ Raf Kinase
Inhibitor Protein (RKIP) superfamily. CO and FT are expressed in leaves and the
FT protein is translocated to the shoot meristem where it promotes ﬂoral induction.
Whereas overexpression of CO did not induce early ﬂowering in Populus (Strauss
et al., 2004), overexpression of the Populus FT orthologs FT1 and FT2 induced
ﬂowering within several months following transformation (Bohlenius et al., 2006;
Hsu et al., 2006). FT1 was particularly effective – some transgenic events devel-
oped ﬂowers while still in tissue culture and larger, potted plants developed catkins
similar to those on adult wild-type trees.
Expression levels of FT1 and FT2 around the seasonal time of ﬂoral initi-
ation were lower in juvenile trees and gradually increased as trees matured to
the adult phase, suggesting that release of FT repression may be involved in the
juvenile to adult transition. In Arabidopsis, the MADS-box gene FLOWERING
LOCUS C (FLC) represses FT, and vernalization releases FLC-mediated repression
by inducing the repression of FLC by histone modiﬁcation (reviewed in Dennis
and Peacock, 2007; Amasino, 2005). Populus contains several FLC homologs
(De Bodt et al., 2006), but whether they have a role in maturation is unknown,
and it is also possible that they regulate the seasonal time of ﬂower initiation
in adult trees (discussed below). In addition to being transcriptionally regu-
lated in a temporal manner, MIR172 abundance is regulated by photoperiod via
miRNA processing, and MIR172 upregulates FT via a pathway independent of
CO (Jung et al., 2007). This dual regulation could potentially provide a mecha-
nism whereby the same factor could contribute to the control of tree maturation
that occurs over years, as well as the seasonal regulation of ﬂowering time in adult
trees.

160
A.M. Brunner
In the shoot meristem, FT interacts with the bZIP transcription factor,
FLOWERING LOCUS D (FD), and the FT-FD complex is able to activate ﬂoral
meristem identity genes, including the MADS-box genes APETALA1 (AP1) and
FRUITFULL (FUL) (Abe et al., 2005; Wigge et al., 2005). FD is expressed at
the shoot apex before ﬂoral induction, and consistent with this expression pattern,
overexpression of FD induces a more modest acceleration of ﬂowering com-
pared to FT overexpression (Wigge et al., 2005). However, overexpression of a
Populus FD ortholog PtFD1 induced extremely early ﬂowering in Populus when
plants were grown under LD photoperiods, but not in SD (G. Coleman, personal
communication). Overexpression of AP1 or a Populus AP1 ortholog PTAP1-1
does not induce early ﬂowering in Populus (Strauss et al., 2004 and unpublished).
Constitutive expression of the ﬂoral meristem identity gene LEAFY (LFY) does
induce solitary ﬂowers in male aspen clones and infrequently in female clones
(Weigel and Nilsson, 1995; Rottmann et al., 2000). Populus LFY (PTLF) was less
effective at inducing early ﬂowering, suggesting that the orthologous proteins may
differ somewhat in their activity or regulatory interactions.
All of the above studies in Populus have involved ectopic overexpression of ﬂo-
ral promoters and have often been limited to greenhouse studies. In Arabidopsis,
different ﬂoral promoters and repressors affect ﬂowering time to varying degrees.
Thus, more modest affects on onset of ﬂowering may be missed if Populus are
only studied in the greenhouse where plant size is limited. Functional study
of a Populus homolog of Arabidopsis TERMINAL FLOWER1(TFL1)/snapdragon
CENTRORADIALIS (CEN) demonstrate the value of Populus ﬁeld studies. Loss-
of-function mutations in TFL1 induces early-ﬂowering, but CEN does not affect
ﬂowering time (Shannon and Meeks-Wagner, 1991; Bradley et al., 1996, 1997).
PopCEN1-RNAi transgenics showing strong downregulation did not show the
extreme early-ﬂowering of PtFT or PtFD overexpressors. However, a multi-year
ﬁeld study revealed that these RNAi transgenics transitioned to ﬂowering during
their second growing season, whereas most non-transgenic controls transitioned to
ﬂowering during their fourth growing season (Mohamed, 2006 and unpublished). In
contrast to PtFT1/2, PopCEN1 expression does not appear to differ much between
juvenile and adult trees. TFL1/CEN and FT encode related proteins that can inter-
act with the same proteins in yeast-two-hybrid studies (Pnueli et al., 2001; Abe
et al., 2005; Wigge et al., 2005), leading to the hypothesis that they antagonisti-
cally regulate ﬂowering by competing for common interacting partners (Ahn et al.,
2006). Thus, one possibility is that downregulation of PopCEN1 moderately accel-
erated ﬂowering onset by reducing the amount of PtFT1/2 needed to outcompete
PopCEN1.
2.2 Transition to Flowering
In monopodial annual plants such as Arabidopsis, the entire plant transitions to the
reproductive phase. The vegetative shoot meristem transitions to an indeterminate
inﬂorescence meristem that gives rise to ﬂoral meristems on its ﬂanks. In an adult

Reproductive Development in Populus
161
Populus, the ﬂoral transition is integrated with the seasonal cycle of growth and
dormancy. The terminal meristem of a shoot always remains a vegetative meristem.
Vegetative buds contain a number of preformed leaves. Axillary vegetative meris-
tems can form in the axils of earliest preformed leaves prior to a bud undergoing
winter dormancy, and following spring bud ﬂush, inﬂorescence or vegetative meris-
tems can form in the axils of preformed leaves (Boes and Strauss, 1994; Yuceer
et al., 2003a). Some shoots will also produce neoformed leaves, and buds formed
in these axils are vegetative. Thus, there is a seasonal window in which inﬂores-
cences initiate. Within the bud scales, the inﬂorescence meristem rapidly elongates,
forming lateral bracts acropetally and then in the axil of each bract a ﬂoral meristem
(Fig. 1). Exactly when ﬂoral induction occurs in Populus and what environmental
signals regulate this process are unknown. The chilling requirement to release dor-
mancy is similar to vernalization, and the increasing photoperiods and/or increasing
Fig. 1 Floral meristems in a developing female P. trichocarpa inﬂorescence. Longitudinal section
of inﬂorescence bud collected in May showing three ﬂoral meristems (FM). The ﬂoral meristems
display an acropetal developmental gradient of ﬂoral organ initiation. Bract, B; carpel primordium,
C; perianth cup, PC

162
A.M. Brunner
ambient temperature during spring could also play a role. Is there an endogenous
developmental clock that monitors seasonal shoot growth to regulate ﬂowering
time? In Arabidopsis, the ﬂoral signal is translocated to the shoot apical meristem
that converts to an inﬂorescence meristem, but in Populus, the shoot apex remains
vegetative and axillary meristems transition to inﬂorescence meristems. Thus, is
the signal for ﬂowering translocated to the terminal shoot meristem or to axillary
meristems?
Deciphering the environmental cues important for Populus ﬂowering is inher-
ently difﬁcult because the size of adult trees prevents moving them to various
controlled environments. A number of Populus homologs of Arabidopsis ﬂowering
time genes have distinct seasonal expression patterns, and PtFT1 and other genes
in the photoperiodic ﬂowering pathway change expression under SD-induced bud-
set (Bohlenius et al., 2006; Ruttink et al., 2007). Thus, another key question is how
these genes and regulatory modules are able to control different developmental pro-
cesses at different times. PtFLC2 is expressed in shoot apices during LD and the
early stages of SD-initiated bud development, but then declines during SD and low
temperature treatment (G. Coleman, pers. comm.). In Arabidopsis, vernalization
induces chromatin modiﬁcations that stably repress FLC transcription and all apical
meristems produce ﬂowers until the plant senesces. In Arabis alpina, a perennial
close relative of Arabidopsis, apical meristems formed before vernalization produce
ﬂower buds during vernalization (Wang et al., 2009). In contrast, apical meristems
not present or at a very early stage of development at the onset of cold treatment
did not produce ﬂowers and grew vegetatively until plants received another vernal-
ization treatment. The Arabis aplina FLC ortholog PERPETUAL FLOWERING1
(PEP1) is only transiently repressed by cold treatment and this correlated with
changes in histone modiﬁcation. Thus, it is tempting to speculate that PtFLC2 has a
similar role in regulating the seasonal cycling between reproductive and vegetative
phases in adult Populus trees.
In addition to the increased leaf expression in adult vs. juvenile trees, FT2
showed a striking winter to summer expression pattern (Hsu et al., 2006). FT2
expression was very low into April, but it was very strongly expressed in mid-
May, and then slowly declined during the summer. PopCEN1 also shows a striking
seasonal expression pattern in shoot tips with the strongest expression around
the time of bud ﬂush (Mohamed, 2006) and also increases during the chilling
treatment phase of a controlled environmental chamber dormancy cycle (unpub-
lished). Although PopCEN1 downregulation had a modest affect on the ﬁrst onset
of ﬂowering (described above), it had a more dramatic effect on the intensity of
ﬂowering with a very large number of the lateral meristems becoming inﬂores-
cence shoots (unpublished). However, terminal meristems remained vegetative in
PopCEN1-RNAi transgenics, suggesting that other factors maintain terminal vege-
tative meristems. Much remains to be determined, but taken together, these studies
suggest the possibility that vernalization-induced transient repression of PtFLC may
allow PtFT1/2 and other genes to promote ﬂowering at a speciﬁc seasonal time and
that PopCEN1 acts to maintain some lateral meristems as vegetative.

Reproductive Development in Populus
163
3 Flower Development and Sex Determination
Populus inﬂorescences are simple racemes (catkins) with each ﬂower being sub-
tended by a bract. Populus ﬂowers are unusual because they are unisexual and
reduced with only two whorls of ﬂoral organs: the perianth cup (ﬂoral disc) and
stamens or pistil. Dioecy has evolved independently numerous times and is
estimated to occur in less than 4% of the angiosperms (Ainsworth et al., 1998).
In the majority of cases, both carpels and stamens are initiated and then develop-
ment of female or male organs is subsequently blocked. Both detailed light and
electron microscopy show that in Populus, only organs of a single sex are initi-
ated. However, numerous reports over the years demonstrate that Populus retains
the capacity to produce bisexual ﬂowers and ﬂowers of the alternate gender (e.g.,
Stettler, 1971; Slavov et al., 2009). Though the causes are unknown, these atypical
ﬂowers may occur rarely in some inﬂorescences, through-out some of the catkins
or even throughout all catkins on the tree, and may reoccur year to year or only in
particular years.
Populus ﬂowers arise in acropetal order within the developing inﬂorescence bud
and organ differentiation continues into fall. As bract primordia enlarge, cells in the
axil form into a ﬂattened disc-shaped structure (Boes and Strauss, 1994; Kaul, 1995;
Yuceer et al., 2003a). Continued growth at the perimeter produces a raised ring of
tissue that will develop into the perianth cup (Fig. 1). In females, 2–4 carpel pri-
mordia arise in the center and unite during summer to form a unilocular ovary and
stigma primordia are evident in autumn (Fig. 2a, b). In the following spring, arch-
esporial cells grow and undergo megasporogenesis and produce the embryo sac and
stigma development completes (Fig. 3a, c). In males, stamen primordia ﬁrst arise in
the center of the meristem, and organogenesis proceeds centrifugally with stamen
primordia differentiating anthers and ﬁlaments during the summer (Fig. 2c, d). In
spring, the microspore mother cells undergo meiosis to form tetrads of microspores
that then mature into individual pollen grains. The mature male ﬂower consists of
5–60 stamens surrounded by a perianth cup and ﬂowers begin to shed pollen before
catkins ﬁnish elongating (Fig. 3b, d). As an adaptation to wind pollination, inﬂores-
cence buds ﬂush before vegetative buds and rapidly elongate into pendulous catkins.
Similar to vegetative bud ﬂush, there is extensive natural variation in inﬂorescence
phenology. Flower number per catkin varies; in a survey of a female hybrid aspen
clone, ﬂower number ranged from 75 to 147 (unpublished).
Studies of ﬂoral development in Arabidopsis, snapdragon and various other
annual plants indicate broad conservation of the genes and mechanisms; however,
some aspects of gene function and regulatory interaction do vary between species
(reviewed in Krizek and Fletcher, 2005; Blazquez et al., 2006; Sablowski, 2007).
LFY and AP1 have partially overlapping roles in specifying ﬂoral meristem identity
and TFL1 acts in opposition to LFY and AP1 to specify inﬂorescence meristem fate.
The ﬂoral meristem identity genes activate an additional set of genes that specify ﬂo-
ral organ fate. These genes were initially identiﬁed in snapdragon and Arabidopsis
based on their mutant phenotypes that were characterized by homeotic transforma-
tion of one ﬂoral organ type into another. These studies led to the ABC model of

164
A.M. Brunner
Fig. 2 P. deltoides female and male inﬂorescence development during summer and fall. Scanning
electron micrographs of developing female inﬂorescences in (a) August and (b) October.
Developing male ﬂowers in (c) August and (d) October. Most of the bracts have been removed
to reveal the developing ﬂowers. Bract, B; fused carpels, C; perianth cup, PC; stamen primordium,
S; tetrasporangiate anther, A. Photos provided by C. Yuceer
ﬂoral organ identity that describes how three regulatory functions, A, B and C, work
in a combinatorial manner to specify organ identity in each whorl of the ﬂoral meris-
tem (Coen and Meyerowitz, 1991). A function speciﬁes sepal identity in whorl one,
A plus B function confers petal identity in whorl two, B and C function specify
stamen identity in whorl three and C function speciﬁes carpel identity in whorl four
and meristem determinacy.
Subsequent studies added E class genes that are required to specify petal, stamen
and carpel identity (Pelaz et al., 2000). In Arabidopsis the A-function is deﬁned by
AP1 and APETALA2 (AP2), the B-function by APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA
(PI), and the C-function by AGAMOUS (AG). SEPALLATA (SEP) genes act redun-
dantly to provide E function. In the sep1 sep2 sep3 triple mutant second and third

Reproductive Development in Populus
165
Fig. 3 Hybrid aspen ﬂowers in March around the time of inﬂorescence bud ﬂush. (a) and (c) show
female ﬂowers approximately two weeks apart. Male ﬂowers are shown in (b) and (d). The isolated
ﬂower in (d) is shedding pollen. Perianth cup, PC; stigma, St: A, anther
whorl organs were converted into sepals and a new inﬂorescence developed from
the center of the ﬂoral meristem. Mutation of a fourth SEP gene (SEP4) in a sep1
sep2 sep3 background resulted in the production of only leaves revealing that SEP4
functions in sepal development (Ditta et al., 2004). With the exception of AP2, all
of the above ﬂoral homeotic genes belong to the MADS-box family.
Gene expression patterns of a number of Populus homologs of Arabidopsis
ﬂower development genes are consistent with a function in specifying ﬂoral
meristem and reproductive organ identities. Both PTFL and the Populus AP1 co-
orthologs, PTAP1-1 and PTAP1-2, are expressed throughout the initiating ﬂoral
meristems (Rottmann et al., 2000 and unpublished). Populus SEP1/2/3 homologs
are expressed at all stages of female and male ﬂower development (Cseke et al.,
2005). PTD, a Populus AP3 homolog, is initially expressed in the inner whorl of
both female and male ﬂoral meristems (Sheppard et al., 2000). As reproductive
primordia begin to form, PTD expression is maintained in stamen primordia, but
excluded from carpel primordia, which is consistent with a role in specifying sta-
men, but not carpel identity. The Populus AG co-orthologs, PTAG1 and PTAG2,

166
A.M. Brunner
are expressed in the inner whorl of female and male ﬂowers both before and
after reproductive primordia emerge, indicating a conserved function in specify-
ing both female and male reproductive identity (Brunner et al., 2000). Interestingly,
PTD, PTAP1-1 and PTAP1-2 are not expressed in the initiating perianth cup, sug-
gesting they do not specify its identity. Developmental morphology and vascular
traces suggest that the perianth cup resulted from the fusion of perianth parts (e.g.,
Kaul, 1995), but it remains uncertain whether it is derived from sepals, petals
or both. Several additional homologs of A and B-class genes as well a SEP4
homolog are present in the Populus genome (De Bodt et al., 2006); thus, it is pos-
sible that one or more of these genes specify fate of the outer whorl in Populus
ﬂowers.
Because of the long juvenile period, there have been few functional studies of
genes in Populus ﬂower development. Similar to TFL1 and CEN, PopCEN1 and/or
its paralog may act to maintain the indeterminacy of the inﬂorescence meristem
(A. Brunner, unpublished data). In PopCEN1-RNAi transgenics, inﬂorescences were
wild-type in appearance except that they were signiﬁcantly shorter with fewer ﬂow-
ers than wild-type, raising the possibility that the inﬂorescence meristem may have
converted to a terminal ﬂower. Long-term ﬁeld study of male and female aspen
clones containing a PTLF-antisense transgene revealed striking effects on male ﬂo-
ral development, but no effects were observed in the female clone (A. Brunner,
unpublished data). Male transgenics displayed a range of altered ﬂoral phenotypes,
from bisexual ﬂowers to female ﬂowers to a proliferation of carpelloid structures.
These suggest that PTFL is necessary for male reproductive development, but is less
important for female ﬂower development. Co-overexpression of LFY and PTAG1 in
a male Populus induced bisexual ﬂowers with three whorls (perianth cup, stamens
and pistil), suggesting that the spatiotemporal expression patterns and/or relative
expression levels of these genes affect reproductive whorl number and identity
(unpublished). In some respects, these results are not surprising. In Arabidopsis,
lfy mutants eventually produce carpelloid ﬂowers, and any of the four ﬂoral organ
types in any of the four whorls can be produced by manipulating the expres-
sion of the ABCE genes (reviewed in Krizek and Fletcher, 2005; Blazquez et al.,
2006).
The Populus transgenic results paired with the observation that sex determina-
tion occurs before reproductive primordia are initiated raise the possibility that sex
determination may involve differential regulation of ﬂoral homeotic genes. Recent
studies suggest that Populus is in the early stages of evolving a sex chromosome.
In three different Populus pedigrees, a sex determination locus has been mapped
to the peritelomeric region of chromosome XIX (Gaudet et al., 2007; Markussen
et al., 2007; Yin et al., 2008). Moreover, this chromosomal region shows suppressed
recombination and high divergence between the alternate haplotypes for the mater-
nal parent in the P. deltoides × P. nigra pedigree. This suppressed recombination
would cause all genes within this region to behave as one locus; thus, the gen-
der locus may include several gender determination genes (Yin et al., 2008). The
progeny of this cross showed a strongly male-biased sex ratio, in accordance with
Haldane’s rule that postulates that the heterogametic sex is more likely to be absent,

Reproductive Development in Populus
167
rare, or sterile in interspeciﬁc crosses (Coyne and Orr, 2004). One approach to select
candidate gender determination genes for further study would be to identify which
genes in the XIX interval are differentially expressed in initiating female vs. male
ﬂoral meristems. Furthermore, as recent studies in maize have revealed a role for
miRNAs in sex determination (reviewed in Chuck et al., 2009), candidates should
not be limited to genes coding for proteins.
4 Perspectives
The Populus genome sequence, associated genomics resources, and comparative
genomics of ﬂowering are helping advance our understanding of the regulation of
ﬂowering in Populus. However, studies of gene function in Populus maturation and
reproductive development remain difﬁcult. Long-term ﬁeld study as well as studying
ﬂowering related Populus transgenics under extensive sets of environmental treat-
ments are needed, but factors such as cost and governmental regulations will likely
keep the number of such studies low. Thus, we need to be judicious in our choice
of genes for functional study in Populus ﬂowering. Various types of Populus ‘omics
resources and studies, particularly in combination, could help answer the questions
of how Populus maturation and ﬂowering are regulated. These include transcriptome
studies at a ﬁne scale with respect to time and location within tissues, and generat-
ing a Populus ﬂowering ORFeome that would then allow protein-protein interaction
networks to be mapped. In addition, careful studies are needed of maturation in
geneotypes used for transgenic studies. In addition, association mapping studies
should be used to identify unambiguous markers for vegetative trait maturation and
establish how these change in relation to reproductive competency. Establishing
these markers for Arabidopsis and maize was key to uncovering genes that regulate
vegetative phase change. Similar genes and mechanisms that extensively involve
small RNAs may also control the maturation that occurs over years in Populus.
Despite the challenges, this is an exciting time to study maturation in Populus.
Study of woody plants led the way in developing concepts of developmental phase
change (Greenwood and Hutchinson, 1993; Hackett and Murray, 1993), and contin-
ued development of Populus omics resources and tools could lead to renewed focus
on woody plants.
References
Abe M, Kobayashi Y, Yamamoto S, Daimon Y, Yamaguchi A, Ikeda Y, Ichinoki H, Notaguchi M,
Goto K, Araki T (2005) FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from the ﬂoral pathway integrator
FT at the shoot apex. Science 309:1052–1056.
Ahn JH, Miller D, Winter VJ, Banﬁeld MJ, Lee JH, Yoo SY, Henz SR, Brady RL, Weigel D
(2006) A divergent external loop confers antagonistic activity on ﬂoral regulators FT and TFL1.
EMBO J 25:605–614.
Ainsworth C, Parker J, Buchanan-Wollaston V (1998) Sex determination in plants. Curr Top Dev
Biol 38:167–223.

168
A.M. Brunner
Amasino RM (2005) Vernalization and ﬂowering time. Curr Opin Biotechnol 16:154–158.
Aukerman MJ, Sakai H (2003) Regulation of ﬂowering time and ﬂoral organ identity by a
MicroRNA and its APETALA2-like target genes. Plant Cell 15:2730–2741.
Battey NH, Tooke F (2002) Molecular control and variation in the ﬂoral transition. Curr Opin Plant
Biol 5:62–68.
Baurle I, Dean C (2006) The timing of developmental transitions in plants. Cell 125:655–664.
Blazquez MA, Ferrandiz C, Madueno F, Parcy F (2006) How ﬂoral meristems are built. Plant Mol
Biol 60:855–870.
Boes TK, Strauss SH (1994) Floral phenology and morphology of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Salicaceae). Am J Bot 81:562–567.
Bohlenius H, Huang T, Charbonnel-Campaa L, Brunner AM, Jansson S, Strauss SH, Nilsson O
(2006) CO/FT regulatory module controls timing of ﬂowering and seasonal growth cessation
in trees. Science 312:1040–1043.
Braatne JH, Rood SB, Heilman PE (1996) Life history, ecology, and conservationof riparian cot-
tonwoods in North America. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds)
Biology of Populus. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada.
Bradley D, Carpenter R, Copsey L, Vincent C, Rothstein S, Coen E (1996) Control of inﬂorescence
architecture in Antirrhinum. Nature 379:791–797.
Bradley D, Ratcliffe O, Vincent C, Carpenter R, Coen E (1997) Inﬂorescence commitment and
architecture in Arabidopsis. Science 275:80–83.
Brunner AM, Rottmann WH, Sheppard LA, Krutovskii K, DiFazio SP, Leonardi S, Strauss SH
(2000) Structure and expression of duplicate AGAMOUS orthologues in poplar. Plant Mol Biol
44:619–634.
Brunner AM, Busov VB, Strauss SH (2004) Poplar genome sequence: Functional genomics in an
ecologically dominant plant species. Trends Plant Sci 9:49–56.
Brunner AM, Nilsson O (2004) Revisiting tree maturation and ﬂoral initiation in the poplar
functional genomics era. New Phytol 164:43–51.
Brunner AM, Li J, DiFazio SP, Shevchenko O, Mohamed R, Montgomery B, Elias A, Van Wormer
K, Strauss SH (2007) Genetic containment of forest plantations. Tree Genet Genomes 3:
75–100.
Buhtz A, Springer F, Chappell L, Baulcombe DC, Kehr J (2008) Identiﬁcation and characterization
of small RNAs from the phloem of Brassica napus. Plant J 53:739–749.
Chuck G, Candela H, Hake S (2009) Big impacts by small RNAs in plant development. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 12:81–86.
Chuck G, Cigan AM, Saeteurn K, Hake S (2007) The heterochronic maize mutant Corngrass1
results from overexpression of a tandem microRNA. Nat Genet 39:544–549.
Coen ES, Meyerowitz EM (1991) The war of the whorls: Genetic interactions controlling ﬂower
development. Nature 353:31–37.
Coyne JA, Orr HA (2004) Speciation. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Cseke LJ, Cseke SB, Ravinder N, Taylor LC, Shankar A, Sen B, Thakur R, Karnosky DF, Podila
GK (2005) SEP-class genes in Populus tremuloides and their likely role in reproductive survival
of poplar trees. Gene 358:1–16.
De Bodt S, Theissen G, Van de Peer Y (2006) Promoter analysis of MADS-box genes in eudicots
through phylogenetic footprinting. Mol Biol Evol 23:1293–1303.
Dennis ES, Peacock WJ (2007) Epigenetic regulation of ﬂowering. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:
520–527.
Ditta G, Pinyopich A, Robles P, Pelaz S, Yanofsky MF (2004) The SEP4 gene of Arabidopsis
thaliana functions in ﬂoral organ and meristem identity. Curr Biol 14:1935–1940.
Farrona S, Coupland G, Turck F (2008) The impact of chromatin regulation on the ﬂoral transition.
Semin Cell Dev Biol 19:560–573.
Gaudet M, Jorge V, Paolucci I, Beritognolo I, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, Sabatti M (2007) Genetic
linkage maps of Populus nigra L. including AFLPs, SSRs, SNPs, and sex trait. Tree Genet
Genomes 4:25–36.

Reproductive Development in Populus
169
Greenwood M, Hutchinson KW (1993) Maturation as a developmental process. In: Ahuja MR,
Libby WJ (eds) Clonal Forestry I: Genetics and Biotechnology. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Hackett WP, Murray JR (1993) Maturation and rejuvenation in woody species. In: Ahuja MR (ed)
Micropropagation of Woody Plants. Kluwer Academic Press, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Harper Jl, White J (1974) The demography of plants. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 5:419–463.
Hsu CY, Liu Y, Luthe DS, Yuceer C (2006) Poplar FT2 shortens the juvenile phase and promotes
seasonal ﬂowering. Plant Cell 18:1846–1861.
Hunter C, Willmann MR, Wu G, Yoshikawa M, de la Luz Gutierrez-Nava M, Poethig SR
(2006) Trans-acting siRNA-mediated repression of ETTIN and ARF4 regulates heteroblasty
in Arabidopsis. Development 133:2973–2981.
Jung JH, Seo YH, Seo PJ, Reyes JL, Yun J, Chua NH, Park CM (2007) The GIGANTEA-regulated
microRNA172 mediates photoperiodic ﬂowering independent of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 19:2736–2748.
Kaul RB (1995) Reproductive structure and organogenesis in a cottonwood, Populus deltoides
(Salicaceae). Int J Plant Sci 156:172–180.
Kearsley MJ, Whitham TG (1997) The developmental stream of cottonwoods affects ramet growth
and resistance to galling aphids. Ecology 79:178–191.
Kobayashi Y, Weigel D (2007) Move on up, it’s time for change–mobile signals controlling
photoperiod-dependent ﬂowering. Genes Dev 21:2371–2384.
Krizek BA, Fletcher JC (2005) Molecular mechanisms of ﬂower development: An armchair guide.
Nat Rev Genet 6:688–698.
Lacey EP (1986) Onset of reproduction in plants: Size- versus age-dependency. Trends Ecol Evol
1:72–75.
Lauter N, Kampani A, Carlson S, Goebel M, Moose SP (2005) microRNA172 down-regulates
glossy15 to promote vegetative phase change in maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9412–
9417.
Markussen T, Pakull B, Fladung M (2007) Positioning of sex-correlated markers for Populus in
an AFLP- and SSR-marker based genetic map of Populus tremula × tremuloides. Silvae Genet
56:180–184.
Meilan R (1997) Floral induction in woody angiosperms. New Forests 14:179–202.
Meilan R, Sabatti M, Ma C, Kuzminsky E (2004) An early-ﬂowering genotype of Populus. J Plant
Biol 47:52–56.
Michaels SD (2009) Flowering time regulation produces much fruit. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12:75–
80.
Mohamed R (2006) Expression and Function of Populus Homologs to TERMINAL FLOWER
1 Genes: Roles in Onset of Flowering and Shoot Phenology. PhD Thesis, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA.
Mutasa-Gottgens E, Hedden P (2009) Gibberellin as a factor in ﬂoral regulatory networks. J Exp
Bot 60:1979–1989.
Pelaz S, Ditta GS, Baumann E, Wisman E, Yanofsky MF (2000) B and C ﬂoral organ identity
functions require SEPALLATA MADS-box genes. Nature 405:200–203.
Pnueli L, Gutﬁnger T, Hareven D, Ben-Naim O, Ron N, Adir N, Lifschitz E (2001) Tomato SP-
interacting proteins deﬁne a conserved signaling system that regulates shoot architecture and
ﬂowering. Plant Cell 13:2687–2702.
Poethig RS (2003) Phase change and the regulation of developmental timing in plants. Science
301:334–336.
Rottmann WH, Meilan R, Sheppard LA, Brunner AM, Skinner JS, Ma C, Cheng S, Jouanin L,
Pilate G, Strauss SH (2000) Diverse effects of overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF, a poplar
(Populus) homolog of LEAFY/FLORICAULA, in transgenic poplar and Arabidopsis. Plant J
22:235–245.
Ruttink T, Arend M, Morreel K, Storme V, Rombauts S, Fromm J, Bhalerao RP, Boerjan W, Rohde
A (2007) A molecular timetable for apical bud formation and dormancy induction in poplar.
Plant Cell 19:2370–2390.

170
A.M. Brunner
Sablowski R (2007) Flowering and determinacy in Arabidopsis. J Exp Bot 58:899–907.
Shannon S, Meeks-Wagner DR (1991) A mutation in the Arabidopsis TFL1 gene affects inﬂores-
cence meristem development. Plant Cell 3:877–892.
Sheppard LA, Brunner AM, Krutovskii KV, Rottmann WH, Skinner JS, Vollmer SS, Strauss
SH (2000) A DEFICIENS homolog from the dioecious tree black cottonwood is expressed
in female and male ﬂoral meristems of the two-whorled, unisexual ﬂowers. Plant Physiol
124:627–640.
Slavov GT, Leonardi S, Burczyk J, Adams WT, Strauss SH, DiFazio SP (2009) Extensive pollen
ﬂow in two ecologically contrasting populations of Populus trichocarpa. Mol Ecol 18:357–373.
Strauss SH, Brunner AM, Busov V, Ma C, Meilan R (2004) Ten lessons from 15 years of transgenic
Populus research. Forestry 77:455–465.
Stettler RF (1971) Variation in sex expression in black cottonwood and related hybrids. Silvae
Genet 20:42–46.
Turck F, Fornara F, Coupland G (2008) Regulation and identity of ﬂorigen: FLOWERING LOCUS
T moves center stage. Annu Rev Plant Biol 59:573–594.
Wang R, Farrona S, Vincent C, Joecker A, Schoof H, Turck F, Alonso-Blanco C, Coupland G,
Albani MC (2009) PEP1 regulates perennial ﬂowering in Arabis alpina. Nature 459:423–427.
Weigel D, Nilsson O (1995) A developmental switch sufﬁcient for ﬂower initiation in diverse
plants. Nature 377:495–500.
Wigge PA, Kim MC, Jaeger KE, Busch W, Schmid M, Lohmann JU, Weigel D (2005) Integration
of spatial and temporal information during ﬂoral induction in Arabidopsis. Science 309:1056–
1059.
Willmann MR, Poethig RS (2005) Time to grow up: The temporal role of smallRNAs in plants.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 8: 548–552.
Willmann MR, Poethig RS (2007) Conservation and evolution of miRNA regulatory programs in
plant development. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:503–511.
Wu G, Poethig RS (2006) Temporal regulation of shoot development in Arabidopsis thaliana by
miR156 and its target SPL3. Development 133:3539–3547.
Yin T, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Zhang X, Sewell MM, Woolbright SA, Allan GJ, Kelleher CT,
Douglas CJ, Wang M, Tuskan GA (2008) Genome structure and emerging evidence of an
incipient sex chromosome in Populus. Genome Res 18:422–430.
Yuceer C, Land SB, Kubiske ME, Harkess RL (2003a) Shoot morphogenesis associated with
ﬂowering in Populus deltoides (Salicaceae). Am J Bot 90:194–204.
Yuceer C, Kubiske ME, Harkess RL, Land SB Jr. (2003b) Effects of induction treatments on
ﬂowering in Populus deltoides. Tree Physiol 23:489–495.
Yuceer C, Hsu C-H, Brunner AM, Strauss SH (2009) Regulation of ﬂowering time in poplar. In:
Joshi CP, DiFazio SP (eds) Poplar, Genomics of Industrial Plant Series. Science Publishers,
Enﬁeld, NH.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy
Cycling and Overwintering
Päivi L.H. Rinne, Annikki Welling, and Chris van der Schoot
Abstract Deciduous trees in boreal and temperate areas are strictly conditioned
by the environment, especially by photoperiod and temperature. However, it is in
particular the successful submission to these conditions that has rewarded them with
long-life spans. A crucial strategy to ensure growth over many seasons is to timely
assume dormancy and a level of hardiness that permits survival through winter. A
consensus is emerging that dormancy, although traditionally regarded as a systemic
feature, is a property of the shoot apical meristem (SAM). This chapter discusses
our current understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that drive the annual cycles
of dormancy and acclimation.
1 Deﬁning Perenniality
1.1 Seasonal Growth
Perennial plants are uniquely equipped with mechanisms that allow vigorous growth
in the summer while preventing proliferation during the less favourable seasons.
This cycle of growth and inactivity is synchronized with the seasons by sensory
systems that detect alterations in environmental cues. Tree species in temperate and
boreal zones rely on a declining photoperiod (SD) for the timely cessation of elon-
gation growth and the acquisition of a dormant and freezing-tolerant state (Weiser,
1970; Welling, 2003; Welling et al., 1997, 2002). Photoperiod is not only a reli-
able timing signal, eliciting growth cessation at the same time every year, but it
is also versatile in providing increasingly shorter critical daylengths towards the
south. This permits clinal regulation of growth cessation in tree species with a wide
C. van der Schoot (B)
Department of Plant & Environmental Sciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, N-1432
Aas, Norway
e-mail: chris.vanderschoot@umb.no
171
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_9,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

172
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
distribution range. For example, southern aspen (51◦N) responds with cessation of
elongation growth to a photoperiod of 15 h or less, whereas for northern popula-
tions (63◦N) this critical photoperiod is in excess of 20 h (Böhlenius et al., 2006).
The photoperiod-speciﬁcity is heritable (Howe et al., 1995, 1996), securing an efﬁ-
cient use of the growth season and avoidance of potential frost damage. This would
be difﬁcult to attain when seasonal growth would be regulated by temperature alone
(Howell and Weiser, 1970). Despite the predictability of photoperiodic decline, the
timing of growth cessation shows some variability due to the modulating effects of
other environmental conditions (Arora et al., 2003).
While photoperiod is the major factor in the initiation of dormancy and accli-
mation in poplar, chilling is required for the deepening of freezing tolerance, and
for the release from dormancy (e.g. Weiser, 1970; Welling and Palva, 2006). In
contrast, elevated temperatures are crucial for deacclimation and bud break (Sauter
et al., 1996; Welling et al., 2004; Linkosalo et al., 2006). This synchronization of
activities with the seasons has a high adaptive value and determines the success
of perennial plant life. It is feasible that climate change might have a deregulating
effect on this seasonal growth pattern through the uncoupling of temperature traits
and photoperiod. Therefore continued research efforts are needed to understand at
multiple levels how the environment modulates the cycles of growth and dormancy.
1.2 Meristems
Growth over many seasons gives rise to complex shoot systems with architectures
that emerge from the organised activity of various types of meristems, all of which,
directly or indirectly, derive from the shoot apical meristem (SAM). The SAM is
situated at the shoot tip and is not only the ultimate source of the shoot system, but
also contributes in varying degrees to its branching pattern by preventing activation
of axillary buds lower along the stem. In addition, the SAM is a major player in
dormancy cycling, during which its functional organisation undergoes dramatic but
reversible alterations (Section 2.4).
The SAM of Populus and other dicotyledons has three sets of superimposed
initials (stem cells) whose directional divisions give rise to a superﬁcial two-
layered tunica and a subjacent corpus (Newman, 1965; Steeves and Sussex, 1989).
Within each layer the individual stem cells form a clonal sector consisting of a
branched lineage tree that unites all descendents symplasmically to the stem cell
(van der Schoot and Rinne, 1999). Sideways lineage branches and clonal sectors are
united by formation of secondary plasmodesmata (PD) (van der Schoot and Rinne,
1999). The fate of SAM cells is not strictly determined by lineage but depends
on their position in the SAM, as cells that deviate from the lineage path become
reprogrammed (Szymkowiak and Sussex, 1996). In other words, the behaviour of
individual cells is supervised by the integrated signal network of the SAM (van
der Schoot, 1996; Rinne and van der Schoot, 1998). As surgically isolated SAMs
can continue shoot formation (Smith and Murashige, 1970; Ball, 1980), the SAM

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
173
is also an autonomously organised unit. Thus, for SAM organization iterative com-
munication between its cells is both necessary and sufﬁcient (van der Schoot, 1996;
Rinne and van der Schoot, 1998). For communication SAM cells utilize the cell wall
space as well as PD. In recent years the importance of signalling across the extracel-
lular divide, involving excreted ligand peptides and membrane receptor kinases, has
been extensively documented (Gray et al., 2008; Chae et al., 2009). In particular,
the CLAVATA1-3 (CLV1-3)-WUSCHEL (WUS) system has emerged as the central
regulatory loop in the SAM (Schoof et al., 2000; Tucker and Laux, 2007). Equally
important, but more elusive, is signalling within the symplasmic continuum of the
SAM. This continuum is functionally subdivided into symplasmic ﬁelds (SFs) that
are regulated via positional closing of PD at boundaries within the SAM (Rinne and
van der Schoot, 1998; Ruonala et al., 2008). Within SFs cells exchange metabo-
lites and morphogens by diffusion (van der Schoot and Rinne, 1999). Gating of PD
(Epel, 1994; McLean et al., 1997) enables the exchange of morphogens between
adjacent SF (van der Schoot and Rinne, 1999), including transcription factors which
might move selectively within the SAM (Carpenter and Coen, 1995; Hantke et al.,
1995; Furner et al., 1996; Perbal et al., 1996; Sessions et al., 2000; Kim et al., 2003).
These two signalling systems are complementary, and understanding how they work
together to maintain the organization and function of the SAM is one of the biggest
challenges in SAM research.
Subjacent to the SAM is the rib meristem (RM), a small meristematic area that
gives rise to the inner stem (Bernier et al., 1981). Originally the SAM and the RM
were recognized as morphogenetic units with different tasks (Sachs et al., 1960;
Esau, 1977; Bernier et al., 1981), but presently this distinction seems often over-
looked. However, the fact that SAM and RM function can be uncoupled, most
visibly in rosette plants, but also in caulescent plants (Rinne et al., 2005; Ruonala
et al., 2008), suggests that they are distinct in nature. This functional identity is
supported by the presence of a symplasmic “barrier” between them (Ruonala et al.,
2008), in which PD might function as gatable corridors for the selective entry of
phloem-delivered signals from the RM into the SAM.
In poplars and other perennial dicotyledons the increase in girth of stem and
branches results from the activity of the vascular cambium. Although seemingly
simpler than the SAM, the cambial zone has a complexity of its own. It is composed
of two types of stem cells, fusiform and ray initials, each of which in an alternat-
ing fashion produces ﬁles of derivatives that make up the axial and radial tissues
of the xylem and the phloem (Esau, 1977). Stem cells of the same type might be
symplasmically united (van der Schoot and van Bel, 1990). Cyto-morphologically
cambium and SAM stem cells are remarkably different. Cambium cells are fusiform
or brick shaped and highly vacuolated (Esau, 1977), whereas typical meristem cells
possess dense cytoplasm, minute pro-vacuoles, and a nearly isodiametric shape. On
the other hand, at the molecular level the cambium shows similarities with the SAM
in terms of aspects of regulation, and both express ARBORKNOX1, a class 1 KNOX
homeobox gene that is required to keep meristem cells in an undifferentiated state
(Groover et al., 2006). An interesting genetic difference, however, is that SAM stem
cells typically express the ligand encoding CLV3 gene (Schoof et al., 2000; Tucker

174
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
and Laux, 2007), whereas the cambium of aspen expresses a gene encoding the
receptor kinase CLV1 (Schrader et al., 2004).
The SAM, as the central organizer of perennial growth, is the direct target of
the leaf-based mechanisms that respond to environmental cues (Rinne and van der
Schoot, 2003), while the cambium is a potential second target. Considering that
meristems are crucial for survival through winter this seems an appropriate strategy.
However, in spite of this central role, a mechanistic understanding of dormancy
cycling as a cyclic alteration in the functional organisation of the SAM is still
lacking. Nontheless, a consensus is emerging that this would require both the identi-
ﬁcation of leaf-to-apex signals (inputs) and the SAM intrinsic response mechanisms
that bring about and consolidate the dormant state. In practise, the uncertainty about
the actual state of investigated materials – whether or not it was truly dormant –
has led to ambiguity in the data and confusion about how to deﬁne the dormancy
state, as pointed out by Saure (1985). As this concern remains, we will ﬁrst describe
the various forms of growth arrest, identify the loci of dormancy, and deﬁne some
unambiguous terms.
1.3 Dormancy Concept
The term dormancy (F. dormir, to sleep) in its general use covers a wide spectrum of
phenomena in various plant structures including seeds, tubers and buds. It is used to
indicate a “resting or quiescent condition with reduced metabolism” (Usher, 1965;
Allaby, 1991; Lawrence, 2005), the “suspension of visible growth” (Samish, 1954)
or the “suspension of visible growth in any plant structure containing a meristem”
(Lang et al., 1987). These descriptions are general and phenological, and they do not
imply any speciﬁc mechanism. Moreover, the constraints that may prevent meris-
tems from functioning are so diverse that an abundance of terminology emerged.
Early efforts to come to a “universal terminology” (Lang, 1987; Lang et al., 1987)
distinguished para-, eco-, and endo-dormancy. Although readily adopted, this ter-
minology also raises questions. The main problem is that it addresses contexts,
thereby classifying inputs rather than states. This might reﬂect a lack of attention
for the loci of dormancy (Section 1.4) and the nature of the emerging meristem
states.
A generally adopted criterion is that dormancy persists in conditions that are
growth promoting. As eco-dormancy is due to non-permissive growth conditions,
and simply removed by reintroducing permissive conditions, it does not count as
true dormancy. Para- and endo-dormancy may both be regarded as true dormancy
with the argument that in both cases meristems are unable to initiate growth under
growth permissive conditions (Rohde and Bhalerao, 2007). Nonetheless, para-
dormant meristems display the capacity for growth when liberated from correlative
inhibition or apical dominance, or from constraints imposed by adjacent tissues
(Cline, 1991; Napoli et al., 1999; Sussex and Kerk, 2001; Leyser, 2005; Ongaro and
Leyser, 2007). Early on, it was already recognized that endo-dormancy is unique. It

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
175
is the only state that is intrinsically (endo) dormant, being enforced by an endoge-
nous mechanism (Samish, 1954; Lang, 1987; Lang et al., 1987; Dennis, 1994;
Seeley, 1994). In the following we will refer to this state as dormancy and, following
Dennis (1994), to eco-dormancy as quiescence and para-dormancy as correlative
inhibition.
1.4 Dormancy Locus
Historically, dormancy was investigated phenologically in the context of horticul-
tural and forestry practises (Lavender, 1991). The attention gradually shifted from
phenology to whole plant physiology and the controlling role of hormones and
hormone balances (reviewed in Lachaud, 1989; Dennis, 1994; Arora et al., 2003;
Horvath et al., 2003; Tanino, 2004). Dormancy was habitually regarded as a sys-
temic property, or as a property of various overwintering organs or tissue systems.
Awareness has been gradually growing that dormancy is not a systemic response but
rather a property of the growing point (Rees, 1981), of meristematic tissues (Seeley,
1994; Rohde and Bhalerao, 2007), or of the SAM (van der Schoot, 1996; Rinne
et al., 2001). The argument for the latter is based on a dynamic systems perspective,
which views the SAM as self-organizing its morphogenetic activity as well as its
arrest in response to input signals (van der Schoot, 1996; Rinne and van der Schoot,
1998, 2003). This view, that dormancy is a particular state of the meristem rather
than a process, is currently gaining wider recognition (Schrader et al., 2004; Druart
et al., 2007; Ruttink et al., 2007; Ruonala et al., 2008), and its adoption implies that
gene expression studies should discriminate between the sites of signal production
(source leaves), signal transduction (phloem), and responses (RM, SAM, and cam-
bium). As dormancy is based on the execution of an intrinsic response mechanism,
it is this mechanism that deﬁnes dormancy and not the input signals that arrive at
the SAM (van der Schoot, 1996).
A fundamental feature of dormancy cycling is the seasonal regulation of the cel-
lular communication network in the SAM (Rinne et al., 2001). During the dormancy
cycle the SAM passes through three sequential, environmentally triggered states of
symplasmic cell communication – online, ofﬂine and standby (Fig. 1). A major chal-
lenge is to map the SAM-speciﬁc changes in gene expression, and to identify genes,
hormones and other signalling components that give input to the SAM and elicit
cyclic alterations in its functional organisation.
2 Photoperiod Induced Priming of Overwintering
2.1 Sensing by the Leaves
Populus trees, like many other perennials and annuals, keep track of seasonal pro-
gression by monitoring photoperiodic changes with sensory mechanisms in the

176
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
STANDBY
quiescent
freezing tolerant
OFFLINE
dormant
freezing tolerant
ONLINE
active
freezing sensitive
ABA
FT
GA
ETH
CENL
GLS
Photoperiod
Temperature
Temperature
Water supply
GA
GLH
OLE
FLC
Fig. 1 Dormancy cycling in perennial trees like aspen. The SAM has repertoire of three distinct
and intrinsic states of symplasmic communication – online, ofﬂine and standby – each of which
has a unique responsiveness to speciﬁc environmental cues. Cellular and biochemical changes
that drive or follow the cycling of the SAM are placed within the circle. Factors that indirectly
inﬂuence the meristems are indicated outside the circle in an approximate temporal sequence. All
environmental and endogenous factors are placed in an arrow-shaped frame indicating decrease or
increase. The frames are blue, orange or green, representing hormonal signals, proteins/genes, and
environmental factors, respectively. The proliferating and freezing sensitive SAM requires online
communication via PD. At the ofﬂine dormant state cells are dehydrated, freezing-tolerant, and
uncoupled by DSC and water-repellent cell walls. Chilling releases SAM dormancy by restoring
the PD and the cell walls, while deepening freezing tolerance. This results in SAM that is in a
standby or quiescent state. In spring, a rise in temperature and water availability enhances cellular
physiology and kick-starts metabolic coupling and cell-cell signalling, resulting in SAM activation
and bud burst. ABA, abscisic acid; CENL, CENTRORADIALIS-like; DSC, dormancy sphincter
complexes; ETH, ethylene; FT, FLOWERING LOCUS T; FLC, FLOWERING LOCUS C; GA,
gibberellin; GLH, glucan hydrolase (1,3-β-glucanase); GLS, glucan synthase; OLE, OLEOSIN;
PD, plasmodesmata; SAM, shoot apical meristem; SD, short day. Adapted from Rinne et al. (2001)
leaves (Thomas and Vince-Prue, 1997). In recent years considerable progress has
been made in elucidating the early signalling events that follow photoperiod sensing
and eventually lead up to ﬂoral transition in Arabidopsis or transition to dormancy
in poplar (Yanovsky and Kay, 2002; Böhlenius et al., 2006; Kobayashi and Weigel,
2007). Phytochromes (PHY) and other light-sensitive pigments in conjunction with
physiological clocks regulate the expression of genes encoding systemic signals
(Zeevaart, 1976; Bernier et al., 1993; Vince-Prue, 1994; Mouradov et al., 2002;
Böhlenius et al., 2006) that target the apex.
Although end-of-season growth cessation in poplar and ﬂowering in Arabidopsis
seem very different processes, intriguing similarities exist in terms of developmental
responses to SD. In Populus, short day (SD) induced bud set and dormancy estab-
lishment are preceded by cessation of elongation growth (Howe et al., 1995; Olsen
et al., 1997; Welling et al., 2002; Böhlenius et al., 2006; Rohde and Bhalerao, 2007).
The opposite process, the abrupt initiation of elongation growth during bolting is

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
177
exempliﬁed by Arabidopsis, where LD induces the rapid emergence of an inﬂores-
cence stem in conjunction with ﬂoral transition (Koorneef et al., 1991; Yanovsky
and Kay, 2002).
At the molecular level bolting requires the expression of the clock-regulated gene
CONSTANS (CO) in the light to promote the expression of FLOWERING LOCUS
T (FT) gene in companion cells (Kardailsky et al., 1999; Kobayashi et al., 1999;
Yanovsky and Kay, 2002; An et al., 2004). FT protein is a mobile signal that moves
via the phloem to the apex to induce ﬂowering, in Arabidopsis and several other
herbaceous plants (Corbesier et al., 2007; Lin et al., 2007; Tamaki et al., 2007)
as well as in trees (Böhlenius et al., 2006; Hsu et al., 2006). FT1 and FT2 also
play a role in the events leading up to the transition to dormancy in aspen (Fig. 2a)
(Böhlenius et al., 2006; Ruonala et al. 2008). A crucial difference with ﬂowering
is that in the transition to dormancy transcript levels of FT1/FT2 are rapidly and
severely reduced instead of elevated. The downregulation of FT1/FT2 occurs very
early after the start of SD, about three and ﬁve weeks in advance of visible bud
formation and dormancy establishment, respectively (Böhlenius et al., 2006; Hsu
et al., 2006; Ruonala et al., 2008). It is unknown how the interruption of FT supply
to the apex results in the cessation of elongation growth, and how it affects the
downstream events of bud formation and dormancy establishment. The possibility
a                                        b                      
c
FT
PHY
LD
SD
WINTER
PHLOEM
RM
pd
w
w
DSC
1,3-ß-GLUCAN
(CALLOSE)
m
PHLOEM
w
-
CO/ FT
w
CENL1
Fig. 2 Leaf-to-apex signalling during dormancy development in perennial trees like aspen.
(a) During active growth long photoperiod facilitates the functioning of the CO/FT module, medi-
ated by phytochromes and resulting in the movement of FT from leaf companion cells to the RM.
The gene CENL1 is expressed at the RM, where it is involved in regulating stem elongation. FT
is almost instantaneously downregulated by SD, while CENL1 is downregulated later concomitant
with the cessation of elongation growth, which is followed by bud set and dormancy development.
(b) Dormancy is arresting the SAM in a state of cellular uncoupling in which all supracellular
activities are dissipated. After the storage sites in the stem are ﬁlled, winter phloem is develop-
ing. (c) Cellular uncoupling is enforced by installation of DSCs, which tightly seal of the ends of
each plasmodesm (PD). Each DSC is composed of an extracellular ring and an intracellular plug
of callose-enriched material. In the meanwhile cells dehydrate and cell walls become water repel-
lent. CENL, CENTRORADIALIS-like; CO, CONSTANS; DSC, dormancy sphincter complexes; FT,
FLOWERING LOCUS T; SAM, shoot apical meristem; SD, short day; RM, rib meristem. W, cell
wall. Adapted from Rinne and van der Schoot (2003)

178
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
cannot be excluded that concomitantly a positive signal is generated in the leaves,
and send out to the apex.
FT belongs to a group of proteins, including the Arabidopsis protein TERMINAL
FLOWER (TFL1), that share motifs which function in ligand binding and signalling
(Yeung et al., 1999; Banﬁeld and Brady, 2000). In addition to FT, TFL1 and its
Populus ortholog CENTRORADIALIS-LIKE1 (CENL1) play a role in the transition
to ﬂowering and dormancy, respectively. However, in contrast to FT both TFL1 and
CENL1 are produced in the RM (Bradley et al., 1997; Ruonala et al., 2008). In ﬂow-
ering, the expression of FT and TFL1 increase during ﬂoral induction. Although they
have opposite effects on ﬂowering time (Kobayashi et al., 1999; Koorneef et al.,
1991; Shannon and Meeks-Wagner, 1991) they both promote the formation of an
elongating inﬂorescence stem. FT is involved in the induction process whereas TFL1
is implicated in enhancing elongation, as suggested elsewhere (Ruonala et al., 2008),
because tﬂ1 mutant have considerably shortened inﬂorescence stems (Shannon and
Meeks-Wagner, 1991; Alvarez et al., 1992; Bradley et al., 1997) while overexpres-
sors show enhanced inﬂorescence stem formation (Ratcliffe et al., 1998). In the
transition to dormancy in aspen CENL1 might have a similar function as TFL1 in
Arabidopsis (Ruonala et al., 2008; Section 2.2).
2.2 Events at the Apex
Signalling from leaves, whether negative or positive or both, affects the shoot sys-
tem in complex ways. Global gene expression analysis of apical buds (Ruttink et al.,
2007), cambium (Druart et al., 2007), and bark (Park et al., 2008) in Populus trees
showed that under SD the expression of a large number of genes is altered. In
buds major changes take place during the ﬁrst three to four weeks of SD expo-
sure, mostly concerning genes that function in metabolism and cell division, cold
acclimation, and reserve accumulation (Ruttink et al., 2007). The expression analy-
sis suggests that signalling pathways are operated in an orderly sequence, including
light-, ethylene-, and abscisic acid (ABA)-signalling (Ruttink et al., 2007). Ethylene
signalling precedes ABA signalling (Ruttink et al., 2007), and is probably necessary
to time growth cessation and bud formation (Fig. 1) (Ruonala et al., 2006).
In buds, ABA levels peak in response to SD (Rinne et al., 1994a; Welling et al.,
1997; Rinne et al., 1998; Rohde et al., 2002; Ruonala et al., 2006), and in cam-
bium in response to SD and cold (Druart et al., 2007). Commonly, the peak in
ABA corresponds with the upregulation of genes for ABA biosynthesis, ABA sig-
nal transduction, and ABA responsive transcription factors (Ruttink et al., 2007).
In aspices, ABA levels do not correlate with growth cessation or dormancy devel-
opment (Welling et al., 1997). However, sensitivity to ABA increases during SD
and decreases during chilling (Barros and Neill, 1986; Rinne et al., 1998), indicat-
ing that changes in ABA sensitivity do play a role during dormancy development.
In contrast, a correlation does exist between ABA levels and cold hardiness. ABA
levels increase during acclimation, and the inability to regulate ABA levels impairs
acclimation (Welling et al., 1997; Rinne et al., 1998; Welling et al., 2002).

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
179
Interestingly, CENL1, Populus ortholog of TFL1 and of the tomato gene SELF-
PRUNING (SP) (Pnueli et al., 1998), was initially strongly upregulated at the RM,
one or two weeks after the reduction of FT1/FT2 transcripts (Böhlenius et al.,
2006; Hsu et al., 2006; Ruonala et al., 2008). However, the subsequent complete
downregulation concomitant with the cessation of elongation growth indicates that
CENL1 might be required for stem elongation. This was conﬁrmed in transgenic
aspen that under SD increased elongation growth and continuously upregulated
CENL1 (Ruonala et al., 2008). In addition to its proposed role in stem elongation
CENL1 may be involved in safeguarding SAM identity during bud formation in a
manner analogous to that suggested for TFL1 in Arabidopsis (Conti and Bradley,
2007).
An early event at the apex of aspen as well as birch is the diminished symplas-
mic permeability of the SAM (Rinne and van der Schoot, 1998; Rinne et al., 2001;
Ruonala et al., 2008). As symplasmic communication is pivotal for morphogenesis
this reduction at around 10-15 SDs in aspen (Ruonala et al., 2008) might hamper the
formation of new primordia. With a plastochron of one day (Ruonala et al., 2008) a
mere 10-15 leaves could still be initiated from the SAM under SD. Potential sym-
plasmic movement of signalling molecules like CENL1 between the RM and the
SAM could preferentially occur in this period.
The initiation of a bud is marked by the organogenesis of scale leaves. In poplar
this is suggested to start immediately (Rohde et al., 2002), probably after a sin-
gle or a few SDs, involving the incipient primordia. So far no genes have been
directly related to scale initiation, and all major changes in gene expression take
place later (Ruttink et al., 2007), albeit scale formation might coincide roughly
with the strong reduction in FT supply to the SAM (Böhlenius et al., 2006). At one
week of SD the GA response modulator GA-INSENSITIVE and the gene PICKLE
(PKL), a repressor of the Arabidopsis cell cycle regulator AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)
(Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), are upregulated (Ruttink et al., 2007). These genes
might be involved in scale and embryonic leaf formation by repressing normal leaf
development.
2.3 Gibberellins in the Stem
In trees reduced GA levels have been thought to trigger growth cessation under
SD (Junttila and Jensen, 1988; Moritz, 1995; Olsen et al., 1997; Eriksson, 2000).
In aspen, this is supported by the downregulation of a gene that encodes a key
GA biosynthetic enzyme in leaves, GA 20-oxidase, after just 4 SD (Eriksson
and Moritz, 2002). In line with this, overexpression of GA-20 oxidase in aspen
trees resulted in delayed growth cessation (Eriksson et al., 2000). Since growth
cessation is not entirely prevented, other controlling factors must be involved that
override the promoting effects of GA on stem elongation. Although GA levels
decrease in the upper stem during SD (Olsen et al., 1995), endogenous GA levels
have not been determined for the SAM, RM or even the RZ due to technical
limitations.

180
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
In contrast to the upper stem parts the SAM is devoid of GA because GA 20-
oxidase genes in the SAM are subject to direct transcriptional repression (Sakamoto
et al., 2001). GA2-oxidase, which deactivates biologically active GAs and their pre-
cursors, is expressed at the base of the meristematic dome in Arabidopsis (Jasinski
et al., 2005), and this could inactivate GAs arriving from the stem. The emerging
view is that the SAM is the territory of cytokinins that in conjunction with KNOX
genes keep it free from destructive GA inﬂuences (Shani et al., 2006).
The cambium of aspen contains low levels of bioactive GAs (Israelsson et al.,
2005), whereas the major site of GA biosynthesis is the expanding xylem tissue
were bioactive GA1, GA4 and GA-20 oxidase1 co-localise (Israelsson et al., 2005).
In contrast to the young stem, the cambium does not downregulate GA-20-oxidase
genes in autumn (Druart et al., 2007) suggesting that GA levels might not be key
regulators of cambial cell division. The Populus homolog of RGA (repressor of
ga1-3), encoding a GA-regulated nuclear DELLA protein that represses growth,
was upregulated during growth cessation in the cambium (Druart et al., 2007). In
buds of aspen, the DELLA gene, GAI was reported to be dramatically upregulated
(Ruttink et al., 2007). However, in view of the recent ﬁnding that GAI RNA trafﬁcks
long-distance in the phloem (Huang and Yu, 2009) elevated transcript levels could
also be due to import in the early stages of bud formation. This shows that even
though GA biosynthesis is not altered in the autumn, the growth promoting effects
of GA might be effectively diminished. DELLA proteins might therefore have some
function in dormancy cycling, as proposed for seeds (Penﬁeld et al., 2006). This is
squaring with the fact that DELLAs are regulated by ethylene signalling (Achard
et al., 2007), which is required for the timing of the dormancy assumption (Ruonala
et al., 2006).
2.4 Dormancy at the SAM
Contrary to some general notions in the literature, a lowered metabolic state on
its own is an insufﬁcient condition for dormancy. A strong reduction in the sup-
ply of photosynthate to the apex slows down metabolism and can arrest elongation
growth, but without preventing leaf development at the SAM (Rinne et al., 2005).
In contrast, it is the isolation of SAM cells from each other that will halt patterning
and impose dormancy. This was demonstrated for birch (van der Schoot and Rinne,
1999; Rinne et al., 2001), and aspen (Ruonala et al., 2008) in which symplasmic per-
meability decreased after ten to ﬁfteen SDs (Section 2.2). This was followed by the
physical isolation of SAM cells through formation of 1,3-β-glucan containing dor-
mancy sphincter complexes (DSC) on all PD (Fig. 2c) (Rinne and van der Schoot,
2003). At a later stage, and in addition to the cellular uncoupling of cells within the
SAM, the SAM as a whole becomes de facto isolated from the shoot system. This is
achieved by occlusion of the supply routes to the apex by “dormancy callose” (Aloni
and Peterson, 1997), a phenomenon referred to as “winter phloem” (Fig. 2b) (Aloni
et al., 1991). The time lag between these events is probably used to ﬁll the stores
in the stem with photosynthetic and breakdown products from the senescing leaves.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
181
In the SAM meanwhile, cell-cell signalling via excreted ligands and membrane-
based receptor kinases is impeded by cellular dehydration and the impregnation of
cell walls with water-repellent substances (Rinne et al., 2001; Welling et al., 2002).
In this dormant state SAM cells have a low metabolism and membrane potentials
that have decreased below the value of the diffusion potential (Rinne and van der
Schoot, 1998; Ruonala et al., 2008). Altogether, the process of dormancy establish-
ment in aspen takes six to eight weeks to develop under SD (Böhlenius et al., 2006;
Ruonala et al., 2008). As the correlatively inhibited axillary buds enter dormancy in
a similar time-frame, changes comparable to those in the SAM might be expected to
occur.
2.5 Dormancy at the Cambium
Like the SAM, the cambium is sensitive to adverse conditions and is arrested at the
end of the growing season (Schrader et al., 2004), a state traditionally referred to as
“winter rest” (Esau, 1977). Although apical buds and overwintering cambium show
commonalities in gene expression (Druart et al., 2007; Ruttink et al., 2007), it is
as yet unclear how similar cambial and SAM dormancy are. Nonetheless, cambial
arrest is real and distinct from quiescence and we will refer to it as cambial dor-
mancy (Oribe et al., 2003; Schrader et al., 2004). As in the SAM of aspen and birch,
cambial arrest involves cessation of cell proliferation, accumulation of storage prod-
ucts, dehydration, cold-acclimation, and cell wall modiﬁcations (Clausen and Apel,
1991; Rowland and Arora, 1997; Welling et al., 1997, 2002; Ermel et al., 2000;
Rinne et al., 1998, 2001; Kozlowski and Pallardy, 2002; Schrader et al., 2004). In
addition, the number of cell layers in the cambial zone is reduced from more than
ten to fewer than four (Schrader et al., 2004). Concomitant changes in gene expres-
sion, investigated by analysing single cell layers (Uggla et al., 1996; Hertzberg
et al., 2001), showed that major cell cycle genes are downregulated in the dor-
mant cambium (Schrader et al., 2004). Interestingly, transcripts of some cell cycle
genes remain present, perhaps facilitating reactivation of the cambium in spring and
reﬂecting that cambial activity is regulated at the transcriptional and translational
level (Schrader et al., 2004).
Although cessation of cell proliferation accompanies the establishment of dor-
mancy, it is not a deﬁning feature, as it is also found in case of quiescence and
correlative inhibition. In the cambium the difference may reside at the level of cell
cycle machinery, as key cyclin dependent kinases are lost during the transition from
quiescence to the ofﬂine mode of dormancy (Espinosa-Ruiz et al., 2004). Although
in the SAM of aspen and birch the dissipation of the supracellular organisation is
characteristic for dormancy (Rinne and van der Schoot, 1998; Rinne et al., 2001;
Ruonala et al., 2008), it remains to be seen if this is also true for cambial dormancy.
The upregulation of a glucan-synthase gene in the cambial zone of aspen during
dormancy establishment (Schrader et al., 2004) is suggestive of physical isolation
of cambial cells by deposition of callose (1,3-β-glucan) at PD. Alternatively, the

182
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
upregulation of the glucan-synthase genes could induce the accumulation of callose
in the cell walls, which would impede intercellular movement of a putative ligand
for the CLV1 receptor kinase (Schrader et al., 2004).
Overall, the complexity of the cambial transcriptome is considerably reduced
in the arrested state, while a number of genes involved in storage processes and
defence or stress reactions are upregulated (Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al.,
2007). These include genes that are involved in drought and cold stress responses
like LEA, osmotin and ERD10. Other strongly downregulated genes include the
Populus homolog of ANT (Druart et al., 2007), which is also a putative target for cell
cycle regulation in buds (Ruttink et al., 2007). Similarly, RLK3 and HB3, Populus
homologs of the Arabidopsis genes CLV1 and WUS, are strongly downregulated
(Schrader et al., 2004). However, expression of another CLV1 homolog (PttCLV1) is
maintained, probably providing some form of cambial “identity” during dormancy
(Schrader et al., 2004).
Other important genes that are downregulated during cambial dormancy in aspen
are PIN1 and PIN2, encoding auxin efﬂux carriers (Schrader et al., 2004). This
could explain the reduction of polar auxin transport in the dormant cambium and
the desensitization to applied auxin (Schrader et al., 2004; Odani, 1975; Little and
Bonga, 1974) while auxin levels in the cambium remain relatively high (Savidge and
Wareing, 1982; Sundberg et al., 1991). Insensitivity to auxin is a deﬁning property
of the dormant cambium (Little and Bonga, 1974; Oribe et al., 2003) and could be
used to assess its dormancy status (Aloni et al., 1991), perhaps in combination with
the typical absence of speciﬁc CDKs (Espinosa-Ruiz et al., 2004). Lack of sucrose
may help sustain dormancy in auxin-desensitized cambium (Little and Bonga, 1974;
Oribe et al., 2003).
2.6 Events in Leaves and Stem
In some Populus species, elongation ceases in three to four weeks of SD (Böhlenius
et al., 2006; Ruttink et al., 2007), while the leaves continue photosynthesis for at
least another 4–5 weeks. Following growth arrest, the diminished demand from
sinks generates a surplus of photosynthates that become re-routed to storage sinks
in roots, stem and developing buds (Fege and Brown, 1984; Rinne et al., 1994b),
where carbohydrate metabolism is modiﬁed to facilitate storing (Sauter et al., 1998;
Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al., 2007; Ruttink et al., 2007; Park et al., 2008).
Imported photosynthates are stored as sugars, or converted to starch, fats and pro-
teins (Sauter and van Cleve, 1991; Rinne et al., 1994b; Sauter et al., 1996). The
importance of storage in the form of protein is illustrated by the fact that in aspen the
gene BARK STORAGE PROTEIN (BSP), which is under strong photoperiodic regu-
lation (Black et al., 2001), accounts for 20% of all transcripts in dormant cambium
(Schrader et al., 2004). These stored proteins might be remobilised in the cambium
during spring, as the increased level in amino acids appears just prior to cambial
activation (Druart et al., 2007). Storage build up is important for overwintering,
as hindering photosynthesis during growth cessation, for example by removal of

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
183
leaves, impairs acclimation and survival capacity (Fuchigami et al., 1971). In aspen
this phase continues until dormancy has set in, and is followed by leaf senescence
(Keskitalo et al., 2005).
Growth cessation is a prerequisite for leaf senescence as for example over-
expression of PHYTOCHROME A (PHYA) or the FRUITFULL-like MADS box
gene BpMADS4 (Böhlenius et al., 2006; Hoenicka et al., 2008) prevents not only
growth cessation but also leaf senescence. However, the regulation of autum-
nal leaf senescence is a more variable trait than end-of-season growth cessation,
and it might be sensitive to both low temperatures and photoperiod (Fracheboud
et al., 2009). Autumnal senescence is accompanied by a major change in gene
expression reﬂecting a shift to mitochondrial respiration, fatty acid oxidation and
nutrient mobilisation (Bhalerao et al., 2003; Andersson et al., 2004). Upregulation
of genes involved in amino acid metabolism (Ruttink et al., 2007; Park et al.,
2008) in bark and buds suggests that the leaf-derived mineral nutrients and nitroge-
nous compounds are imported by storage sites in the overwintering parts of the
tree. A clear sign of advanced autumn senescence is the yellowing of leaves by
carotenoids that become visible after chlorophyll breakdown, while subsequent
reddening is due to anthocyans that provide protection to the ailing photosyn-
thetic apparatus (Andersson et al., 2004; Keskitalo et al., 2005). Eventually, when
phloem of both leaves and stem is occluded with callose (Aloni et al., 1991; Aloni
and Peterson, 1997; Krabel et al., 1993), export ceases and the fate of the leaf
is sealed.
3 Freezing Tolerance
3.1 Environmental Regulation
Cold acclimated boreal and temperate zone trees are the most freezing tolerant
species on earth. Freezing tolerance is based on the capacity to endure cellular
dehydration, which occurs when at sub zero temperatures water is moving along
the water potential gradient to extracellular ice (Steponkus, 1984). This capacity is
crucial as, due to the extremely low winter temperatures, cells have to survive almost
complete dehydration for prolonged periods. Not surprisingly, successful overwin-
tering requires numerous coordinated morphological and biochemical adaptations to
dehydration, including the downregulation of metabolism and removal of reactive
oxygen species and free radicals, the accumulation of protective proteins, such as
dehydrins and other LEA proteins, and the maintenance of macromolecules in bio-
logically relevant structures through accumulation of disaccharides and other glass
forming compounds (Oliver et al., 2002).
The extreme cold hardiness of overwintering plants results from the addi-
tive affects of photoperiod and temperature on freezing tolerance (Weiser, 1970).
Typically, SD-induced freezing tolerance starts to increase when elongation growth
ceases (Welling et al., 1997, 2002; Rinne et al., 1999). SD induced acclimation is

184
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
most efﬁcient at physiological temperatures as it involves metabolic processes that
are slowed down at low temperature (Fuchigami et al., 1971). Remarkably, in trees
SD exposure on its own can increase freezing tolerance beyond the level of fully
acclimated herbaceous species, with a survival rate LT50 (50% survival) of –19
to –40◦C (Junttila and Kaurin, 1990; Rinne et al., 1998, 1999). However, subse-
quent low and sub zero temperatures are required for a further increase of freezing
tolerance. Typical for this second stage is that it is governed by alterations in ambi-
ent temperature: it increases with decreasing temperatures and vice versa (Sauter
et al., 1996; Welling et al., 2004; Park et al., 2008).
3.2 Osmotic Adjustments and Dehydration
During SD induced acclimation cells and tissues adjust osmotically. This is an active
metabolic process that is hampered by low temperature (Welling et al., 2002). The
resulting decrease in water content and the increase in water and osmotic potential
(Rinne et al., 1998; Welling et al., 1997, 2002) contribute to the cold hardiness of
woody plants. These programmed events are characteristic for buds and stems, as
in leaves they remain essentially unchanged (Welling et al., 1997). Collectively, the
events prevent intracellular ice formation and alleviate the effects of frost-induced
dehydration.
Starch breakdown provides the sugars (Sauter et al., 1996) that are required for
building up freezing tolerance (Wanner and Junttila, 1999; Uemura et al., 2003), but
breakdown products are also utilized for example in fatty acid metabolism (Druart
et al., 2007). Highly abundant sugars might play a role in osmotic adjustments
whereas less abundant sugars might also function in cryoprotection and signalling
(Stitt and Hurry, 2002). Although starch hydrolysis occurs in response to low tem-
perature during winter (Sauter et al., 1996), genes encoding the starch degrading
endoamylases are expressed already under SD conditions both in buds (Ruttink
et al., 2007) and in stem (Schrader et al., 2004). These endoamylases might asso-
ciate with starch grains only in response to low temperature (Sauter et al., 1998),
which would explain the temperature-dependence of starch hydrolysis. As hydroly-
sis occurs in dehydrated tissues trees might have evolved dehydrin proteins (Section
3.4) that rescue enzyme function by sequestering water at the surface of starch grains
(Rinne et al., 1999). Sauter and co-workers (1996) proposed that sugars desiccate
protoplasts by pulling water into the dilated tubular or vesicular ER-cisternae, where
sucrose and its galactosides are sequestered after starch hydrolysis. Several stud-
ies report that sugars and other protecting molecules stabilize membranes during
freeze-thaw (Close, 1996). Thus, the agents of osmotic adjustment, accumulated
proteins and sugars, also provide protection against freezing for macromolecules
and membranes.
Unique to woody plants is the capacity to form metastable solutions known
as glasses, which make cells extremely stable and unaffected by the stresses of
low temperature and ice. The formation of solid intracellular glass occurs at about
−28◦C in cells with high sugar concentrations and prevents further water loss to

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
185
extracellular ice at lower temperatures. Glassed solutions are not subject to ice
nucleation, solute crystallization and water vapor cavitation as long as the solu-
tion remains below the melting temperature of glass (Hirsh et al., 1985; Wisniewski
et al., 2003). Under severe cellular dehydration, when water is almost absent, sugars
might replace water in the hydration shell of the membranes, maintaining the space
between phospholipids (Hoekstra et al., 2001). Sugars are also needed for repair of
freeze-induced cavitated vessels as the increase of sucrose in xylem sap results in
active reﬁlling of embolized vessels through winter stem pressure (Améglio et al.,
2004; Decourteix et al., 2006).
3.3 Regulation of Gene Expression
While the phenological alterations in freezing tolerance during overwintering are
well deﬁned, the associated molecular changes have remained largely unknown. The
recent transcriptional, proteomic and metabolic proﬁling of aspen and other boreal
tree species during the annual growth cycle has provided a global map of sequen-
tial molecular changes during overwintering (Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al.,
2007; Ruttink et al., 2007; Park et al., 2008; Renaut et al., 2008). The data conﬁrm
at a molecular level the documented cellular and metabolic alterations that occur
during hardiness and dormancy development. In addition, these studies suggest
metabolic routes that are utilized during overwintering. For example, comparison of
transcriptional analyses of stem samples from cottonwoods grown in the ﬁeld and
under controlled conditions conﬁrms that genes that are predominantly expressed
in autumn are responsive to SD and drought, whereas genes expressed during early
and late winter respond mostly to the combination of SD and low temperature, or to
low temperature alone (Park et al., 2008).
Although, in trees, the most notable alterations in SD induced gene expression
relate to the cessation of growth and the development of dormancy, they are remark-
ably similar to the cold-induced changes in the transcriptome and metabolome of
Arabidopsis (Fowler and Thomashow, 2002; Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al.,
2007; Renaut et al., 2008). SD and low temperature can induce the expression
of cold-regulated genes independently, but SD can enhance cold-induced expres-
sion even in cases where on its own it does not have an effect (Park et al., 2008).
Also Puhakainen et al., (2004) showed for birch that although the dehydrin gene
BpLTI36 was not expressed in leaves of SD-exposed trees, SD was “priming” the
leaves for enhanced cold-induced expression of this gene. Despite its signiﬁcance,
the mechanism of this SD priming has remained unknown.
Several studies have shown that expression of some of the cold regulated genes
is maximal during mid-winter, at the time when trees are the most freezing tolerant
(Artlip et al., 1997; Rinne et al., 1998; Karlson et al., 2003; Welling et al., 2004). In
that period trees are exposed to freeze-thaw conditions (Welling et al., 2004), and
might need maximum protection. A number of cold regulated genes are responsive
to freeze-thaw treatment (Zhu et al., 2000; Welling et al., 2004; Decourteix et al.,

186
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
2006; Tommasini et al., 2008; Welling and Palva, 2008). As the degree of freezing
tolerance correlates with the expression level of cold regulated genes, sequen-
tial exposure to SD, cold and freezing might be required for a stepwise increase
in cold acclimation, resulting in the extreme freezing tolerance that is typical of
overwintering trees.
3.4 Dehydrins and Other Protective Proteins
Besides genes that are related to storage accumulation and membrane and cell wall
modiﬁcation, various genes implicated in cell defence and rescue are upregulated in
Populus trees in response to SD and early winter (Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al.,
2007; Park et al., 2008). These include genes encoding pathogen-resistant proteins
that have antifreeze-activity (Wisniewski et al., 1999) and proteins that are known to
scavenge reactive oxygen species and other free radicals (Fowler and Thomashow,
2002; Schrader et al., 2004; Druart et al., 2007; Ruttink et al., 2007; Park et al.,
2008). In addition, upregulated genes include those encoding dehydrins and other
LEA proteins (Close, 1996) as well as a number of ABA and cold regulated proteins
(Druart et al., 2007; Ruttink et al., 2007).
Dehydrins are signiﬁcantly elevated during overwintering as they are produced in
response to stresses that cause cellular dehydration such as low temperature, drought
and high salinity (e.g. Svensson et al., 2002). In addition, dehydrins accumulate
either in response to SD (Welling et al., 1997; Karlson et al., 2003), a combination of
SD and cold (Welling et al., 2002, 2004) or freezing temperatures (Zhu et al., 2000;
Tommasini et al., 2008; Welling and Palva, 2008). Dehydrins are stable proteins
and often the total level of various dehydrins is highest during mid-winter, reﬂect-
ing the need for maximum protection when temperatures are the lowest (Welling
et al., 2004). Although the precise function of dehydrins has not been elucidated,
their consistent presence in dehydrated tissue suggests a central role in dehydra-
tion tolerance of plants. Dehydrins have been shown to have in vitro cryo-protective
(Close, 1996; Rinne et al., 1999; Wisniewski et al., 1999; Hara et al., 2001; Peng
et al., 2008) and antifreeze-activity (Wisniewski et al., 1999). Dehydrins might func-
tion as compatible solutes under mild water stress, and interact under severe stress
with other proteins to stabilize macromolecules and membranes (Close, 1996).
Collectively, sugars, dehydrins and other LEA proteins can confer higher protection
to cell membranes than sugars alone (Wolkers et al., 2001).
3.5 Transcriptional Regulation
During SD a number of transcription factors (TFs) involved in responses to dehy-
dration, photoperiod, cold, salinity, and glucose are upregulated in poplar buds
(Ruttink et al., 2007). Considering the complexity of cold acclimation, it seems
likely that several of these TFs are involved in regulating different steps of the pro-
cess (Druart et al., 2007). For example, in aspen two cold-induced TFs, DRTY and
HB12, are expressed at different times during overwintering, possibly regulating

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
187
different target genes (Druart et al., 2007). In trees, the best characterized tran-
scriptional regulatory pathway is the CBF/DREB1 regulon. Overexpression of the
Arabidopsis AtCBF1 in poplar induces a speciﬁc subset of cold-responsive genes
and leads to an increase in freezing tolerance of both leaves and stem, suggest-
ing that the CBF-mediated signalling pathway is conserved in perennial and annual
tissues (Benedict et al., 2005). In addition, four endogenous CBF genes are dif-
ferentially expressed in leaves and stems in response to cold, suggesting that they
might regulate different CBF regulons in different tissues (Benedict et al., 2005).
As CBF genes are expressed transiently, it has been difﬁcult to study their role in
the annual growth cycle and, for the same reason, they are usually not detected in
microarray experiments (Druart et al., 2007). Ruttink and coworkers (2007) showed
that numerous CBF target genes were upregulated in response to SD in bud tis-
sues. This suggests that SD triggers the same targets as cold and drought, but that
the input paths might differ. Similar to aspen, birch has at least four different CBF
genes that are all induced in response to cold in leaves, stem and buds, with slightly
different expression levels (Welling and Palva, 2008). The CBFs and one of the tar-
get genes, the dehydrin encoding BpLTI36, were expressed at a much higher level
when pre-exposed to a combination of SD and cold, than when pre-exposed to cold
alone. Especially freeze-thaw treatment induced very strong expression of CBFs and
BpLTI36, although the transcript levels were upregulated only during the thawing-
phase (Welling and Palva, 2008). These results suggest that CBFs are components
of the mechanism that enables trees to cope with repeated freeze-thaw periods dur-
ing winter and to maintain adequate levels of freezing-tolerance (Welling and Palva,
2008) until an increase in ambient temperature leads to the sequential deacclimation
of stem and buds (Welling et al., 2004; Kalberer et al., 2006).
4 Release from Dormancy
4.1 Phenology
As much as dormancy and freezing tolerance are regulated coordinately, a rela-
tionship exists between deacclimation and dormancy, because deacclimation occurs
more easily when buds are released from dormancy (Leinonen et al., 1997; Kalberer
et al., 2006). Release from dormancy requires prolonged exposure to temperatures
between 2 and 7◦C, a process referred to as chilling (Coville, 1920; Chouard,
1960). In aspen, bud dormancy release at these temperatures takes about 6–8 weeks
(Espinosa-Ruiz et al., 2004; Rinne et al., unpublished), which is fulﬁlled already in
late autumn. In nature trees are commonly exposed longer to chilling, which might
accelerate the rate of future budburst. Among species indigenous to the same latitude
differences exist in chilling demands (Leinonen, 1996). Possibly, and in analogy to
differences in dormancy onset among clinal ecotypes (Howe et al., 1995; Frewen
et al., 2000; Luquez et al., 2008), differences in chilling demand may also exist
among ecotypes, although this is little investigated (Leinonen, 1996).

188
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
Lack of sufﬁcient chilling does not prevent eventual bud burst, but adequate
chilling is important for deciduous perennials to fully develop their foliation and
architectural potential. For example, in apple and beach insufﬁcient chilling leads
to a diminished bursting of buds, which will be mostly conﬁned to the shoot tip
(Arora et al., 2003). In contrast, in aspen and birch insufﬁcient chilling promotes
growth from basal buds, resulting in a bushy growth habit (Rinne et al., 1994a). In
practise, inadequate chilling can be compensated partly by application of chemi-
cals that break dormancy, such as hydrogen cyanamide (Fuchigami and Nee, 1987).
This is economically important, for example in fruit tree cultivation, and insight in
the mechanism may contribute to the understanding of natural dormancy release
(Arora et al., 2003). Traditionally, chilling is regarded as the natural cause of dor-
mancy release, but freezing can also release buds from dormancy (Rinne et al.,
1997) and its effect is as fast as that of dormancy-release chemicals. Thus, incidental
early frosts might result in premature dormancy release and bud burst, which makes
them vulnerable to subsequent freezing. In general, the increase in the frequency
and duration of warm spells during winter, as prognosed by climate models, might
be problematic for trees which are released from dormancy through most of the
winter time.
4.2 Cell Biology and Biochemistry
Traditionally dormancy has been viewed as a systemic property and investi-
gated phenologically (Kozlowski and Pallardy, 2002). Although valuable, such
approaches remain restricted and are insufﬁcient to understand dormancy cycling in
terms of a seasonal regulation of meristem activity. Observations indicate that chill-
ing effects cannot be imported from other parts of the plant and that buds themselves
need to be exposed to cold (Metzger, 1996). This is crucial to our understanding of
the dormant state, as it indicates that SAM cells respond cell-autonomously to dor-
mancy releasing signals like chilling. It is also what one would expect if all transport
routes in the stem and the SAM, both symplasmic and apoplastic, are obstructed.
This places the mechanism that enforces cell isolation at the centre of the dormancy
phenomenon. The intrinsic mechanism that enforces the dormant state (Fig. 1) has
been identiﬁed as the mechanism that obstructs PD and cell walls in the SAM
(Rinne and van der Schoot, 1998; Rinne et al., 2001; Ruonala et al., 2008). Chilling
therefore might impinge on cellular mechanisms which restore cell wall properties
and PD functionality (van der Schoot, 1996; Rinne et al., 2001) and allow renewed
exchange of peptide signals through the extracellular space and morphogens through
PD (Rinne and van der Schoot, 2003). Restoration of PD might resemble the spring
restoration of sieve plate pores, which originate from PD (Lucas et al., 1993), and
which in winter phloem are occluded with callose deposits (Fig. 2b, c) (Aloni and
Peterson, 1991, 1997). Chilling-induced removal of callose from DSC requires the
targeted delivery of the callose-hydrolyzing enzyme 1,3-β-glucanase (Rinne et al.,

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
189
2001). This is a cell autonomous process as the dormant SAM is reduced to a mere
collection of metabolically and physiologically uncoupled cells. After supply routes
and intercellular transport paths are restored, sugars and other nutrients re-enter
the SAM.
In contrast to the young stem and the pith, which during SD exposure become
loaded with starch, the SAM and the RM remain free from starch, both in aspen
and birch (Rinne et al., 1994b, 2001, 2008). Interestingly, the starch grains imme-
diately subjacent to the SAM disappear during wintertime to reappear prior to bud
burst in spring at the same locations (Rinne et al., 1994b). This probably contributes
to freezing tolerance by providing starch-derived sugars for protection (Section
3.2). Such role for starch-derived sugars must be lacking in the starch-free SAM
and RM. Instead of starch the SAM and RM, in both aspen and birch (Rinne
et al., 2001, 2008), produce a remarkable number of lipid bodies (LBs). Similar
LBs accumulate in large numbers in the dormant cambium of other perennials
like for example Robinia pseudoacacia (Farrar and Evert, 1997). In Arabidopsis
seeds LBs provide both cryoprotection and energy (Shimada et al., 2008), but in
the dormant SAM they might additionally function in dormancy cycling (Rinne
et al., 2001).
LBs contain triglycerides and are decorated with a set of proteins, including
oleosins, lipases and hydrolytic enzymes (Murphy, 2001; Rinne et al., 2001). The
role of oleosins is to prevent LB fusion via electrical repulsion, thereby retaining a
minute size (Siloto et al., 2006). In dormant birch and other perennials the minute
oleosin-decorated LBs are displaced during chilling from random positions to the
peripheral cytoplasm, thereby contacting the plasmamembrane and PD (Pihakaski
et al., 1987; Rinne et al., 2001). Dehydrating seeds have similarly behaving LBs
(Cordova-Tellez and Burris, 2002). Isolation of LBs from birch, and analysis of their
LB-proteome showed that in addition to oleosins and other peptides they contain
1,3-β-glucanase (Rinne et al., 2008). This hydrolytic enzyme might play a critical
role in dormancy cycling by regulating in conjunction with 1,3-β-glucan synthase
the levels of callose (1,3-β-glucan) at the PD (Rinne et al., 2001; Rinne and van
der Schoot, 2003, 2004). In support of this several 1,3-β-glucanase genes and other
cell wall modifying enzymes are involved in the release of seeds from primary dor-
mancy (Leubner-Metzger and Meins, 2000; Cadman et al., 2006). In Arabidopsis
seeds, these 1,3-β-glucanase genes include a member (Cadman et al., 2006) that is
identiﬁed as a putative PD-associated protein (PPAP) which localizes at PD (Levy
et al., 2007). In the cambial zone of Populus trees similar PD and wall modiﬁca-
tions may take place considering that cold exposure upregulates a 1,3-β–glucanase
as well as a receptor kinase gene which requires ligand exchange through the cell
wall space (Druart et al., 2007; Park et al., 2008).
LBs originate from the outer leaﬂet of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Napier
et al., 1996; Murphy, 2001). Their production is signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed during the
transition to dormancy while, in contrast, cell divisions slow down and eventually
cease. This suggests that the ER plays an important role in the complex array of
processes that underlie growth cessation, bud formation and dormancy. Notably,

190
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
the ER is also the site of an ethylene receptor (Grefen et al., 2008), which is
required for the correct timing of dormancy, both in birch (Ruonala et al., 2006)
and poplar (Ruttink et al., 2007). It is tempting therefore to speculate that photope-
riodic signalling somehow regulates processes at the ER of meristem cells. Ethylene
biosynthesis genes are upregulated at around two weeks of SD in poplar (Ruttink
et al., 2007), corresponding to the upregulation of an oleosin gene (Rinne et al.,
2008). ABI3 mutants in Arabidopisis are deﬁcient in oleosins and possess fused
LBs (Parcy et al., 1994), suggesting that ABA could be required for normal LB for-
mation. Knocking out oleosin genes similarly resulted in fused LBs, and caused a
delay of dormancy release and germination (Siloto et al., 2006).
In summary, LBs are produced early during the dormancy induction period, put
into action during the dormancy release phase, and decomposed during tissue acti-
vation (Riding and Little, 1984; Farrar and Evert, 1997; Rinne et al., 2001). The
presence of such a pro-active system shows that temporal correlations based on tran-
script proﬁling should be regarded with some caution as cellular dormancy release
mechanisms, including stored mRNAs and compartmentalized proteins, could be
hold in abeyance for future use. It seems feasible that de novo gene expression is
initially not necessary for kick-starting the dormancy release process. Together it
suggests that in order to understand dormancy release more completely investiga-
tions should address the pre-instalment of the release mechanism during dormancy
induction.
4.3 Gibberellins
While chilling is the natural condition that releases buds from dormancy, GA appli-
cation to a dormant bud can replace chilling, suggesting that chilling effects are
mediated, at least in part, by GA (Lang, 1957; Purvis, 1961). This was supported
by evidence showing that chilling can activate GA-biosynthetic genes locally at the
shoot tip in some ﬂowering plants (Hazebroek et al., 1993; Zanewich and Rood,
1995). This probably involved vernalization-induced changes in methylation of the
gibberellin biosynthesis genes (Burn et al., 1993; Finnegan et al., 1996, 1998).
Recent studies have shown that a key biosynthesis gene for GA, GA-20-oxidase,
is transiently upregulated during spring-time reactivation of the cambium in aspen
Druart et al., (2007). It is uncertain if the upregulation is due to chilling or to
growth induction. An exclusive role of GA in bud dormancy release is doubtful
in view of the many abiotic factors that can break dormancy, such as anaerobiosis,
freezing, high temperature, and a range of different chemicals (Tanino et al., 1989;
Shirazi and Fuchigami, 1995; Cohn, 1996; Rinne et al., 1997; Wisniewski et al.,
1997). A plausible explanation is that near-lethal factors converge on a damage-
repair system, involving 1,3-β-glucanases, that kick-starts cell-cell communication
between meristem cells and subsequent morphogenetic processes (Rinne et al.,
2001).

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
191
The fact that the SAM might be kept free of GA (Sakamoto et al., 2001; Jasinski
et al., 2005; Shani et al., 2006) suggests that the ability of exogenously applied GA
to compensate chilling is due to an indirect effect on the SAM itself. It is impor-
tant to mention, however, that the in situ localization of GA biosynthesis genes
has so far been analysed only in active meristems of herbaceous plants. Work of
Eriksson and Moritz (2002), using cDNA dot blot analysis, indicated that GA-
20-oxidase levels might be higher in isolated SAMs than in the apex as a whole.
Poplars differ from Arabidopsis not only because they are perennial species, but
also because of their caulescent growth habit. This might set different requirements
for GA biosynthesis sites compared to the rosette plant Arabidopsis. Even when
GA is not produced in the SAM it could show up there if GA2-oxidases would be
downregulated during chilling, as it would allow GA to diffuse into the meristem
from the young stem. GA is a small molecule and can easily move via PD (Drake
and Carr, 1979; Kwiatkowska, 1991; Lucas et al., 1993). GA could also function
during dormancy release by promoting degradation of SD-induced DELLA pro-
teins, thereby repressing growth repressors. Collectively, the above suggests that
1,3-β-glucanases are involved in re-establishing PD during chilling, while subse-
quent degradation of DELLA proteins might facilitate the liberation of meristems
from growth constraints.
4.4 Chilling and Vernalization
Chilling and vernalization are both processes that are non-transferable and time-
requiring, and executed under low but non-freezing temperatures. Despite these
commonalities, few shared cellular or genetic features have been uncovered. In
Arabidopsis winter annuals the gene FRIGIDA (FRI) elevates the expression of
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) which is predominantly expressed in the SAM,
where it represses ﬂowering (Michaels and Amasino, 1999, 2001; Sibum and
Amasino, 2004). Vernalization prevents FLC elevation by epigenetic silencing
through histone modiﬁcations (Bastow et al., 2004). However, vernalization needs
VERNALIZATION 1 (VERN1), VERN2 and VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3
(VIN3) to stably maintain FLC repression (Gendall et al., 2001; De Lucia et al.,
2008). Recently, differential expression of FLC like genes has been observed during
chilling of poplar buds (Chen and Coleman, 2006), suggesting that vernaliza-
tion can be a useful reference framework for the study of chilling. In addition,
gene expression studies suggest the involvement of temperature-induced regula-
tory mechanisms, including chromatin remodelling mechanisms, both in aspen and
other perennial species (Yakolev et al., 2006; Druart et al., 2007). Addressing dor-
mancy cycling from a cell and developmental viewpoint may add context to the gene
expression data and integrate them with phenology. Eventually, functional genomics
studies in combination with cell biological approaches need to be performed to test
candidate genes and the cellular mechanisms that drive dormancy cycling.
Acknowledgments The authors thank the Norwegian Research Council (PR and CvdS; nr 171970
and nr 192013) and the Academy of Finland (AW; nr 1115280) for ﬁnancial support.

192
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
References
Achard P, Baghour M, Chapple A et al. (2007) The plant stress hormone ethylene controls ﬂoral
transition via DELLA-dependent regulation of ﬂoral meristem-identity genes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 104:6484–6489.
Allaby M (1991) The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Botany. Oxford University Press, New York.
Aloni R, Peterson CA (1991) Seasonal changes in callose levels and ﬂuorescein translocation in
the phloem of Vitis vinifera. Iawa Bull 12:223–234.
Aloni R, Peterson CA (1997) Auxin promotes dormancy callose removal from the phloem of
Magnolia kobus and callose accumulation and earlywood vessel differentiation in Quercus.
J Plant Res 110:37–44.
Aloni R, Raviv A, Peterson CA (1991) The role of auxin in the removal of dormancy callose and
resumption of phloem activity in Vitis vinifera. Can J Bot 69:1825–1832.
Alvarez J, Guli CL, Yu X-H et al. (1992) Terminal ﬂower: A gene affecting inﬂorescence
development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 2:103–116.
Améglio T, Decourteix M, Alves G et al. (2004) Temperature effects on xylem sap osmolarity
in walnut trees: Evidence for a vitalistic model of winter embolism repair. Tree Physiol 24:
785–793.
An H, Roussot C, Suárez-López P et al. (2004) CONSTANS acts in the phloem to regulate
a systemic signal that induces photoperiodic ﬂowering of Arabidopsis. Development 131:
3615–3626.
Andersson A, Keskitalo J, Sjödin A et al. (2004) A transcriptional timetable of autumn senescence.
Genome Biol 5:R24.1–13.
Arora R, Rowland LJ, Tanino K (2003) Induction and release of bud dormancy in woody
perennials: A science comes of age. HortScience 38:911–921.
Artlip TS, Callahan AM, Basset CL et al. (1997) Seasonal expression of a dehydrin gene in sibling
deciduous and evergreen genotypes of peach (Prunus persica [L] Batch). Plant Mol Biol 33:
61–70.
Bhalerao R, Keskitalo J, Sterky F et al. (2003) Gene expression in autumn leaves. Genome Anal
131:430–442.
Ball EA (1980) Regeneration from isolated portions of the shoot apex of Trachymene coerulea
Grah Rc. Ann Bot 45:103–112.
Banﬁeld MJ, Brady RL (2000) The structure of Antirrhinum centroradialis protein (CEN) suggests
a role as a kinase regulator. J Mol Biol 297:1159–1170.
Barros RS, Neill SJ (1986) Periodicity of response to abscisic acid in lateral buds of willow (Salix
viminalis L). Planta 168:530–535.
Bastow R, Mylne JS, Lister C et al. (2004) Vernalization requires epigenetic silencing of FLC by
histone methylation. Nature 427:164–167.
Benedict C, Skinner JS, Meng R et al. (2005) The CBF1-dependent low temperature signalling
pathway, regulon, and increase in freeze tolerance are conserved in Populus spp. Plant Cell
Environ 29:1259–1272.
Bernier G, Havelange A, Houssa C et al. (1993) Physiological signals that induce ﬂowering. Plant
Cell 5:1147–1155.
Bernier G, Kinet JM, Sachs RM (1981) The Physiology of Flowering. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Boston.
Black BL, Parmentier-Line CM, Fuchigami LH et al. (2001) Ecotypic and genetic variation in
poplar bark storage protein gene expression and accumulation. Tree Physiol 21:1289–1297.
Böhlenius H, Huang T, Charbonnel-Campaa L et al. (2006) CO/FT regulatory module controls
timing of ﬂowering and seasonal growth cessation in trees. Science 312:1040–1043.
Bradley D, Ratcliffe O, Vincent C et al. (1997) Inﬂorescence commitment and architecture in
Arabidopsis. Science 275:80–83.
Burn JE, Bagnall DJ, Metzger JD et al. (1993) DNA methylation, vernalizarion and the initiation
of ﬂowering. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:287–291.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
193
Cadman CSC, Toorop PE, Hilhorst HWM et al. (2006) Gene expression proﬁles of Arabidopsis Cvi
seeds during dormancy cycling indicate a common underlying dormancy control mechanism.
Plant J 46:805–822.
Carpenter R, Coen ES (1995) Transposon induced chimeras show that ﬂoricaula, a meristem
identity gene, acts non-autonomously between cell layers. Development 121:19–26.
Chae L, Sudat S, Dudoit S et al. (2009) Diverse transcriptional programs associated with
environmental stress and hormones in the Arabidopsis receptor-like kinase gene family.
Molecular Plant 2:84–107.
Chen KY, Coleman GD (2006) Type II MADS-box genes associated with poplar apical bud
development and dormancy ( http://abstracts.aspb.org/pb2006/public/P03/P03015.html)
Chouard P (1960) Vernalization and its relations to dormancy. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 11:191–238.
Clausen S, Apel K (1991) Seasonal changes in the concentration of the major storage protein and
its mRNA in xylem ray cells of poplar trees. Plant Mol Biol 17:669–678.
Cline MG (1991) Apical dominance. Bot Rev 57:318–358.
Close TJ (1996) Dehydrins: Emergence of a biochemical role of a family of plant dehydration
proteins. Physiol Plant 97:795–803.
Cohn MA (1996) Chemical mechanisms of breaking seed dormancy. In: Lang GA (ed) Plant
Dormancy. Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. CAB International, Wallingford,
UK.
Conti L, Bradley D (2007) TERMINAL FLOWER1 is a mobile signal controlling Arabidopsis
architecture. Plant Cell 19:767–778.
Corbesier L, Vincent C, Jang S et al. (2007) FT protein movement contributes to long-distance
signaling in ﬂoral induction of Arabidopsis . Science 316:1030–1033.
Cordova-Tellez L, Burris JS (2002) Alignment of lipid bodies along the plasma membrane during
the acquisition of desiccation tolerance in maize seed. Crop Sci 42:1982–1988.
Coville FV (1920) The inﬂuence of cold in stimulating the growth of plants. J Agric Res 20:
151–160.
De Lucia F, Crevillen P, Jones AME et al. (2008) A PHD-Polycomb repressive Complex 2 trig-
gers the epigenetic silencing of FLC during vernalization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:
16831–16836.
Decourteix M, Alves G, Brunel N et al. (2006) JrSUT1, a putative xylem sucrose transporter, could
mediate sucrose inﬂux into xylem parenchyma cells and be up-regulated by freeze-thaw cycles
over the autumn-winter period in walnut tree (Juglans regia L). Plant Cell Environ 29:36–47.
Dennis FG (1994) Dormancy: What we know and don’t know. HortScience 29:1249–1255.
Drake GA, Carr DJ (1979) Symplastic transport of gibberellins: Evidence from ﬂux and inhibitor
studies. J Exp Bot 116:439–447.
Druart N, Johansson A, Baba K et al. (2007) Environmental and hormonal regulation of the
activity-dormancy cycle in the cambial meristem involves stage-speciﬁc modulation of the
transcriptional and metabolic networks. Plant J 50:557–573.
Epel BL (1994) Plasmodesmata – composition, structure and trafﬁcking. Plant Mol Biol 26:
1343–1356.
Eriksson ME (2000) The role of phytochrome A and gibberellins in growth under long and short
day conditions. Studies in hybrid aspen. Acta Univ Agric Sueciae. Silvestria 164
Eriksson ME, Israelsson M, Olsson O et al. (2000) Increased gibberellin biosynthesis in trans-
genic trees promotes growth, biomass production and xylem ﬁber length. Nature Biotechnol 18:
784–788.
Eriksson ME, Moritz T (2002) Daylength and spatial expression of a gibberellin 20-oxidase
isolated from hybrid aspen (Populus tremula L × P tremuloides Michx). Planta 214:
920–930.
Ermel FF, Follet-Gueye ML, Cibert C et al. (2000) Differential localisation of arabinan and
galactan side chains of rhamnogalacturonan 1 in cambial derivatives. Planta 210:732–740.
Esau K (1977) Anatomy of Seed Plants. John Wiley and Sons Inc, New York.

194
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
Espinosa-Ruiz A, Saxena S, Schmidt J et al. (2004) Differential stage-speciﬁc regulation of cyclin-
dependent kinases during cambial dormancy in hybrid aspen. Plant J 38:603–615.
Farrar JJ, Evert RF (1997) Seasonal changes in the ultrastructure of the vascular cambium of
Robinia pseudoacacia. Trees 11:191–202.
Fege AS, Brown GN (1984) Carbohydrate distribution in dormant Populus shoots and hardwood
cuttings. Forest Sci 30:999–1010.
Finnegan EJ, Genger RK, Kovac K et al. (1998) DNA methylation and the promotion of ﬂowering
by vernalization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:5824–5829.
Finnegan EJ, Peacock WJ, Dennis ES (1996) Reduced DNA methylation in Arabidopsis thaliana
results in abnormal plant development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:8449–8454.
Fowler S, Thomashow M (2002) Arabidopsis transcriptome proﬁling indicates that multiple reg-
ulatory pathways are activated during cold acclimation in addition to the CBF cold response
pathway. Plant Cell 14:1675–1690.
Fracheboud Y, Luquez V, Björkén L et al. (2009) The control of autumn senescence in European
aspens (Populus tremula). Plant Physiol 149:1982–1991.
Frewen BE, Chen THH, Howe GT et al. (2000) Quantitative trait loci and candidate gene mapping
of ﬂush in Populus. Genetics 154:834–845.
Fuchigami LH, Nee C-C (1987) Degree growth stage model and rest-breaking mechanism in
temperate woody perennials. HortScience 22:836–845.
Fuchigami LH, Weiser CJ, Evert DR (1971) Induction of cold acclimation in Cornus stolonifera
Michx. Plant Physiol 47:98–103.
Furner IJ, Ainscough JF-X, Pumfrey JA et al. (1996) Clonal analysis of the late ﬂowering fca
mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana: Cell fate and cell autonomy. Development 122:1041–1050.
Gendall AR, Levy YY, Wilson A et al. (2001) The VERNALIZATION 2 gene mediates the
epigenetic regulation of vernalization in Arabidopsis. Cell 197:525–535.
Gray JE, Casson S, Hunt L (2008) Intercellular peptide signals regulate plant meristematic cell fate
decisions. Sci Signal 1(49):pe53, doi:10.1126/scisignal.149pe53.
Grefen C, Stadele K, Ruzicka K et al. (2008) Subcellular localization and in vivo interactions of
the Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene receptor family members. Mol Plant 1:308–320.
Groover AT, Mansﬁeld SD, DiFazio SP et al. (2006) The Populus homeobox gene ARBORKNOX1
reveals overlapping mechanisms regulating the shoot apical meristem and the vascular cam-
bium. Plant Mol Biol 61:917–932.
Hantke SS, Carpenter R, Coen ES (1995) Expression of ﬂoricaula in single layers of periclinal
chimeras activates downstream homeotic genes in all layers of ﬂoral meristems. Development
121:27–35.
Hara M, Terashima S, Kuboi T (2001) Characterization and cryoprotective activity of cold-
responsive dehydrin from Citrus unshiu. J Plant Physiol 158:1333–1339.
Hazebroek JP, Metzger JD, Mansager ER (1993) Thermoinductive regulation of gibberellin
metabolism in Thlaspi arvense L II. Cold induction of enzymes in gibberellin biosynthesis.
Plant Physiol 102:547–552.
Hertzberg M, Aspeborg H, Schrader P et al. (2001) A transcriptional roadmap to wood formation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:14732–14737.
Hirsh AG, Williams RJ, Meryman HT (1985) A novel method for cryoprotection. Intracellular
glass formation in deeply frozen Populus. Plant Physiol 79:41–56.
Hoekstra FA, Golovina EA, Buitink J (2001) Mechanism of plant desiccation tolerance. Trends
Plant Sci 6:431–438.
Hoenicka H, Nowitzki O, Hanelt D et al. (2008) Heterologous overexpression of the birch
FRUITFULL-like MADS-box gene BpMADS4 prevents normal senescence and winter dor-
mancy in Populus tremula L. Planta 227:1001–1011.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
195
Horvath DP, Anderson JV, Chao WS et al. (2003) Knowing when to grow: Signals regulating bud
dormancy. Trends Plant Sci 8:534–540.
Howe GT, Gardner G, Hackett W et al. (1996) Phytochrome control of shortday-induced bud set
in black cottonwood. Physiol Plant 97:95–103.
Howe GT, Hackett WP, Furnier GR et al. (1995) Photoperiodic responses of a northern and
southern ecotype of black cottonwood. Physiol Plant 93:695–708.
Howell GS, Weiser CJ (1970) The environmental control of cold acclimation in apple. Plant
Physiol 45:390–394.
Hsu CY, Liu Y, Luthe DS et al. (2006) Poplar FT2 shortens the juvenile phase and promotes
seasonal ﬂowering. Plant Cell 18:1846–1861.
Huang N-C, Yu T-S (2009) The sequences of Arabidopsis GA-INSENSITIVE RNA constitute the
motifs that are necessary and sufﬁcient for RNA long-distance trafﬁcking. Plant J 59:921–929.
Israelsson M, Sundberg B, Moritz T (2005) Tissue-speciﬁc localization of gibberellins and expres-
sion of gibberellin-biosynthetic and signaling genes in wood-forming tissues in aspen. Plant J
44:494–504.
Jasinski S, Piazza P, Craft J et al. (2005) KNOX action in Arabidopsis is mediated by coordinate
regulation of cytokinin and gibberellin activities. Curr Biol 15:1560–1565.
Junttila O, Jensen E (1988) Gibberellins and photoperiodic control of shoot elongation in Salix.
Physiol Plant 74:371–376.
Junttila O, Kaurin Å (1990) Environmental control of cold acclimation in Salix pentandra. Scand
J For Res 5:195–204.
Kalberer SR, Wisniewski M, Arora R (2006) Deacclimation and reacclimation of cold-hardy
plants: Current understanding and emerging concepts. Plant Sci 171:3–16.
Kardailsky I, Shukla VK, Ahn JH et al. (1999) Activation tagging of the ﬂoral inducer FT. Science
286:1962–1965.
Karlson DT, Zeng Y, Stirm VE et al. (2003) Photoperiod regulation of a 24-kD dehydrin-like
protein in red-osier dogwood (Cornus Sericea L) in relation to freeze-tolerance. Plant Cell
Physiol 44:25–34.
Keskitalo J, Bergquist G, Gardeström P et al. (2005) A cellular timetable of autumn senescence.
Plant Physiol 139:1635–1648.
Kim J-Y, Yuan Z, Jackson D (2003) Developmental regulation and signiﬁcance of KNOX protein
trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Development 130:4351–4362.
Kobayashi Y, Kaya H, Goto K et al. (1999) A pair of related genes with antagonistic roles in
mediating ﬂowering signals. Science 286:1960–1962.
Kobayashi Y, Weigel D (2007) Move on up, it’s time for change - mobile signals controlling
photoperiod-dependent ﬂowering. Genes Dev 21:2371–2384.
Koorneef M, Hanhart CJ, van der Veen JH (1991) A genetic and physiological analysis of late
ﬂowering mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol Gen Genet 229:57–66.
Kozlowski TT, Pallardy SG (2002) Acclimation and adaptive responses of woody plants to
environmental stresses. Bot Rev 68:270–334.
Krabel D, Eschrich W, Wirth S et al. (1993) Callase-(1,3-beta-D-glucanase) activity during spring
reactivation in deciduous trees. Plant Sci 93:19–23.
Kwiatkowska M (1991) Autoradiographic studies on the role of plasmodesmata in the transport of
gibberellin. Planta 183:294–299.
Lachaud S (1989) Participation of auxin and abscisic acid in the regulation of seasonal variations
in cambial activity and xylogenesis. Trees 3:125–137.
Lang A (1957) The effect of gibberellin upon ﬂower formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 43:
709–711.
Lang G (1987) Dormancy: A new universal terminology. HortScience 22:817–820.
Lang GA, Early JD, Martin GC et al. (1987) Endo-, para-, and ecodormancy: Physiological
terminology and classiﬁcation for dormancy research. HortScience 22:371–377.
Lavender DP (1991) Measuring phenology and dormancy. In: Lassoie JP, Hinckley TM (eds)
Techniques and Approaches in Forest Tree Ecophysiology, CRC press, Boca Raton, Boston.

196
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
Lawrence E (2005) Henderson’s Dictionary of Biology. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow.
Leinonen I (1996) Dependence of dormancy release on temperature in different origins of Pinus
sylvestris and Betula pendula seedlings. Scan J For Res 11:122–128.
Leinonen I, Repo T, Hänninen H (1997) Changing environmental effects on frost hardiness of
Scots pine during dehardening. Ann Bot 79:133–138.
Leubner-Metzger G, Meins F (2000) Sense transformation reveals a novel role for classI β-1,3-
glucanase in tobacco seed germination. Plant J 23:215–221.
Levy A, Erlanger M, Rosenthal M et al. (2007) A plasmodesmata-associated β-1,3-glucanase in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 49:669–682.
Leyser O (2005) The fall and rise of apical dominance. Curr Opin Genet Devel 15:468–471.
Lin M-K, Belanger H, Lee Y-J et al. (2007) FLOWERING LOCUS T protein may act as the
long-distance ﬂorigenic signal in the cucurbits. Plant Cell 19:1488–1506.
Linkosalo T, Häkkinen R, Hänninen H (2006) Models of the spring phenology of boreal and
temperate trees: is there something missing? Tree Physiol 26:1165–1172.
Little CHA, Bonga JM (1974) Rest in the cambium of Abies balsamea. Can J Bot 52:1723–1730.
Lucas WJ, Ding B, van der Schoot C (1993) Plasmodesmata and the supracellular nature of plants.
New Phytol 125:435–476.
Luquez V, Hall D, Albrectsen BR et al. (2008) Natural phonological variation in aspen (Populus
tremula): The SwAsp collection Tree Genet Genomes 4:279–292.
McLean BG, Hempel FD, Zambryski PC (1997) Plant intercellular communication via plasmod-
esmata. Plant Cell 9:1043–1054.
Metzger JD (1996) A physiological comparison of vernalization and dormancy chilling require-
ment. In: Lang GA (ed) Plant Dormancy. Physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology,
CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Michaels SD, Amasino RM (1999) FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a novel MADS domain
protein that acts as a repressor of ﬂowering. Plant Cell 11:949–956.
Michaels SD, Amasino RM (2001) Loss of FLOWERING LOCUS C activity eliminates the late-
ﬂowering phenotype of FRIGIDA and autonomous pathway mutations but not responsiveness
to vernalization. Plant Cell 13:935–941.
Mizukami Y, Fischer RL (2000) Plant organ size control: AINTEGUMENTA regulates growth and
cell numbers during organogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:942–947.
Moritz T (1995) Biological activity, identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of gibberellins in seedlings of
Norway spruce (Picea abies) grown under different photoperiods. Physiol Plant 95:67–72.
Mouradov A, Cremer F, Coupland G (2002) Control of ﬂowering time: Interacting pathways as a
basis for diversity. Plant cell 14:S111–S130.
Murphy D (2001) The biogenesis and functions of lipid bodies in animals, plants and microorgan-
isms. Prog Lipid Res 40:325–438.
Napier JA, Stobart AK, Shewry PR et al. (1996) The structure and biogenesis of plant oil bodies:
The role of ER membrane and the oleosin class of proteins. Plant Mol Biol 31:945–956.
Napoli CA, Beveridge CA, Snowden KC (1999) concepts of apical dominance and the control of
axillary bud outgrowth. Curr Topics Dev Biol 44:127–169.
Newman IV (1965) Pattern in the meristems of vascular plants. III. Pursuing the patterns in the
apical meristem where no cell is a permanent cell. Linn Soc (Bot) 59:185–214.
Odani K (1975) Transport of indoleacetic acid in dormant shoots of Populus deltoides. J Jpn
Forestry Soc 57:144–147.
Oliver AE, Hincha DK, Crowe JH (2002) Looking beyond sugars: The role of amphiphilic solutes
in preventing adventitious reactions in anhydrobiotes at low water contents. Comp Biochem
Physiol 131A:515–525.
Olsen JE, Junttila O, Nilsen J et al. (1997) Ectopic expression of oat phytochrome A in hybrid aspen
changes critical daylength for growth and prevents cold acclimatization. Plant J 12:1339–1350.
Olsen JE, Junttila O, Moritz T (1995) A localized decrease of GA(1) in shoot tips of Salix pen-
tandra seedlings precedes cessation of shoot elongation under short photoperiod. Physiol Plant
95:627–632.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
197
Ongaro V, Leyser O (2007) Hormonal control of shoot branching. J Exp Bot 59:67–74.
Oribe Y, Funada R, Takafumi K (2003) Relationship between cambial activity, cell differentiation
and the localization of starch in storage tissue around the cambium in locally heated stems of
Abies sachalinensis (Schmidt) Masters. Trees 17:185–192.
Parcy F, Valon C, Raynal M (1994) Regulation of gene-expression programs during Arabidopsis
seed development – roles of the ABI3 locus and the endogenous abscisic acid. Plant Cell
6:1567–1582.
Park S, Keathley DE, Han K-H (2008) Transcriptional proﬁles of the annual cycle in Populus
deltoides. Tree Physiol 28:321–329.
Penﬁeld S, Gilday AD, Halliday KJ et al. (2006) DELLA-mediated cotyledon expansion breaks
coat-imposed seed dormancy. Curr Biol 16:2366–2370.
Peng Y, Reyes JL, Wei H et al. (2008) RcDhn5, a cold acclimation-responsive dehydrin
from Rhododendron catawbiense rescues enzyme activity from dehydration effects in vitro
and enhances freezing tolerance in RcDhn-overexpressing Arabidopsis plants. Physiol Plant
134:583–597.
Perbal M-C, Haughn G, Seadler H et al. (1996) Non-cell autonomous function of the Antirrhinum
ﬂoral homeotic proteins DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA is exerted by their polar cell-to-cell
trafﬁcking. Development 122:3433–3441.
Pihakaski K, Pihakaski S, Karunen P et al. (1987) Seasonal changes in leaf lipids of Diapensia
lapponica, with special reference to storage lipid bodies. Nord J Bot 7:281–292.
Pnueli L, Carmel-Goren L, Hareven D et al. (1998) The SELF-PRUNING gene of tomato regulates
vegetative to reproductive switching of sympodial meristems and is the ortolog of CEN and
TFL1. Development 125:1979–1989.
Puhakainen T, Li C, Boije-Malm M et al. (2004) Short-day potentiation of low temperature-
induced gene expression of a C-repeat-binding factor-controlled gene during cold acclimation
in silver birch. Plant Physiol 136:4299–4307.
Purvis ON (1961) The physiological analysis of vernalization. Encycl Plant Physiol 16:76–122.
Ratcliffe OJ, Amaya I, Vincent CA et al. (1998) A common mechanism controls the life cycle and
architecture of plants. Development 125:609–1615.
Rees AR (1981) Concepts of dormancy as illustrated by the tulip and other bulbs. Ann Appl Biol
98:544–548.
Renaut J, Hausman J-F, Bassett C et al. (2008) Quantitative proteomic analysis of short photope-
riod and low-temperature responses in bark tissues of peach (Prunus persica L Batsch). Trees
4:589–600.
Riding RT, Little CHA (1984) Anatomy and histochemistry of Abies balsamea cambial zone cells
during the onset and breaking of dormancy. Can J Bot 62:2570–2579.
Rinne P, Hänninen H, Kaikuranta P et al. (1997) Freezing exposure releases bud dormancy in
Betula pubescens and B pendula. Plant Cell Environ 20:1199–1204.
Rinne P, Saarelainen A, Junttila O (1994a) Growth cessation and bud dormancy in relation to ABA
level in seedlings and coppice shoots of Betula pubescens as affected by a short photoperiod,
water stress and chilling. Physiol Plant 90:451–458.
Rinne P, Tuominen H, Junttila O (1994b) Seasonal changes in bud dormancy in relation to bud
morphology, water and starch content, and abscisic acid concentration in adult trees of Betula
pubescens. Tree Physiol 14:549–561.
Rinne P, Welling A, Kaikuranta P (1998) Onset of freezing tolerance in birch (Betula pubescens
Ehrh) involves LEA proteins and osmoregulation and is impaired in an ABA-deﬁcient
genotype. Plant Cell Environ 21:601–611.
Rinne PLH, Kaikuranta PLM, van der Plas LHW et al. (1999) Dehydrins in cold-acclimated
apices of birch (Betula pubescens Ehrh): Production, localization and potential role in rescuing
enzyme function during dehydration. Planta 209:377–388.
Rinne PLH, Kaikuranta PM, van der Schoot C (2001) The shoot apical meristem restores
its symplasmic organization during chilling-induced release from dormancy. Plant J 26:
249–264.

198
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
Rinne PLH, Ruonala R, Ripel L et al. (2008) Dormancy release-proteins in the shoot apical
meristem of populus. Physiol Plant 133(supplement):P06–P047.
Rinne PLH, van den Boogaard R, Mensink MGJ et al. (2005) Tobacco plants respond to the con-
stitutive expression of the tospovirus movement protein NSM with a heat-reversible sealing of
plasmodesmata that impairs development. Plant J 43:688–707.
Rinne PLH, van der Schoot C (1998) Symplasmic ﬁelds in the tunica of the shoot apical meristem
coordinate morphogenetic events. Development 125:1477–1485.
Rinne PLH, van der Schoot C (2003) Plasmodesmata at the crossroads between development,
dormancy, and defense. Can J Bot 81:1182–1197.
Rinne PLH, van der Schoot C (2004) Cell-cell communication as a key factor in dormancy cycling.
J Crop Imp 10:113–156.
Rohde A, Bhalerao RP (2007) Plant dormancy in the perennial context. Trends Plant Sci 12:
217–223.
Rohde A, Prinsen E, De Rycke R et al. (2002) PtABI3 impinges on the growth and differentiation
of embryonic leaves during bud set in poplar. Plant Cell 14:1885–1901.
Rowland LJ, Arora R (1997) Proteins related to endodormancy (rest) in woody perennials. Plant
Sci 126:119–144.
Ruonala R, Rinne PLH, Baghour M et al. (2006) Transitions in the functioning of the shoot apical
meristem in birch (Betula pendula) involves ethylene. Plant J 46:628–640.
Ruonala R, Rinne PLH, Kangasjärvi J et al. (2008) CENL1 expression in the rib meristem affects
stem elongation and the transition to dormancy in Populus. Plant Cell 20:59–74.
Ruttink T, Arend M, Morreel K et al. (2007) A molecular timetable for apical bud formation and
dormancy induction in poplar. Plant Cell 19:2370–2390.
Sachs RM, Lang A, Bretz CF et al. (1960) Shoot histogenesis: Subapical meristematic activity in
a caulescent plant and the action of gibberellic acid and AMO-1618. Am J Bot 47:260–266.
Sakamoto T, Kamiya N, Ueguchi-Tanaka M et al. (2001) KNOX homeodomain protein directly
suppresses the expression of gibberellin biosynthetic gene in the tobacco shoot apical meristem.
Genes Dev 15:581–590.
Samish RM (1954) Dormancy in woody plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 5:183–204.
Saure MC (1985) Dormancy release in deciduous fruit trees. Hortic Rev 7:239–300.
Sauter J, van Cleve B (1991) Biochemical and ultrastructural results during strach-sugar-
conversion in ray parenchyma cells of Populus during cold adaptation. J Plant Physiol
139:19–26.
Sauter JJ, Elle D, Witt W (1998) A starch granule bound endoamylase and its possible role dur-
ing cold acclimation of parenchyma cells in poplar wood (Populus × canadensis Moench
<robusta>). J Plant Physiol 153:739–744.
Sauter JJ, Wisniewski M, Witt W (1996) Interrelationships between ultrastructure, sugar levels, and
frost hardiness of ray parenchyma cells during frost acclimation and deacclimation in poplar
(Populus × canadensis Moench <robusta>) wood. J Plant Physiol 149:451–461.
Savidge RA, Wareing PF (1982) Apparent auxin production and transport during winter in the
nongrowing pine tree. Can J Bot 60:681–691.
Schoof H, Lenhard M, Haecker A et al. (2000) The stem cell population of Arabidopsis shoot
meristems is maintained by a regulatory loop between the CLAVATA and WUSCHEL genes.
Cell 1000:635–644.
Schrader J, Moyle R, Bhalerao R et al. (2004) Cambial meristem dormancy in trees involves
extensive remodelling of the transcriptome. Plant J 40:173–187.
Seeley SD (1994) Dormancy: The black box. HortScience 29:1248.
Sessions A, Yanofsky MF, Weigel D (2000) Cell-cell signaling and movement by the ﬂoral
transcription factors LEAFY and APETALA1. Science 289:779–781.
Shani E, Yanai O, Ori N (2006) The role of hormones in shoot apical meristem function. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 9:484–489.
Shannon S, Meeks-Wagner DR (1991) A mutation in the Arabidopsis TFL1 gene affects inﬂores-
cence meristem development. Plant Cell 3:877–892.

Perennial Life Style of Populus: Dormancy Cycling and Overwintering
199
Shimada T, Takahashi H, Fukao Y et al. (2008) A novel role for oleosins in freezing tolerance of
oilseeds in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 55:798–809.
Shirazi AM, Fuchigami LH (1995) Effects of ‘near-lethal’ stress on bud dormancy and stem cold
hardiness in red-osier dogwood. Tree Physiol 15:275–279.
Sibum S, Amasino RM (2004) Vernalization and epigenetics: How plants remember winter. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 7:4–10.
Siloto RMP, Findlay K, Lopez-Villalobos A et al. (2006) The accumulation of oleosins determines
the size of seed oilbodies in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18:1961–1974.
Smith RH, Murashige T (1970) In vitro development of the isolated shoot apical meristem of
angiosperms. Am J Bot 57:562–568.
Steeves TA, Sussex IM (1989) Patterns in Plant Development. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Steponkus PL (1984) Role of plasma membrane in freezing injury and cold acclimation. Annu Rev
Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 35:543–584.
Stitt M, Hurry V (2002) A plant for all seasons: Alterations in photosynthetic carbon metabolism
during cold acclimation in Arabidopsis. Curr Opin Plant Biol 5:199–206.
Sundberg B, Little CHA, Cui K et al. (1991) Level of endogenous indole-3-acetic acid in the stem
of Pinus sylvestris in relation to the seasonal variation of cambial activity. Plant Cell Environ
14:241–246.
Sussex IM, Kerk NM (2001) The evolution of plant architechture. Curr Opin Plant Biol 4:33–37.
Szymkowiak EJ, Sussex IM (1996) What chimeras can tell us about plant development. Annu Rev
Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 47:351–376.
Svensson J, Ismail AM, Palva ET et al. (2002) Dehydrins. In: Storey KB, Storey JM (eds) Cell and
Molecular Responses to Stress, Vol. 3. Elsevier Press, Amsterdam.
Tamaki S, Matsuo S, Wong HL et al. (2007) Hd3a protein is a mobile ﬂowering signal in rice.
Science 316:1033–1036.
Tanino K (2004) Hormones and endodormancy induction in woody plants. J Crop Imp 10:
157–199.
Tanino KK, Fuchigami LH, Chen THH et al. (1989) Dormancy-breaking agents on acclimation
and deacclimation of dogwood. HortScience 24:353–354.
Thomas B, Vince-Prue D (1997) Photoperiodism in Plants. Academic Press, San Diego.
Tommasini L, Svensson JT, Rodriguez EM et al. (2008) Dehydrin gene expression provides an indi-
cator of low temperature and drought stress transcriptome-based analysis of Barley (Hordeum
vulgare L). Func Integr Genomics 8:387–405.
Tucker MR, Laux T (2007) Connecting the paths in plant stem cell regulation. Trends Cell Biol
17:403–410.
Uemura M, Warren G, Steponkus PL (2003) Freezing sensitivity in the sfr4 mutant of Arabidopsis
is due to low sugar content and is manifested by loss of osmotic responsiveness. Plant Physiol
131:1800–1807.
Uggla C, Moritz T, Sandberg G, Sundberg B (1996) Auxin as a positional signal in pattern
formation in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9282–9286.
Usher G (1965) A Dictionary of Botany. Constable, London.
van der Schoot C (1996) Dormancy and symplasmic networking at the shoot apical meristem.
In: Lang G (ed) Plant Dormancy. Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CAB
International, Wallingford.
van der Schoot C, Rinne P (1999) Networks for shoot design. Trends Plant Sci 4:31–37.
van der Schoot C, van Bel AJE (1990) Mapping membrane potential differences and dye coupling
in internodal tissues of tomato. Planta 182:9–21.
Vince-Prue D (1994) The duration of light and photoperiodic responses. In: Kendrick RE,
Kronenberg GHM (eds) Photomorphogenesis in plants. Kluwer Academic Press, Dordrecht.
Wanner LA, Junttila O (1999) Cold-induced freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol
120:391–399.
Weiser CJ (1970) Cold resistance and injury in woody plants. Science 169:1269–1278.

200
P.L.H. Rinne et al.
Welling A (2003) Overwintering in woody plants: Involvement of ABA and dehydrins. PhD thesis.
University of Helsinki. http://urn.ﬁ/URN:ISBN:952-10-1044-4
Welling A, Kaikuranta P, Rinne P (1997) Photoperiodic induction of dormancy and freezing
tolerance in Betula pubescens. Involvement of ABA and dehydrins. Physiol Plant 100:119–125.
Welling A, Moritz T, Palva ET et al. (2002) Independent activation of cold acclimation by low
temperature and short photoperiod in hybrid aspen. Plant Physiol 129:1633–1641.
Welling A, Palva ET (2006) Molecular control of cold acclimation in trees. Physiol Plant 127:
167–181.
Welling A, Palva ET (2008) Involvement of CBF transcription factors in winter hardiness in birch.
Plant Physiol 147:1199–1211.
Welling A, Rinne P, Viherä-Aarnio A et al. (2004) Photoperiod and temperature differentially reg-
ulate the expression of two dehydrin genes during overwintering of birch (Betula pubescens
Ehrh). J Exp Bot 55:507–516.
Wisniewski M, Basset C, Gusta LV (2003) An overview of cold hardiness in woody plants: Seeing
the forest through the trees. HortScience 38:952–959.
Wisniewski M, Sauter JJ, Fuchigami LH et al. (1997) Effects of near-lethal heat stress on bud
break, heat-shock proteins and ubiquitin in dormant poplar (Populus nigra Charkowiensis × P
nigra incrassate). Tree Physiol 17:453–460.
Wisniewski M, Webb R, Balsamo R et al. (1999) Puriﬁcation, immunolocalization, cryoprotec-
tive, and antifreeze activity of PCA60: A dehydrin from peach (Prunus persica). Physiol Plant
105:600–608.
Wolkers WF, McCready S, Brandt WF et al. (2001) Isolation and characterization of a D-7 LEA
protein from pollen that stabilizes glasses in vitro. Bioch Bioph Acta 1544:196–206.
Yakolev IA, Fossdal CG, Johnsen O et al. (2006) Analysis of gene expression during bud burst
initiation in Norway spruce via ESTs from subtracted cDNA libraries. Tree Genet Genomes
2:39–52.
Yanovsky MJ, Kay SA (2002) Molecular basis of seasonal time measurement in Arabidopsis.
Nature 419:308–312.
Yeung K, Seitz T, Li S et al. (1999) Suppression of Raf-1 kinase activity and MAP kinase signalling
by RKIP. Nature 401:173–177.
Zanewich KP, Rood SB (1995) Vernalization and gibberellins physiology of winter carnola –
endogenous gibberellin (GA) content and metabolism of OF [H-3] GA(1) and [H-3] GA(20).
Plant Physiol 108:615–621.
Zeevaart JAD (1976) Physiology of ﬂower formation. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol
27:321–348.
Zhu B, Choi D-W, Fenton R et al. (2000) Expression of the barley dehydrin multigene family and
the development of freezing tolerance. Mol Gen Genet 264:145–153.

Wood Formation in Populus
Andrew T. Groover, Kaisa Nieminen, Ykä Helariutta,
and Shawn D. Mansﬁeld
Abstract Developmental genetic, genomic and biochemical approaches in Populus
are providing new insights into the molecular and genetic mechanisms regulating
wood formation. We discuss here wood properties, new approaches for the study
of wood formation, and the genes and hormones responsible for regulating wood
formation in Populus.
1 Biology and Salient Features of Populus Wood
1.1 Introduction to Wood Formation
Wood is arguably one of the most important biologically produced materials for a
variety of practical reasons. The two most abundant polymers on earth, cellulose and
lignin, are primary components of wood. Wood plays a major role in carbon cycles,
with forests second only to oceans in terms of biological carbon sequestration. The
woody bodies of trees underpin vital ecosystems and provide unique habitats and
symbiotic relationships. The amazing mechanical properties of wood are exploited
by carpenters and architects, and are illustrated by the massive bodies of the giant
sequoia and coast redwood. Wood is the raw material supporting the forest products
industry. Wood is a vital source of energy in developing countries. And wood is
being developed as a source of renewable bioenergy in developed countries.
Wood also represents the culmination of a set of complex developmental and
physiological events that are highly responsive to environmental cues. Wood for-
mation provides striking examples of tissue patterning, cell differentiation, and
meristematic activity that can take place over the course of thousands of years for
some of the longer lived trees (e.g. bristlecone pines). Environmental cues feed into
A.T. Groover (B)
Institute of Forest Genetics, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Davis, CA,
95618, USA
e-mail: agroover@fs.fed.us
201
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_10,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

202
A.T. Groover et al.
and modify wood development. For example, during the course of a growing sea-
son, the properties of developing cells within woody tissues can vary dramatically,
as illustrated by annual rings. And wood formed in stems challenged by mechanical
stress can form “reaction wood” with highly altered chemical composition.
While of high scientiﬁc and practical signiﬁcance, there have been traditional
barriers that have hindered understanding of the genetic and molecular regulation
of wood formation. One major hindrance is the genetic properties of most tree
species. Most trees have long generation times and can take many years or decades
to become sexually mature. Most trees are outcrossing, highly heterozygous, and
suffer from inbreeding depression. These attributes make approaches relying on
multiple generations of crosses or close inbreeding (e.g. for loss of function muta-
genesis) impractical for trees. However, more recently, genomic approaches that are
well suited to or even exploit the genetic attributes of trees have been developed that
are quickly expanding our knowledge of wood formation in trees.
Importantly, the radial organization of woody stems facilitates the harvest of large
quantities of relatively homogeneous cells at speciﬁc stages of development. For
example, cambial initials produce daughter cells, which in turn divide and give
rise to cells that ultimately differentiate into cell types within secondary xylem
and phloem. Tangential sections of stem tissues taken progressively from the bark,
cambium, and through wood forming tissues thus represent a developmental series
(Schrader et al., 2004). Cells can be easily harvested in large quantities during the
spring when the cambium is actively dividing. The cells of the cambium have thin,
fragile cell walls. An incision through the bark allows one to peel back the bark,
with the tissues separating from the stem at the fragile cambium layer. Large quan-
tities of cambium, secondary xylem, and secondary phloem can then be harvested
by progressive scraping or sectioning. This feature facilitates biochemical and other
approaches that are not feasible for root or shoot apical meristems.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst introduce some salient features of wood formation. We
then discuss approaches that have been taken to understand the genetic mechanisms
regulating wood formation, including recent genomics-based approaches. Plant hor-
mones play a major role in regulating wood formation, and their role is described in
the following section.
1.2 Wood Development in Populus
To understand and discuss the molecular and genetic processes regulating wood
formation in Populus, it is necessary ﬁrst to consider some basic properties of wood.
What follows is a brief description of the basic developmental processes underlying
wood formation, some features of Populus wood anatomy and wood properties, and
variation in Populus wood development in response to the environment.
Wood formation in Populus and other eudicots is a product of secondary growth –
the radial growth that occurs after the elongation of stems during primary growth.
Secondary growth is supported by the vascular cambium (Esau, 1977; Larson,
1994; Philipson et al., 1971). The cambial fusiform initials (oriented longitudi-
nally to the long axis of the stem) divide periclinally to produce phloem mother

Wood Formation in Populus
203
cells centrifugally and xylem mother cells centripetally. These cells in turn divide
to produce daughter cells that are ultimately recruited to differentiate within sec-
ondary phloem (bark) or within secondary xylem (wood). Together, these tissues
comprise the axial system with cells whose long axes are oriented vertically relative
to the stem. Populus cambium is characterized as non-storied, meaning there is no
strong tendency for cambial initials to appear in rows side-by-side when viewed in
tangential section.
In addition to the axial system, the Populus stem also has a radial system of rays
arranged horizontally relative to the long axis of the stem. The vascular rays are
composed primarily of parenchyma cells and serve to transport substances including
photosynthate and water across the stem between the secondary xylem and phloem.
The rays also serve as a storage tissue (Esau, 1977). Rays originate from ray initials
found within the vascular cambium. The ray system of Populus is characterized
as uniserate, meaning they are one cell across in tangential cross section (Panshin,
1980).
The chemical composition of wood is a reﬂection of the differentiation of cells
within secondary xylem. Typical Populus wood contains about 33% (vol/vol) tra-
cheary (vessel) elements, 53–55% ﬁbers, 11–14% ray parenchyma, and about
1% axial parenchyma (Mellerowicz et al., 2001). Tracheary elements and ﬁbers
both have thick, ligniﬁed secondary cell walls that impart most of the mechani-
cal strengths to wood. Tracheary elements undergo a process of differentiation that
includes construction of an elaborately patterned secondary cell wall, followed by
a programmed cell death that hydrolyzes the cell contents (Groover and Jones,
1999; Moreau et al., 2005). Perforations connect neighboring tracheary elements.
Perforation plates in Populus are “simple,” meaning they have an unobstructed open
hole between cells (Panshin, 1980). The ﬁnal, fully differentiated cell is a hollow
cell corpse which, by end to end association with other tracheary elements, forms
vessels that conduct water. Fibers undergo a similar differentiation process but do
not hydrolyze cell wall ends or conduct water, and serve a mechanical role. While
less studied, xylem parenchyma cells generally serve primarily transport, storage,
and other metabolic functions.
The vascular cambium is the ultimate source of new cells within secondary
xylem. While the cambium has been the subject of numerous studies, many funda-
mental features of the cambium are only recently being understood at the regulatory
level. One fundamental question is how the cells of the cambium are maintained
in an “undifferentiated” dividing state. Elegant studies by Bannan (Bannan, 1956,
1957) demonstrated that the cambium is a dynamic tissue whose cells are likely
speciﬁed by spatial cues, and can be replaced after injury. This view is in keep-
ing with the current understanding of the more intensely studied root and shoot
apical meristems, where cell to cell signaling plays a fundamental role in specifying
the identity of the meristematic stem cells and regulating the size of the meris-
tem. Daughter cells derived from the cambium must determine their position within
either secondary phloem or xylem and differentiate into an appropriate cell type for
their position.
In an additional analogy to the shoot apical meristem, the radial pattern of a
woody stem can be viewed as a set of tissues with polarity. Just as a leaf has a top

204
A.T. Groover et al.
(or adaxial) and bottom (or abaxial) surface, the woody stem has polarity. In Populus
leaves, vascular bundles have polarity with xylem in the adaxial position in the bun-
dle and phloem at the abaxial position. Following the vascular bundles of leaves
through the petiole and into leaf traces connecting to the stem vasculature illustrates
that the secondary xylem of the stem corresponds to adaxial tissues, and secondary
phloem as abaxial. A fundamental question is whether similar mechanisms might
determine polarity in secondary growth as determine polarity in leaves and other
primary organs? As discussed in Section 3.1, there is evidence to support the gen-
eral notion that some of the key mechanisms regulating shoot apical meristems, and
perhaps root meristems, have been co-opted in the evolution of the cambium, but
that mechanisms unique to the cambium are also likely.
1.3 Populus Wood and Its Uses
Anatomically, Populus spp. have whitish to cream-colored sapwood that gradually
merges into the heartwood, which is light cream to light grey in color. Although
there is not a distinct transition to heartwood formation, the heartwood does possess
a characteristics unpleasant odor when wet (generally absent when dry). The wood
has uniform texture, is soft, and generally straight-grained, displaying a gradual
transition between earlywood and latewood zones of annual growth rings; the latter
possessing a slightly darker color that is not always consistently visible. Populus
spp. contains numerous small pores, which are generally concentrated in the early-
wood and dissipate in size and number as latewood is formed (classiﬁed as semi-ring
to ring porous). They also possess very ﬁne, uniserate rays (Panshin and DeZeeuw,
1980). Standing poplar trees have relatively high moisture contents that do not vary
signiﬁcantly between the heartwood and sapwood, typically near 100% of oven-dry
weight. Hybrid poplars generally have a higher standing moisture content com-
pared to the aspens, although there is substantial seasonal and geographic variation
(Kennedy, 1974).
Aspens differ slightly from hybrid poplars in that they slightly lighter in color
and display a silky luster. The hybrid poplars are courser in texture – a function of
the larger vessels needed for the transport of water during their rapid growth. The
yield of plantation-grown hybrid poplars ranges between ∼9 and 35 m3 ha–1 yr–1,
which is substantially greater than the ∼7 m3 ha–1 yr–1 common to aspen (CCFM,
2001). At maturity, hybrid poplars have ﬁber lengths ranging from 0.7 to 1.35 mm
(mean 1.2 mm) and ﬁber widths ranging between 24 and 32 μm (mean 27 μm),
while the aspen are generally notably shorter 0.5–1.25 (mean 1.0 mm) and narrower:
12–25 μm in width (mean 21 μm). The xylem ﬁber length is shortest near the pith
and progressively increases towards the cambium; increasing in overall length with
age (Yanchuk et al., 1984). The ﬁber length then plateaus between 7 and 10 years of
age, and is generally maintained for the remainder of growth. In contrast, the mean
hybrid poplar vessel element length is 0.55 mm (0.4–0.84 mm range), while aspen
is 0.63 mm (0.4–0.88 mm range). Vessel element width in aspen ranges between

Wood Formation in Populus
205
38 and 99 μm (62 μm mean), while the range in hybrid poplars is 50–121 μm
(88 μm mean).
These inherent differences in growth rates and ﬁber traits are reﬂected in the
variability in overall wood density, which is generally lower than other hardwood
species. Aspen’s inherent small diameter and thin walled ﬁbers are the major deter-
minant of the variability in the difference in wood density within the genus Populus.
Hybrid poplars wood density ranges from 285 to 390 kg/m3, while aspen ranges
from 310 to 430 kg/m3 (Mansﬁeld and Weineisen, 2007). The bending strength and
stiffness, numerically represented by the modulus of rupture (MOR) and modulus
of elasticity (MOE), are arguably the two most important mechanical properties of
wood. These ﬂexural properties have been shown to exhibit strong correlations with
several inherent wood properties including intrinsic density, moisture content, and
slope of grain (Mansﬁeld et al., 2007). The poplars are generally characterized as
possessing lower mechanical strength properties; however, there is a clear differ-
ence between the aspens and other Populus spp. For example, MOE estimates of
5.93, 5.17, 6.96 and 7.45 GPa have been reported for P. tremuloides, P. balsamifera,
P. deltoides, P. trichocarpa, respectively, while the corresponding MOR esti-
mates for these same species are 35.17, 26.89, 36.54 and 33.79 MPa, respectively
(Alden, 1995).
Chemically, Populus spp. are generally characterized as being low in lignin
content, and correspondingly high in carbohydrates. Although composition is inﬂu-
enced by both genetic and environmental variation, typical Populus wood contains
roughly 43–50% glucose, 17–21% xylans 2–4% mannans and 19–24% lignin
(Mansﬁeld and Weineisen, 2007). The major form of hemicellulose in aspens is
O-acetyl-(4-O-methylglucurono)-xylan, but also contains O-acetylated glucomman-
nan (Gustavsson, 2001; Teleman et al., 2003). The lignin is syringyl-guaiacyl lignin,
rich in syringyl units, often showing a syringyl monomer content ranging between
65 and 72 mol% syringyl. The syringyl:guaiacyl ratio, has been shown to directly
correlate with ease of pulping, and therefore, the innate high-syringyl monomer
composition common to Populus spp. imparts a low chemical load required for
wood pulp production from Populus feedstocks (Stewart et al., 2006). The wood
extractives content has been shown to range between 2 and 5% of the woody com-
posite (Yanchuk et al., 1988; Mansﬁeld and Weineisen, 2007). A thorough analysis
of aspen wood extractives indicated that although there was little difference in the
total amount of extractives, a detailed analyses of the major extractives classes
(resin and fatty acid, sterols, sterol esters and triglycerides) by gas chromatography
showed that there were only minor differences in the class composition as well, with
an inverse relationship between content of resin and fatty acids and triglycerides
(Stewart et al., 2006).
The genus Populus contains some of the most widespread and fastest-growing
tree genus in North America and Europe. The genus is frequently the domi-
nant broad-leaved tree species in many forested regions. Populus has a substantial
breadth of distribution across geographic and climatic ecoregions, and are notable
for their vigorous growth (Dickmann et al., 2001). Populus has been identiﬁed as
a key genus as a ﬁbre crop because of this rapid growth, inherent lower age of

206
A.T. Groover et al.
maturity, perennial nature, and limited fertilizer requirements (Murphey et al.,
1979). Populus has long been valued by the agroforestry industry for their use as
windbreaks and shelterbelts, as well as timber belts from which farmers have derived
wood resource. Environmental management applications also regularly include the
use of Populus plantings for erosion control near streams, rivers, and reservoirs, as
well as to provide for riparian buffer zones.
The utility of Populus as a short-rotation crop by the forest industry to pro-
vide wood-derived products is also becoming increasingly apparent. Poplar and
more speciﬁcally aspen is currently employed primarily as a feedstock for pulp and
paper production – the inherently small diameter ﬁbres with thin walls are ideal for
producing high-density paper sheets with very good optical properties (Mansﬁeld
and Weineisen, 2007). Furthermore, both the cottonwoods and aspens are low in
lignin and high in carbohydrate, which makes them amenable to a variety of pulp-
ing regimes. In addition, Populus spp. are being employed as ﬁbre resource for
engineered solid wood products such as oriented strand board (OSB). The wood
is well-suited for particle, ﬂake, and strand-based composite boards because of its
low density and ease of ﬂaking, low cost, and availability (Gunn, 1963; Bendtsen
et al., 1981; Dickerhoof et al., 1982). These inherent properties of Populus spp.
medium density ﬂake and strand boards whose strength properties are enhanced
by good compaction and inter-ﬂake contact and bonding. In contrast aspen, which
is has long been a key resource for OSB production, black cottonwood (Populus
balsamifera L.) has been shown to produce poorer quality waferboard and OSB
when compared with native aspen strands (Pfaff, 1988). Recently, Semple et al.
(2007) evaluated ﬁve different plantation-grown, industrially relevant hybrid poplar
genotypes of the same age, grown on a common site in British Columbia Canada
for their performance in strand production and properties of OSB. The results were
compared against a benchmark mill-run OSB furnish derived from native aspen.
Variation in solid wood density among the hybrid poplar clones was shown to inﬂu-
ence the compaction ratio and densiﬁcation of the OSB, which in-turn manifested
variation in board strength properties. The lower density wood from fastest grow-
ing P. deltoides x P. trichocarpa (DTAC 7) clone resulted in better mat compaction
and higher bond strength, whereas the higher density wood from a P. trichocarpa x
P. deltoides (TD 50-184) clone resulted in lower compaction and bonding strength.
Flexural strength (rupture and elastic moduli) and nail pull through were not as sig-
niﬁcantly affected by either board density or genotype when adjusted for density.
The study clearly demonstrates that fast grown, large diameter wood of lower ini-
tial wood density from hybrid poplar is highly suited for OSB production. Despite
lower clear wood strength properties, the use of intensively cultivated poplar species
and hybrid poplar wood in OSB composites has yielded positive ﬁndings, and
that the lower density and strength of wood from intensively managed, fast grown
plantations does not, for the most part, translate into inferior composite board
quality.
Populus spp. have also traditionally been used in the manufacture of specialty
products such as chopsticks and pallets. Populus is also a source of fuel energy
and an agriculture feedstock for ruminant pellet manufacture. One of the major

Wood Formation in Populus
207
limitations in utilizing signiﬁcant volumes of poplar wood in the secondary man-
ufacturing sector has been the substantial degrade that results during kiln drying,
and effective means of minimizing this phenomenon have been elusive. Historically
Populus spp. have been regarded as a “low value” resource in comparison to other
species (both hardwood and softwoods) and, as such, very little attention has been
devoted to optimizing the processing of this wood species for the manufacturing
sector. However, recently, Kang et al. (2007) demonstrated that drying schedule
has a greater effect on grade recovery and degree of deformation, than the geno-
type of hybrid poplar. Furthermore, it was shown than many of the deformations
that are inherently associated with wood derived from fast-grown poplar trees can
be reduced or removed with an aggressive drying schedule. With such ﬁndings, the
utility of Populus spp. in the manufacturing sector has the potential to increase in the
near future. This is apparent from the increase use of this resource in the value-added
sector, including the Italian furniture industry, which employ signiﬁcant volumes of
hybrid poplar as a resource supply for its value-added furniture components. The
future will increasingly see this material used in several other sectors. For exam-
ple, China has identiﬁed hybrid poplar as a key species for internal markets and
manufacturing. As such, China has established signiﬁcant hybrid poplar plantations
(10 million hectares in 2002) throughout the country, and has evaluated both native
and exogenous genotypes (53 species) for almost every application in both the pri-
mary and secondary manufacturing, ranging from pulp to plywood and furniture
manufacture (Yukun and Xiaoyan, 2000).
1.4 Environmental Inﬂuences on Wood Formation
Wood development and resulting wood properties are highly inﬂuenced by environ-
mental variation. One source of environmental variation is seasonal changes. The
familiar annual rings seen in cross sections of Populus woody stems represent the
rapid growth during favorable environmental conditions in spring and early sum-
mer (early wood) characterized by cells with thin secondary cell walls and larger
lumens. As drought stress increases and growing conditions become less favorable
during summer, tracheary elements are produced that are characterized by thicker
cell walls and smaller lumens. Tracheary elements with large lumens characteristic
of early wood are capable of larger capacity water conduction, but may be more
prone to cavitation as compared to the tracheary elements produced in late wood.
Variation also occurs across years, as can be seen by variation in the thickness
of annual rings. Years with favorable environmental conditions are associated with
wider annual rings, while unfavorable years are represented by more narrow rings.
The timing of transition between early wood and late wood is also inﬂuenced by
environmental conditions, with unfavorable conditions leading to early transition to
late wood.
Wood development is also impacted by gravity and mechanical stress. For
example, a Populus tree that is listing at an angle after a wind storm will attempt to
correct future growth to be perpendicular to the ground. This correction is achieved

208
A.T. Groover et al.
by asymmetric growth characterized by preferential production of wood on the
upper side of stems, referred to as tension wood (Evert, 2006). This wood has prop-
erties distinct from normally produced wood, including a low lignin content and
higher cellulose content. The wood contains small vessels and ﬁbers characterized
by an inner cell wall layer (G-layer) that consists primarily of cellulose (Haygreen
and Bowyer, 1996; Jourez et al., 2001; Norberg and Meier, 1996). Recent analysis
has estimated that as much as 10% (mol%) of tension wood in P. alba is composed
of non-cellulosic carbohydrates, primarily xyloglucan (Nishikubo et al., 2007).
An intriguing idea of how tension wood generates longitudinal tensile force
is emerging after many years of debate and speculation. Cellulose macroﬁbrils
(aggregates of microﬁbrils) in the G-layer are oriented parallel to the cell’s long
axis (Chaffey, 2000) and have been shown to generate tensile force, although the
mechanism is unknown (Clair et al., 2006). Xyloglucan has been suggested to link
cellulose macroﬁbrils of the G layer to adjacent cell wall layers, this serving to
transfer the tensile force of the G layer macroﬁbrils (Long et al., 1996) to the tissue
level (Mellerowicz et al., 2008; Nishikubo et al., 2007). The xyloglucan-mediated
contacts between wall layers may be maintained and repaired during shrinkage
even after cell death by persistent xyloglucan endo-transglycosylase and xyloglucan
endo-transglycosylase/hydrolase activity (Nishikubo et al., 2007).
2 Genetic and Genomic Methods for the Study of Wood
Formation in Populus
A number of genetic and genomic approaches have been taken to better understand
the genetic regulation of wood formation in Populus and other tree species. These
include traditional quantitative genetic approaches, molecular genetic approaches,
and genomic approaches. As we will see, these approaches are different in scope
and precision, but are complimentary.
2.1 Traditional Breeding and Quantitative Genetics
Traditional tree breeding and quantitative genetic approaches provide general
insights into the genetic regulation of wood formation. One general question is,
to what extent is variation among trees for a given wood characteristic a reﬂection
of genetic variation, versus environmental variation? This can be estimated through
measures of heritability using pedigreed material and progeny tests. Importantly,
only genes with allelic variants that have large enough effects on wood proper-
ties (e.g. wood speciﬁc gravity) to be detectable using phenotypic measuring can
be inferred or manipulated using traditional pedigree and progeny testing methods.
Typically the segregation of individual genes cannot be detected or manipulated
using these approaches. Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) mapping can give a more

Wood Formation in Populus
209
granular estimation of the number of genes responsible for variation in wood prop-
erties, and the relative magnitude of their effect. But only limited reports for QTL
studies of wood properties in Populus have been reported (Tuskan et al., 2001) and
are not discussed here.
Overall, results of quantitative genetic studies indicate that signiﬁcant genetic
variation exists for all wood property traits assayed, and at least some show moder-
ate to high heritability. For example, wood speciﬁc gravity showed moderate broad
sense heritability (0.41–0.46) in a test of three provenances of Populus balsamifera,
while a test of Populus deltoides from the lower Mississippi valley found a high
broad sense heritability of 0.62 (Olson et al., 1985). In the same study (Olson et al.,
1985), holocellulose content (remaining after removal of lignin and extractives)
showed low broad sense heritability (0.08), while alpha cellulose content (carbo-
hydrate content most relevant to paper manufacture) showed moderate heritability
(0.34). In general, results from breeding and quantitative genetic studies are con-
sistent with the hypothesis that genetic variation underlying wood quality traits is a
reﬂection of variation at several to many loci, each with modest inﬂuence on wood
phenotypes.
2.2 Gene Discovery Using Gene Tagging
Molecular genetic or transgenic approaches in Populus that aim to identify and char-
acterize individual genes inﬂuencing traits can be divided into two classes – forward
genetic and reverse genetic. This section will examine forward genetic approaches,
and the following Section 2.3 will examine reverse genetic approaches. Examples
of forward molecular genetic approaches in Populus include the use of gene and
enhancer trap tagging, and activation tagging. Activation tagging has not resulted
in published identiﬁcation of wood development genes in Populus and thus will not
be further discussed, but has been used to identify development-related genes in
Populus (Bush et al., 2007). For gene trap tagging, a construct is introduced into the
Populus genome at random that contains a reporter gene such as GUS proceeded
by splice acceptor sites. If the construct lands in the expressed portion of a gene in
the same reading orientation of that gene, the result is a translational fusion of the
GUS protein to the interrupted gene’s protein product. Enhancer traps are similar but
contain a marker gene with a minimal promoter, and results in marker expression
when it lands in or near an expressed gene. In both cases marker gene expression
typically reﬂects the normal expression pattern of the tagged gene (Groover et al.,
2004; Groover et al., 2003).
Populus gene and enhancer traps have been used to identify genes expressed
during vascular development, including genes expressed in the cambial zone and
secondary xylem (Groover et al., 2004). Because the expression patterns of genes is
revealed in detail by marker gene expression, genes expressed within speciﬁc tissues
or even cell types within complex vascular tissues were discovered (Fig. 1). Gene
and enhancer traps revealed that 40% of genes expressed in leaves were expressed

210
A.T. Groover et al.
Fig. 1 Transverse section
through a Populus stem
exclusively within the veins, showing that a large number of genes are involved
in primary vascular development and function (Groover et al., 2004). In addition,
vascular-expressed genes were commonly found to be expressed in both primary
and secondary vascular tissues, likely reﬂecting the similar cell types found in both
tissues, and a shared evolutionary origin for primary and secondary vascular tissues
(Groover, 2005). For genes expressed in the cambium, a relatively broad expres-
sion was found and there were no genes identiﬁed whose expression was uniquely
associated with the presumptive cambial initials. This could reﬂect an artifact of
expanded GUS staining, insufﬁcient sampling, or could indicate that there are few
if any genes whose expression tightly deﬁnes narrow regions or boundaries within
the cambial zone. Indeed, for a gene expression pattern to be tightly associated with
the initials would require not only expression in those cells, but also rapid degra-
dation of the transcript as the cell is displaced out of the initial position and into a
mother cell position.

Wood Formation in Populus
211
2.3 Determining Gene Function Using Transgenics
The function of individual genes can be studied in detail using a transgenic
approach, even in the absence of natural allelic variation for the gene of inter-
est. In Populus, the primary strategy is to introduce a transgene that produces a
dominant phenotype that can be scored in primary transformants. This general
strategy obviates the need for lengthy rounds of sexual reproduction to produce
mutants that can be studied (e.g. loss of function homozygous mutants). The primary
approaches reported to date for Populus have involved use of constructs for overex-
pression or knock down of target gene expression using RNA interference (RNAi).
Resources have also been developed for using synthetic miRNAs in Populus. A
web-based tool is now available for the identiﬁcation of optimized sequences for
targeting transcripts of individual or multiple genes using these short interfering
RNAs (http://wmd.weigelworld.org/cgi-bin/mirnatools.pl). Currently, promoters for
driving transgene expression in speciﬁc tissues of the stem are largely lacking.
While a powerful approach for determining gene function, as in other species, the
production and thorough characterization of transgenics in Populus is laborious and
time consuming. The number of published reports using this approach is thus rela-
tively low, yet provides some of the most insightful and detailed information about
wood development. However, ambitious projects are underway for Populus using a
reverse genetics approach paired with higher throughput screening for wood prop-
erties (notably, in Sweden and the United States). Findings from some individual
studies are incorporated in Section 3.1 below.
2.4 Gene Discovery Using Microarray Proﬁling of Gene
Expression
Microarray proﬁling of global gene expression across wood forming tissues has
produced the most comprehensive view of the genes and mechanisms regulating
wood formation. A highly informative strategy has been to harvest serial longitudi-
nal sections across the cambium and wood forming tissues. Because of the radial
structure of woody stems, the collection of such sections represent a developmen-
tal gradient including cambial initials, cambium daughter cells, and early through
late xylem development. Comprehensive gene expression proﬁling of each sec-
tion allows reconstruction of the changes in gene expression through development
and wood formation. Experiments to date have used both sequencing of ESTs and
microarray proﬁling to catalogue gene expression in wood forming tissue of Populus
(Schrader et al., 2004; Sterky et al., 1998). Current microarray platforms avail-
able for Populus include both “spotted” arrays and synthesized oligo arrays that
include probes interrogating all available gene models from the Populus genome
(Affymetrix, NimbleGen, and Agilent). The most comprehensive microarray anal-
ysis of the cambium and wood forming tissues to date was performed by Schrader
et al. (2004). Their results are discussed below in Section 3.1.

212
A.T. Groover et al.
2.5 Proteomic and Other “Omic” Approaches
Wood is a chemically complex but anatomically simple tissue that can be har-
vested in large quantities, and can be subjected to a wide array of biochemical,
metabolomic, and proteomic techniques. This stands in contrast to many other plant
tissues that are intermingled with other tissue types (for example, vascular tissues
embedded within leaf mesophyll) and are thus difﬁcult to harvest in quantities easily
amenable to biochemical techniques requiring relatively large inputs of material.
Proteomic approaches extend and are highly complementary to gene and
transcript-based approaches (Finnie, 2006). Transcript levels do not always correlate
well with protein levels, and protein activity can be regulated by post-translational
modiﬁcations. Proteomic methods that can survey proteins and protein modiﬁca-
tions are being extended to Populus research. Similarly, methods for metabolomic
proﬁling and determining wood quality parameters are available that are quickly
being extended to Populus. Currently, Populus projects are underway in Sweden,
Canada, France, and the United States that have major proteomic and metabolomic
components.
An example of a proteomics approach applied to wood formation in Populus is
given by Du et al. (2006), who identiﬁed proteins expressed during regeneration
of cambium and secondary growth after girdling of Chinese white poplar. Proteins
were isolated from stems at different stages of regeneration and subjected to 2-D gel
electrophoresis. Protein spots of interest were then excised from gels and sequenced
after trypsin digestion using a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer. Increased expres-
sion of proteins associated with wood formation and secondary cell wall formation
was noted during regeneration and resumption of normal growth progressed.
3 Genetic Regulation of Cambium Functions and Wood
Formation
The development and application of genomic technologies have rapidly increased
our understanding of the regulatory and biochemical processes regulating wood for-
mation in Populus. In this section, we discuss some of the biological principles of
wood formation emerging from genomic and related studies.
3.1 Global Gene Expression Across Cambium and Wood Forming
Tissues
Studies of global gene expression using EST sequencing (Sterky et al., 1998) and
microarrays (Schrader et al., 2004) have produced a nearly comprehensive catalogue
of genes involved in cambium regulation and different stages of wood forma-
tion. Results from expression proﬁling of tissue layers, combined with anatomical

Wood Formation in Populus
213
studies and measures of cell division from the cambium across wood forming tis-
sues is consistent with the hypothesis that there is a developmental gradient that
ranges from meristematic cells within the cambium through progressive, irreversible
cell differentiation in wood forming tissues. Strict developmental boundaries are
not identiﬁed. This could reﬂect a limitation of the tissue sectioning method,
which results in samples 20 μm thick (corresponding to about three cell layers)
and containing many thousands of cells. But for the relatively small number of
meristem-related genes expressed in the cambium for which in situ hybridizations
have been performed, these genes show relatively broad expression patterns. One
biological explanation for this result would be that gene expression with tight devel-
opmental boundaries would require not only cell-speciﬁc expression, but also rapid
degradation of transcripts in daughter cells.
However, clustering of genes based on peak expression levels across the cambial
zone and wood forming tissues reﬂects developmental processes and correlates with
anatomical features. This type of analysis has been extremely informative in deﬁn-
ing the cambium and wood forming tissues in terms of gene expression. Regions
of the cambium and wood forming tissues can be deﬁned based on gene expres-
sion, and include a region of cambial initials, region of cell division, region of cell
expansion, and region of terminal cell differentiation.
In the cambial zone, a layer of cells can be identiﬁed that show a small number
of uniquely expressed genes, and which do not show high expression of genes asso-
ciated with cell division. These cells likely represent the “stem cells” or initials of
the cambium, having relatively low rates of cell division consistent with other stem
cell populations in plants and animals. In the shoot apical meristem, distinct parts
of the meristem are identiﬁed by speciﬁc genes regulating the meristem. For exam-
ple, the Arabidopsis Class I KNOX transcription factor, SHOOTMERISTEMLESS
(STM), is required for meristem maintenance, and is expressed broadly in the meris-
tem but downregulated in leaf primordia (Long et al., 1996). The Populus ortholog
of STM, ARBORKNOX1(ARK1), is expressed both in the shoot apical meristem
and also in the cambial zone (Groover et al., 2006). Overexpression of ARK1 in
Populus results in inhibition of the differentiation of ligniﬁed, xylem and phloem
ﬁbers (Groover et al., 2006), consistent with the notion that, as for STM in the shoot
meristem, ARK1 functions to support meristematic cell fate and inhibit differentia-
tion. Microarray analysis of these mutants shows misregulation of genes associated
with cell wall formation and lignin biosynthesis, consistent with the hypothesis
that ARK1 negatively regulates genes associated with terminal cell differentiation.
A related Arabidopsis gene, KNAT1, is also broadly expressed in the shoot apical
meristem and serves to inhibit terminal cell differentiation. The Populus ortholog of
KNAT1, ARBORKNOX2 (ARK2), is expressed in both the shoot apical meristem and
the cambial zone (A. Groover and Juan Du, unpublished). Overexpression of ARK2
in Populus results in the expansion of the cambial zone and inhibition of terminal
cell differentiation of both tracheary elements and ﬁbers in secondary xylem, and of
phloem ﬁbers (Fig. 2). Knock-down of ARK2 results in early appearance of ligniﬁed
secondary xylem and thicker secondary cell walls. Together these results support the
hypothesis that at least some critical cambium genetic regulatory mechanisms were

214
A.T. Groover et al.
Fig. 2 Examples of Populus enhancer trap staining patterns. An enhancer trap construct carrying
the GUS reporter was introduced at random into Populus. Individual transformants, each with a
unique insertion, were then screened for GUS expression. Patterns of GUS expression reﬂect the
normal expression pattern of a nearby gene. (a) Enhancer trap 4-109 with GUS expression in the
vasculature of leaves. (b) Enhancer trap 4-110 with expression in the cambium region through the
cortex in a stem cross section. (c) Enhancer trap 4-558 with expression throughout the cortex in a
stem cross section
co-opted from the shoot apical meristem during the evolution of secondary growth
(Groover, 2005).
Not all shoot meristem genes are expressed in the cambium, however. Other key
shoot meristem regulatory genes include the transcription factor WUSCHEL (WUS),
which is expressed in a small number of cells in the stem cell-organizing center that
underlies the stem cell population of the meristem (Scheres, 2007). The Populus
WUS ortholog is not expressed in the cambium, although another WUS-like gene is
(Schrader et al., 2004). This could indicate that WUS related functions are present
in the cambium and the duplication of an ancestral WUS gene allowed for new
expression and function of a duplicated gene in the cambium. Alternatively, it could
indicate that WUS-mediated signaling does not occur in the cambium. Unfortunately
functional analysis of WUS-like and other genes regulating shoot meristem main-
tenance and size (e.g. CLAVATA genes) have not yet been reported in Populus.
As more genes are characterized a more complete picture of cambium regulation
and evolution will emerge, including the relationship to the root and shoot apical
meristems.
Progressing inwards (towards the xylem) across the cambial zone, a distinct
increase in the expression of genes associated with cell division is observed
(Schrader et al., 2004). This region includes the xylem mother cells, which are
responsible for the bulk of cell divisions that produce cells that will ultimately dif-
ferentiate in secondary xylem. Cell division genes upregulated in this region include
Populus orthologs of Cyclin A1, Cyclin D3, cyclin-dependent kinase CDKB2, CKS1,
and a DP-E2F-like (DEL) gene. Variation in expression among cell cycle genes was
also noted, including maintenance of the Populus Cyclin A2 (CYCA2) well into the
region of secondary cell wall formation. Because CYCA2 expression is believed
to be associated with the competence to divide, this could reﬂect that xylem cells
maintain the ability to divide until late in their development.
The expression of several genes associated with cell expansion increase across
the cambial zone, and then show relatively consistent expression across the zones
of division and expansion (Schrader et al., 2004). These genes include expansins,
pectin methyltransferase, and xyloglucan endotransglycosylase that are variously
involved in cell wall modiﬁcation, loosening, and intrusive growth (Nishikubo et al.,
2007; Siedlecka et al., 2008). Aquoporin-encoding genes are also expressed in a

Wood Formation in Populus
215
similar pattern. Aquaporins could potentially be involved in the uptake of water,
which increases turgor pressure and drives cell expansion, although this has not
been shown experimentally.
Not surprisingly, genes involved in the synthesis and ligniﬁcation of secondary
cell walls show increased expression in progressively older tissue of secondary
xylem. Genes associated with programmed cell death are expressed slightly later,
during the cell death and lysis of tracheary elements whose hollow cell corpses con-
duct water within secondary xylem. Genes regulating the balance of meristematic
cell fate versus cell differentiation include the Class I KNOX transcription factors,
as previously mentioned. Additional genes regulating cell differentiation include
the NAC transcription factors. While not yet characterized in Populus, NAC family
members have been shown to be primary regulators of tracheary element differen-
tiation in Arabidopsis, and overexpression can result in ectopic tracheary element
differentiation (Masatoshi Yamaguchi et al., 2008; Zhong et al., 2006). Other genes
identiﬁed in Arabidopsis but not yet characterized in Populus include genes regu-
lating the patterning of secondary cell wall. These include genes encoding proteins
directing the position of cellulose-synthase rosettes by the cytoskeleton.
3.2 Regulation of Tissue Patterning
Secondary vascular tissues in poplar are regularly patterned with xylem to the inside
and phloem to the outside of the stem. The microarray proﬁling by Schrader et al.
(2004) found that genes known to regulate polarity of leaves derived from the shoot
apical meristem are also expressed in the cambial zone and early differentiating
secondary vascular tissues. YABBY and KANADI gene families in Arabidopsis
function to promote an abaxial fate in leaves. No evidence for differential expression
was found for three Populus YABBY genes across the cambial zone, suggesting
these genes may regulate polarity exclusively in leaves. In contrast, an ortholog
of the Arabidopsis KANADI1 showed differential expression in the phloem side of
the cambial zone. Secondary phloem (bark) represents an abaxial tissue, consistent
with the idea that the Populus KANADI1 ortholog could function to promote abaxial
fate both in lateral organs derived from the shoot apical meristem and in secondary
vascular tissues.
Five genes comprise the Class III HD-ZIPs gene family in Arabidopsis. These
genes have various functions in both meristem regulation and vascular devel-
opment, including promoting adaxial fate in leaves. Interestingly, these genes
are all negatively regulated post-transcriptionally by microRNAs. Schrader et al.
(2004) found that the poplar orthologs of PHAVOLUTA/PHABULOSA, ATHB8, and
ATHB15/CORONA all showed differential expression on the xylem (adaxial) side
of the cambial zone. A Populus ortholog of the ﬁfth member of this gene fam-
ily in Arabidopsis, REVOLUTA, has recently been characterized using transgenics.
Interestingly, Populus overexpressing a micro-RNA resistant Populus REVOLUTA
ortholog showed defects in pattering secondary vascular tissues that are consistent
with this gene regulating polarity in Populus stems (A. Groover and M. Robischon,

216
A.T. Groover et al.
Fig. 3 Cross sections stained with TBO from matched internodes from a transgenic hybrid
aspen overexpressing the Populus ortholog of KNAT 1, ARBORKNOX2, and wildtype control.
(a) Overexpression plants have a wider cambium region, copious procambium, reduced phloem
ﬁbers, and reduced ligniﬁed xylem. (b) Wildtype control (Images from A. Groover and J. Du,
unpublished)
unpublished). Plants showing extreme defects include the formation of a second
cambium which produces secondary xylem towards the outside of the stem (Fig. 3).
This and other defects suggest a fundamental role for Class III HD ZIPs in regulating
how woody tissues are patterned.
4 Hormonal Control of Wood Formation
4.1 Introduction
Most, if not all, plant hormones have been implicated in the regulation of wood
formation. Classical hormone treatment studies have shown that several plant hor-
mones can stimulate radial growth through induction of cambial cell proliferation
or affect xylem cell differentiation when applied to tree stems. Recently, through
the sequencing of the Populus trichocarpa genome and the development of various
genetic, genomic and biochemical tools for Populus, it has become possible to move
beyond exogenous hormone treatments and more directly address the function of
hormones in wood formation. Importantly, recent studies using transgenic Populus
trees with modiﬁed hormone responses and determination of hormone concentra-
tions and hormone-related gene expression across wood forming tissues have greatly
extended our understanding of hormonal regulation of wood formation. However,
hormone signaling pathways regulating the cambium and secondary growth are
highly complex and require new approaches to be fully resolved. We describe below
the current understanding of the role of speciﬁc hormones in secondary growth and
wood formation in Populus.
4.2 Auxin
Auxin is the best known hormonal regulator of wood formation. Classical hormone
treatment studies implicated auxin as a stimulator of cambial activity, and apically

Wood Formation in Populus
217
applied exogenous auxin can reactivate cambium in decapitated shoots (Snow, 1935;
Digby and Wareing, 1966; Björklund et al., 2007; reviewed by Savidge, 1988). The
shoot apex is a major source of auxin (Sundberg and Uggla, 1998), and auxin is
hypothesized to be transported in a polar fashion through the cambial zone down
the stem. Furthermore, a radial gradient of auxin (indole-3-acetic acid, IAA) has
detected across the cambial zone of both Populus and Pinus trees (Uggla et al.,
1996, 1998; Tuominen et al., 1997). The level of IAA peaks in the dividing cambial
cells, from which it decreases steeply towards differentiating phloem and more grad-
ually towards the differentiating xylem. This gradient is assumed to be formed by
auxin transported downwards from the stem apex being distributed radially across
the cambial zone (Schrader et al., 2003). Signiﬁcantly, differential radial expres-
sion of various genes encoding auxin inﬂux and efﬂux carrier genes has been found
across the cambial zone in Populus (Schrader et al., 2003).
The cambial auxin gradient correlates with an expression peak of auxin signaling
genes in the cambial cells (Moyle et al., 2002). However, recently studies identi-
ﬁed auxin responsive genes from hormone treated Populus whole stem samples and
compared their expression patterns across the cambial zone to the auxin gradient
(Nilsson et al., 2008). They observed that a large portion of the identiﬁed auxin-
responsive genes was expressed at a higher level in the differentiating xylem cells
than in the dividing cells where the auxin concentration is at its highest (Nilsson
et al., 2008). The reason for this difference between the auxin signaling and auxin
response gene expression patterns remains to be clariﬁed.
During transition to cambial dormancy, polar auxin transport is severely reduced,
as is expression of genes encoding auxin transporters (Schrader et al., 2003). This
is reﬂected by the observation that the cambial activity can not be reactivated when
auxin is applied to decapitated stems in a dormant state (Little and Bonga, 1974).
Also the expression of auxin inducible AUX/IAA transcriptional repressor PttIAA
genes is reduced during transition of the active cambium into dormancy, consistent
with a down-regulated status of auxin signaling (Moyle et al., 2002). However, it has
been shown in Pinus that the cambial IAA concentration does not decrease upon
the cessation of cambial growth during the induction of dormancy (Uggla et al.,
1996, 2001). Taken together, the results indicate that the level of auxin transport,
responsiveness and signalling, but not the auxin concentration itself, may link the
status of cambial activity to seasonal changes.
Recently, functional studies using transgenic Populus trees have further described
the role of auxin in the regulation of wood formation (Nilsson et al., 2008). Nilsson
et al. (2008) engineered transgenic Populus trees to ectopically express a stabilized
form of a Populus AUX/IAA transcriptional repressor gene (PttIAA3), leading to
reduced auxin responsiveness. In these trees, a reduced number of both pericli-
nal and anticlinal cell divisions was observed in the vascular cambium, resulting
in the compromised radial growth of the stems. A deﬁnition of the cambial ini-
tials by Larson (1994) and Schrader et al. (2004) states that they are the only
cells in radial ﬁles that are able to produce both phloem and xylem mother cells
through periclinal cell divisions and to initiate new cell ﬁles by anticlinal divisions.
Schrader et al. (2004) observed that in Populus the anticlinal divisions appeared
to be restricted on the phloem side of the cambial zone, whereas in the PttIAA3

218
A.T. Groover et al.
overexpressing trees the anticlinal divisions were spread across a wider zone,
occurring also in the middle of the cambium (Nilsson et al., 2008). This obser-
vation indicates that auxin signaling may regulate the position of cambial initials
in the vascular cambium, or at least the position where their anticlinal divisions
take place. Additionally, the transgenic trees with reduced auxin responsiveness
had reduced width and length of xylem ﬁber and vessels, indicating that auxin
is involved in regulating the anatomy of developing xylem cells (Nilsson et al.,
2008).
4.3 Gibberellin
Gibberellin (GA) has been implicated in cambial growth due to its stimulatory effect
on cambial activity upon hormone treatments on tree stems (Digby and Wareing,
1966; Wang et al., 1997; Björklund et al., 2007), and its synergistic action with
auxin. As described above, auxin (IAA) is able to induce cell divisions in the
vascular cambium when applied to decapitated tree stems (Little and Bonga, 1974).
Application of gibberellin to decapitated Populus stems stimulates cell divisions in
the cambial zone, but the identity of the newly formed cells remains unresolved
(Björklund et al., 2007). The morphology of the GA-induced cells is somewhat
abnormal; in a cross-section they look more spherical than the ﬂat, thin-walled cells
of the normal cambium. Furthermore, instead of differentiating into xylem cells on
the xylem side of the cambial zone, they seem to remain in the parechymous state.
As a result the GA treatment leads to the loss of an easily distinguishable vascular
cambium (Björklund et al., 2007). These observations indicate that GA alone is
not sufﬁcient to maintain and stimulate cambial activity (Björklund et al., 2007).
However, application of IAA together with GA enhances cambial cell divisions
more than either hormone alone, indicating that these two hormones have a syner-
gistic effect on cambial growth (Digby and Wareing, 1966; Björklund et al., 2007).
Björklund et al. (2007) also showed that IAA concentration in stem tissues is higher
when IAA is applied in combination with GA than when IAA is applied alone, indi-
cating that GA action promotes cambial auxin transport. Furthermore, GA treatment
induces expression of a cambial abundant Populus auxin transport protein gene,
PttPIN1. Auxin treatment also stimulates expression of GA biosynthesis genes,
inhibits expression of GA degradation genes, and GA and auxin treatments induce
similar transcriptional changes (Björklund et al., 2007). The stimulating effect of
GA on plant growth was demonstrated by increased shoot size after ectopic over-
expression of a GA biosynthetic enzyme (AtGA20ox1) in transgenic Populus trees
(Eriksson et al., 2000).
Only trace amounts of GAs have been detected in the dividing cambial cells,
whereas they peaked in the differentiating xylem cells (Israelsson et al., 2005).
Correspondingly, genes coding for GA biosynthetic enzymes and GA signaling
pathway genes have low cambial expression, whereas they are higher expressed
in both differentiating phloem and xylem cells (Israelsson et al., 2005). A transient

Wood Formation in Populus
219
induction of a GA biosynthetic enzyme gene (PttGA20ox) was observed in spring
during the cambial reactivation from dormancy (Druart et al., 2007). It is possi-
ble that the GA stimulates cambial activity mostly through promoting polar auxin
transport into the cambial cells.
Gbberellin
has
also
been
indicated
to
function
in
control
of
xylem
development during wood formation. Both analyses of transgenic trees overpro-
ducing GAs and hormone application experiments have shown that GAs stim-
ulate xylem ﬁber elongation (Digby and Wareing, 1966; Eriksson et al., 2000).
Furthermore, tissue speciﬁc distribution pattern of GAs across the wood-forming
tissues in Populus show that bioactive GAs peak in the expanding xylem cells
coincident with expression of GA biosynthetic and signaling genes, indicating
a role for GAs in xylem differentiation (Israelsson et al., 2005). Functional
studies with transgenic Populus trees having modiﬁed cambial auxin and GA
responses are required to clarify the function of these two hormones between
the regulation of cambial cell divisions and xylem differentiation during wood
development.
4.4 Cytokinin
Since their discovery as regulators of plant cell division (Miller et al., 1955),
cytokinins have been assumed to function in the control of cambial activity.
Evidence for this action was deduced from hormone treatment experiments, where
exogenously applied cytokinin was shown to act synergistically with auxin to
enhance cambial cell divisions in diverse plant organs and species (Loomis and
Torrey, 1964; Saks et al., 1984).
However, until recently the role of cytokinin in cambial development remained
uncertain. Nieminen et al. (2008) found that both a cytokinin primary response
gene (PtRR7) and genes encoding cytokinin receptors are expressed in the cam-
bial zone of Populus stems. Transgenic Populus trees with repressed cambial
cytokinin signaling were created by expressing an Arabidopsis cytokinin degrad-
ing enzyme (AtCKX2) under the promoter for a birch cytokinin receptor gene which
drives high cambial expression. The transgenic trees have reduced cytokinin con-
tent and responsiveness in the cambial zone. They also have signiﬁcantly impaired
radial growth caused by a reduced number of cell divisions in the vascular cam-
bium. Together, these data suggest that cytokinin is required for vascular cambium
function by inﬂuencing cell division.
Cytokinin also affects xylem cell dimensions, as xylem ﬁber length and ves-
sel width are slightly reduced in transgenic trees with reduced cytokinin signalling
(Nieminen et al., 2008). However, it is possible that these differences were caused by
the altered rate of cell proliferation in the cambial zone rather than by the compro-
mised cytokinin signalling. The interaction between cytokinin and other hormone
signalling pathways during wood formation is an important area requiring further
study.

220
A.T. Groover et al.
4.5 Ethylene
Ethylene has been implicated to affect wood formation based on hormone treat-
ment studies (Telewski and Jaffe, 1986; Junghans et al., 2004; reviewed by Little
and Savidge, 1987). The application of an ethylene releasing compound on Populus
stems can induce radial swelling (Junghans et al., 2004). The organization of the
ethylene-induced xylem tissue was disturbed, however. The axis of the xylem
cells was not strictly vertical; the cells had instead grown into a tilted orientation.
It thus remains unresolved in which extend the ethylene-induced cell prolifera-
tion resembles normal cambial development (Junghans et al., 2004). However,
the expression of an ethylene biosynthetic gene from Populus, PttACO1, peaks
in the developing xylem cells in the cambial zone, implying a possible func-
tion for ethylene in xylem differentiation (Andersson-Gunnerås et al., 2003).
Furthermore, ethylene treatments reduce xylem ﬁber and vessel length (Junghans
et al., 2004), indicating a possible function for ethylene in regulation of xylem cell
morphogenesis.
Further data supporting a role for ethylene in the regulation of wood formation
have been provided by studies examining ethylene signalling during tension wood
development. In Populus, expression of both ethylene biosynthetic and signalling
genes, together with auxin signalling genes, has been shown to be increased in devel-
oping tension wood (Andersson-Gunnerås et al., 2003, 2006). Recent studies using
both pharmacological treatments and ethylene overproducing Populus transgenics
correlated endogenous ethylene production with increases in cell division and dif-
ferential growth during tension wood formation (Love et al., 2009). The interaction
of IAA and ethylene during tension wood formation is less clear, and induction of
tension wood formation did not result in an increase in IAA concentration in the
upper side of a bent Populus shoot, whereas the IAA level in the lower side of the
shoot was reduced (Hellgren et al., 2004). On the other hand, support for the inter-
action between ethylene and auxin signalling pathways in wood formation has been
provided by gene expression studies which found that several ethylene biosynthe-
sis genes are induced by auxin in wood-forming tissues of Populus (Nilsson et al.,
2008).
4.6 Other Hormones
In addition to auxin, GA, cytokinin and ethylene, other hormones have been detected
in cambial cells, including abscisic acid (ABA). Recently, Druart et al. (2007)
demonstrated that the growth cessation of cambial cells occurs before cambial ABA
levels are increased, and that high levels of ABA are present in the cambial cells at
the time of cambial reactivation in spring. ABA levels are lower during the active
cambial growth phase in summer. As ABA is known to regulate cold acclima-
tion (Welling et al., 2002), these results suggest that ABA could function in the
regulation of cold hardiness of cambial cells, but may not have a direct role in the
regulation of cambial activity.

Wood Formation in Populus
221
Little is currently known about any possible function of other plant hormones
during wood formation. Brassinosteroids have been identiﬁed from the cambial zone
of Pinus trees, indicating that they may have a role in regulation of this meristem
function (Kim et al., 1990), and have also been implicated in the differentiation of
tracheary elements (Yamamoto et al., 1997). In the future, a major challenge will be
to determine the role both of individual hormones in regulating secondary growth,
and also the interaction and cross-talk between different hormones.
References
Alden HA (1995). Hardwoods of North America. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-83. Madison,
WI: US Dept. Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory.
Andersson-Gunnerås S, Hellgren JM, Björklund S, Regan S, Moritz T, Sundberg B (2003)
Asymmetric expression of a poplar ACC oxidase controls ethylene production during gravi-
tational induction of tension wood. Plant J 34:339–349.
Andersson-Gunnerås S, Mellerowicz E, Love J, Segerman B, Ohmiya Y, Coutinho PM, Nilsson
P, Henrissat B, Moritz T, Sundberg B (2006) Biosynthesis of cellulose-enriched tension
wood in Populus: Global analysis of transcripts and metabolites identiﬁes biochemical and
developmental regulators in secondary wall biosynthesis. Plant J 45:144–165.
Bannan M (1956) Cell size and survival in conifer cambium. Can J Bot 34:769–776.
Bannan M (1957) The relative frequency of the different types of anticlinal divisions in conifer
cambium. Can J Bot 35:875–884.
Bendtsen BA, Maeglin RR, Frederick D (1981) Comparison of mechanical properties of eastern
cottonwood and populus hybrid NE-237. Wood Sci 14(1):1–14.
Björklund S, Antti H, Uddestrand I, Moritz T, Sundberg B (2007) Cross-talk between gibberellin
and auxin in development of Populus wood: Gibberellin stimulates polar auxin transport and
has a common transcriptome with auxin. Plant J 52:499–511.
Bush M, Plett JM, McPhee DP, Vitez R, O’Malley B, Sharma V, Bosnich W, Seguin A, MacKay J,
Regan S, Harrison EJ (2007) Diverse developmental mutants revealed in an activation-tagged
population of poplar. Can J Bot 85:1071–1081.
CCFM (2001) Forest 2020 – Plantations Canada, Canadian Council of Forest Ministers.
http://www.ccfm.org/forest2020/plantationscanada.e.html.
Chaffey N (2000) Microﬁbril orientation in wood cells: New angles on an old topic. Trends Plant
Sci 5:360–362.
Clair B, Almeras T, Yamamoto H, Okuyama T, Sugiyama J (2006) Mechanical behavior of cel-
lulose microﬁbrils in tension wood, in relation with maturation stress generation. Biophys J
91:1128–1135.
Dickmann DI, Isebrands JG, Echenwalder JE, Richardson J (2001) Poplar Culture in North
America. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada. p. 397.
Dickerhoof HE, Youngquist JA, Carll CG (1982) U.S. Wood-based panel industry: Production
trends and changing markets. Forest Prod J 32(6):14–23.
Digby J, Wareing PF (1966) The effect of applied growth hormones on cambial division and the
differentiation of the cambial derivatives. Ann Bot 30:539–548.
Druart N, Johansson A, Baba K, Schrader J, Sjödin A, Bhalerao, RR, Resman L, Trygg J, Moritz T,
Bhalerao RP (2007) Environmental and hormonal regulation of the activity-dormancy cycle
in the cambial meristem involves stage-speciﬁc modulation of transcriptional and metabolic
networks. Plant J 50:557–573.
Du J, Xie HL, Zhang DQ, He XQ, Wang MJ, Li YZ, Cui KM, Lu MZ (2006) Regeneration of
the secondary vascular system in poplar as a novel system to investigate gene expression by a
proteomic approach. Proteomics 6:881–895.

222
A.T. Groover et al.
Eriksson ME, Israelsson M, Olsson O, Moritz T (2000) Increased gibberellin biosynthesis in
transgenic trees promotes growth, biomass production and xylem ﬁber length. Nat Biotechnol
18:784–788.
Esau K (1977) Anatomy of Seed Plants. 2nd edition. Wiley, New York.
Evert RF (2006) Esau’s Plant Anatomy. Meristems, Cells, and Tissues. 3rd edition. Wiley,
Hoboken, NJ.
Finnie C (2006) Plant proteomics. Ann Plant Rev 28:151–184.
Groover AT (2005) What genes make a tree a tree? Trends Plant Sci 10:210–214.
Groover AT, Fontana JR, Arroyo JM, Yordan C, McCombie WR, Martienssen RA (2003) Secretion
trap tagging of secreted and membrane-spanning proteins using arabidopsis gene traps. Plant
Physiol 132:698–708.
Groover A, Fontana JR, Dupper G, Ma C, Martienssen R, Strauss S, Meilan R (2004)
Gene and enhancer trap tagging of vascular-expressed genes in poplar trees. Plant Physiol
134:1742–1751.
Groover A, Jones A (1999) Tracheary element differentiation uses a novel mechanism coordinating
programmed cell death and secondary cell wall synthesis. Plant Physiol 119:375–384.
Groover A, Mansﬁeld S, DiFazio S, Dupper G, Fontana J, Millar R, Wang Y (2006) The Populus
homeobox gene ARBORKNOX1 reveals overlapping mechanisms regulating the shoot apical
meristem and the vascular cambium. Plant Mol Biol 61:917–932.
Gunn JM (1963) Wafer dimension control: Number 1 design criteria for plant producing particle-
board for building construction uses. Forest Prod J 13(4):163–167.
Gustavsson M, Bengtsson M, Gatenholm P, Glasser W, Teleman A, Dahlman O (2001)
Isolation, characterisation and material properties of 4-O-methylglucuronoxylan from aspen.
In: Chiellini E, Gil H, Braunegg G, Buchert J, Gatenholm P, van der Zee M (eds) Biorelated
Polymers – Sustainable Polymer Science and Technology. Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers, New York, pp. 41–52.
Haygreen JG, Bowyer JL (1996) Forest Products and Wood Science. 3rd edition. Iowa State
University Press, Ames, IA, pp 108–120.
Hellgren JM, Olofsson K, Sundberg B (2004) Patterns of auxin distribution during gravitational
induction of reaction wood in poplar and pine. Plant Physiol 135:212–220.
Israelsson M, Sundberg B, Moritz T (2005) Tissue-speciﬁc localization of gibberellins and expres-
sion of gibberellin-biosynthetic and signaling genes in wood-forming tissues in aspen. Plant J
44:494–504.
Jourez B, Riboux A, Leclercq A (2001) Anatomical characteristics of tension wood and oppo-
site wood in young inclined stems of poplar (Populus euramericana cv ‘Ghoy’). IAWA J 22:
133–157.
Junghans U, Langenfeld-Heyser R, Polle A, Teichmann T (2004) Effect of auxin transport
inhibitors and ethylene on the wood anatomy of poplar. Plant Biol 6:22–29.
Kang K-Y, Bradic S, Avramidis S, Mansﬁeld SD (2007) Kiln drying lumber quality of hybrid
poplars clones. Holzforschung 61(1):65–73.
Kennedy RW (1974) Properties of poplar that affect utilization. In: Neilson RW, McBride CF (eds)
Poplar Utilization Symposium Proceedings. May 23–24, 1974 Edmonton, Alberta, Canada,
pp. 54–65.
Kim SK, Abe H, Little CH, Pharis RP (1990) Identiﬁcation of two brassinosteroids from
the cambial region of scots pine (Pinus silverstris) by gas chromatography-mass spec-
trometry, after detection using a dwarf rice lamina inclination bioassay. Plant Physiol
94:1709–1713.
Larson PR (1994) The Vascular Cambium. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Little CHA, Bonga JM (1974) Rest in the cambium of Abies balsamea. Canadian Journal of
Botany. 52:1723–1730.
Long JA, Moan EI, Medford JI, Barton MK (1996) A member of the KNOTTED class of
homeodomain proteins encoded by the STM gene of Arabidopsis. Nature 379:66–69.
Loomis RS, Torrey JG (1964) Chemical control of vascular cambium initiation in isolated radish
roots. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 52:3–11.

Wood Formation in Populus
223
Love J, Björklund S, Vahala J, Hertzberg M, Kangasjörvi J, Sundberg B (2009) Ethylene is an
endogenous stimulator of cell division in the cambial meristem of Populus. Proc Natl Acad Sci
106:5984–5989.
Mansﬁeld SD, Iliadis L, Avramidis S (2007) Neural network prediction of bending strength and
stiffness in western hemlock. Holzforschung 61(6):707–716.
Mansﬁeld SD, Weineisen H (2007) Wood ﬁbre quality and kraft pulping efﬁciencies of trembling
Aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx) clones. J Wood Chem Technol 27:135–151.
Masatoshi Yamaguchi MK, Hiroo F, Taku D (2008) VASCULAR-RELATED NAC-DOMAIN7 is
involved in the differentiation of all types of xylem vessels in Arabidopsis roots and shoots.
Plant J 55:652–664.
Mellerowicz EJ, Baucher M, Sundberg B, Boerjan W (2001) Unravelling cell wall formation in the
woody dicot stem. Plant Mol Biol 47:239–274.
Mellerowicz EJ, Immerzeel P, Hayashi T (2008) Xyloglucan: The molecular muscle of trees. Ann
Bot 102:659–665.
Miller CO, Skoog F, Von Saltza MH, Strong F (1955) Kinetin, a cell division factor from
deoxyribonucleic acid. J Am Chem Soc 77:1392.
Moreau C, Aksenov N, Lorenzo M, Segerman B, Funk C, Nilsson P, Jansson S, Tuominen H (2005)
A genomic approach to investigate developmental cell death in woody tissues of Populus trees.
Genome Biol 6:R34.
Moyle R, Schrader J, Stenberg A, Olsson O, Saxena S, Sandberg G, Bhalerao RP (2002)
Environmental and auxin regulation of wood formation involves members of the Aux/IAA
gene family in hybrid aspen. Plant J 31:675–685.
Murphey WK, Bowsersox TW, Blankenhorn PR (1979) Selected wood properties of young
Populus hybrids. Wood Sci 11:263–267.
Nieminen K, Immanen J, Laxell M, Kauppinen L, Tarkowski P, Dolezal K, Tahtiharju S, Elo A,
Decourteix Ml, Ljung K, Bhalerao R, Keinonen K, Albert VA, Helariutta Y (2008) Cytokinin
signaling regulates cambial development in poplar. Proc Natl Acad Sci 105:20032–20037.
Nilsson J, Karlberg A, Antti H, Lopez-Vernaza M, Mellerowicz E, Perrot-Rechenmann C,
Sandberg G, Bhalerao RP (2008) Dissecting the molecular basis of the regulation of wood
formation by auxin in hybrid aspen. Plant Cell 20:843–855.
Nishikubo N, Awano T, Banasiak A, Bourquin V, Ibatullin F, Funada R, Brumer H, Teeri TT,
Hayashi T, Sundberg B, Mellerowicz EJ (2007) Xyloglucan endo-transglycosylase (XET) func-
tions in gelatinous layers of tension wood ﬁbers in poplar – a glimpse into the mechanism of
the balancing act of trees. Plant Cell Physiol 48:843–855.
Norberg PH, Meier H (1996) Physical and chemical properties of gelatinous layer in tension wood
ﬁbres of aspen (Populus tremula L.). Holzforschung 20:174–178.
Olson JR, Jourdain CJ, Rousseau RJ (1985) Selection for cellulose content, speciﬁc gravity, and
volume in young Populus deltoides clones. Can J For Res 15:393–396.
Panshin AJ, de Zeeuw C (1980) Textbook of Wood Technology. Structure, Identiﬁcation and Uses
of the Commercial Woods of the United States and Canada. 4th edition. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York. 576p
Pfaff F (1988) Status of balsam (black) poplar utilization in waferboard/OSB production. Canada-
Alberta Forest Resource Development Agreement Summary Report. Forestry Canada/Alberta
Forest Service, Edmonton. 20pp.
Philipson WR, Ward JM, Butterﬁeld BG (1971) The Vascular Cambium. Barnes and Nobel,
New York.
Saks Y, Feigenbaum P, Aloni R (1984) Regulatory effect of cytokinin on secondary xylem ﬁber
formation in an in vivo system. Plant Physiol 76:638–642.
Savidge RA (1988) Auxin and ethylene regulation of diameter growth in trees. Tree Physiol 4:
401–414.
Semple DE, Vaillant M-H, Kang K-Y, Oh SW, Smith GD, Mansﬁeld SD (2007) Evaluating the suit-
ability of hybrid poplar clones for the manufacture of oriented strand boards. Holzforschung,
61:430–438.
Scheres B (2007) Stem-cell niches: Nursery rhymes across kingdoms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
8:345–354.

224
A.T. Groover et al.
Schrader J, Baba K, May ST, Palme K, Bennett M, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (2003) Polar
auxin transport in the woodforming tissues of hybrid aspen is under simultaneous control of
developmental and environmental signals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:10096–10101.
Schrader J, Nilsson J, Mellerowicz E, Berglund A, Nilsson P, Hertzberg M, Sandberg G (2004)
A high-resolution transcript proﬁle across the wood-forming meristem of poplar identiﬁes
potential regulators of cambial stem cell identity. Plant Cell 16:2278–2292.
Siedlecka A, Wiklund S, Peronne MA, Micheli F, Lesniewska J, Sethson I, Edlund U, Richard L,
Sundberg B, Mellerowicz EJ (2008) Pectin methyl esterase inhibits intrusive and symplastic
cell growth in developing wood cells of Populus. Plant Physiol 146:554–565.
Snow R (1935) Activation of cambial growth by pure hormones. New Phytol 34:347–360.
Sterky F, Regan S, Karlsson J, Hertzberg M, Rohde A, Holmberg A, Amini B, Bhalerao R,
Larsson M, Villarroel R, Van Montagu M, Sandberg G, Olsson O, Teeri TT, Boerjan W,
Gustafsson P, Uhlen M, Sundberg B, Lundeberg J (1998) Gene discovery in the wood-forming
tissues of poplar: Analysis of 5, 692 expressed sequence tags. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:
13330–13335.
Stewart JJ, Kadla JF, Mansﬁeld SD (2006) The inﬂuence of lignin chemistry and ultrastructure
on the pulping efﬁciency of clonal aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.). Holzforschung 60(2):
111–122.
Sundberg B, Uggla C (1998) Origin and dynamics of indoleacetic acid under polar transport in
Pinus sylvestris. Physiologia Plantarum 104:22–29.
Telewski FW, Jaffe MJ (1986) Thigmomorphogenesis: The role of ethylene in the response of
Pinus taeda and Abies fraseri to mechanical perturbation. 66:227–233.
Teleman A, Nordström M, Tenkanen M, Jacobs A, Dahlman O (2003) Isolation and char-
acterization of O-acetylated glucomannans from aspen and birch wood. Carbohydrate Res
338:525–534.
Tuominen H, Puech L, Fink S, Sundberg B (1997) A radial concentration gradient of indole-3-
acetic acid is related to secondary xylem development in hybrid aspen. Plant Physiol 115:
577–585.
Tuskan G, West D, Davis M, Elam C, Evans R, Bradshaw H, Neale D, Sewell M, Wheeler N,
Megraw B, Jech K, Weirman C, Dinus R (2001) Development and validation of marker-aided
selection methods for woody property traits in loblolly pine and hybrid poplar –ﬁnal report.
Oak Ridge National Laboratory Technical Report ORNL/TM–2001/41
Uggla C, Magel E, Moritz T, Sundberg B (2001) Function and dynamics of auxin and carbohy-
drates during earlywood/latewood transition in Scots pine. Plant Physiol 125:2029–2039.
Uggla C, Mellerowicz EJ, Sundberg B (1998) Indole-3-acetic acid controls cambial growth in
Scots pine by positional signalling. Plant Physiol 117:113–121.
Uggla C, Moritz T, Sandberg G, Sundberg B (1996) Auxin as a positional signal in pattern
formation in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9282–9286.
Wang Q, Little CH, Odén PC (1997) Control of longitudinal and cambial growth by gibberellins
and indole-3-acetic acid in current-year shoots of Pinus sylvestris. Tree Physiol 17:715–721.
Welling A, Moritz T, Palva, ET, Junttila O (2002) Independent activation of cold acclimation by
low temperature and short photoperiod in hybrid aspen. Plant Physiol 129:1633–1641.
Yamamoto R, Demura T, Fukuda H (1997) Brassinosteroids induce entry into the ﬁnal stage of
tracheary element differentiation in cultured zinnia cells. Plant Cell Physiol 38:980–983.
Yanchuk AD, Dancik BP, Micko MM (1984) Variation and heritability of wood density and ﬁbre
length of trembling aspen in Alberta, Canada. Silvae Genet 33:11–16.
Yanchuk AD, Spilda I, Micko MM (1988) Genetic variation of extractives in the wood of trembling
aspen. Wood Sci Technol 22:67–71.
Yukun H, Xiaoyan Z (2000) The development of the hybrid poplar processing industry in the
P.R. China. In: Evans PD (ed) Wood-Cement Composites in the Asia-Paciﬁc Region. ACIAR
Proceedings No. 107. pp. 123–128.
Zhong R, Demura T, Ye Z-H (2006) SND1, a NAC domain transcription factor, is a key regulator
of secondary wall synthesis in ﬁbers of arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18:3158–3170.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
Urs Fischer and Andrea Polle
Abstract In their natural habitats Populus trees often face rapidly as well as season-
ally changing climatic conditions and especially drought and other osmotic stresses
contribute globally to loss of productivity in Populus stands. Rich genetic variation
in drought sensitivity and response make Populus to a valuable model genus in order
to study adaptation to water stress. Here, we outline tree speciﬁc responses and the
underlying hormonal signaling in response to drought stress.
1 Introduction
The adaptation and acclimation to changing environmental conditions is crucial for
survival and productivity of trees. In addition to seasonal changes, trees also have to
cope with unfavorable, acute weather conditions such as extended drought periods,
late frost events or with gradually changing environmental conditions imposed by
environmental pollution.
In most areas world-wide, water shortage is the major limiting factor for plant
productivity (Chaves et al., 2009). To afford agricultural production land is being
irrigated, frequently by usage of so called “grey water”, which is waste water still
containing relatively high concentrations of ions, or by utilizing slightly saline
water in coastal areas. These irrigation practices lead to secondary soil salinization,
successively rendering the land unsuitable for agriculture. Currently about 6% of the
world’s land area are salt affected (Munns and Tester, 2008). The devastated areas
are abandoned and new land has to be gained for food production. Since this usually
involves burning or cutting of natural forests, problems related to global change are
increasing.
U. Fischer (B)
Büsgen-Institut, Forstbotanik und Baumphysiologie, Georg-August Universität Göttingen,
Büsgenweg 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany
e-mail: uﬁsche@gwdg.de
225
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_11,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

226
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Drought spells and their direct and indirect consequences for silviculture are
not only a growing problem in arid areas but are also likely to affect temperate
and boreal forests. Climate forecasts for the northern hemisphere predict signiﬁcant
changes in precipitation patterns with less rain in summer (Meehl and Tebaldi, 2004,
Schär et al., 2004). Species in the genus Populus are among the most desiccation-
susceptible woody taxa, but nevertheless signiﬁcant genotypic variability exists,
which renders them suitable to explore the molecular basis of drought tolerance
(Ceulemans et al., 1978; Pallardy and Kozlowski, 1981; Gebre and Kuhns, 1991;
Liu and Dickmann, 1996; Chen et al., 1997; Marron et al., 2002, 2003; Hukin et al.,
2005; Monclus et al., 2006).Therefore, the focus of this overview is on drought and
other osmotic stresses in Populus. Basic molecular and physiological signaling and
defense responses will be covered brieﬂy. Emphasis is on tree-speciﬁc responses
such as restructuring of the hydraulic system and on leaf abscission and branch sac-
riﬁce as important adaptation measures to drought stress that have only received
little attention to date.
2 Stress Signaling and Responses at the Cellular
and Tissue Level
2.1 Cellular Consequences of Water Shortage
Water is the transport medium for nutrients and metabolites and the solvent, in which
all biochemical reactions of the living cell take place. Water deﬁcits result in dehy-
dration and turgor loss with negative consequences for cellular functions such as
membrane integrity and enzyme activities. Physiological water deﬁcits are caused
by drought stress, but also by freezing or soil salinity. Freezing often starts in the
extracellular compartment where apoplastic crystallization of ice has the same effect
as dry air: the water vapour is reduced and consequently, water is removed from the
protoplast, which will shrink accordingly. This results in increasing cellular con-
centrations of salts and other solutes. Similarly, high soil salinity may also impede
water uptake or even reverse water ﬂux during events of sudden salt shock, hence,
requiring osmotic adjustment to maintain water transport to the leaves. Long-term
salt exposure results in excessive accumulation of Na and Cl, which require spe-
ciﬁc compartmentation to avoid ion-induced injury. We refer to recent reviews that
treat these effects of salt toxicity (Munns and Tester, 2008; Chen and Polle, 2010)
and focus here on the implications of the osmotic component common to drought,
salinity and cold stress.
Since different stresses have similar effects at the cellular level, it is not sur-
prising that they lead to activation of overlapping signaling and response networks
to mediate acclimation (Yamagushi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006). Knowledge of
the cellular pathways involved in osmotic stress signaling in Populus is however still
very fragmentary. But – as outlined below – the basic components are conserved in
land plants.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
227
2.2 Signaling Water Limitations
An important mediator of stress responses in plants with some tree-speciﬁc fea-
tures is the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) (Popko et al., 2010). Recently, a
putative sensor of ABA has been identiﬁed in the plasma membrane that has high
homology with a gene encoding Bet V allergen protein that is very abundant in
trees (Ma et al., 2009). Furthermore, two homologs of the putative osmosensor HK1
of Arabidopsis (Urao et al., 1999) have been identiﬁed in eucalypt and seem to
play roles in transduction of dehydration signals in trees (Liu et al., 2001) (Fig. 1).
Membrane
MAPK
Gene expression 
Cis acting  elements 
MYC 
ABRE 
DRE 
Dehydration
HK1
Receptor
Ca2+
CDPK
PLC
ABA-dependent 
ABA-independent 
Repair 
Chaperone
Redox control 
Osmolytes 
Abiotic stress
Drought 
 
Salinity 
 
Freezing 
Receptor
ABA 
ABA 
MYC 
AREB/ABF
DREB
Fig. 1 Molecular responses to osmotic stress. Upon dehydration the cell activates an array of
responses, starting with signaling cascades and leading to the activation of gene transcription and
stress adaptation to acquire a new level of homeostasis (for details see text)

228
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Subsequent signaling pathways involve several MAP kinases (mitogen activated like
protein), phosphatases, and Ca-dependent protein kinases CDPK (Luan, 1998; Lee
et al., 1999; Knight and Knight, 2001) whose activation is mediated through ABA
responsive elements (ABRE) and ABA-independent motives (DRE/CRT) in their
promoters (Bartels and Souer, 2004, Yamagushi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006). It
has been suggested that sensitivity of these pathways may differ in tree species with
different stress responsiveness. For example, different Populus species as well as
different ecotypes of the same species originating from different climatic conditions
varied in their stomatal responsiveness to ABA (Chen et al., 2002a; Yin et al., 2004;
Zhang et al., 2004). Correlative evidence indicated that polyamines and ethylene
acted as such modulators of the intensity of the ABA signal (Chen et al., 2002b).
Hence, ﬁne-tuning of the ABA signal leads to differences in acclimatory responses
to drought in Populus.
2.3 Activation of Cellular Defences
Stress signaling pathways activate down-stream genes encoding enzymes for detox-
iﬁcation and synthesis of osmoprotectants as well as chaperones that rescue cellular
proteins from deactivation (Fig. 1). “Osmoprotectants” encompass diverse chemi-
cal components such as mannitol, rafﬁnose, galactinol, trehalose, glycine betaine,
proline, etc. (Rathinasabapathi, 2000). However, in most cases their mode of action
is unclear. For example, in various tree species drought or salt stress caused pro-
nounced increases in proline (Arndt et al., 2001; Watanabe et al., 2001; Peuke
et al., 2002; Sofo et al., 2004; Ottow et al., 2005). Transgenic approaches in
herbaceous plants that led to increased proline concentrations enhanced their resis-
tance against drought, salt, and cold (Kishor et al., 1995; Yoo et al., 2005). In
P. euphratica, however, calculations showed that the accumulation of proline was
insufﬁcient to contribute substantially to the adjustment of the osmotic pressure
(Ottow et al., 2005). By contrast, P. tomentosa overexpressing a gene encoding
mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase leading to elevated mannitol levels were more
stress-resistant (Hu et al., 2005). Albeit, analysis of primary carbohydrates such
as glucose, fructose and sucrose suggested that their accumulation in response
to drought was by far more important for osmotic adjustment (Luo et al., 2009).
Since compatible solutes also have free radical scavenging capacities (Shen et al.,
1997a, b), they may prevent oxidative injury by osmotic stress (Shen et al., 1999).
Another explanation for the protective function of these compounds is their ability
to act as molecular chaperones stabilizing proteins by preventing unfolding and loss
of function (Vinocur and Altman, 2005).
Transcriptional proﬁling has been used as another strategy to characterize
osmotic stress responses. Genes encoding proteins with chaperone-like activities
(dehydrins, LEA proteins, HSP proteins), repair enzymes (aldehyde and alcohol
dehydrogenases), water and solute transport (aquaporins) and enzymes involved in
phenylpropanoid and polyamines biosynthesis were up-regulated (Brosché et al.,
2005; Ottow et al., 2005; Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007; Street et al., 2006). However,

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
229
it should be emphasized that transcriptional responses strongly depend on the dura-
tion and severity of stress, which is difﬁcult to control in drought stress treatments.
Proteomic analyses showed that both the dark and light reaction of photosynthesis
were particularly sensitive to water limitation (Bonhomme et al., 2009). Combined
proteome and transcriptome studies in trees are scarce. In Populus, no overlap
was found for differentially drought-regulated proteins and genes (Bogeat-Triboulot
et al., 2007). This might have partially been a technical problem since a 6.4 K
microarray was used covering only part of the Populus genome. However, the result
may also reﬂect differences in time courses of protein and RNA biosynthesis, an
experience also gained with systems approaches of other model species (Gygi et al.,
1999). Despite these limitations, the analysis showed that proteins of the photo-
synthetic apparatus were most sensitive to changes in plant water status, whereas
asparagine synthetase, cold-regulated LTCOR12, thioredoxin H, and alcohol dehy-
drogenase were early drought-responsive genes (Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007). This
suggests that adjustment of photosynthesis, regulation of the redox balance and
protection of membranes are of prime importance.
Up-regulation of asparagine synthase (synonymous with glutamine dehydroge-
nase) was repeatedly found in salt or drought-stressed Populus (Brosché et al.,
2005; Ottow et al., 2005; Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007) but also in drought-stressed
Arabidopsis (Rizhsky et al., 2004). This observation points to an unexpected co-
regulation of drought acclimation and nitrogen metabolism. Accordingly, El-Khatib
et al. (2004) showed that Populus trees overexpressing glutamine synthetase were
more drought-resistant and maintained higher photosynthetic electron transport and
Rubisco activity than wild type plants. Increased stress persistence was probably
caused by increased capacity for photorespiration, which might have served as a
protective sink for electrons from photosynthetic reaction centres (El-Khatib et al.,
2004).
Although these results shed only spotlights on cellular signaling and activation
of defenses in response to osmotic stress, they underpin that fundamental patterns
of stress sensing and acclimation in trees and herbaceous plants are similar and
that drought tolerance has unexpected links with primary nitrogen metabolism. The
few studies currently available that compared stress tolerant and sensitive Populus
species indicate that differences in regulation of transcriptional networks exist. Our
current knowledge on these differences and their relevance for stress tolerance at the
cellular levels is still patchy because dehydration is a dynamic process modulated
within the environmental and physiological context of the cell.
3 Tree-Speciﬁc Adaptation Measures
3.1 Growth Responses to Drought
When trees are subjected to osmotic stress, a general chronology of growth
responses can be observed: usually roots continue to grow, whereas shoot growth
stops (Wilkinson and Davies, 2002). Radial growth is generally more sensitive

230
U. Fischer and A. Polle
to drought stress than shoot elongation growth, a feature observed in juvenile as
well as in adult trees (Breda and Granier, 1996). Water deﬁcit tolerance has been
deﬁned operationally as the ability to limit the decrease of biomass production in
response to moderate water deﬁcits (Passioura, 2002). Detailed analysis of the time
course of drought responses in a susceptible Populus species showed that radial
stem growth was most sensitive declining before any ecophysiological measure-
ments indicated water deﬁcit (Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007). When drought stress
increased further, shoot elongation growth stopped whereas root growth continued
until a severe decline in photosynthesis was found, which probably limited the sup-
ply with assimilates (Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007). The decline in photosynthesis
is initially caused by ABA mediated stomatal closure, upon progression of desicca-
tion stress by degradation of the photosynthetic apparatus and ﬁnally by shedding
of leaves. The latter process, discussed later in this chapter, has not received much
attention although it can be regarded as an adaptation measure that reduces water
loss by transpiration.
It is obvious that soil water deﬁcits have diverse effects on different tree organs.
The drought responses follow a strict orchestration, whose underlying mecha-
nisms are not yet fully understood. However, they are more diverse than reactions
observed in small herbaceous plants. As they constitute important adaptation mea-
sures to maintain and regulate water uptake, transport and transpirational loss, their
morphological, physiological and molecular basis will be considered in greater
detail.
3.2 Adaption of the Hydraulic Architecture to Drought
With respect to the ecology of woody species, the hydraulic architecture is particu-
larly important following climatic gradients from wet to dry conditions (Westoby
and Wright, 2006; Swenson and Enquist, 2007). In angiosperms, vessel lumina
are most relevant for the hydraulic characteristics because conductivity increases
with the fourth power of radius and only linearly with vessel number (Tyree
and Zimmermann, 2002). Smaller vessels are usually less susceptible to drought-
induced xylem embolism than those with large volumes (Sperry and Tyree, 1988;
Sperry and Saliendra, 1994; Hargrave et al., 1994; Lo Gullo et al., 1995; Hacke
and Sauter, 1996). Species surveys show that cavitation resistance is usually corre-
lated with wood density (Hacke and Sperry, 2001; Hacke et al., 2001, 2006). Since
the transport features of embolized vessels can be restored by re-ﬁlling, drought
tolerance also depends on species-speciﬁc repair capabilities (Hacke et al., 2001).
Interestingly, repeated cycles of cavitation and re-ﬁlling caused cavitation fatigue
in some species including Populus; this phenomenon probably results from rup-
ture or loosening of the cellulosic mesh of interconduit pit membranes during the
water stress and cavitation treatment (Hacke et al., 2001). Indeed, it was not possi-
ble to increase cavitation resistance of P. trichocarpa clones by hardening through
preceding drought cycles (Harvey and van den Driessche, 1997), whereas usually
hardening enhances tolerance to subsequent stress events.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
231
Wood formation involves a strongly orchestrated sequence of molecular and
physiological processes (Mellerowicz et al., 2001; Mellerowicz and Sundberg,
2008). Anatomical features and growth potential of the xylogenic cambium are
genetically determined (Chen et al., 1997; Monclus et al., 2006, Novaes et al., 2009).
However, the realized radial growth is highly plastic and strongly affected by envi-
ronmental conditions such as nutrient availability and weather conditions (Wind
et al., 2004; Luo et al., 2005; Lautner et al., 2007; Luo and Polle, 2009; Novaes
et al., 2009). In particular, interannual variability in precipitation strongly inﬂuences
wood formation of temperate trees and results in a close correlation between wood
production and water availability (Sass and Eckstein, 1995; Garcia-Gonzalez and
Eckstein, 2003; Fonti and Garcia-Gonzalez, 2004).
Wood formation is a highly carbon costly process. Therefore, drought-induced
decline in photosynthesis and consequently diminished assimilate supply have
negative effects on wood formation (Sauter, 2000). However, it is necessary to
distinguish between long and short term effects of osmotic stress since the initial
decline in radial growth precedes decreases in photosynthesis (Bogeat-Triboulot
et al., 2007). Under mild water deﬁcit cell division continues, but the expansion
of vessels is strongly diminished (Arend and Fromm, 2007; Bogeat-Triboulot et al.,
2007). Cell expansion depends on turgor, which is achieved by solute accumulation
and cellular water uptake (Passioura and Fry, 1992; Langer et al., 2002). Therefore,
already in initial stages, signals that lead to osmotic changes regulating vessel size
must be important for the adaptation of the wood anatomy. This is probably also
true for salt exposed trees (Junghans et al., 2006; Escalente-Perez et al., 2009). Both
drought as well as salt stress result in smaller vessels but increased vessel frequen-
cies compared with non-stressed trees (Junghans et al., 2006; Arend and Fromm,
2007). Actually, the sum of vessel lumen area remained unchanged under mild salt
stress compared with non-stressed Populus because an increased vessel frequency
compensated the decreased size of individual vessels (Fig. 2). Furthermore, cell
wall thickness was increased leading to higher resilience of the conductive system
to decreasing turgor pressure (Junghans et al., 2006). Similar structural changes
were also reported for water-limited Eucalyptus (February et al., 1995; Searson
et al., 2004) underlining the ability of trees to adapt their wood anatomy ﬂexibly
to environmental requirements.
Currently, we have only little information which molecular events and signals
mediate adjustment of wood structures to external conditions. Phytohormones such
as ABA and auxin play important roles in seasonal variation of wood formation
(Lachaud, 1989; Aloni et al., 2000; Mellerowicz et al., 2001). Since they are also
involved in mediating osmotic stresses (see above), they most likely are key compo-
nents for structural ﬂexibility of wood formation. For example, Arend and Fromm
(2007) showed that drought induced changes were only signiﬁcant during early but
not during late wood formation, i.e., only when wide vessels and not when small
vessels are formed. They speculated that the apparent differences in seasonal des-
iccation sensitivity might have been related to seasonal variation in sensitivity of
cambial cells to ABA. Such seasonal shifts in sensitivity to ABA and also to auxin
have been postulated for a long time (Lachaud, 1989).

232
U. Fischer and A. Polle
0
100
200
300
*
Change in anatomical properties
(% of control)
*
ns
VA
VL
VF
Fig. 2 Changes in wood anatomical properties in P. x canescens in response to osmotic stress.
Stress was imposed by exposure by stepwise increase of NaCl to 75 mM in hydroponic solution
(details, see Ehlting et al., 2007). Cross sections of xylem developed during the experimental stress
exposure were analysed for luminal area of individual vessels (VL), sum of all vessel lumina per
area unit (VA) and vessel frequency (VF). Changes induced by salt are shown relative to controls,
which were set as 100% (horizontal line). Stars indicate signiﬁcant differences from controls
In Populus as in other vascular plants most auxin is present in conjugated forms
with amino acids or peptides that serve as a storage form (Cohen and Bandurski,
1982). Auxin amidohydrolases release active auxin from these storage conjugates.
In Populus, moderate salt stress that led to smaller vessels resulted in decreased con-
centrations of auxin conjugates in the developing xylem of sensitive but not in that
of salt tolerant Populus species (Junghans et al., 2006). Furthermore, reporter gene
constructs with the auxin sensitive GH3 promoter were activated in the cambium of
salt stressed P. x canescens but not in non-stressed trees, despite high auxin concen-
trations in the latter tissues (Teichmann et al., 2008). These observations suggest that
dynamic changes in auxin levels and changes in auxin-responsiveness and not the
amount of auxin per se are part of the molecular net required to adjust wood anatomy
to environmental cues. Indeed, Nilsson et al. (2008) recently showed that pertur-
bations in auxin-responsiveness affected wood anatomy. It is obvious that future
studies will require systems approaches at cell, tissue and plant level to understand
the integration of environmental input signals and their transduction into adjustment
of wood formation to osmotic stresses. This knowledge may aid selection programs
for drought and salt tolerant tree species.
4 Abscission as a Drought Stress Avoidance Strategy
Leaf and branch abscission offer deciduous trees an additional strategy to
face drought stress, compared to Arabidopsis and other rosette plants. Whereas
Arabidopsis does not develop functional abscission zones, neither on petioles,

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
233
pedicels nor inﬂorescence stems (Patterson, 2001), many other plants have the
possibility to shed organs either upon stress or seasonal signals. Leaf shed-
ding as an adaptive measure is well known in tropical trees but has also been
observed in temperate and boreal tree species (Bochert, 1998; Fort et al., 1998;
Gindaba et al., 2004; Ogaya and Penuelas, 2006; Castro-Diez and Navarro,
2007). Theoretical considerations suggest that it is next to low epidermal con-
ductance a major factor to prolong plant survival under severe drought (Sinclair,
2000).
By separating lateral organs form the hydraulic continuum, the overall tran-
spiration of the main plant body is greatly lowered and therefore reduced xylem
cavitation can be expected. Since lateral meristems are proximal to the leaf abscis-
sion zone, they remain on the growth axis after leaf shedding. In other words, lateral
buds can potentially resume growth after stress induced or seasonal leaf abscission.
Depending on the degree of loss of lateral organs this stress avoidance strategy is
costly; however given re-establishment of growth at protected meristematic sites
after a dry period, survival is achieved. Especially in trees, avoidance of xylem cav-
itation is of importance since water has to be transported to greater heights, and
damage might not easily be overcome by root sap pressure or capillary forces as in
annual plants.
In addition to seasonal leaf abscission, which depends on the perception of
decreasing day-length and temperature, other environmental cues can induce leaf
abscission. Exogenous application of various plant hormones indicates that down-
stream of such environmental cues several plant hormones have either a promot-
ing (ethylene, ABA) or inhibiting (auxin) effect on leaf abscission (Taylor and
Whitelaw, 2001; Roberts et al., 2002). An attractive model based on experiments
employing explants of various herbaceous species states that an auxin gradient is
spanning the abscission zone, with a maximum distally (faced to the leaf) to the
abscission zone. When the auxin production of the leaf is decreasing, the gradi-
ent in the abscission zone ﬂattens or reverses, leading to higher ethylene sensitivity
of the cells in the abscission zone (Addicott et al., 1955). Ethylene is then sup-
posed to trigger the induction or the secretion of hydrolytic enzymes, which are
responsible for the spatial separation. Although this model never has been proven,
it became well accepted and represents nowadays text-book knowledge (e.g. Taiz
and Zeiger, 2002). Despite a formal proof for an instructive auxin gradient as a
regulator of leaf abscission is lacking, the involvement of ethylene as a down-
stream signaling compound seems to be granted also for trees (Ruonala et al.,
2006).
Despite ABA was discovered as an abscission inducing agent in cotton (Liu and
Carns, 1961; Ohkuma et al., 1963; Addicott et al., 1968) its role during leaf abscis-
sion is still a matter of debate (Taylor and Whitelaw, 2001; Roberts et al., 2002)
and the current consensus is that it affects leaf abscission indirectly by enhancing
senescence. However, there is no doubt that exogenous application of ABA in many
experimental systems can promote abscission (Roberts et al., 2002) and there is also
support for a more direct role of ABA in cell separation processes in seeds (Sargent
et al., 1984) and ﬂoral organs (Aneja et al., 1999).

234
U. Fischer and A. Polle
4.1 Stress Induced Abscission
Chen et al. (1997, 2002b) showed that drought stress induces rapidly leaf abscission
in P. x euamericana (cv. Italica) but not in P. popularis and that the application of
ABA to the xylem sap is sufﬁcient to induce leaf shedding in well watered plants
of both species, with P. popularis being the less sensitive one. In P. x euamer-
icana a sharp increase of ABA concentration in the xylem sap, which peaked 3
days after the drought stress had been initiated, preceded leaf abscission. After leaf
abscission the water status of P. x euamericana plants rapidly recovered. By con-
trast, in P. popularis leaves remained on the stem during the water stress and the
ABA concentration increased during the ﬁrst day of treatment but rapidly reached
normal levels thereafter. The authors argue that ABA levels had not reached a cer-
tain threshold or that rapid re-establishment of normal ABA levels was the cause
for retention of those leaves. Since ABA application is sufﬁcient to induce leaf
abscission, ABA seems not only to be important as a short-term signal in drought
stress but also directly be involved in drought induced leaf abscission for long-term
adaptation.
In order to uncover molecular players Street and coworkers (2006) elegantly
made use of two Populus species different in their reaction to drought stress. P.
trichocarpa showed quick and dramatic necrosis 14 days after the water regime had
started, whereas in P. deltoides necrosis proceeded slowly and leaves were not shed
in consequence of drought stress. Global transcriptome analysis under drought stress
revealed that differentially expressed genes are involved in ABA (one EST match-
ing to AREB1) and ethylene signaling and biosynthesis (EIN3 and an ACC oxidase).
AREB1 is a leucine zipper transcription factor, which binds to ABA responsive
elements of ABA inducible genes (Uno et al., 2000; Fujita et al., 2005). ACC
oxidases (ACO) are required for the biosynthesis of ethylene and have been found
to be strongly induced during ethylene burst in Populus (Andersson-Gunnerås et al.,
2003). Under drought stress two ESTs matching to one Populus ACO gene model
were drought-induced in the leaf-shedding species P. trichocarpa but not in the leaf
retaining species P. deltoides. Even though ACC synthase (ACS) is considered as
the rate limiting step in ethylene biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (Chae and Kieber,
2005) the above summarized data suggest that under drought stress ACO induction
leads to increased ethylene biosynthesis and subsequent leaf abscission.
In addition to the separation of single leaves from the hydraulic continuum sev-
eral Populus species show premature senescence of leaves and leaf abscission on
whole branches and subsequently necrosis and loss of these branches (Tyree et al.,
1993); a process, which is referred to as “branch sacriﬁce” (Rood et al., 2000). In
contrast to simple leaf abscission, growth of the proximal buds can not be resumed
by entering more favorable conditions. Hence, branch dieback can be considered as
a more extreme form of stress avoidance than leaf abscission. Unlike during abscis-
sion removal of the dead branch at a histological separation zone is not involved.
Dead branches will be retained in the crown or eventually be separated from the
tree body by mechanical forces. Interestingly, the phenomenon of branch sacriﬁce
can be observed in P. deltoides and P. fremantii, two species, which are native to

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
235
semi-arid areas and therefore supposedly well adapted to drought stress; whereas
in P. trichocarpa, P. balsamifolia and P. augustifolia branch dieback only rarely
was observed during drought periods (Rood et al., 2000). Branch dieback in P.
deltoides and P. fremantii correlates with higher xylem vulnerability compared to
P. trichocarpa, which is adapted to more humid areas (Rood et al., 2000). The
paradoxon of higher xylem vulnerability in species of arid compared to humid
regions indicates the importance of abscission as a mechanism for survival during
drought periods.
Regulation of the water balance of a tree via branch sacriﬁce goes at the expense
of not only annual but also perennial parts of the tree. However, one should note
that the process involves leaf senescence as observed on the basis of leaf yellow-
ing (Rood et al., 2000), and therefore a substantial amount of the leaf structure
might be recycled. Branch sacriﬁce only is an efﬁcient mechanism if dieback pro-
ceeds from younger, more apical to older, more basal parts of a branch. If dieback
is not coordinated nutrient remobilization during the initial phase of branch sacri-
ﬁce will not be yielding. Indeed it was reported that xylem vulnerability is gradually
decreasing from petioles over young branches to less peripheral regions (Tyree et al.,
1993).
In comparison to stomatal closure, which reduces the transpiration rate per unit
leaf area, abscission or branch sacriﬁce might leave this rate constant. The water
balance is in this case regulated by reducing the surface area of the canopy and
hence the total water demand of a tree is lowered.
4.2 Abscission Induced by Seasonal Drought Stress
Leaf abscission in deciduous tress is considered as an adaptive advantage to sea-
sonally reoccurring drought (Addicott, 1968). In temperate regions the winters are
dry and with low temperature the viscosity of water in the soil increases and there-
fore its availability decreases. In such a niche seasonal leaf shedding is seen as
a strategy to reduce leaf surface area and consequently the overall transpiration
of a tree. Reduction of such an annually reoccurring drought stress goes along
with carbon loss and subsequently rich stands of deciduous trees are expected to
occur on nutritious soil. Indeed, geographic dominance of deciduous over evergreen
stands strongly correlates with winter drought stress and rich soils (DeFries et al.,
2000; Hansen et al., 2000; Givnish, 2002). The ability of shedding leaves may have
evolved when trees manifested dry niches during the Cretacous (Axelrod, 1966;
Addicott, 1968). Although there is considerable criticism on the relevance of sea-
sonal drought stress as a selective force in the evolution of the deciduous character
(Givnish, 2002), there is no doubt that at least coincidently leaf shedding alleviates
drought stress during winter. In contrast to trees, which commonly only ﬂower after
several growth periods, annual plants can overcome seasonal dry periods by setting
seeds that endure drought periods.

236
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Primary induction of seasonal leaf abscission is given by decreasing day length
and possibly decreasing temperature (Keskitalo et al., 2005; Fracheboud et al.,
2009). Downstream of this primary, environmental cues, hormonal signals come
into play. In birch, overexpression of the dominant allele etr1-1 of the Arabidopsis
ethylene receptor leads to ethylene insensitivity and strongly delayed seasonal leaf
abscission (Ruonala et al., 2006). Hence, ethylene signaling seems to be required
for seasonal leaf abscission. Evidence that ethylene is involved in seasonal leaf
abscission also in Populus comes from a global gene expression analysis during
autumn (Andersson et al., 2004).The expression levels of ﬁve 1-aminocyclopropane-
1-carboxylate oxidase genes (ACO) gradually increased during natural autumnal
senescence in P. tremula (Andersson et al., 2003). The increase negatively correlates
with the temperature and precipitation; two factors, which reduce water availability
and therefore contribute to seasonal drought stress.
From microarray data a hint can be gotten if during autumnal senescence Populus
trees are indeed experiencing drought stress. Tables 1 & 2 show a comparison
of the above mentioned experiments of Andersson et al. (2004) and Street et al.
(2006), listing the overlap of signiﬁcantly regulated ESTs during autumnal senes-
cence in P. tremula and of regulated ESTs during drought stress in P. deltoides and
P. trichocarpa. The overlap between the seasonal and drought stress regulon is sur-
prisingly strong (Tables 1 & 2), i.e. 229 and 383 ESTs of a total of 13490 were
up-regulated during drought and season, respectively; of which 31 ESTs were up-
regulated in both experiments (Table 1). The expected random overlap for the same
number of regulated genes is only 6.5 ESTs (13490∗(229/13490)∗(383/13490)),
while for the down-regulated ESTs 2.4 hits are expected and 22 ESTs were indeed
identiﬁed (Table 2). Most of the down-regulated ESTs of both experiments match
to genes involved in both the light and dark reaction of photosynthesis. While this
outcome is expected for the seasonal regulation, other microarray experiments and
proteomics studies support the reduction of components of photosynthesis under
drought stress (Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007; Plomion et al., 2006; Xiao et al.,
2009). Interestingly, 13 of the 22 commonly down-regulated EST encode for pro-
teins, which will be transported to the plastid suggesting intense communication
between plastids and nucleus during drought as well as autumnal senescence.
Among the ESTs induced during both drought stress and seasonal senescence
several map to Arabidopsis gene models, which have been evidentially associated
to drought stress. The two transcription factors AtAF1 and AtHB-12 have been
described as inducible by ABA and drought stress (Lu et al., 2007; Olsson et al.,
2004). Interestingly single mutants in these loci render the plants hyposensitive
towards ABA, indicating that they function in the ABA dependent drought response
(Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006). Also HISTONE1-3 (HIS1-3), a diver-
gent but in plants conserved HISTONE1, is in Arabidopsis inducible by drought
and ABA (Ascenzi and Gantt, 1997 and 1999). These ﬁndings strongly suggest that
Populus trees experience drought stress via ABA signaling during natural seasonal
senescence.
Most prominently represented among the co-regulated genes during drought
stress and seasonal senescence are the metallothionein (MT) proteins, which have

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
237
Table 1 ESTs signiﬁcantly up-regulated during autumnal senescence (P. tremula; Andersson
et al., 2004) and drought stress (P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides; Street et al., 2006)
ESTa
Arabidopsis
gene modelb
Description/Function
Regulation
PU00285
At1g51200
zinc ﬁnger (AN1-like) family protein
PU10362
AtAF1
NAC DNA binding domain; negative regulation of
abscisic acid mediated signaling
PU09347
AtHB-12
homeodomain leucine zipper class I; response to ABA
stimulus and drought stress
PU02852
At3g61260
DNA-binding family protein/remorin family protein
PU03690
HIS1-3
structurally divergent linker histone, induced by
dehydration and ABA.
PU10820
CIPK10
CBL interacting kinase
PU03431
AtCBL9
Calcineurin B-like calcium sensor protein; drought
stress induced
PU03538
STRS1
RNA helicase; suppression of stress response
PU09968
At4g32250
protein kinase family protein
Cytoskeleton
PU10724
AtMAP70-4
microtubule associated protein
PU04900
AtG8F
autophagy; microtuble binding
PU08221
ERD10
actin binding; response to dehydration
Metabolism
PU02043
AtNADP-
ME4
malate oxidoreductase
PU05029
AtNADP-
ME4
malate oxidoreductase
PU05169
AtNADP-
ME4
malate oxidoreductase
PU01406
AtUGT85A4
UDP-glucosyl transferase
PU03376
AtSRG1
member of the Fe(II)/ascorbate oxidase gene family;
senescence-related gene
PU11611
LKR/SDH
lysine-ketoglutarate reductase
Other
PU08542
GUT15
non-coding RNA
PU03101
At5g65520
unknown
PU10963
ELIP1
chlorophyll binding
PU10994
At2g04620
cation efﬂux family protein
PU10380
AtMT-1
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
PU10607
AtMT-1
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
PU03887
AtMT-1
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
PU11789
AtMT-1
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
PU10863
AtMT-3
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
PU05599
AtMT-3
metallothionein protein; limiting oxidative damage
aESTs refer to POP1 arrays and the corresponding Populus and Arabidopsis gene models can be
retrieved from the PopulusDB, http://www.populus.db.umu.se/.
bInformation about Arabidopsis gene models retrieved from Arabidopsis Information Resource
(TAIR), www.arabidopsis.org/.

238
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Table 2 ESTs signiﬁcantly down-regulated during autumnal senescence (P. tremula; Andersson
et al., 2004) and drought stress (P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides; Street et al., 2006)
ESTa
Arabidopsis
gene modelb
Description/Function
Photosynthesis
PU00298
LHCB3
light-harvesting chlorophyll b binding protein
PU08604
PSBQ-2
PsbQ subunit of PSII
PU08719
LHB1B1
light-harvesting chlorophyll-protein complex II subunit B1
PU09731
LHCA1
light harvesting complex of PSI
PU10089
LHCB6
light harvesting complex of photosystem II
PU10383
PSAO
subunit O of photosystem I
PU08681
HEMA1
glutamyl-tRNA reductase; chlorophyll biosynthesis
PU09533
CH-42
subunit of a magnesium chetalase; chlorophyll biosynthesis
PU10714
RBCS1A
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase small chain 1A
PU11249
RCA
rubisco activase
PU08539
RBCS1A
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase small chain 1A
PU11749
RPL4
plastid ribosomal protein L4
PU12504
ATPD
chloroplast ATPase delta-subunit
Regulation
PU08670
At5g04840
bZIP protein
PU09075
At1g08010
zinc ﬁnger (GATA type) family protein
PU09378
At1g55150
DEAD box RNA helicase
PU09599
RBR
retinoblastoma homologue
PU08668
UBP8
ubiquitin speciﬁc protease
PU08561
CRT1
calreticulin
PU02810
At3g13470
chaperonin
Other
PU08461
At4g19160
unknown protein
PU08710
At2g34430
unknown protein
aESTs refer to POP1 arrays and the corresponding Populus and Arabidopsis gene models can be
retrieved from the PopulusDB, http://www.populus.db.umu.se/.
bInformation about Arabidopsis gene models retrieved from Arabidopsis Information Resource
(TAIR), www.arabidopsis.org/.
already been linked to drought stress in Populus (Brosché et al., 2005; Plomion et al.,
2006; Bogeat-Triboulot et al., 2007) and furthermore to senescing tissue in various
species (Buchanan-Wollaston, 1994; Butt et al., 1998; Mir et al., 2004). MTs limit
oxidative damage to DNA and other molecules and are supposed to be involved in
the translocation of heavy metals in senescing tissue (Mir et al., 2004). Both roles
seem to be relevant in the proposed mechanism of leaf shedding as a drought stress
avoidance mechanism.
Beyond all questions the cytoskeleton plays an important function during drought
stress (e.g. change in cell turgor) and autumnal senescence (e.g. breakdown of
cellular structure). Indeed Xiao et al. (2009) identiﬁed lower abundance of an
alpha-tubulin during drought stress. The comparison of the drought stress and the
autumnal senescence regulon (Table 1) reveals further overlap of ESTs linked to

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
239
the cytoskeleton. Two ESTs for microtubule binding proteins and also one EST
for an actin binding protein are co-regulated during drought stress and autumnal
senescence (Table 1). One of these ESTs matches with the microtubule binding pro-
tein AtG8F, which is involved in autophagy, a process, which ensures recycling of
cytoplasmic components via transport in membrane surrounded compartments into
vacuoles or lysosomes (Contento et al., 2005). The other microtubule binding pro-
tein is of unknown function in Arabidopsis, while the actin binding protein ERD10
is a member of the divergent protein families of dehydrins and late embryogenesis-
abundant (LEA) proteins, which are induced by various dehydration stressors via
ABA signaling (Rorat, 2006).
Co-regulated ESTs for homologs of AtCBL9 (CALCINEURIN B-LIKE PROTEIN
9), CIPK10 (CBL-INTERACTING PROTEIN KINASE 10) and the calreticulin
AtCRT1 indicate an involvement of calcium signaling during autumnal senescence
and drought response. Calreticulin is involved in homeostasis of Ca2+ (Persson et al.,
2001) and protein folding (Christensen et al., 2008), whereas the calcium sensor
protein AtCBL9 and CIPK10 are involved in calcium signaling.
In summary, co-regulation of EST during drought and autumnal senescence can
be abundantly identiﬁed. Major groups of this co-regulon are genes involved in pho-
tosynthesis, regulation of cytoskeleton, calcium signaling and various transcription
factors (Fig. 3). The surprisingly high number of genes, which are co-regulated dur-
ing seasonal senescence and drought stress, indicates that during these processes
similar biochemical events and hormonal signaling take place. Interestingly, many
ABA-regulated drought speciﬁc genes are up-regulated during seasonal senescence,
revealing drought stress during this period and a central role for ABA signaling
during seasonal senescence.
Fig. 3 Model of hormonal signaling during drought stress in leaf shedding and leaf retaining
Populus species

240
U. Fischer and A. Polle
5 Conclusions
Increasing demand on sustainable wood biomass requires that the yield of existing
stands is improved and that new, less favorable areas are exploited in order to grow
trees. Loss due to abiotic stress, especially osmotic stress, counters these strate-
gies and therefore the study of responses to abiotic stressors is essential. Although
valuable information from the study of annual species can be obtained, tree models
need to account for responses speciﬁc to perennials. Among the perennial-speciﬁc
responses leaf abscission stands out as efﬁcient strategy for survival under severe
drought stress. In climates with occasional severe droughts, trees sensitive to abscis-
sion could be beneﬁcial. For less extreme climates however, engineering or breeding
of trees with increased drought tolerance, but not involving abscission, is more
promising. Molecular targets are plentiful and have been listed in this review.
Acknowledgments We are grateful to the German Science foundation for supporting AP
via Poplar Research Group Germany (PRG) and UF (Fi1668/1), to the European communi-
ties for funding ENERGYPOPLAR (QLK5-CT-2000-01377) and to the Bundesministerium für
Verbraucherschutz, Ernährung und Landwirtschaft (BMVEL) for a travel grant.
References
Addicott FT (1968) Environmental factors in physiology of abscission. Plant Physiol 43:
1471–1479.
Addicott FT, Lynch RS, Carns HR (1955) Auxin gradient theory of abscission regulation. Science
121:644–645.
Addicott FT, Lyon JL, Ohkuma K et al. (1968) Abscisic acid – a new name for a abscisin 2
(dormin). Science 159:1493.
Aloni R, Feigenbaum P, Kalev N, Rozovsky S (2000) Hormonal control of vascular differentiation
in plants: the physiological basis of cambium ontogeny and xylem evolution. In: Savidge RA,
Barnett JR, Napier R (eds) Cell and Molecular Biology of Wood Formation, pp. 223–236. Bios
Scientiﬁc Publishers Ltd, Oxford.
Andersson A, Keskitalo J, Sjödin A et al. (2004) A transcriptional timetable of autumn senescence.
Genome Biol 5.
Andersson-Gunnerås S, Hellgren JM, Björklund S et al. (2003) Asymmetric expression of a poplar
ACC oxidase controls ethylene production during gravitational induction of tension wood.
Plant J 34:339–349.
Aneja M, Gianfagna T, Ng E (1999) The roles of abscisic acid and ethylene in the abscission and
senescence of cocoa ﬂowers. Plant Growth Regul 27:149–155.
Arend M, Fromm J (2007) Seasonal change in the drought response of wood cell development in
poplar. Tree Physiol 27:985–992.
Arndt SK, Clifford SC, Wanek W, Jones H-G, Popp M (2001) Physiological and morphological
adaptations of the fruit tree Ziziphus rotundifolia in response to progressive drought stress. Tree
Physiol 21:705–715.
Ascenzi R, Gantt JS (1997) A drought-stress-inducible histone gene in Arabidopsis thaliana is a
member of a distinct class of plant linker histone variants. Plant Mol Biol 34:629–641.
Ascenzi R, Gantt JS (1999) Molecular genetic analysis of the drought-inducible linker histone
variant in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Mol Biol 41:159–169.
Axelrod DI (1966) Origin of deciduous and evergreen habits in temperate forests. Evolution 20:
1–15.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
241
Bartels D, Souer E (2004) Molecular responses of higher plants to dehydration. In: Hirt H,
Shinozaki K (eds) Plant Responses to Abiotic Stresses, Vol 4. Topics in Current Genetics.
Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 9–38.
Bogeat-Triboulot MB, Brosché M, Renaut J et al. (2007) Gradual soil water depletion results in
reversible changes of gene expression, protein proﬁles, ecophysiology, and growth performance
in Populus euphratica, a poplar growing in arid regions. Plant Physiol 143:876–892.
Bonhomme L, Monclus R, Vincent D et al. (2009) Leaf proteome anaysis of eight Populus x
euramericana genotypes: genetic variation in drought response and in water-use efﬁciency
involves photosynthesis-related proteins. Proteomics 9:4121–4142.
Borchert R (1998) Responses of tropical trees to rainfall seasonality and its long-term changes.
Climatic Change 39:381–393.
Breda N, Granier A (1996) Intra- and interannual variations of transpiration, leaf area index and
radial growth of a sessile oak stand (Quercus petraea). Annales des Sciences Forestrières
53:521–536.
Brosché M, Vinocur B, Alatalo ER et al. (2005) Gene expression and metabolite proﬁling of
Populus euphratica growing in the Negev desert. Genome Biol 6.
Buchanan-Wollaston V (1994) Isolation of cDNA clones for genes that are expressed during
leaf senescence in Brassica napus – identiﬁcation of a gene encoding a senescence-speciﬁc
metallothionein-like protein. Plant Physiol 105:839–846.
Butt A, Mousley C, Morris K et al. (1998) Differential expression of a senescence-enhanced
metallothionein gene in Arabidopsis in response to isolates of Peronospora parasitica and
Pseudomonas syringae. Plant J 16:209–221.
Castro-Diez P, Navarro J (2007) Water relations of seedlings of three Quercus species: varia-
tions across and within species grown in contrasting light and water regimes. Tree Physiol 27:
1011–1018.
Ceulemans R, Impens I, Lemeur R, Moermans R, Samsuddin Z (1978) Water movement in the soil-
poplar-atmosphere system. I. Comparative study of stomatal morphology and anatomy, and the
inﬂuence of stomatal density and dimensions on the leaf diffusion characteristics in different
poplar clones. Oecologia Plantarum 13:1–12.
Chae HS, Kieber JJ (2005) Eto Brute? Role of ACS turnover in regulating ethylene biosynthesis.
Trends Plant Sci 10:291–296.
Chaves MM, Flexas J, Pinheiro C (2009) Photosynthesis under drought and salt stress: regulation
mechanisms from whole plant to cell. Ann Botany 103:551–560.
Chen S, Li J, Wang T et al. (2002a) Osmotic stress and ion-speciﬁc effects on xylem
abscisic acid and the relevance to salinity tolerance in poplar. J Plant Growth Regul 21:
224–233.
Chen S, Polle A (2010) Salinity tolerance of Populus. Plant Biol, in press.
Chen SL, Wang SS, Altman A, Hüttermann A (1997) Genotypic variation in drought tolerance of
poplar in relation to abscisic acid. Tree Physiol 17:797–803.
Chen SL, Wang SS, Huttermann A, Altman A (2002b) Xylem abscisic acid accelerates leaf abscis-
sion by modulating polyamine and ethylene synthesis in water-stressed intact poplar. Trees
16:16–22.
Christensen A, Svensson K, Persson S et al. (2008) Functional characterization of Arabidopsis
calreticulin1a: A key alleviator of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Plant Cell Physiol 49:
912–924.
Cohen JD, Bandurski RS (1982) The chemistry and physiology of the bound auxins. Ann Rev
Plant Physiol 33:403–430.
Contento AL, Xiong Y, Bassham DC (2005) Visualization of autophagy in Arabidopsis using
the ﬂuorescent dye monodansylcadaverine and a GFP-AtATG8e fusion protein. Plant J 42:
598–608.
Defries RS, Hansen MC, Townshend JRG (2000) Global continuous ﬁelds of vegetation charac-
teristics: a linear mixture model applied to multi-year 8 km AVHRR data. Int J Remote Sens
21:1389–1414.

242
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Ehlting B, Dluzniewska P, Dietrich H et al. (2007) Interaction of nitrogen nutrition and salinity in
grey poplar (Populus tremula x alba). Plant Cell Environ 30:796–811.
El-Khatib RT, Hamerlynck EP, Gallardo F, Kirby EG (2004) Transgenic poplar characterized by
ectopic expression of a pine cytosolic glutamine synthetase gene exhibits enhanced tolerance
to water stress. Tree Physiol 24:729–736.
Escalante-Pérez M, Lautner S, Nehls U et al. (2009) Salt stress affects xylem differentiation of
grey poplar (Populus x canescens). Planta 229:299–309.
February EC, Stock WD, Bond WJ, Le Roux D (1995) Relationships between water availability
and selected vessel characteristics in Eucalyptus grandis and two hybrids. IAWA J 16:269–276.
Fonti P, Garcia-Gonzalez I (2004) Suitability of chestnut earlywood vessel chronologies for
ecological studies. New Phytol 163:77–86.
Fort C, Muller F, Label P, Granier A, Dreyer E (1998) Stomatal conductance, growth and
root signaling in Betula pendula seedlings subjected to partial soil drying. Tree Physiol 18:
769–776.
Fracheboud Y, Luquez V, Björken L et al. (2009) The control of autumn Senescence in European
aspen. Plant Physiol 149:1982–1991.
Fujita Y, Fujita M, Satoh R et al. (2005) AREB1 is a transcription activator of novel ABRE-
dependent ABA signaling that enhances drought stress tolerance in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
17:3470–3488.
Garcia-Gonzalez I, Eckstein D (2003) Climatic signal of earlywood vessels of oak on a maritime
site. Tree Physiol 23:497–504.
Gebre GM, Kuhns MR (1991) Seasonal and clonal variations in drought tolerance of Populus
deltoides. Can J For Res 21:910–916.
Gindaba J, Rozanov A, Negash L (2004) Response of seedlings of two Eucalyptus and three
deciduous tree species from Ethiopia to severe water stress. For Ecol Manag 201:121–131.
Givnish TJ (2002) Adaptive signiﬁcance of evergreen vs. deciduous leaves: Solving the triple
paradox. Silva Fennica 36:703–743.
Gygi SP, Rochon Y, Franza BR, Aebersold R (1999) Correlation between protein and mRNA
abundance in yeast. Mol Cell Biol 19:1720–1730.
Hacke U, Sauter JJ (1996) Drought-induced xylem dysfunction in petioles, branches, and roots of
Populus balsamifera L. and Alnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn. Plant Physiol 111:413–417.
Hacke UG, Sperry JS (2001) Functional and ecological xylem anatomy. Perspect Plant Ecol Evol
Syst 4:97–115.
Hacke UG, Sperry JS, Pockman WT, Davis SD, McCulloh KA (2001) Trends in wood density
and structure are linked to prevent of xylem explosion by negative pressure. Oecologia 126:
457–461.
Hacke UG, Sperry JS, Wheeler JK, Castro L (2006) Scaling of angiosperm xylem structure with
safety and efﬁciency. Tree Physiol 26:689–701.
Hansen MC, Defries RS, Townshend JRG, Sohlberg R (2000) Global land cover classiﬁca-
tion at 1 km spatial resolution using a classiﬁcation tree approach. Int J Remote Sens 21:
1331–1364.
Hargrave KR, Kolb KJ, Ewers FW, Davis SD (1994) Conduit diameter and drought-induced
embolism in Salvia mellifera Greene (Labiatae). New Phytol 126:695–705.
Harvey HP, van den Driessche R (1997) Nutrition, xylem cavitation and drought resistance in
hybrid poplar. Tree Physiol 17:647–654.
Hu L, Lu H, Liu Q, Chen X, Jiang X (2005) Overexpression of mtlD gene in transgenic
Populus tomentosa improves salt tolerance through accumulation of mannitol. Tree Physiol 25:
1273–1281.
Hukin D, Cochard H, Dreyer E, Le Thiec D, Bogeat-Triboulot MB (2005) Cavitation vulnerability
in roots and shoots: does Populus euphratica Oliv., a poplar from arid areas of Central Asia,
differ from other poplar species?. J Exp Botany 56:2003–2010.
Junghans U, Polle A, Düchting P et al. (2006) Effects of salt stress on the anatomy and auxin
physiology of poplar xylem. Plant Cell Environ 29:1519–1531.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
243
Keskitalo J, Bergquist G, Gardeström P, Jansson S (2005) A cellular timetable of autumn
senescence. Plant Physiol 139:1635–1648.
Kishor PBK, Hong Z, Miao GH, Hu CAA, Verma DPS (1995) Overexpression of delta-1-
pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase increases proline production and confers osmotolerance in
transgenic plants. Plant Physiology 108:1387–1394.
Knight H, Knight M (2001) Abiotic stress signalling pathways: speciﬁcity and cross talk. Trends
Plant Sci 6:262–267.
Lachaud S (1989) Participation of auxin and abscisic acid in the regulation of seasonal variations
in cambial activity and xy-logenesis. Trees 3:125–137.
Langer K, Ache P, Geiger D et al. (2002) Poplar potassium transporters capable of controlling K+
homeostasis and K+- de- pendent xylogenesis. Plant J 32:997–1009.
Lautner S, Ehlting B, Windeisen E et al. (2007) Calcium nutrition has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
wood formation in poplar. New Phytol 173:743–752.
Lee JH, van Montagu M, Verbruggen N (1999) A highly conserved kinase is an essential
component for stress tolerance in yeast and plant cells. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 96:5873–5877.
Liu WC, Carns HR (1961) Isolation of abscisin, an abscission acceleration substance. Science
134:384–385.
Liu Z, Dickmann DI (1996) Effects of water and nitrogen interaction on net photosynthesis,
stomatal conductance, and water-use efﬁciency in two hybrid poplar clones. Physiol Plant
97:507–512.
Liu WH, Fairbairn DJ, Reid RJ, Schachtman DP (2001) Characterization of two HKT1 homo-
logues from Eucalyptus camaldulensis that display intrinsic osmosensing capability. Plant
Physiolgy 127:283–294.
Lo Gullo MA, Salleo S, Piaceri EC, Rosso R (1995) Relations between vulnerability to xylem
embolism and xylem conduit dimensions in young trees of Quercus cerris. Plant Cell Environ
8:661–669.
Lu PL, Chen NZ, An R et al. (2007) A novel drought-inducible gene, ATAF1, encodes a NAC fam-
ily protein that negatively regulates the expression of stress-responsive genes in Arabidopsis.
Plant Mol Biol 63:289–305.
Luan S (1998) Protein phosphatases and signaling cascades in plants. Trends Plant Sci 3:
271–275.
Luo ZB, Langenfeld-Heyser R, Calfapietra C, Polle A (2005) Inﬂu- ence of free air CO2 enrich-
ment (EUROFACE) and nitrogen fer- tilisation on the anatomy of juvenile wood of three poplar
spe- cies after coppicing. Trees 19:109–118.
Luo ZB, Li K, Jiang XN, Polle A (2009) The ectomycorrhizal fungus (Paxillus involutus)
and hydrogels affect drought tolerance of Populus euphratica. Ann For Sci 106. DOI:
10.1051/forest:2008073.
Luo Z, Polle A (2009) Wood composition and energy content in a poplar short rotation plantation
on fertilized agricultural land in a future CO2 atmosphere. Glob Chang Biol 15:38–47.
Ma Y, Szostkiewicz I, Korte A et al. (2009) Regulators of PP2C phosphatase activity function as
abscisic acid sensors. Science 324:1064–1068.
Marron N, Delay D, Petit JM et al. (2002) Physiological traits of two Populus × euramericana
clones, ‘Luisa Avanzo’ and ‘Dor- skamp’, during a water stress and re-watering cycle. Tree
Physiol 22:849–858.
Marron N, Dreyer E, Boudouresque E et al. (2003) Impact of suc- cessive drought and rewatering
cycles on growth and speciﬁc leaf area of two Populus × canadensis (Moench) clones, ‘Dor-
skamp’ and ‘Luisa-Avanzo’. Tree Physiol 23:1225–1235.
Meehl GA, Tebaldi C (2004) More intense, more frequent, and longer lasting heat waves in the
21st century. Science 305:994–997.
Mellerowicz EJ, Baucher M, Sundberg B, Boerjan W (2001) Unrav elling cell wall formation in
the woody dicot stem. Plant Mol Biol 47:239–274.
Mellerowicz EJ, Sundberg B (2008) Wood cell walls: biosynthesis, developmental dynamics and
their implications for wood properties. Curr Opin Biotechnol 11:293–300.

244
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Mir G, Domenech J, Huguet G et al. (2004) A plant type 2 metallothionein (MT) from cork tissue
responds to oxidative stress. J Exp Botany 55:2483–2493.
Monclus R, Dreyer E, Delmotte FM et al. (2006) Productivity, leaf traits and carbon isotope
discrimination in 29 Populus deltoids ×P. nigra clones. New Phytol 167:53–62.
Monclus R, Dreyer E, Villar M et al. (2006) Impact of drought on productivity and water
use efﬁciency in 29 genotypes of Populus deltoides×Populus nigra. New Phytol 169:
765–777.
Munns R, Tester M (2008) Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Ann Rev Plant Biol 59:651–681.
Nilsson J, Karlberg A, Antti H et al. (2008) Dissecting the molecu- lar basis of the regulation of
wood formation by auxin in hybrid aspen. The Plant Cell 20:843–855.
Noaves E, Osorio L, Drost DR et al. (2009) Quantitative genetic analysis of biomass and wood
chemistry of Populus under different nitrogen levels. New Phytol 182:878–890.
Ogaya R, Penuelas J (2006) Contrasting foliar responses to drought in Quercus ilex and Phillyrea
latifolia. Biologia Plantarum 50:373–382.
Ohkuma K, Smith OE, Lyon JL, Addicott FT (1963) Abscisin 2, an abscission-accelerating
substance from young cotton fruit. Science 142:1592–1593.
Olsson ASB, Engström P, Söderman E (2004) The homeobox genes ATHB12 and ATHB7 encode
potential regulators of growth in response to water deﬁcit in Arabidopsis. Plant Mol Biol
55:663–677.
Ottow EA, Brinker M, Teichmann T et al. (2005) Populus euphratica displays apoplastic
sodium accumulation and develops leaf succulence under salt stress. Plant Physiol 139:
1362–1372.
Pallardy SG, Kozlowski TT (1981) Water relations in Populus clones. Ecology 62:159–169.
Passioura JB (2002) Environmental biology and crop improvement. Funct Plant Biol 29:
537–546.
Passioura JB, Fry SC (1992) Turgor and cell expansion: beyond the Lockhart Equation. Aust J
Plant Physiol 19:565–576.
Patterson SE (2001) Cutting loose. Abscission and dehiscence in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol
126:494–500.
Persson S, Wyatt SE, Love J et al. (2001) The Ca2+ status of the endoplasmic reticulum is altered
by induction of calreticulin expression in transgenic plants. Plant Physiol 126:1092–1104.
Peuke AD, Schraml C, Hartung W, Rennenberg H (2002) Identiﬁcation of drought-sensitive beech
ecotypes by physiological parameters. New Phytol 154:373–387.
Plomion C, Lalanne C, Claverol S et al. (2006) Mapping the proteome of poplar and application to
the discovery of drought-stress responsive proteins. Proteomics 6:6509–6527.
Popko J, Hänsch R, Mendel RR, Polle A, Teichmann T (2010) The role of abscisic acid and auxin
in the response of poplar to abiotic stress. Plant Biol, in press.
Rathinasabapathi B (2000) Metabolic engineering for stress tolerance: installing osmoprotectant
synthesis pathways. Ann Botany 86:709–716.
Rizhsky L, Liang HJ, Shuman J et al. (2004) When defense pathways collide. The response of
Arabidopsis to a combination of drought and heat stress. Plant Physiol 134:1683–1696.
Roberts JA, Elliott KA, Gonzalez-Carranza ZH (2002) Abscission, dehiscence, and other cell
separation processes. Ann Rev Plant Biol 53:131–158.
Rood SB, Patino S, Coombs K, Tyree MT (2000) Branch sacriﬁce: cavitation-associated drought
adaptation of riparian cottonwoods. Trees 14:248–257.
Rorat T (2006) Plant dehydrins – Tissue location, structure and function. Cell Mol Biol Lett
11:536–556.
Ruonala R, Rinne PLH, Baghour M et al. (2006) Transitions in the functioning of the shoot apical
meristem in birch (Betula pendula) involve ethylene. Plant J 46:628–640.
Sargent JA, Osborne DJ, Dunford SM (1984) Cell-separation and its hormonal control during fruit
abscission in the gramineae. J Exp Botany 35:1663–1674.
Sass U, Eckstein D (1995) The variability of vessel size in beech (Fagus Sylvatica L) and its
ecophysiological interpretation. Trees 9:247–252.

Populus Responses to Abiotic Stress
245
Sauter J (2000) Photosynthate allocation to the vascular cambium: facts and problems. In: Savidge
RA, Barnett JR, Napier R (eds) Cell and Molecular Biology of Wood Formatiom, pp. 71–84.
BIOS Scientiﬁc Publishers, Oxford, U.K.
Schär C, Vidale PL, Lüthi D et al. (2004) The role of increasing temperature variability in European
summer heatwaves. Nature 427:332–336.
Searson MJ, Thomas DS, Montagu KD, Conroy JP (2004) Wood density and anatomy of water-
limited Eucalyptus. Tree Physiol 24:1295–1302.
Shen B, Hohmann S, Jensen RG, Bohnert HJ (1999) Roles of sugar alcohols in osmotic stress
adaptation. Replacement of glycerol by mannitol and sorbitol in yeast. Plant Physiol 121:
45–52.
Shen B, Jensen RG, Bohnert HJ (1997a) Increased resistance to oxidative stress in transgenic plants
by targeting mannitol biosynthesis to chloroplasts. Plant Physiol 113:1177–1183.
Shen B, Jensen RG, Bohnert HJ (1997b) Mannitol protects against oxidation by hydroxyl radicals.
Plant Physiol 115:1211–1219.
Sinclair TR (2000) Model analysis of plant traits leading to prolonged crop survival during severe
drought. Field Crop Res 68:211–217.
Sofo A, Dichio B, Xiloyannis C, Masia A (2004) Lipoxygenase activity and proline accumu-
lation in leaves and roots of olive trees in response to drought stress. Physiol Plant 121:
58–65.
Sperry JS, Saliendra NZ (1994) Intra- and inter-plant variation in xylem cavitation in Betula
occidentalis. Plant cell Environ 17:1233–1241.
Sperry JS, Tyree MT (1988) Mechanism of water-stress in-duced xylem embolism. Plant Physiol
88:581–587.
Street NR, Skogström O, Sjödin A et al. (2006) The genetics and genomics of the drought response
in Populus. Plant J 48:321–341.
Swenson NG, Enquist BJ (2007) Ecological and evolutionary deter- minants of a key plant func-
tional trait: wood density and its community-wide variation across latitude and elevation. Am
J Botany 94:451–459.
Taiz L, Zeiger E (2002) Plant Physiology, p. 531. Sinauer Associates Publishers, Sunderland, MA.
Taylor JE, Whitelaw CA (2001) Signals in abscission. New Phytol 151:323–339.
Teichmann T, Bolu-Arianto WH, Olbrich A et al. (2008) GH3:GUS depicts cell-speciﬁc develop-
mental patterns and stress-induced changes in wood anatomy in the poplar stem. Tree Physiol
28:1305–1315.
Tyree MT, Cochard H, Cruiziat P, Sinclair B, Ameglio T (1993) Drought-induced leaf shedding in
walnut – evidence for vulnerability segmentation. Plant Cell Environ 16:879–882.
Tyree M, Zimmermann MH (2002) Xylem structure and the ascent of sap. Springer-Verlag,
New York.
Uno Y, Furihata T, Abe H et al. (2000) Arabidopsis basic leucine zipper transcription fac-
tors involved in an abscisic acid-dependent signal transduction pathway under drought and
high-salinity conditions. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 97:11632–11637.
Urao T, Yakubov B, Satoh R et al. (1999) A transmembrane hybrid-type histidine kinase in
Arabidopsis functions as an osmosensor. The Plant Cell 11:1743–1754.
Vinocur B, Altman A (2005) Recent advances in engineering plant tolerance to abiotic stress:
achievements and limitations. Curr Opin Biotechnol 16:1–10.
Watanabe S, Katsumi K, Yuji I, Sasaki S (2001) Effects of saline and osmotic stress on pro-
line and sugar accumulation in Populus euphratica in vitro. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 63:
199–206.
Westoby M, Wright IJ (2006) Land plant ecology on the basis of functional traits. Trends Ecol
Evol 21:261–268.
Wilkinson S, Davies WJ (2002) ABA-based chemical signalling: the co-ordination of responses to
stress in plants. Plant Cell Environ 25:195–210.
Wind C, Arend M, Fromm J (2004) Potassium-dependent cambial growth in poplar. Plant Biol
6:30–37.

246
U. Fischer and A. Polle
Xiao XW, Yang F, Zhang S, Korpelainen H, Li CY (2009) Physiological and proteomic responses
of two contrasting Populus cathayana populations to drought stress. Physiol Plant 136:
150–168.
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K (2006) Transcriptional regulatory networks in cellu-
lar responses and tolerance to dehydration and cold stresses. Ann Rev Plant Biol 57:
781–803.
Yin C, Duan B, Wang X, Li C (2004) Morphological and physiological responses of two con-
trasting poplar species to drought stress and exogenous abscisic acid application. Plant Sci
167:1091–1097.
Yoo RH, Park CY, Kim JC et al. (2005) Direct interaction of a divergent CaM isoform and
the transcription factor, MYB2, enhances salt tolerance in Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 280:
3697–3706.
Zhang X, Zang R, Li C (2004) Population differences in physiological and morphological adap-
tations of Populus davidiana seedlings in response to progressive drought stress. Plant Sci
166:791–797.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
George Newcombe, Francis Martin, and Annegret Kohler
Abstract The effects of symbionts on plant defense and nutrition are increas-
ingly seen as signiﬁcant but neglected factors in plant ecology. The roles of some
endophytic and mycorrhizal fungi associated with Populus are beginning to be
addressed with advanced tools of genetics and genomics. At the same time previ-
ously unknown Populus symbionts are still being discovered and described. In this
chapter, defense and nutrient mutualists of Populus are reviewed in the context of
the wider literature, and with an eye towards potential applications to poplar culture.
1 Introduction
Interactions between plants and fungi are now studied at expanding scales from
molecular mechanisms to the ecosystem level (Glazebrook and Ton, 2007). In this
review we will highlight recent research on two groups of symbionts that appear
to be able to increase host plant growth and tolerance of biotic and abiotic stress:
endophytic and mycorrhizal fungi. Both are relevant to discussion of Populus as a
model with expanding implications for woody plant biology (Bradshaw et al., 2000;
Bradshaw and Strauss, 2001; Brunner et al., 2004).
Populus and Salix diverged 60–65 mya (Tuskan et al., 2006), but there are still
many parallels between them in their fungal symbionts and much of what follows
will likely apply quite well to Salix. Although some genera of pathogenic fungi
are exclusive to either Populus or Salix (e.g., the specialization of Rhytisma on
Salix but not Populus, or the specialization of Taphrina on Populus but not Salix),
commonalities are likely to emerge from comparative studies of the symbiont com-
munities of each. A further disclaimer is that this chapter will not reiterate fairly
G. Newcombe (B)
Department of Forest Resources, Center for Research on Invasive Species and Small Populations,
University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1133, USA
e-mail: georgen@uidaho.edu
247
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_12,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

248
G. Newcombe et al.
recent reviews of Melampsora (Pei and McCracken, 2005) and other pathogens of
Populus (Newcombe, 1996; Newcombe et al., 2001). Our focus here is instead on
mycorrhizal and endophytic fungi that function as nutrient and defense mutualists
or that play still undetermined roles in the ecology of species of Populus. Rather
than starting with the symbionts of Populus, we will start with the wider literature
because it reveals the many directions that Populus symbiont research might take.
A striking example of fresh momentum in endophyte research involves infection
with a speciﬁc fungus that can make the difference between life and death for its host
plant attempting to grow in geothermal soils (Redman et al., 2002). Endophytes may
assume roles as defense or protection mutualists by deterring insect pests (Clark
et al., 1989; Calhoun et al., 1992; Wilson and Carrol, 1997; Wilkinson et al., 2000;
Miller et al., 2002) and by reducing disease severity (Clay, 1988; Liu et al., 2001;
Arnold et al., 2003; Wicklow et al., 2005; Clarke et al., 2006; Ganley et al., 2008).
Well known endophytes in grasses deter mammalian herbivores (Clay and Schardl,
2002), but this deterrence is now known to operate in other plants as well (Valdez
Barillas et al., 2007). Muscodor albus, an endophyte of Cinnamomum zeylanicum,
provides perhaps the most dramatic example of a defense mutualist by killing most
fungal and bacterial pathogens of its host with a mixture of volatile compounds
(Strobel et al., 2001).
Even though some endophytes may be mutualists that confer protection or some
other beneﬁt on their hosts in exchange for photosynthates and microhabitat (Kogel
et al., 2006), others may be parasites or commensalists (Stone et al., 2000), and this
idea of a continuum in interactive ‘lifestyles’ has been applied to mycorrhizas as
well (Jones and Smith, 2004). Endophytes have been variously deﬁned, but most
commonly they are symbionts colonizing and living within an apparently healthy
plant (Stone et al., 2000). Of course, candidate mutualists such as endophytic and
mycorrhizal fungi are by no means the only classes of symbionts to interact with
a plant. Pathogens, insect herbivores, pollinators, rhizobacteria, and bacterial shoot
endophytes also affect host growth and ﬁtness. Symbiont classes not only interact
indirectly with one another via induced defense signaling that will be discussed
at greater length, but they may also interact directly. Interactions of the symbiont
community of a plant that are mediated entirely or in part by the plant immune
system have been termed the ‘interactome’ (Glazebrook and Ton, 2007), and we
will use this lense to review what we know currently of the community of fungal
symbionts of Populus.
2 Ecological Relevance
Interactions between plants and symbionts are now studied primarily at two levels:
(1) the molecular level of signaling networks and gene expression related to defense
and nutrient transfer, and (2) the ecological level of pot and ﬁeld experiments. It has
to be said at the outset that the ecological relevance of endophytes and even mycor-
rhizal fungi at the ﬁeld level is somewhat contentious. On the one hand, in asking

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
249
whether endophytes of forest trees are mutualists, one recent reviewer emphasizes
the impossibility of producing the adult, endophyte-free trees that are needed for
comparative purposes (Sieber, 2007); he regards this difﬁculty as one that blocks
proof of mutualism. “Mutualism of tree endophytes is often assumed, but evidence
is mostly circumstantial” (Sieber, 2007). Exactly the same point about controls is
made in a review focused on the question of whether mycorrhizas are always mutu-
alists (Jones and Smith, 2004). In reviewing the literature on the question of whether
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi alter plant-pathogen interactions, another author
laments the dominance of studies with few, economically important plant species
growing in low-phosphorus soil in the greenhouse (Borowicz, 2001). Even with
simpliﬁed, model systems, it has proven difﬁcult to generalize about the effects
of AM fungi on interactors such as pathogens because host genotype, the species
of pathogen, and AM species and strain are all signiﬁcant variables that have not
been fully explored (Borowicz, 2001). Thus, these authors and others are conclud-
ing that mycorrhizas may actually vary “along the continuum from parasitism to
mutualism” (Jones and Smith, 2004), and the same conclusion, albeit with less
supporting evidence, has been posited to apply to endophytes (Schulz and Boyle,
2005).
On the other hand, a strikingly divergent view highlighting the importance of
plant-fungal symbiosis is apparent in the literature. At this end of the spectrum of
interpretation, endophytes can be seen as determinants of plant community structure
(Clay and Holah, 1999), or as controlling elements in insect host-parasite inter-
action webs (Omacini et al., 2001). According to the habitat-adapted symbiosis
hypothesis, endophytes are essential to plant establishment in high-stress habitats
(Rodriguez and Redman, 2008). Mycorrhizal fungal diversity may determine “plant
biodiversity, ecosystem variability and productivity” (van der Heijden et al., 1998).
The extraradical mycelial networks of mycorrhizal fungi have been described as
“networks of power and inﬂuence” and supporting evidence for their role in “con-
trolling plant communities and agroecosystem functioning” is considerable (Leake
et al., 2004). Further, the importance of the mycorrhizal symbiosis has been inte-
grated into one widely accepted deﬁnition of mycorrhizas: as symbiotic associations
“essential for one or both partners, between a fungus (specialized for life in soils
and plants) and a root (or other substrate-contacting organ) of a living plant, that is
primarily responsible for nutrient transfer” (Brundrett, 2004).
Diametrically opposed to the views in the preceding paragraph is the position
that plant symbionts are essentially irrelevant. For instance, symbiotic contribu-
tions to the discipline of plant stress physiology have largely been ignored by
plant biologists (Rodriguez and Redman, 2008). Similarly, symbiotic contributions
to resistance to plant pathogens and other biotic stresses are frequently lacking in
reviews of this subject. Most research in plant ecology is conducted as if endophytes
did not exist, and frequently, mycorrhizal fungi are ignored as well. So, the middle-
ground view of the ecological relevance of endophytic and mycorrhizal symbionts
is actually held by those symbiologists who maintain that ecological relevance is
still a good question without a convincing answer (Jones and Smith, 2004; Sieber,
2007).

250
G. Newcombe et al.
In contrast, the ecological relevance of other plant symbionts such as pathogens
and insect herbivores is unquestioned. Not only is “40% of all world food pro-
duction” lost to pathogens, insects and competing vegetation (Pimentel, 2008),
but crop losses due to plant pathogens in the United States alone are valued at
$21 billion annually (Rossman, 2009). Moreover, losses due to pathogens are cer-
tainly not restricted to agricultural ecosystems. Forests in the original range of the
American chestnut, Castanea dentata, were notoriously transformed by an intro-
duced pathogen (Paillet, 2002) with huge, collateral effects on other tree species
(McGormick and Platt, 1980) and even extinctions of chestnut-dependent organ-
isms (Opler, 1978). Concerns about pathogens in forest tree plantations are based
on everything from decreased volume growth (Bendz-Hellgren and Stenlid, 1997)
to mortality (Newcombe et al., 1994). We could go on but our point here is to
emphasize that balanced mutualisms can be based on defense against organisms
that are already known to seriously reduce the ﬁtness of the host.
3 Defense Mutualisms
So, what could symbionts contribute to plant defense? Whereas nutrient mutualisms
between plants and fungi may be conﬁned to mycorrhizas (Brundrett, 2004) with
notable endophytic exceptions (Doty et al., 2005), both endophytes and mycorrhizas
may potentially be involved in plant defense mutualisms. By priming plants for rapid
response to pathogens or herbivores (Beckers and Conrath, 2007), and by activating
defense signaling pathways, both endophytes and mycorrhizas may improve host
ﬁtness in exchange for photosynthates.
Transmission of defense mutualists. Symbiont-mediated protection is not neces-
sarily restricted to vertically transmitted organisms (Haine, 2008), at least in plants
where such transmission from one generation to the next is through seed. Examples
of mycorrhiza- and endophyte-mediated protection abound for fungi that are hor-
izontally transmitted and must therefore infect each new plant generation (Arnold
et al., 2003; Waller et al., 2005; Newcombe et al., 2009). We also know that the
line between defense mutualists and pathogens may be thin, as mutation at a single
locus converted a pathogenic Colletotrichum into a defense mutualist (Freeman and
Rodriguez, 1993; Redman et al., 1999). And conversely, an endophytic mutualist in
grasses, Epichloë festucae, was converted into a pathogen by a single-copy plasmid
insertion in the NADPH oxidase gene, noxA (Tanaka et al., 2006).
Piriformospora indica. A model defense mutualist has emerged in the last
decade, in part because it interacts with Arabidopsis. This fungus, Piriformospora
indica, has been called a root endophyte (Varma et al., 1999; Waller et al., 2005;
Deshmukh et al., 2006) but P. indica actually belongs to a broadly mycorrhizal order,
the Sebacinales (Weiss et al., 2004). This root-colonizing mutualist can function as
a symbiont of Populus as well as Arabidopsis and a wide range of other plants that
host arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. This native of the Thar desert of Rajasthan in
India (Verma et al., 1998) was shown early to have attributes beyond defense; it

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
251
doubled root and shoot biomasses of Populus tremula as well as maize, tobacco and
other plants (Varma et al., 1999). Piriformospora indica also promoted adventitious
root formation of cuttings (Druege et al., 2007), and amazingly it reprogrammed
barley to salt-stress tolerance, disease resistance and higher yield (Waller et al.,
2005). Not only was growth of Arabidopsis improved (Peskan-Berghofer et al.,
2004), perhaps through production by P. indica of auxin (Sirrenberg et al., 2007),
but its seed production (i.e., its fecundity) was increased as well (Shahollari et al.,
2007). Flowering of yet other plants was enhanced (Rai et al., 2001). As a defense
mutualist, P. indica induced systemic resistance in Arabidopsis, by activating the
defense pathway characterized by jasmonic acid signaling (i.e., induced systemic
resistance or ISR) (Stein et al., 2008).
Perhaps the most provocative result thus far in this research is the discovery
that hosts of P. indica may need leucine-rich repeat proteins to recognize this fun-
gus (Shahollari et al., 2007). The most closely related homologue of the protein
in question, pii-2, is a protein thought to be associated with disease resistance in
rice. Major genes for resistance to pathogens, or R genes, frequently encode pro-
tein products characterized by nucleotide binding site (NBS) and leucine-rich repeat
(LRR) domains associated with recognition of pathogen effectors (Jones and Dangl,
2006). Prior to the research with P. indica we had learned that genes for resistance
to powdery mildew modulated mycorrhization by Glomus mosseae (Ruiz-Lozano
et al., 1999). With Populus we also know that quantitative trait loci related to ecto-
mycorrhiza formation can at least be linked to genes associated with resistance to
Melampsora (Tagu et al., 2005). So, although it might thus be tempting to think
that R genes are broadly involved in recognition of mutualists as well as parasites
(i.e., symbiont recognition genes), given the topic of this chapter and the fact that
Populus possesses more than 400 NBS genes (Tuskan et al., 2006; Kohler et al.,
2008), that tentative inference has to be considered in the context of what is called
the plant immune system. The latter is presumably the central mechanism of the
interactome, and the primary means by which plant symbionts interact with one
another.
The plant immune system. Though they both interact with the plant immune
system, defense mutualists and pathogens do somehow bring about different sym-
biotic outcomes within plants (i.e., balanced and unbalanced, respectively) (Jones
and Dangl, 2006). The reason for the different outcomes will hopefully emerge
in time with an improved understanding of the plant immune system. Currently,
we know that plants ﬁrst respond to pathogen-associated molecular patterns, or
PAMPs, that are generated by pathogens attempting to colonize plants (Bittel and
Robatzek, 2007). It appears that MAMPs, or microbe-associated molecular patterns,
of defense mutualists are essentially the same as PAMPs (Van Wees et al., 2008) in
that they may be cell wall constituents common to all microbes. Or, MAMPs may
be small, secreted proteins, or antibiotics. Pathogens may then produce effectors
that can suppress a second, stronger immune response from the plant that will fol-
low the ﬁrst unless the plant recognizes the effector or its activities. The ﬁrst, most
basic, immune response is termed pathogen-triggered immunity whereas the sec-
ond, stronger response is effector-triggered immunity (Jones and Dangl, 2006), and

252
G. Newcombe et al.
it is the latter that can result in the programmed cell death that is known as the
hypersensitive response, that is traditionally associated with R genes.
Defense signaling pathways. Perception of the intruder meanwhile activates
defense signaling pathways leading to different sets of defense genes (Pozo and
Azcon-Aguilar, 2007) that may modulate one another via ‘cross-talk’. If expressed
systemically, defense reponses may link aboveground symbionts with belowground
counterparts (Erb et al., 2008). Salicylate-dependent, systemic acquired resistance
(SAR) tends to be effective against biotrophic pathogens (i.e., obligate parasites
of living host cells and tissues) whereas jasmonate-dependent, induced systemic
resistance (ISR) tends to work against necrotrophs (i.e., parasites that kill and then
consume host cells and tissues). As biotrophs, arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi
may repress SAR while enhancing ISR, and this modulation of these two pathways
could possibly explain both greater susceptibility of aboveground tissues of AM
plants to biotrophs and reduced susceptibility to necrotrophs and generalist insects
(Pozo and Azcon-Aguilar, 2007). Variations on this type of symbiont interaction
are common however. It is now known that speciﬁc AM fungi are regulated differ-
entially (Scervino et al., 2005). It is also important to bear in mind that signaling
pathways are by no means restricted to the two that we have mentioned thus far
(Glazebrook and Ton, 2007). Volatiles may even prime neighboring plants for faster
defense responses (Pieterse and Dicke, 2007). In particular, it is becoming appar-
ent that the reactive oxygen gene network of plants is extensive (i.e., 152 genes
in Arabidopsis), and that reactive oxygen species (ROS) may be key regulators of
mutualistic interactions (Tanaka et al., 2006; Rodriguez and Redman, 2008).
Commonalities among symbioses may include the in planta secretion of effectors
or virulence factors by pathogenic and mutualistic fungi alike. The ectomycor-
rhizal fungus, Laccaria bicolor, produces myorrhiza-induced, cysteine-rich, small,
secreted proteins (MISSPs) that might act as “effector proteins to manipulate host
cell signaling or to suppress defense pathways during infection” (Martin et al.,
2008). The ascomycetous genus Fusarium also possesses genes with similarities
to “known virulence factors” (Cuomo et al., 2007). Of course, this might seem
unsurprising because Fusarium is known primarily for its pathogenic members.
However, endophytic isolates of Fusarium are quite common as well (Kuldau and
Yates, 2000), so it is possible that all three groups (i.e., pathogens, mycorrhizal fungi
and endophytes) produce effectors.
Symbiont interactions. Symbiont interactions can be direct. An obvious exam-
ple is the mycoparasitism of Melampsora rust fungi on Populus by another fungus,
Eudarluca caricis (Nischwitz et al., 2004), and many others undoubtedly remain
undiscovered. But symbiont interactions mediated by the host plant must be much
more common in nature than direct interactions, and few examples and no general-
izations can be cited at this point in time. Grass endophytes, for example, are known
to reduce mycorrhization by AM fungi (Omacini et al., 2006; Antunes et al., 2008)
and this, in turn, would affect additional symbionts, perhaps via modulation of sig-
naling pathways as just outlined. Endophyte-infected plants differ biochemically in
many ways from endophyte-free plants (Rasmussen et al., 2007; Rasmussen et al.,

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
253
2008) so the mechanism by which endophytes reduce mycorrhization is not clear
although it is assumed to involve allelochemicals (Antunes et al., 2008).
Life cycles of defense mutualists. Horizontally transmitted symbionts may spend
part of their own life cycles outside the tissues of their hosts. Many fungi that are
isolated as endophytes of root and/or shoot tissues are also found in the rhizosphere
(Koike et al., 2001; Djonovic et al., 2006), and some of them promote growth and
also induce resistance. For example, species of Trichoderma with known potential
to reduce the effects of plant diseases (Harman et al., 2004) are often isolated either
as endophytes or as rhizosphere inhabitants. Trichoderma virens can play a variety
of roles in a plant symbiont community because it can act as a mycoparasite, induce
systemic resistance, and combat other fungi at a distance with antibiotics (Djonovic
et al., 2006). A small protein, designated as Sm1, is produced by T. virens. Sm1
induces expression of defense-related genes and it also stimulates production of
ROS in a diverse array of plants (Djonovic et al., 2006). As such, Sm1 appears to
be more than a MAMP. Yet other endophytic Trichoderma isolates also appear to be
able to induce defense responses that then inhibit pathogens of cacao (Bailey et al.,
2006).
A web of symbiont interactions. Trichoderma species are also known to inter-
act with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi that can themselves induce resistance to
pathogens (Pozo and Azcon-Aguilar, 2007). Interactions in root-free soil com-
partments between Glomus intraradices and Trichoderma harzianum resulted in
suppression of the latter (Green et al., 1999), which is a reversal of suppression
of Glomus by grass endophytes in the ﬁrst interaction mentioned in this section. It
appears possible that the same symbiont could interact with a plant and the rest of
its symbiont community in one manner as a rhizosphere inhabitant and in another
as an endophyte.
Similarly, both microbial products and symbiont-induced, plant products may
serve more than one role in symbiont interactions. 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol
(DAPG) is an antibiotic produced by Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens. An antibiotic, of
course, may be used by one symbiont against another, but in this case DAPG also
induces ISR that is dependent on both jasmonic acid and ethylene (Iavicoli et al.,
2003). In the grass endophyte system in which endophyte-produced alkaloids are
key (Clay and Schardl, 2002), damage to simulate vertebrate grazing reduces resis-
tance to aphids, but a Neotyphodium endophyte in Festuca arundinacea can increase
resistance following damage (Bultman et al., 2004). Chitinase production is induced
in pine by endophytes (Pirttila et al., 2003) and by ectomycorrhizal fungi (Sauter and
Hager, 1989) but the possibility that chitinase might play differential roles has not
been explored.
Eventual applications of defense mutualists in Populus will likely affect tran-
scriptional responses to Melampsora that have thus far been determined in their
absence (Miranda et al., 2007; Rinaldi et al., 2007). The tools to test this hypothesis
are in place as some naturally occurring endophytes from P. trichocarpa that can
reduce rust severity have now been isolated (Fig. 1; Raghavendra and Newcombe,
unpublished). Populus mutualists that activate jasmonate-dependent signaling are

254
G. Newcombe et al.
A
C
B
D
E
Fig. 1 Endophyte-mediated resistance to Melampsora leaf rust in a hybrid poplar clone.
(a) Control leaf that was inoculated with Melampsora x columbiana without having ﬁrst been
inoculated with one of four endophytes (b-e) that reduced rust severity (i.e., uredinial density)
(b) Stachybotrys sp (c) Trichoderma sp. (d) Truncatella sp. (e) Ulocladium sp
likely to induce changes in carbon transport and partitioning that could not only
directly affect herbivory but many other interactions (Babst et al., 2005). Systemic
defense signaling is known to occur in Populus (Major and Constabel, 2007).
To re-emphasize the complexity of symbiont interactions, it is now clear that
speciﬁc organismal and functional groups are not homogeneous with respect to
their interactions with plants. For instance, all plant growth-promoting rhizobac-
teria do not induce resistance to pathogens in the same manner (Wang et al., 2005).

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
255
Rhizosphere bacteria also do not all affect metal uptake by plants in the same man-
ner; only speciﬁc bacteria in the rhizosphere of Salix caprea improved metal uptake
(Kuffner et al., 2008), an important issue in phytoremediation. Or, whereas it was
once thought that necrosis-inducing pathogens generally trigger SAR (Felton et al.,
1999), it is now known that Piriformospora indica induces necrosis (Deshmukh
et al., 2006) but not SAR. Instead, the resistance to pathogens that P. indica confers
to its hosts is jasmonate-dependent and thus an example of ISR (Schafer et al.,
2007). So, rather than generalizing from single examples from model systems,
one might justiﬁably question, for instance, whether yeast increases resistance to
bacterial diseases and necrotrophic fungal diseases in general, or whether this effect
is seen in Arabidopsis alone versus speciﬁc bacteria and fungi (Raacke et al., 2006).
Since virtually all plants in nature are infected with both endophytic and mycor-
rhizal symbionts, it will be important in coming years to determine under realistic
conditions the net effects on host ﬁtness of the entire complex of interactions among
endophytes, mycorrhizas, pathogens and other symbionts.
4 Mycorrhizal Fungi
Ectomycorrhizal versus arbuscular mycorrhizal symbionts. Populus is among the
woody plant lineages that form both ectomycorrhizae (EM) (Figs. 2, 3 and 4) and
arbuscular mycorrhizae (AM) in “tripartite” associations (Lodge, 2000). Populus
was thus a good candidate for sequencing of both its own genome (Tuskan et al.,
2006) and the genomes of Glomus intraradices and Laccaria bicolor, representing
the AM and EM fungi, respectively (Martin et al., 2004). Coincidentally, many plant
taxa that can form tripartite associations are commercially important for forestry:
Salix, Eucalyptus, Alnus, Acacia, and Casuarina (Molina et al., 1992; Brundrett
et al., 1996; Lodge, 2000). Now we also know that a third mycorrhizal interac-
tion type is also possible for Populus (Kaldorf et al., 2005) although interactions
with Piriformospora indica have not yet been observed in nature. Future surveys
might reveal other members of the Sebacinales that do naturally form mycorrhizae
with Populus. Broad receptivity to mycorrhizal associations increases the number of
symbionts that associate with Populus. Furthermore, the dark septate endophytes of
the Phialocephala fortinii s.l. – Acephala applanata species complex are common
in many woody plants of the northern hemisphere (Grünig et al., 2008), yet still
largely unexplored in Populus.
The capacity of Populus species to simultaneously interact with several symbi-
otic partners from both groups of AM and EM fungi introduces a unique dilemma;
detecting and punishing those exploiting the mutualism becomes increasingly difﬁ-
cult if these individuals can continue to access resources from alternative sources.
Although both environment and genetics have been shown to affect the mycorrhizal
colonization of host plants, the impacts of these factors on hosts that can be dually
colonized by both EM and AM fungi are less understood. Gehring et al. (2006)

256
G. Newcombe et al.
Fig. 2 Seedlings of Populus tremula x alba colonized by the ectomycorrhizal fungus Pisolithus
tinctorius in vitro. Lateral roots ensheathed by the mycobiont are boxed. Photos courtesy of A
Jambois (© INRA)
examined the inﬂuence of environment and host crosstype on the EM and AM col-
onization of cottonwoods (Populus angustifolia and natural hybrids) by comparing
levels of colonization of trees growing in common gardens that differed in eleva-
tion and soil type. Environment, particularly soil moisture, has a larger inﬂuence
on colonization by AM versus EM fungi than host genetics, and suggest that envi-
ronmental stress may be a major determinant of mycorrhizal colonization in dually
colonized host plants. A shift in abundance between AM and EM associations has
been observed during ﬂoodplain succession along river shores (Piotrowski et al.,
2008). The peak in AM fungi infectivity and hyphal length during early succes-
sion suggests that regular ﬂooding and establishment of new sites promotes AMF
abundance in this ecosystem. Similarly, AMF surveys in Populus-Salix stands along
complex ﬂoodplain gradients of the Verde River (Arizona, USA) (Beauchamp et al.,
2006) showed that AM species richness declined with stand age and distance from
and elevation above the channel and was positively related to perennial species
cover and richness and gravimetric soil moisture. Distance from and elevation above
the active channel, forest age, annual species cover, perennial species richness, and
exchangeable potassium concentration all played a role in structuring the AMF com-
munity in this riparian area. Regulation of rivers that eliminates creation of new sites
may reduce contributions of AMF to riparian areas.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
257
B
A
Fig. 3 The ectomycorrhizal symbiosis and its impact on root morphology (a) Nonmycorrhizal
roots of Populus tremula x alba with abundant root hairs (b) Lateral roots of P. tremula x alba
colonized by the ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria bicolor; a thick mantle of fungal hyphae is
ensheathing the root tips. Clusters of roots are also induced by the mycobiont colonisation. Photos
courtesy of J Richter (© INRA)
CC
EC
M
HN
EM
Fig. 4 Microscopy image of
a transverse section of a
P. tremula x alba – Laccaria
bicolor ectomycorrhiza
showing extramatrical
mycelium (EM), the mantle
(M) and Hartig net hyphae
(HN) between epidermal cells
(EC); cortical cells (CC);
scale, 10 μm. Photos courtesy
of J Richter and V Legué
(© INRA)

258
G. Newcombe et al.
Ectomycorrhizal species associated with Populus. Like most trees, Populus
species host a wide diversity of species of EM fungi. Symbionts in seedling
roots from Populus maximowiczii, Salix sachalinensis and S. hultenii var. angus-
tifolia were identiﬁed based on their morphotypes and ribosomal DNA internal
transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences (Obase et al., 2007). Laccaria amethystea,
Inocybe lacera, Hebeloma mesophaeum, Scleroderma bovista, Thelephora ter-
restris, Thelephoraceae spp., Tuber sp. and unidentiﬁed fungi were the most abun-
dant symbionts. The ectomycorrhizal community under trembling aspen (Populus
tremuloides Michx.), white birch (Betula papyrifera Marsh.) or white spruce [Picea
glauca (Moench) Voss], and balsam ﬁr [Abies balsamea (L.) Mill.] is inﬂu-
enced by the relative proportions of host tree species. Piloderma sp., Russula
sp., Cortinarius sp., and Lactarius sp. were the most common ectomycorrhizas.
Interestingly, tomentelloid EM are constant, diverse and abundant members of the
EM communities in temperate-continental broad-leaved forests.
Impact of elevated CO2. The effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 and subse-
quent plant responses on the soil microbial community composition associated with
trembling aspen was assessed using Free Air Carbon Dioxide Enrichment (FACE)
systems. Comparative analysis of the microbial community metagenome of tremb-
ing aspen grown in free-air CO2 and O3 enrichment FACE experiments (Lesaulnier
et al., 2008) provided a detailed and deep branching proﬁle of population changes
incurred as a response to this environmental perturbation. Total bacterial and eukary-
otic abundance did not change; however, an increase in heterotrophic decomposers
and EM fungi was observed. These changes in soil biota are evidence for altered
interactions between trembling aspen and the microorganisms in its surrounding
soil, and support the theory that greater plant detritus production under elevated
CO2 signiﬁcantly alters soil microbial community composition. These detritus from
aboveground and belowground plant parts constitutes the primary source of C for
soil organic matter (SOM), and accumulation of SOM in forests may provide a
signiﬁcant mechanism to mitigate increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations. The
mycorrhizal external mycelium of Populus is the dominant pathway (62%) through
which carbon entered the SOM pool, exceeding the input via leaf litter and ﬁne
root turnover (Godbold et al., 2006). In this FACE experiment, the input via the
mycorrhizal external mycelium was not inﬂuenced by elevated CO2, but elevated
atmospheric CO2 enhanced soil C inputs via ﬁne root turnover. The turnover of the
mycorrhizal external mycelium may be a fundamental mechanism for the transfer
of root-derived C to SOM.
Mycorrhizas in plantation forestry. Production of native and hybridized varieties
of Populus has received considerable interest in temperate regions as an alterna-
tive to agricultural crops and an additional wood source, while acting as a potential
carbon (C) sink to offset emissions of fossil fuel-based greenhouse gases. Several
large-scale inoculation programmes have shown that mycorrhizal associations are
essential in the establishment and growth of poplar and aspens. Populus clones
showed variable degrees of colonization by both ectomycorrhizal and arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi, suggesting differential host susceptibility (Khasa et al., 2002;
Quoreshi and Khasa, 2008). Mycorrhizal inoculation increases the resistance of the

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
259
cuttings to soil-borne pathogens and their competitiveness for nutrients and space
against weeds (Baum et al., 2002). Colonisation by AM fungi could inﬂuence the
longevity of roots, an important element determining the ﬂuxes of nutrients and
carbon within terrestrial ecosystems (Hooker et al., 1995).
Phytoremediation. Poplars are suitable for phytoremediation purposes, conﬁrm-
ing that mycorrhizal fungi can be useful for phytoremediation. This fact underscores
the importance of appropriate combinations of plant genotypes and fungal sym-
bionts (Lingua et al., 2008). Trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) and
paper birch (Betula papyrifera Marsh.) seedlings inoculated with Hebeloma crus-
tuliniforme or Laccaria bicolor appeared to be relatively tolerant of the applied
NaCl treatment and did not develop visible leaf symptoms that are characteristic of
salt injury (Yi et al., 2008).
Symbiosis development & functioning. There is a striking variability in the ability
to form ectomycorrhizas among P. trichocarpa x P. deltoides progenies, including
individual genotypes which are different to either parent conﬁrming a genetic basis
for mycorrhiza formation (Tagu et al., 2001; Tagu et al., 2005). For optimal devel-
opment of the symbiosis, ectomycorrhizal partners evolve complex coordinated
developmental processes and at the same time, sense and respond to physiologi-
cal factors and environmental cues (Martin et al., 2001; Martin et al., 2007; Martin
et al., 2008). The establishment of the ectomycorrhiza is a coordinated process of
cross-talk between plant and fungus, followed by metabolic, developmental, and
structural changes in the fungus, resulting in its growth toward the root. Special
interest has been paid for many years to the role of auxins in the formation of the
symbiosis. Populus inoculated with the ectomycorrhizal Laccaria bicolor (Fig. 2)
produced an increased number of ectomycorrhizal roots conﬁrming that some mor-
phogenetic steps controlling the mycorrhiza development are regulated by fungal
auxins (Richter et al., 2009) (Fig. 3). This involves an alteration in the accumula-
tion of transcripts coding for auxin transporters and auxin/ethylene-responsive genes
(Richter et al., 2009). On the other hand, development of Amanita muscaria ecto-
mycorrhiza was not affected by the transformation of aspen (Populus tremula x P.
tremuloides), expressing the IAA biosynthetic genes in roots (Hampp et al., 1996).
Coordinated expression of malate synthase and other lipid metabolism genes along
with acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase, suggest that alteration in lipid metabolism could
be an important part of the preinfection process in ectomycorrhizal symbiosis and
in the transfer and utilization of the carbon in the fungus (Hiremath et al., 2006). It
has also been suggested that haemoglobin genes may play a role during ectomycor-
rhiza development in hybrid aspen (Populus tremula x tremuloides) (Jokipii et al.,
2008).
Transcript proﬁling. Transcript proﬁling of Populus ectomycorrhizas revealed
upregulation of genes coding for proteins involved in stress and defense responses
as well as for proteins involved in cell wall modiﬁcation (Kohler et al., unpublished
data). Transcripts coding for regulators of root development, such as a NAC domain-
containing protein, an AP2-TINY-like transcription factor, a SCARECROW like
modulator and an auxin-binding protein are up-regulated in the root tips in con-
tact with Pisolithus mycelium (Kohler et al., unpublished data) (Table 1). The ﬁrst

260
G. Newcombe et al.
Table 1 Poplar transcripts showing the highest induction during the colonisation of roots by the
ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete Pisolithus microcarpus
Putative function
4d of
contact
(fold)
14d of
contact
(fold)
GenBank#
P. trichocarpa
Protein ID
Primary metabolism
UDP-glucose dehydrogenase
2.0
18.6
CA825241
556397
Cytosolic malate dehydrogenase
2.4
–1.2
CA820897
564942
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
3.4
–1.2
CA821253
575307
S-adenosylmethionine synthetase
3.6
–1.4
CA824979
644907
Phenylpropanoid pathway
Trans-caffeoyl-CoA
3-O-methyltransferase
–1.2
7.3
CA824791
829835
4-coumarate-CoA ligase
–1.1
4.6
CA825131
662119
Protein metabolism
60S ribosomal protein
6.4
–1.2
CA824447
813651
Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerise
4.1
–1.2
CA825316
818813
Cysteine peptidase
3.6
1.3
CA824069
822036
U-Box protein
1.8
3.8
CA823526
564694
Signaling/hormone related
WD-40 repeat protein
1.1
17.4
CA826076
592758
IAA-amino acid hydrolase
4.4
10.4
CA823558
551444
Myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase
4.7
9.5
CA821145
831371
EF-Hand containing
calcium-binding protein
1.8
9.4
CA825399
645031
Auxin-binding protein
2.8
6.0
CA821074
180742
Calmodulin-related protein
–1.7
5.4
CA825093
717167
Serine/threonine protein kinase
1.1
5.1
CA826022
592708
Guanine nucleotide-binding
protein, beta subunit
–1.1
4.9
CA825225
834267
Serine/threonine protein kinase
–1.1
4.7
CA825903
834835
NAC-domain protein
1.4
2.8
CA821225
654710
Calreticulin
2.9
–1.3
CA822515
729432
Stress/defense related
Pathogenesis-related thaumatin
1.4
9.0
CA821226
180318
Cytochrome P450
6.5
8.7
CA821073
645827
Glutaredoxin-like protein
1.1
6.6
CA825390
586055
Proteinase inhibitor
1.8
3.1
CA825852
739058
Heat shock protein 70
3.2
–1.0
CA822754
563894
Xyloglucan
endo-1,4-beta-d-glucanase
2.6
–1.6
CA824320
658681
Transcription factor
GRAS family transcription factor
–1.1
5.1
CA824677
654429
MYB-related protein
2.9
4.6
CA821175
784079
AP2/ERF domain-containing
transcription factor
1.4
2.4
CA822110
739204

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
261
Table 1 (continued)
Putative function
4d of
contact
(fold)
14d of
contact
(fold)
GenBank#
P. trichocarpa
Protein ID
RNA silencing
Argonaute-like protein
1.2
3.3
CA824775
709669
Membrane transporter
Lys/His-speciﬁc transporter
2.7
3.2
CA822109
815560
Poplar plantlets (P. tremula x alba, INRA clone 717-1B4) were grown together with Pisolithus
microcarpus 441 mycelium in an in vitro system described in (Luster and Finlay, 2006) for
4 days and 14 days, respectively. After 4 days the fungal hyphae are attached to the root
and after 14 days mycorrhizal tissues are differentiating. Three biological replicates of these
samples as well as controls from non-inoculated poplar plantlets were used to hybridize a
Populus 4.6 K cDNA macroarray. This array is described as platform GPL4887 at GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/index.cgi). Representative differentially-expressed transcripts
compared to the control roots (>2fold, p-value<0.05, values in bold) are listed by functional cat-
egories. For each transcript, its putative function, the Genbank accession number of the cDNA
clone spotted on the macroarray and the JGI protein ID of the corresponding Populus trichocarpa
gene are given.
genome-wide transcript proﬁling of L. bicolor interacting with Populus roots has
revealed several genes with a striking upregulation in symbiotic tissues (>100-fold)
(Martin et al., 2008). One of the more exciting ﬁndings has been the observation
that many of the mycorrhiza-upregulated transcripts are coding for small cysteine-
rich proteins that eventually ﬁnd their way out of the colonizing hyphae and onto
the surface of the fungal and root cells (Fig. 5). These proteins may play a role
in the construction of the novel symbiotic apoplastic interface, act as decoys to
help the mycobiont evades the host defense system, and/or may be directed into the
root cells. Understanding the molecular function of these secreted effectors became
widely accepted as essential for a mechanistic understanding of the processes
underlying plant colonization by ﬁlamentous pathogens.
Carbohydrates. A major function of the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis is the
exchange of fungus-derived nutrients for plant-derived carbohydrates, enabling the
colonization of mineral nutrient-poor environments. As shown in various Populus
ectomycorrhizal associations, the creation of such a strong sink is directly related
to the efﬁciency of fungal hexose uptake at the plant/fungus interface, the conver-
sion of plant-derived hexoses into fungus-speciﬁc compounds, and the export of
carbohydrates towards soil growing hyphae (Nehls et al., 2007). Tracer experiments
have shown (Bucking and Heyser, 2001): (1) the fungal partner has a high capac-
ity to attract photosynthates; (2) the main transfer of carbohydrates is localized in
the median zone of a mycorrhizal root; (3) carbohydrates that are absorbed by the
mycorrhizal fungus are translocated to the fungal sheath and are homogeneously
distributed. In Amanita muscaria-Populus (P. tremula x tremuloides) ectomycor-
rhizas, the transcript abundances of genes encoding key enzymes of fungal trehalose

262
G. Newcombe et al.
MiSSP7
Fig. 5 A hypothetical model
indicating the presence of
mycorrhiza-induced secreted
proteins (red circles), such as
the small secreted protein
MiSSP7, in the symbiotic
apoplastic space (1) and
within the host cells.
Expression of hydrophobins
and the symbiosis-regulated
acidic polypeptides SRAP32
is also induced by
ectomycorrhizal development
and are likely involved in the
hyphae attachment on the
root surface. High expression
of the transcripts coding for
the secretory pathways (2)
and cell wall synthesis (3) is
also observed during the
interaction
biosynthesis, namely trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (TPS), trehalose-6-phosphate
phosphatase (TPP) and trehalose phosphorylase (TP), were increased (Lopez et al.,
2007). The enhanced trehalose biosynthesis at the plant-fungus interface indicates
that trehalose is a relevant carbohydrate sink in symbiosis. However, not only the
fungus but also the plant partner increase its expression of hexose importer genes
at the plant/fungus interface. This increase in hexose uptake capacity of plant roots
in combination with an increase in photosynthesis may explain how the plant deals
with the growing fungal carbohydrate demand in symbiosis and how it can restrict
this loss of carbohydrates under certain conditions to avoid fungal parasitism.
Nitrogen. Ectomycorrhizal symbionts play a key role in the nitrogen metabolism
of their host plants. The high-afﬁnity ammonium importer from P. tremula x
tremuloides (PttAMT1.2) is strongly increased in a N-independent manner upon
ectomycorrhiza formation (Selle et al., 2005) indicating an increased ammonium
uptake capacity of mycorrhizal Populus roots and suggest, together with the expres-
sion of putative ammonium exporter genes in the ectomycorrhizal fungus Amanita
muscaria and L. bicolor (Selle et al., 2005; Martin et al., 2008) that ammo-
nium could be a major N source delivered from the fungus towards the plant in
symbiosis.
Drought stress. The formation of ectomycorrhizas may also increase plant sur-
vival under drought stress conditions. The water transport capacity of the plasma
membrane of root cells is strongly increased in mycorrhizal Populus (Marjanovic
et al., 2005). On the other hand, Siemens and Zwiazek (2008) suggested that hyphal
penetration of the root cortex in itself may have little inﬂuence on root hydraulic
properties.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
263
5 Plant Symbiont Communities – Diversity
Part of the difﬁculty in determining net effects of symbiont interactions on host
plants is that the diversity of symbiont communities is poorly known. And the
longer-lived and larger the plant, the more complex its community of fungal sym-
bionts is likely to be. But even for relatively short-lived plants of small stature our
knowledge of symbionts is unlikely to be complete even with ambitious sampling
(Shipunov et al., 2008). For perspective, the human mouth, or ‘oral microbiome’,
hosts hundreds of microbes that are still unknown to science (Mlot, 2004). The
microbes that populate speciﬁc niches, such as the human mouth, have been called
the ‘uncultured majority’ (Mlot, 2004), and unculturable bacteria and fungi (Arnold
et al., 2007) are fairly common endophytes of plants. But culturability is hardly the
main issue; endophytes in particular are mostly rare in overall frequency at the host
plant population and species levels, with largely unknown geographic distributions
(Shipunov et al., 2008). A rare endophyte that could potentially perform some valu-
able service to Populus culture might never be naturally recruited into hybrid poplar
plantations. Instead, a human-aided introduction would be needed.
Since most readers of this chapter will be plant biologists it is worth emphasizing
here a key shortcoming in mycology vis-à-vis botany: today, 83% of vascular plants
are known to science, whereas, at best, from 7% to perhaps 20% of the fungi are
presently described (Hawksworth, 2001; Cox and Moore, 2005; Rossman, 2009).
Diversity matters if symbionts play speciﬁc and signiﬁcant roles in plant ecology.
This is doubly true if their unknown distributions across the landscape were dis-
covered to be confounded with variables that are more commonly measured by
ecologists (e.g., plant traits or abiotic, environmental variables).
The sampling problem for symbionts, and endophytes in particular, is
formidable. By way of example, some of the most extensive, modern studies of
endophyte communities of trees have involved Theobroma cacao. Even with many
studies (Arnold and Herre, 2003; Arnold et al., 2003; Evans et al., 2003; Rubini
et al., 2005; Bailey et al., 2008), “it is likely that only a small part of the vast
microbial diversity associated with cacao has been described” (Bailey et al., 2008).
Ironically, the endophyte communities of our model Populus are much more obscure
at this point than those of cacao.
Existing records of fungi on Populus do not help us make up this deﬁcit of
knowledge of its endophytes for they emphasize its pathogens (i.e., fungi that
cause diseases). For example, for P. trichocarpa, the fungal databases of the USDA
Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory list 363 host-pathogen com-
binations, 567 records, and 850 specimens (Farr et al., n.d.). For P. deltoides, the
numbers are 146, 299, and 526, respectively. Similar numbers obtain for other com-
mercially important species of Populus, but the fungi of non-commercial species
have, of course, only been studied incidentally (e.g., the numbers for P. heterophylla
are 5, 6 and 26, and for P. ciliata 15, 23, and 2).
Furthermore, the lifetime associations with fungi of a single Populus tree have
never been recorded in their entirety, but it is safe to say that they would be diverse
and that they would change with the age of the tree and with local availability
of inoculum. Decay fungi, isolated as quiescent endophytes in the young tree

264
G. Newcombe et al.
(Hutchinson, 1999) for example, can become active in decay of the older tree.
A Populus tree also experiences continuous or episodic battles with pathogens
(Newcombe, 1996; Newcombe et al., 2001) and herbivores (Whitham et al., 1996;
Mattson et al., 2001); not only can symbionts affect the outcomes of these bat-
tles but it is likely that the battles themselves affect recruitment into ever-changing,
symbiont communities.
6 Endophytes Associated with Populus
Endophyte studies in Populus lag behind those of many other taxa of woody plants.
“Members of the Betulaceae, Fagaceae, Cupressaceae and Pinaceae have been
most intensively examined for the presence of endophytic fungi” (Sieber, 2007).
In Sieber’s review of studies of the endophytes of woody plants, the only species of
Populus that received mention was P. tremula, based on a study of its endophytes
in Spain (Santamaria and Diez, 2005). An earlier review of studies of endophytic
mycobiota of nearly 80 plant hosts did not include a single species of Populus (Stone
et al., 2000).
There are, however, a few studies that might be compared to that of the endo-
phytes in leaves, twigs, and stem bark of P. tremula in Spain (Santamaria and
Diez, 2005). Comparisons provide a sense of how much of the endophytic diver-
sity of Populus remains to be discovered. The ﬁrst that we will consider is one of
fungi in bark and wood of P. tremuloides in western Canada (Hutchinson, 1999).
These two aspen species, P. tremula and P. tremuloides, are similar ecologically and
closely related by descent from a common ancestor (Eckenwalder, 1996). Although
Hutchison’s was not explicitly an endophyte study, great care was taken to avoid sur-
face contaminants so that it does appear comparable to the Spanish study. Conducted
in a small area of Spain, a total of 48 fungal species were isolated from 960
plant fragments. From twigs speciﬁcally, isolates belonged to a total of 26 genera,
whereas in western Canada isolates belonged to 37 genera. Only nine genera (i.e.,
35% of the Spanish community and 24% of the western Canadian community) were
common to both wood-inhabiting, fungal communities.
Wood-inhabiting, or xylotropic, endophytes of P. tremuloides have also been
sampled in eastern North America (Chapela, 1989). Chapela isolated ten genera
that were not subsequently found in either western Canada or Spain: Daldinia,
Herpotrichia, Melanconium, Pestalotia, Coniophora, Peniophora, Sistotrema,
Ozonium, Phaeococcum and Cylindrocarpon. Hutchison also notes in his study
the “conspicuous absence of the microfungus Trichocladium canadense despite the
frequent isolation of this species from aspen wood in Quebec (Laﬂamme and Lortie,
1973), Ontario (Weingartner and Basham, 1985) and New Hampshire (Shigo,
1963).”
These comparisons simply illustrate that Populus-wide inventories of fungal
endophytes remain largely unknown, especially if it is true in a general sense that

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
265
endophytes may be hyperdiverse in plants (Arnold et al., 2000; Ganley et al., 2004;
Arnold et al., 2007). Because we know so few of its endophytes, it is not surprising
that new species of fungi associated with Populus have continued to be described
in the last decade: Endoconidioma populi gen. et sp. nov. (Tsuneda et al., 2004),
or Knuﬁa endospora sp. nov. (Tsuneda and Currah, 2005). But, currently, bacterial
endophytes of Populus appear to be receiving more study than its fungal endophytes.
For example, new species of bacteria have been described (Van Aken et al., 2004),
ecologically important species have been reported (Doty et al., 2005) and sequence-
based surveys and community-level work have also been reported (Germaine et al.,
2004; Ulrich et al., 2008).
If endophytes of Populus are like its pathogens (Newcombe, 1996), then they are
likely to play speciﬁc roles in the symbiont community. This has been suggested by
studies of natural hybrid zones of Populus (Bailey et al., 2005). This was also cer-
tainly the case for the recently discovered mycoparasite, Hydropisphaera fungicola,
that is endophytic in Populus trichocarpa and that speciﬁcally parasitizes another
endophyte in the community (Rossman et al., 2008).
7 Plant Symbiont Communities – Assembly Rules
The assembly rules of plant communities are still hotly debated after nearly a cen-
tury of research initiated by Clements and Gleason (Chase, 2003). We do know that
plant communities tend to reach single stable equilibria when prevailing conditions
include “small regional species pools, high rates of connectance, low productivity
and high disturbance”(Chase, 2003). We also know that when conditions differ from
the latter, the history of community assembly may itself become an important factor
leading to multiple stable equilibria.
Rules governing assembly of the symbiont communities of plants are even
murkier. We do know that speciﬁc groups of fungi succeed one another during
decomposition of wood (Boddy, 2000), and plant litter generally (Thormann et al.,
2003). We know that competition to capture resources is ﬁerce, ranging from
antagonism at a distance through to mycoparasitism (Boddy, 2000). Competition
and mycoparasitism may also be expected among fungi in symbiont communi-
ties of living plants. But, in contrast to a dead substrate, the immune system of a
living plant might be modulated with each new microbial arrival. Sequential arrival
(i.e., assembly history) is itself a highly signiﬁcant factor in structuring microbial
communities in freshwater ecosystems (Fukami and Morin, 2003), and the same
may turn out to be true of plant symbiont communities. Insights thus far into the
workings of the interactome of Populus have mostly been derived from studies of
single microbial species under controlled conditions. But, in nature, hundreds or
thousands of microbes are likely members of the fungal symbiont community of a
single Populus at any given time. In this sense, the Populus interactome is still a
blank slate.

266
G. Newcombe et al.
8 Applications of Fungal Symbionts of Populus
Domesticating Populus to help meet the “wood, ﬁber, energy, and environmental
needs of the rapidly growing world” (Bradshaw and Strauss, 2001) is a broad and
worthwhile challenge. The primary objective of Populus domestication is increased
yield, but leaf rust caused by Melampsora, leaf spot (Marssonina), leaf and shoot
blight (Venturia), and leaf spot and stem canker (Septoria) limit the productivity
of Populus (Newcombe et al., 2001). To combat these diseases, Populus breeders
and pathologists have followed an expensive and constraining ‘agricultural model’
involving cultural practices, pesticides, and genetically resistant clones selected in
a traditional manner. This work has often had to proceed without full understanding
of defense mechanisms at the molecular level in Populus.
Genomics and genetic engineering have been seen as the principal, novel means
by which Populus might be rapidly improved for characters associated with growth
and pest resistance (Bradshaw and Strauss, 2001; Brunner et al., 2004). Application
of select symbionts has been suggested as another novel means to improve Populus
(Doty, 2008), in addition to conventional breeding and selection (Riemenschneider
et al., 2001). However, it has not really been clear how best to proceed to select
symbionts in a genus that collectively might host thousands of unique microbes.
Symbiont selection assays would need to be developed, and the potential for these
assays to be based on underlying genetic mechanisms is still untapped although it
will no doubt be facilitated by ongoing symbiotic sequencing efforts (Martin et al.,
2004).
By way of example, another undomesticated tree, coffee, is in the process of
being improved via symbiont selection (Vega et al., 2008); two entomopathogenic
fungal endophytes, Beauveria bassiana and Clonostachys rosea, have been isolated
from coffee itself and are thought to be able to provide continuous protection against
the coffee berry borer and other insects. Endophytes of cacao, including new species
of Trichoderma (Hanada et al., 2008), have shown potential for biological control of
the diseases of cacao (Bailey et al., 2008), as discussed above. Rugulosin-producing
endophytes are currently being inoculated into spruce seedlings on a commercial
basis in Canada (Miller et al., 2002) to protect the outplanted trees from spruce bud-
worm. Finally, isolates of Muscodor albus are being selected so that they could
be inoculated into forest and orchard trees for control of pathogens and insects
(Strobel, 2006). In fact, symbiont selection is potentially rewarding with any wild
woody plant in which traditional improvement via breeding might be perceived as
slow, or where biotechnological progress might be impeded by regulation (Strauss
et al., 2004), or where resistance to disease of transgenic trees might be less than
optimal (Mohamed et al., 2001).
Combatting the eventual loss of enemy release in Populus culture. It is impor-
tant to remember that many species and hybrids of Populus have been introduced
far outside their native ranges where they likely beneﬁt both from enemy release
(Mitchell and Power, 2003), and from positive feedback with mycorrhizal fungi
(Klironomos, 2002). However, enemy release has typically been temporary for crop
plants, and it is likely to be that way for Populus also. For example, after being

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
267
introduced into North America, Populus nigra cv. ‘Italica’ has been reunited with
at least two of its pathogens that it had temporarily left behind in its native range
in Eurasia: Melampsora larici-populina (Newcombe and Chastagner, 1993) and
Venturia populina (Newcombe, 2003). As the beneﬁts of enemy release are lost
it will be necessary to respond to a growing list of pathogens. It is in that context
that defense mutualists with a broad spectrum of activity will be most useful to save
Populus breeders from having to respond to each ‘new’ pathogen. Restoring defense
mutualists to ‘exotic’ Populus clones might actually be interpreted as classical bio-
logical control. Some even see agriculture and production forestry as disruptive of
beneﬁcial symbiotic systems that then need to be ﬁxed (Tikhonovich and Provorov,
2007).
At this point, it is difﬁcult to judge the potential of symbiont selection with
Populus in part because we know few of its symbionts, let alone which might be
most efﬁcacious in host defense. Ironically, an endophyte isolated from Populus
tomentosa, Chaetomium spirale, is being applied in the ﬁeld in China but not in
Populus plantations (Xin and Shang, 2005). Instead, C. spirale is being applied to
control of apple canker.
Historically, J.E. Bier was one of the ﬁrst to take an interest in endophyte-
pathogen interactions in Populus (Bier and Rowat, 1962). Bier demonstrated
that naturally occurring saprophytes could prevent the development of Hypoxylon
canker, but this promising line of research was never developed into an applica-
tion. Strains of Streptomyces have since been used to reduce infection rates of
Septoria musiva (Gyenis et al., 2003) but it remains to be seen whether these soil-
borne actinomycetes could become stable members of the symbiont community of
Populus.
9 Evolutionary History and Fossil Record
The arbuscular mycorrhiza is the ancestral type of mycorrhiza as suggested by its
distribution among extant land plants, the fossil record, and mapping of mycor-
rhizal types onto a land plant phylogeny (Remy et al., 1994; Wang and Qiu, 2006).
The ancestors of the modern-day Glomeromycota (SchÜßLer et al., 2002) formed
AM-like symbioses with Devonian plants 400 million years ago, but AM have since
been replaced in many plant lineages with other types of mycorrhizal relationship.
Populus appears to be among the latter that is currently transitioning from AM
to EM; the Salicaceae are regarded as 15% AM, 49% EM, 34% AM+EM, and 2%
ectendomycorrhizal (Wang and Qiu, 2006). Although the mycorrhizae of only 41
species of the Salicaceae have been examined it appears likely that this formula
captures the trend. Populus trichocarpa may be relatively advanced in its evolution-
ary transitioning in that it is reported as EM only (Wang and Qiu, 2006), and even
its young seedlings are rapidly colonized by EM fungi (Helm et al., 1996).
Foliar fossil fungi have tended to be interpreted as parasites or pathogens but they
could also have been endophytes. The record of fossil fungi speciﬁcally associated

268
G. Newcombe et al.
Fig. 6 Images of dispersed spores (a and b), hyphal fragments (c and d) and conidiophores
(e and f) obtained from a Miocene leaf fossil of Populus from the Clarkia deposits of north central
Idaho. The leaves were separated from their rock matrix with hydroﬂuoric acid (Rember, 1991) and
cleared in KOH (Phipps, 2007) before being mounted in lactoglycerol on glass slides. (a) Spore
9.5 μm in length. (b) Alternaria-like spore 18 μm in length. (c) Hypha 13 μm in width with ver-
ticillate branching. (d) Hypha 5 μm in width. (e & f) Conidiophores that are Cladosporium-like.
E: 3.5 μm wide. F: 5 μm wide and warty below
with Populus has received little attention to date, yet it might eventually shed light on
coevolutionary relationships and paleoclimatic adaptations of Populus and its sym-
bionts. For example, the dispersed spores, hyphal fragments, and conidiophores of

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
269
fossil fungi found in Miocene leaves of Populus (Fig. 6) are all reminiscent of mod-
ern fungi (Pirozynski, 1976). All of the images are from a single leaf fossil obtained
from the Clarkia deposits of Idaho (Rember, 1991). Seen in this single leaf were
some ten spore types varying in length from 5 to 98 μm. Hyphae varied in width
from 2.5 to 15 μm. This morphological variation, and the absence of spores typi-
cal of modern pathogens, suggest a community of endophytes that might have had
time to sporulate after their host leaf was shed and before they themselves became
metabolically inactive. Further study is underway.
References
Antunes PM, Miller J, Carvalho LM, Klironomos JN, Newman. JA (2008) Even after death the
endophytic fungus of Schedonorus phoenix reduces the arbuscular mycorrhizas of other plants.
Funct Ecol 22:912–918.
Arnold AE, Henk DA, Eells RL, Lutzoni F, Vilgalys. R (2007) Diversity and phylogenetic afﬁni-
ties of foliar fungal endophytes in loblolly pine inferred by culturing and environmental PCR.
Mycologia 99:185–206.
Arnold AE, Herre. EA (2003) Canopy cover and leaf age affect colonisation by tropical
fungal endophytes: ecological pattern and process in Theobroma cacao (Malvaceae).
Mycologia 95:388–398.
Arnold AE, Maynard Z, Gilbert GS, Coley PD, Kursar TA (2000) Are tropical fungal endophytes
hyperdiverse? Ecol Lett 3:267–274.
Arnold AE, Mejia LC, Kyllo D, Rojas EI, Maynard Z, Robins N, Herre. EA (2003) Fungal
endophytes limit pathogen damage in a tropical tree. Proc Nat Acad Sci 100:15649–15654.
Babst BA, Ferrieri RA, Gray DW, Lerdau M, Schlyer DJ, Schueller M, Thorpe MR, Orians. CM
(2005) Jasmonic acid induces rapid changes in carbon transport and partitioning in Populus.
New Phytol 167:63–72.
Bailey BA, Bae H, Strem MD, Crozier J, Thomas SE, Samuels GJ, Vinyard BT, Holmes. KA
(2008) Antibiosis, mycoparasitism, and colonization success for endophytic Trichoderma
isolates with biological control potential in Theobroma cacao. Biol Control 46:24–35.
Bailey BA, Bae H, Strem MD, Roberts DP, Thomas SE, Crozier J, Samuels GJ, Choi I-Y, Holmes.
KA (2006) Fungal and plant gene expression during the colonization of cacao seedlings by
endophytic isolates of four Trichoderma species. Planta 224:1449–1464.
Bailey JK, Deckert R, Schweitzer JA, Rehill BJ, Lindroth RL, Gehring C, Whitham. TG (2005)
Host plant genetics affect hidden ecological players: links among Populus, condensed tannins,
and fungal endophyte infection. Can J Botany 83:356–361.
Baum C, Stetter U, Makeschin. F (2002) Growth response of Populus trichocarpa to inoculation by
the ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria laccata in a pot and a ﬁeld experiment. For Ecol Manag
163:1–8.
Beauchamp VB, Stromberg JC, Stutz. JC (2006) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi associated with
Populus-Salix stands in a semiarid riparian ecosystem. New Phytol 170:369–380.
Beckers GJ, Conrath. U (2007) Priming for stress resistance: from the lab to the ﬁeld. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 10:425–431.
Bendz-Hellgren M, Stenlid. J (1997) Decreased volume growth of Picea abies in response to
Heterobasidion annosum infection. Can J For Res 27:1519–1524.
Bier JE, Rowat. MH (1962) The relation of bark moisture to the development of canker diseases
caused by native, facultative parasites: VII. Some effects of the saprophytes on the bark of
poplar and willow on the incidence of Hypoxylon canker. Can J Botany 40:61–69.
Bittel P, Robatzek. S (2007) Microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) probe plant
immunity. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:335–341.

270
G. Newcombe et al.
Boddy L (2000) Interspeciﬁc combative interactions between wood-decaying basidiomycetes.
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 31:185–194.
Borowicz VA (2001) Do arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi alter plant-pathogen relations? Ecology
82:3057–3068.
Bradshaw HD, Ceulemans R, Davis J, Stettler. R (2000) Emerging model systems in plant biology:
Poplar (POPULUS) as a model forest tree. J Plant Growth Regul 19:306–313.
Bradshaw HD Jr., Strauss SH (2001) Breeding strategies for the 21st century: domestication of
poplar. In: Dickmann JGIDI, Eckenwalder JE, Richardson J (eds) Poplar Culture in North
America. Part B, Chapter 14, 383–394. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of
Canada, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.
Brundrett M (2004) Diversity and classiﬁcation of mycorrhizal associations. Biol Rev 79:473–495.
Brundrett M, Bougher N, Dell B, Grove T, Malajczuk. N (1996) Working with Mycorrhizas in
Forestry and Agriculture. ACIAR, Canberra, Australia.
Brunner AM, Busov VB, Strauss. SH (2004) Poplar genome sequence: functional genomics in an
ecologically dominant plant species. Trends Plant Sci 9:49–56.
Bucking H, Heyser. W (2001) Microautoradiographic localization of phosphate and carbohydrates
in mycorrhizal roots of Populus tremula x Populus alba and the implications for transfer
processes in ectomycorrhizal associations. Tree Physiol 21:101–107.
Bultman TL, Bell G, Martin. WD (2004) A fungal endophyte mediates reversal of wound-induced
resistance and constrains tolerance in a grass. Ecology 85:679–685.
Calhoun LA, Findlay JA, Miller JD, Whitney. NJ (1992) Metabolites toxic to spruce budworm
from balsam ﬁr needle endophytes. Mycol Res 96:281–286.
Chapela IH (1989) Fungi in healthy stems and branches of American beech and aspen: a
comparative study. New Phytol 113:65–75.
Chase JM (2003) Community assembly: when should history matter? Oecologia 136:489–498.
Clark CL, Miller JD, Whitney. NJ (1989) Toxicity of conifer needle endophytes to spruce
budworm. Mycol Res 93:508–512.
Clarke BB, White JF Jr, Hurley RH, Torres MS, Sun S, Huff. DR (2006) Endophyte-mediated
suppression of dollar spot disease in ﬁne fescues. Plant Dis 90:994–998.
Clay K (1988) Fungal endophytes of grasses: a defensive mutualism between plants and fungi.
Ecology 69:10–16.
Clay K, Holah. J (1999) Fungal endophyte symbiosis and plant diversity in successional ﬁelds.
Science 285:1742–1744.
Clay K, Schardl. C (2002) Evolutionary origins and ecological consequences of endophyte
symbiosis with grasses. Am Nat 160:S99–S127.
Cox CB, Moore. PD (2005) Biogeography – An Ecological and Evolutionary Approach.
Blackwell, Oxford, U.K.
Cuomo CA, Guldener U, Xu JR, Trail F, Turgeon BG, Di Pietro A, Walton JD, Ma LJ, Baker
SE, Rep. M (2007) The Fusarium graminearum genome reveals a link between localized
polymorphism and pathogen specialization. Science 317:1400–1402.
Deshmukh S, Huckelhoven R, SchÄFer P, Imani J, Sharma M, Weiss M, Waller F, Kogel.
KH (2006) The root endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica requires host cell death
for proliferation during mutualistic symbiosis with barley. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 103:
18450–18457.
Djonovic S, Pozo MJ, Dangott LJ, Howell CR, Kenerley. CM (2006) Sm1, a proteinaceous elici-
tor secreted by the biocontrol fungus Trichoderma virens induces plant defense responses and
systemic resistance. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 19:838–853.
Doty SL (2008) Enhancing phytoremediation through the use of transgenics and endophytes. New
Phyt 179:318–333.
Doty SL, Dosher MR, Singleton GL, Moore AL, Aken B, Stettler RF, Strand SE, Gordon. MP
(2005) Identiﬁcation of an endophytic Rhizobium in stems of Populus. Symbiosis 39:27–35.
Druege U, Baltruschat H, Franken. P (2007) Piriformospora indica promotes adventitious root
formation in cuttings. Scientia Horticulturae 112:422–426.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
271
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. Part I, Chapter 1. In: Stettler
HDBRF Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its Implications for
Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada,
Ottawa, ON, pp. 7–32.
Erb M, Ton J, Degenhardt J, Turlings. TCJ (2008) Interactions between arthropod-induced
aboveground and belowground defenses in plants. Plant Physiol 146:867–874.
Evans HC, Holmes KA, Thomas. SE (2003) Endophytes and mycoparasites associated with an
indigenous forest tree, Theobroma gileri, in Ecuador and a preliminary assessment of their
potential as biocontrol agents of cocoa diseases. Mycol Prog 2:149–160.
Farr DF, Rossman AY, Palm ME, McCray. EB (n.d.) Fungal Databases. Systematic Mycology and
Microbiology, USDA, ARS http://nt.ars-grin.gov/fungaldatabases/.
Felten J, Kohler A, Morin E, Palme K, Martin F, Ditengou F, Legué. V (2009) The ectomycorrhizal
fungus Laccaria bicolor stimulates lateral root formation in poplar and Arabidopsis through
auxin transport and signaling. Plant Physiol DOI:10.1104/pp.109.147231.
Felton GW, Korth KL, Bi JL, Wesley SV, Huhman DV, Mathews MC, Murphy JB, Lamb C, Dixon.
RA (1999) Inverse relationship between systemic resistance of plants to microorganisms and
to insect herbivory. Curr Biol 9:317–320.
Freeman S, Rodriguez. RJ (1993) Genetic conversion of a fungal plant pathogen to a non-
pathogenic, endophytic mutualist. Science 260:75–78.
Fukami T, Morin. PJ (2003) Productivity-biodiversity relationships depend on the history of
community assembly. Nature 424:423–426.
Ganley RJ, Brunsfeld SJ, Newcombe. G (2004) A community of unknown, endophytic fungi in
western white pine. Proc Nat Acad Sci 101:10107–10112.
Ganley RJ, Sniezko RA, Newcombe. G (2008) Endophyte-mediated resistance against white pine
blister rust in Pinus monticola. For Ecol Manag 255:2751–2760.
Gehring CA, Mueller RC, Whitham. TG (2006) Environmental and genetic effects on the forma-
tion of ectomycorrhizal and arbuscular mycorrhizal associations in cottonwoods. Oecologia
149:158–164.
Germaine K, Keogh E, Garcia-Cabellos G, Borremans B, Lelie D, Barac T, Oeyen L, Vangronsveld
J, Moore FP, Moore. ERB (2004) Colonisation of poplar trees by gfp-expressing bacterial
endophytes. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 48:109–118.
Glazebrook J, Ton. J (2007) Biotic interactions: Recurring themes and expanding scales. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 10:331–334.
Godbold DL, Hoosbeek MR, Lukac M, Cotrufo MF, Janssens IA, Ceulemans R, Polle A, Velthorst
EJ, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, De Angelis P, Miglietta F, Peressotti. A (2006) Mycorrhizal hyphal
turnover as a dominant process for carbon input into soil organic matter. Plant Soil 281:
15–24.
Green H, Larsen J, Olsson PA, Jensen DF, Jakobsen. I (1999) Suppression of the biocontrol
agent Trichoderma harzianum by mycelium of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Glomus
intraradices in root-free soil. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:1428–1434.
Grünig CR, Queloz V, Sieber TN, Holdenrieder. O (2008) Dark septate endophytes (DSE) of the
Phialocephala fortinii s.l. – Acephala applanata species complex in tree roots: classiﬁcation,
population biology, and ecology. Botany 86:1355–1369.
Gyenis L, Anderson NA, Ostry. ME (2003) Biological control of septoria leaf spot disease of
hybrid poplar in the ﬁeld. Plant Dis 87:809–813.
Haine ER (2008) Symbiont-mediated protection. Proc Roy Soc B: Biol Sci 275:353–361.
Hampp R, Ecke M, Schaeffer C, Wallenda T, Wingler A, Kottke I, Sundberg. B (1996) Axenic
mycorrhization of wild type and transgenic hybrid aspen expressing T-DNA indoleacetic acid-
biosynthetic genes. Trees-Struct Funct 11:59–64.
Hanada RE, Jorge Souza T, Pomella AWV, Hebbar KP, Pereira JO, Ismaiel A, Samuels. GJ (2008)
Trichoderma martiale sp. nov., a new endophyte from sapwood of Theobroma cacao with a
potential for biological control. Mycol Res 112:1335–1343.

272
G. Newcombe et al.
Harman GE, Howell CR, Viterbo A, Chet I, Lorito. M (2004) Trichoderma species – opportunistic,
avirulent plant symbionts. Nat Rev Microbiol 2:43–56.
Hawksworth DL (2001) The magnitude of fungal diversity: the 1.5 million species estimate
revisited. Mycol Res 105:1422–1432.
Helm DJ, Allen EB, Trappe. JM (1996) Mycorrhizal chronosequence near Exit Glacier, Alaska.
Can J Botany 74:1496–1506.
Hiremath ST, Balasubramanian S, Zheng J, Podila. GK (2006) Symbiosis-regulated expression of
an acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase gene in the ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria bicolor. Can J
Botany 84:1405–1416.
Hooker JE, Black KE, Perry RL, Atkinson. D (1995) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi induced
alteration to root longevity of poplar. Plant Soil 172:327–329.
Hutchinson LJ (1999) Wood-inhabiting microfungi isolated from Populus tremuloides from
Alberta and northeastern British Columbia. Can J Botany 77:898–905.
Iavicoli A, Boutet E, Buchala A, Metraux. JP (2003) Induced systemic resistance in Arabidopsis
thaliana in response to root Inoculation with Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens CHA0. Mol Plant-
Microbe Interact 16:851–858.
Jokipii S, Haggman H, Brader G, Kallio PT, Niemi. K (2008) Endogenous PttHb1 and PttTrHb,
and heterologous Vitreoscilla vhb haemoglobin gene expression in hybrid aspen roots with
ectomycorrhizal interaction. J Exp Botany 59:2449–2459.
Jones JDG, Dangl. JL (2006) The plant immune system. Nature 444:323–329.
Jones MD, Smith. SE (2004) Exploring functional deﬁnitions of mycorrhizas: are mycorrhizas
always mutualisms? Can J Botany 82:1089–1109.
Kaldorf M, Koch B, Rexer KH, Kost G, Varma. A (2005) Patterns of interaction between Populus
Esch5 and Piriformospora indica: a transition from mutualism to antagonism. Plant Biology
7:210–218.
Khasa PD, Chakravarty P, Robertson A, Thomas BR, Dancik. BP (2002) The mycorrhizal status
of selected poplar clones introduced in Alberta. Bioenergy Res 22:99–104.
Klironomos JN (2002) Feedback with soil biota contributes to plant rarity and invasiveness in
communities. Nature 417:67–70.
Kogel KH, Franken P, Hückelhoven R (2006) Endophyte or parasite–what decides? Curr Opin
Plant Biol 9:358–363.
Kohler A, Rinaldi C, Duplessis S, Baucher M, Geelen D, Duchaussoy F, Meyers BC, Boerjan W,
Martin. F (2008) Genome-wide identiﬁcation of NBS resistance genes in Populus trichocarpa.
Plant Mol Biol 66:619–636.
Koike N, Hyakumachi M, Kageyama K, Tsuyumu S, Doke. N (2001) Induction of systemic resis-
tance in cucumber against several diseases by plant growth-promoting fungi: ligniﬁcation and
superoxide generation. Eu J Plant Pathol 107:523–533.
Kuffner M, Puschenreiter M, Wieshammer G, Gorfer M, Sessitsch. A (2008) Rhizosphere bac-
teria affect growth and metal uptake of heavy metal accumulating willows. Plant Soil 304:
35–44.
Kuldau GA, Yates. IE (2000) Evidence for Fusarium endophytes in cultivated and wild plants. In:
Bacon CW, White JF Jr. (eds) Microbial Endophytes. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 85–117.
Laﬂamme G, Lortie. M (1973) Micro-organismes dans les tissus colorés et cariés du peuplier
faux-tremble. Can J For Res 3:155–160.
Leake J, Johnson D, Donnelly D, Muckle G, Boddy L, Read. D (2004) Networks of power
and inﬂuence: the role of mycorrhizal mycelium in controlling plant communities and
agroecosystem functioning. Can J Botany 82:1016–1045.
Lesaulnier C, Papamichail D, McCorkle S, Ollivier B, Skiena S, Taghavi S, Zak D, van der Lelie.
D (2008) Elevated atmospheric CO2 affects soil microbial diversity associated with trembling
aspen. Environ Microbiol 10:926–941.
Lingua G, Franchin C, Todeschini V, Castiglione S, Biondi S, Burlando B, Parravicini V, Torrigiani
P, Berta. G (2008) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi differentially affect the response to high zinc
concentrations of two registered poplar clones. Environ Pollut 153:137–147.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
273
Liu CH, Zou WX, Hong L, Tan. RX (2001) Antifungal activity of Artemisia annua endophyte
cultures against phytopathogenic fungi. J Biotechnol 88:277–282.
Lodge DJ (2000) Ecto-or arbuscular mycorrhizas-which are best? New Phytol 146:353–354.
Lopez MF, Manner P, Willmann A, Hampp R, Nehls. U (2007) Increased trehalose biosynthesis in
Hartig net hyphae of ectomycorrhizas. New Phytol 174:389–398.
Luster J, Finlay R (eds) (2006) Handbook of Methods Used in Rhizophere Research. Swiss Federal
Research Institute WSL, Birmensdorf, Switzerland, pp. 399–400.
Major IT, Constabel. CP (2007) Shoot-root defense signaling and activation of root defense by leaf
damage in poplar. Can J Botany 85:1171–1181.
Marjanovic Z, Uehlein N, Kaldenhoff R, Zwiazek JJ, Weiss M, Hampp R, Nehls. U (2005)
Aquaporins in poplar: What a difference a symbiont makes! Planta 222:258–268.
Martin F, Aerts A, Ahren D, Brun A, Danchin EG, Duchaussoy F, Gibon J, Kohler A, Lindquist
E, Pereda. V (2008) The genome of Laccaria bicolor provides insights into mycorrhizal
symbiosis. Nature 452:88–93.
Martin F, Duplessis S, Ditengou F, Lagrange H, Voiblet C, Lapeyrie. F (2001) Developmental
cross talking in the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis: signals and communication genes. New Phytol
151:145–154.
Martin F, Kohler A, Duplessis. S (2007) Living in harmony in the wood underground: ectomycor-
rhizal genomics. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10:204–210.
Martin F, Tuskan GA, DiFazio SP, Lammers P, Newcombe G, Podila. GK (2004) Symbiotic
sequencing for the Populus mesocosm. New Phytol 161:330–335.
Mattson WJ, Hart ER, Volney. WJA (2001) Insect pests of Populus: coping with the inevitable.
In: Dickmann DI, Isebrands JG, Eckenwalder JE, Richardson J (eds) Poplar Culture in North
America, Part A, Chapter 7, pp. 219–248. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.
McGormick JF, Platt RB (1980) Recovery of an Appalachian forest following the chestnut blight
or Catherine Keever – you were right!. Am Midl Nat 104:264–273.
Miller JD, Mackenzie S, Foto M, Adams GW, Findlay. JA (2002) Needles of white spruce inocu-
lated with rugulosin-producing endophytes contain rugulosin reducing spruce budworm growth
rate. Mycol Res 106:471–479.
Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R, White R, Heath MC, Bohlmann J, Constabel. CP (2007) The
transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus trichocarpa x P. deltoides) to infection by
Melampsora medusae leaf rust involves induction of ﬂavonoid pathway genes leading to the
accumulation of proanthocyanidins. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 20:816–831.
Mitchell CE, Power. AG (2003) Release of invasive plants from fungal and viral pathogens. Nature
421:625–627.
Mlot C (2004) Microbial diversity unbound. BioSci 54:1064–1068.
Mohamed R, Meilan R, Ostry ME, Michler CH, Strauss. SH (2001) Bacterio-opsin gene over-
expression fails to elevate fungal disease resistance in transgenic poplar (Populus). Can J For
Res 31:268–275.
Molina R, Massicotte H, Trappe. JM (1992) Speciﬁcity phenomena in mycorrhizal symbioses:
community-ecological consequences and practical implications. In: Allen MF (ed) Mycorrhizal
Functioning: an Integrative Plant-Fungal Process. Routledge, Chapman & Hall, New York,
pp. 357–423.
Nehls U, Grunze N, Willmann M, Reich M, Kuester. H (2007) Sugar for my honey: carbohydrate
partitioning in ectomycorrhizal symbiosis. Phytochemistry 68:82–91.
Newcombe G (1996) The speciﬁcity of fungal pathogens of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD
jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management
and Conservation. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa,
pp. 223–246.
Newcombe G (2003) Native Venturia inopina sp. nov., speciﬁc to Populus trichocarpa and its
hybrids. Mycol Res 107:108–116.
Newcombe G, Chastagner. GA (1993) First report of the Eurasian poplar leaf rust fungus,
Melampsora laricici-populina, in North America. Plant Dis 77:532–535.

274
G. Newcombe et al.
Newcombe G, Chastagner GA, Schuette W, Stanton. BJ (1994) Mortality among hybrid poplar
clones in a stool bed following leaf rust caused by Melampsora medusae f.sp. deltoidae. Can J
For Res 24:1984–1987.
Newcombe G, Ostry M, Hubbes M, Perinet P, Mottet. M-J (2001) Poplar Diseases. In: Dickmann
JGIDI, Eckenwalder JE, Richardson J (eds) Poplar Culture in North America. Part A, Chapter
8. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada,
pp. 249–276.
Newcombe G, Shipunov A, Eigenbrode SD, Raghavendra A, Ding H, Anderson CL, Menjivar
R, Crawford M, Schwarzländer. M (2009) Endophytes inﬂuence protection and growth of an
invasive plant. Commun Integr Biol 2:1–3.
Nischwitz C, Newcombe G, Anderson. CL (2004) Host specialization of the mycoparasite
Eudarluca caricis and its evolutionary relationship to Ampelomyces. Mycol Res 109:421–428.
Obase K, Tamai Y, Yajima T, Miyamoto. T (2007) Mycorrhizal associations in woody plant species
at the Mt. Usu volcano, Japan. Mycorrhiza 17:209–215.
Omacini M, Chaneton EJ, Ghersa CM, Muller. CB (2001) Symbiotic fungal endophytes control
insect host-parasite interaction webs. Nature 409:78–81.
Omacini M, Eggers T, Bonkowski M, Gange. AC (2006) Leaf endophytes affect mycorrhizal status
and growth of co-infected and neighbouring plants. Funct Ecol 20:226–232.
Opler PA (1978) Insects of American Chestnut: Possible Importance and Conservation Concerns.
The American Chestnut Symposium, Morgantown, West Virginia.
Paillet FL (2002) Chestnut: history and ecology of a transformed species. J Biogeogr 29:
1517–1530.
Pei MH, McCracken. AR (2005) Rust Diseases of Willow and Poplar. CABI Publishing,
Wallingford.
Peskan-Berghofer T, Shahollari B, Giong PH, Hehl S, Markert C, Blanke V, Kost G, Varma A,
Oelmuller. R (2004) Association of Piriformospora indica with Arabidopsis thaliana roots
represents a novel system to study beneﬁcial plant-microbe interactions and involves early plant
protein modiﬁcations in the endoplasmic reticulum and at the plasma membrane. Physiol Plant
122:465–477.
Phipps CJ (2007) Entopeltacites remberi sp. nov. from the Miocene of Clarkia, Idaho, USA. Rev
Palaeobot Palynol 145:193–200.
Pieterse CMJ, Dicke. M (2007) Plant interactions with microbes and insects: from molecular
mechanisms to ecology. Trends Plant Sci 12:564–569.
Pimentel D (2008) Preface special issue: conservation biological control. Biol Control 45:171.
Piotrowski JS, Lekberg Y, Harner MJ, Ramsey PW, Rillig. MC (2008) Dynamics of mycorrhizae
during development of riparian forests along an unregulated river. Ecography 31:245–253.
Pirozynski KA (1976) Fossil fungi. Ann Rev Phytopathol 14:237–246.
Pirttila AM, Pospiech H, Laukkanen H, Myllyla R, Hohtola. A (2003) Two Endophytic Fungi in
Different Tissues of Scots Pine Buds. Microb Ecol 45:53–62.
Pozo MJ, Azcon-Aguilar. C (2007) Unraveling mycorrhiza-induced resistance. Curr Opin Plant
Biol 10:393–398.
Quoreshi AM, Khasa. DP (2008) Effectiveness of mycorrhizal inoculation in the nursery on root
colonization, growth, and nutrient uptake of aspen and balsam poplar. Biomass and Bioenergy
32:381–391.
Raacke IC, von Rad U, Mueller MJ, Berger. S (2006) Yeast increases resistance in Arabidopsis
against Pseudomonas syringae and Botrytis cinerea by salicylic acid-dependent as well as –
independent mechanisms. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 19:1138–1146.
Rai M, Acharya D, Singh A, Varma. A (2001) Positive growth responses of the medicinal plants
Spilanthes calva and Withania somnifera to inoculation by Piriformospora indica in a ﬁeld
trial. Mycorrhiza 11:123–128.
Rasmussen S, Parsons AJ, Bassett S, Christensen MJ, Hume DE, Johnson LJ, Johnson RD,
Simpson WR, Stacke C, Voisey. CR (2007) High nitrogen supply and carbohydrate con-
tent reduce fungal endophyte and alkaloid concentration in Lolium perenne. New Phytol
173:787–797.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
275
Rasmussen S, Parsons AJ, Fraser K, Xue H, Newman. JA (2008) Metabolic proﬁles of Lolium
perenne are differentially affected by nitrogen supply, carbohydrate content, and fungal
endophyte infection. Plant Physiol 146:1440–1453.
Redman RS, Ranson JC, Rodriguez. RJ (1999) Conversion of the pathogenic fungus
Colletotrichum magna to a nonpathogenic, endophytic mutualist by gene disruption. Mol
Plant-Microbe Interact 12:969–975.
Redman RS, Seehan KB, Stout RG, Rodriquez RJ, Henson. JM (2002) Thermotolerance generated
by plant/fungal symbiosis. Science 298:1581.
Rember WC (1991) Stratigraphy and Paleobotany of Miocene Lake Sediments Near Clarkia.
Idaho, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho.
Remy W, Taylor TN, Hass H, Kerp. H (1994) 400 million year old vesicular arbuscular
mycorrhizae (VAM). Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 91:11841–11843.
Riemenschneider DE, Stanton BJ, Vallée G, Périnet. P (2001) Poplar breeding strategies. Part
A, Chapter 2. In: Luster DIDickmann, Isebrands JG, Eckenwalder JE,Richardson J(eds) Poplar
Culture in North America. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, pp. 43–76.
Rinaldi C, Kohler A, Frey P, Duchaussoy F, Ningre N, Couloux A, Wincker P, Le Thiec D, Fluch
S, Martin F, Duplessis. S (2007) Transcript proﬁling of poplar leaves upon infection with com-
patible and incompatible strains of the foliar rust Melampsora larici-populina. Plant Physiol
144:347–366.
Rodriguez R, Redman. R (2008) More than 400 million years of evolution and some plants still
can’t make it on their own: plant stress tolerance via fungal symbiosis. J Exp Botany 59:
1109–1114.
Rossman AY (2009) The impact of invasive fungi on agricultural ecosystems in the United States.
Biol Invasions 11:97–107.
Rossman AY, Farr DF, Platas G, Newcombe. G 2008. Hydropisphaera fungicola Rossman, Farr &
Newcombe, sp. nov., Fungal Planet.
Rubini MR, Silva-Ribeiro RT, Pomella AWV, Maki CS, Araújo WL, dos Santos DR, Azevedo JL
(2005) Diversity of endophytic fungal community of cacao (Theobroma cacao L.) and biolog-
ical control of Crinipellis perniciosa, causal agent of Witches’ Broom Disease. Int J Biol Sci
1:24–33.
Ruiz-Lozano JM, Gianinazzi S, Gianinazzi-Pearson. V (1999) Genes involved in resistance to
powdery mildew in barley differentially modulate root colonization by the mycorrhizal fungus
Glomus mosseae. Mycorrhiza 9:237–240.
Santamaria O, Diez. JJ (2005) Fungi in leaves, twigs and stem bark of Populus tremula from
northern Spain. For Pathol 35:95–104.
Sauter M, Hager. A (1989) The mycorrhizal fungus Amanita muscaria induces chitinase activity
in roots and in suspension-cultured cells of its host Picea abies. Planta 179:61–66.
Scervino JM, Ponce MA, Erra-Bassells R, Vierheilig H, Ocampo JA, Godeas. A (2005) Arbuscular
mycorrhizal colonization of tomato by Gigaspora and Glomus species in the presence of root
ﬂavonoids. J Plant Physiol 162:625–633.
Schafer P, Khatabi B, Kogel. K-H (2007) Root cell death and systemic effects of Piriformospora
indica: a study on mutualism. FEMS Microbiol Lett 275:1–7.
Schulz B, Boyle. C (2005) The endophytic continuum. Mycol Res 109:661–686.
SchÜßLer A, Schwarzott D, Walker. C (2002) A new fungal phylum, the Glomeromycota:
phylogeny and evolution. Mycol Res 105:1413–1421.
Selle A, Willmann M, Grunze N, Geßler A, Weiß M, Nehls. U (2005) The high-afﬁnity poplar
ammonium importer PttAMT1. 2 and its role in ectomycorrhizal symbiosis. New Phytol
168:697–706.
Shahollari B, Vadassery J, Varma A, Oelmuller. R (2007) A leucine-rich repeat protein is required
for growth promotion and enhanced seed production mediated by the endophytic fungus
Piriformospora indica in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 50:1–13.
Shigo A (1963) Fungi associated with the discolorations around rot columns caused by Fomes
igniarius. Plant Dis Rep 47:820–823.

276
G. Newcombe et al.
Shipunov, A., Newcombe, G, Raghavendra, and A, Anderson. C (2008) Hidden diversity of
endophytic fungi in an invasive plant. Am J Botany 95:1096–1108.
Sieber TN (2007) Endophytic fungi in forest trees: are they mutualists? Fungal Biol Rev 21:75–89.
Siemens JA, Zwiazek. JJ (2008) Root hydraulic properties and growth of balsam poplar (Poplus
balsamifera) mycorrhizal with Hebeloma crustuliniforme and Wilcoxina mikolae var. mikolae
mycorrhiza 18:393–401.
Sirrenberg A, Gobel C, Grond S, Cempinski N, Feussner I, Pawlowski. K (2007) Piriformospora
indica induces increased root branching in Arabidopsis through IAA production. Physiol Plant
131:581–589.
Stein E, Molitor A, Kogel KH, Waller. F (2008) Systemic resistance in Arabidopsis conferred
by the mycorrhizal fungus Piriformospora indica requires jasmonic acid signaling and the
cytoplasmic function of NPR1. Plant Cell Physiol 49:1747–1751.
Stone JK, Bacon CW, White JF Jr. (2000) An overview of endophytic microbes: endophytism
deﬁned. In: Bacon CW, White, JF Jr (eds) Microbial Endophytes. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New
York, 3–29.
Strauss SH, Brunner AM, Busov VB, Ma C, Meilan. R (2004) Ten lessons from 15 years of
transgenic Populus research. Forestry 77:455–465.
Strobel G (2006) Muscodor albus and its biological promise. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 33:
514–522.
Strobel GA, Dirkse E, Sears J, Markworth. C (2001) Volatile antimicrobials from Muscodor albus,
a novel endophytic fungus. Microbiology 147:2943–2950.
Tagu D, Bastien C, Faivre-Rampant P, Garbaye J, Vion P, Villar M, Martin. F (2005) Genetic
analysis of phenotypic variation for ectomycorrhiza formation in an interspeciﬁc F1 poplar
full-sib family. Mycorrhiza 15:87–91.
Tagu D, Faivre Rampant P, Lapeyrie F, Frey-Klett P, Vion P, Villar. M (2001) Variation in the
ability to form ectomycorrhizas in the F1 progeny of an interspeciﬁc poplar (Populus spp.)
cross. Mycorrhiza 10:237–240.
Tanaka A, Christensen MJ, Takemoto D, Park P, Scotta. B (2006) Reactive oxygen species play a
role in regulating a fungus-perennial ryegrass mutualistic interaction. Plant Cell 18:1052–1066.
Thormann MN, Currah RS, Bayley. SE (2003) Succession of microfungal assemblages in
decomposing peatland plants. Plant Soil 250:323–333.
Tikhonovich IA, Provorov. NA (2007) Cooperation of plants and microorganisms: getting closer
to the genetic construction of sustainable agro-systems. Biotechnol J 2:833–848.
Tsuneda A, Currah. RS (2005) Knuﬁa endospora, a new dematiaceous hyphomycete from
trembling aspen [Populus]. Reports of the Tottori Mycological Institute (Japan) 42:1–9.
Tsuneda A, Hambleton S, Currah. RS (2004) Morphology and phylogenetic placement of
Endoconidioma, a new endoconidial genus from trembling aspen. Mycologia 96:1128–1135.
Tuskan, GA., DiFazio, S, Jansson, S, Bohlmann, J, Grigoriev, I, Hellsten, U, Putnam, and N, Ralph,
S, Rombauts, S., Salamov, A., Schein, J., Sterck, L., Aerts, A., Bhalerao, RR., Bhalerao, RP.,
Blaudez, D., Boerjan, W., Brun, A., Brunner, A., Busov, V., Campbell, M., Carlson, J., Chalot,
M., Chapman, J., Chen, GL., Cooper, D., Coutinho, PM., Cou-turier, J., Covert, S., Cronk,
Q., Cunningham, R., Davis, J., Degroeve, S., Dejardin, A., Depamphilis, C., Detter, J., Dirks,
B., Dubchak, I., Duplessis, S., Ehlting, J., Ellis, B., Gendler, K., Goodstein, D., Gribskov, M.,
Grimwood, J., Groover, A., Gunter, L., Ham-berger, B., Heinze, B., Helariutta, Y., Henrissat, B.,
Holligan, D., Holt, R., Huang, W., Islam-Faridi, N., Jones, S., Jones-Rhoades, M., Jorgensen,
R., Joshi, C., Kangasjarvi, J., Karlsson, J., Kelleher, C., Kirkpatrick, R., Kirst, M., Kohler,
A., Kalluri, U., Larimer, F., Leebens-Mack, J., Leple, JC., Locascio, P., Lou, Y., Lucas, S.,
Martin, F., Montan-ini, B., Napoli, C., Nelson, DR., Nelson, C., Nieminen, K., Nilsson, O.,
Pereda, V., Peter, G., Philippe, R., Pilate, G., Poliakov, A., Razumovskaya, J., Richardson, P.,
Rinaldi, C., Ritland, K., Rouze, P., Ryaboy, D., Schmutz, J., Schrader, J., Segerman, B., Shin,
H., Siddiqui, A., Sterky, F., Terry, A., Tsai, CJ., Uberbacher, E., Unneberg, P., Vahala, J., Wall,
K., Wessler, S., Yang, G., Yin, T., Douglas, C., Marra, M., Sandberg, G., Van de Peer, Y,and,
Rokhsar, D (2006) The genome of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray).
Science 313:1596–1604.

Defense and Nutrient Mutualisms in Populus
277
Ulrich K, Ulrich A, Ewald. D (2008) Diversity of endophytic bacterial communities in poplar
grown under ﬁeld conditions. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 63:169–180.
Valdez Barillas JR, Paschke MW, Ralphs MH, Child. RD (2007) White locoweed toxicity is
facilitated by a fungal endophyte and nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria. Ecology 88:1850–1856.
Van Aken B, Peres CM, Doty SL, Yoon JM, Schnoor. JL (2004) Methylobacterium populi sp.
nov., a novel aerobic, pink-pigmented, facultatively methylotrophic, methane-utilizing bac-
terium isolated from poplar trees (Populus deltoides× nigra DN34). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
54:1191–1196.
van der Heijden MGA, Klironomos JN, Ursic M, Moutoglis P, Streitwolf-Engel R, Boller T,
Wiemken A, Sanders. IR (1998) Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant biodiversity,
ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 396:69–72.
Van Wees SCM, Van der Ent S, Pieterse. CMJ (2008) Plant immune responses triggered by
beneﬁcial microbes. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:443–448.
Varma A, Verma S, Sahay N, Butehorn B, Franken. P (1999) Piriformospora indica, a cultivable
plant-growth-promoting root endophyte. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:2741–2744.
Vega FE, Posada F, Catherine Aime M, Pava-Ripoll M, Infante F, Rehner. SA (2008)
Entomopathogenic fungal endophytes. Biol Control 46:72–82.
Verma S, Varma A, Rexer KH, Hassel A, Kost G, Sarbhoy A, Bisen P, Bütehorn B, Franken.
P (1998) Piriformospora indica, gen. et sp. nov., a new root-colonizing fungus. Mycologia
90:896–903.
Waller F, Achatz B, Baltruschat H, Fodor J, Becker K, Fischer M, Heier T, Huckelhoven R,
Neumann C, Wettstein D, Franken P, Kogel. KH (2005) The endophytic fungus Piriformospora
indica reprograms barley to salt-stress tolerance, disease resistance, and higher yield. Proc Nat
Acad Sci 102:13386–13391.
Wang Y, Ohara Y, Nakayashiki H, Tosa Y, Mayama. S (2005) Microarray analysis of the
gene expression proﬁle induced by the endophytic plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria,
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens FPT9601-T5 in Arabidopsis. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 18:385–
396.
Wang B, Qiu. YL (2006) Phylogenetic distribution and evolution of mycorrhizas in land plants.
Mycorrhiza 16:299–363.
Weingartner DH, Basham. JT (1985) Variations in the Growth and Defect of Aspen (Populus tremu-
loides Michx.) Clones in Northern Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Toronto,
Ontario.
Weiss M, Selosse MA, Rexer KH, Urban A, Oberwinkler. F (2004) Sebacinales: a hitherto
overlooked cosm of heterobasidiomycetes with a broad mycorrhizal potential. Mycol Res
108:1003–1010.
Whitham TG, Floate KD, Martinsen GD, Driebe EM, Keim. P (1996) Ecological and evolutionary
implications of hybridization: Populus-herbivore interactions. Part I, Chapter 11. In: Stettler
RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM(eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for
Management And Conservation. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, pp. 247–275.
Wicklow DT, Roth S, Deyrup ST, Gloer. JB (2005) A protective endophyte of maize: Acremonium
zeae antibiotics inhibitory to Aspergillus ﬂavus and Fusarium verticillioides. Mycol Res
109:610–618.
Wilkinson HH, Siegel MR, Blankenship JD, Mallory AC, Bush LP, Schardl. CL (2000)
Contribution of fungal loline alkaloids to protection from aphids in a grass-endophyte
mutualism. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 13:1027–1033.
Wilson D, Carrol. GC (1997) Avoidance of high-endophyte space by gall-forming insects. Ecology
78:2153–2163.
Xin Y, Shang. J (2005) Bio-control trials of Chaetomium spirale ND35 against apple canker. J For
Res 16:121–124.
Yi H, Calvo Polanco M, MacKinnon MD, Zwiazek. JJ (2008) Responses of ectomycorrhizal
Populus tremuloides and Betula papyrifera seedlings to salinity. Environ Exp Botany 62:
357–363.

The Impact of Genomics on Advances
in Herbivore Defense and Secondary
Metabolism in Populus
C. Peter Constabel and Richard L. Lindroth
Abstract The genus Populus is ideally suited for applying the tools of genomics to
plant-herbivore interactions and secondary metabolism. Populus is rich in phenolic
secondary metabolites including condensed tannins and salicylate-based glycosides;
these and related-compounds strongly shape the interactions of Populus with a host
of invertebrate and vertebrate herbivores in diverse natural environments and com-
mercial plantations. Microarray studies have been instrumental in delineating the
induced defense response to herbivore damage and in identifying defense-related
genes in Populus. These can now be functionally tested in vitro as recombinant pro-
teins as well as in vivo in transgenic plants. Analysis of the P. trichocarpa genome
has provided access to candidate genes likely to be important for the synthesis
of phenolic secondary metabolites, thereby accelerating progress in understanding
the ecological functions of these compounds. Combining genomics with improved
metabolite proﬁling will lead to a deeper understanding of how the substantial vari-
ation in phenolics among Populus species and genotypes is generated, as well as the
ecological consequences of this variation.
1 Introduction
The motivation for elucidating the genome of Populus trichocarpa is rooted in
widespread interest in understanding the biology of a woody perennial plant – i.e.,
processes of growth and development in a perennial context, including wood forma-
tion, dormancy, and adaptations to seasonal changes. In addition, however, Populus
genomics research affords the potential to address questions of fundamental inter-
est to ecologists and evolutionary biologists interested in plant-animal interactions.
Populus species are quintessential “foundation species” (Ellison et al., 2005) in
C.P. Constabel (B)
Department of Biology, Centre for Forest Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3N5,
Canada
e-mail: cpc@uvic.ca
279
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_13,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

280
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
many ecosystems, and it is the interactions between Populus and their herbivores
that largely shape the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of those ecosystems
(Whitham et al., 2006; Schweitzer et al., 2008). Moreover, plant defense traits are
key mediators of community- and ecosystem-level interactions, and thus are of
principal interest in emerging “genes to ecosystems” research.
Populus makes a broad array of phenolic secondary metabolites, with consid-
erable qualitative and quantitative variation among species and ecotypes. Since
secondary metabolites have strong ecological and evolutionary impacts on herbi-
vores, the Populus system provides excellent opportunities for investigating the
interactions of plants, their defensive secondary metabolites, and herbivores, in both
managed and natural environments. Populus has also been the subject of growing
interest for biofuel production and carbon sequestration, both of which are inti-
mately linked to plant secondary metabolism. Genomic tools and resources applied
to Populus have already yielded signiﬁcant insights into woody plant defense.
Genome-level information can also be directly applied to studies of genetic variation
and diversity within and between species of Populus, for example identifying rapidly
evolving genes that may be under positive selection for pest resistance. In short, the
intersection of chemical ecology with genomics will make for a fruitful area of
research for many years to come.
Our objectives in this chapter are: (i) to provide a brief summary of current
knowledge of the interrelated areas of Populus secondary metabolism and herbi-
vore defense, (ii) to review the impact of the P. trichocarpa genome sequence and
genomics-based approaches on our understanding of these areas, and (iii) to indicate
promising directions for future research. We will not review all aspects of Populus
defense and secondary metabolism; rather, we will focus on those where speciﬁc
genomic approaches are having signiﬁcant impact, or have the potential to do so.
Other overviews of Populus herbivore defense and secondary metabolism are avail-
able in recent reviews (Lindroth, 2001; Constabel and Major, 2005; Phillipe and
Bohlmann, 2007), whereas the genes related to phenolic metabolism of Populus
were recently described by Tsai et al. (2006).
2 Overview of Populus Defense and Secondary Metabolism
2.1 Populus as the “Ecogenomics” Model Plant
The genus Populus, comprised of about 30 species, has emerged as the model sys-
tem for studies of the ecological genomics of woody plant defense and secondary
metabolism. Populus species and hybrids exhibit extensive geographical distribu-
tion in the northern hemisphere and are widely planted in the southern hemisphere.
Distributional ranges of several species (e.g., Populus tremuloides and P. tremula)
are among the largest of any plant species on Earth. Populus is a major food source
for hundreds of species of arthropods, birds and mammals, and is a host plant for
many insect pests (Baker, 1972; Furniss and Carolin, 1977; Dickmann and Stuart,
1983; Perala, 1990). Several Populus species exhibit extraordinary genetic variation,

The Impact of Genomics
281
including traits important for interactions with herbivores (Lindroth and Hwang,
1996a). Furthermore, Populus species synthesize a diversity of both phenolic-based
secondary metabolites and protein-based defenses, subject to variable production,
induction by herbivores, and systemic signalling. These attributes of Populus make
this genus ideal for application of genomic tools to the central question of how-plant
insect interactions are mediated at the chemical and gene level.
2.2 Populus Secondary Metabolites and Their Effects
on Herbivores
The most abundant secondary metabolites of poplars and aspens of relevance to
herbivory are phenolics, synthesized via the shikimic acid pathway. Salicin-based
phenolic glycosides are the signature compounds of the family, and found only in the
Salicaceae. To date, at least 20 structurally-diverse salicylates have been identiﬁed in
Populus (Pearl and Darling, 1968; Palo, 1984; Tsai et al., 2006; Fig. 1). Some, such
Fig. 1 Major classes of phenylpropanoid-derived phenolics in Populus species (a) Representative
phenolic glycosides (salicylates) (b) General structure of polymeric condensed tannins (n =
0–~20). (c) Representative hydroxycinnamate derivative

282
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
as salicin and salicortin, are widespread throughout the genus. Others, such as HCH-
salicortin, have a restricted distribution. Chemical structure strongly inﬂuences the
biological activity of Populus salicylates. For example, compounds containing a
hydroxycyclohexen-on-oyl functional group (e.g., salicortin, tremulacin) are espe-
cially toxic to insect herbivores (Lindroth and Peterson, 1988; Lindroth et al., 1988).
The biosynthetic pathways leading to production of salicylate phenolic glyco-
sides remain largely unresolved, but likely include either isochorismate or benzoate
intermediates (Tsai et al., 2006).
A second abundant class of phenolic secondary metabolites in Populus comprises
the condensed tannins (proanthocyanidins), polymers of ﬂavan-3-ols derived via
the ﬂavonoid pathway (Fig. 1). Tannin polymer size and composition vary among
Populus species. The extender units are comprised of epicatechin, gallocatechin, or
epigallocatechin monomers, and range in number from 0–5 (P. fremontii), to 8–11
(P. tremuloides) or 15–20 (P. angustifolia) (Schweitzer et al., 2008). The ecological
implications of variation in extender composition and number are likely signiﬁcant,
but remain unexplored. Other products of the ﬂavonoid pathway that accumulate in
leaves are the ﬂavonoids kaempferol and quercetin, which have been studied in the
context of their UV screening abilities (Warren et al., 2003). Because of multiple
glycosylations with different sugars, the ﬂavonol proﬁles of poplar and aspen leaves
appear to be complex.
Hydroxycinnamate derivatives (HCDs) deﬁne a third major class of phenolic
constituents in Populus. Hydroxycinnamates are synthesized from cinnamate via
hydroxylation and O-methylation of the aromatic ring, and undergo additional
quinate ester conjugations to produce HCDs (e.g., chlorogenic acid; Tsai et al.,
2006). Populus expresses considerable diversity of HCDs both among and within
species, although their role as defenses against herbivory or other stresses is poorly
understood in Populus. However, caffeic acid derivatives such as chlorogenic acid
are excellent substrates for polyphenol oxidase (PPO), itself implicated in herbivore
defense (Constabel et al., 2000).
In addition to these relatively abundant phenolic metabolites, however, the list of
secondary compounds described from the genus is extensive. Comprehensive stud-
ies by W. Greenaway and collaborators on the bud exudate from several Populus
species (i.e. English et al., 1991; Greenaway and Whatley, 1990, 1991) identiﬁed
a myriad of phenolics including almost all classes of chalcones and ﬂavonoids,
a variety of substituted benzoic acids and their esters, and various hydroxycinna-
mates and their esters. Remarkably, representative species from different sections of
Populus showed very different proﬁles and constituents. While these are purely ana-
lytical studies, they demonstrate the tremendous biosynthetic potential of the genus,
in particular in the phenylpropanoid pathway. Terpenoids are also present in bud
exudates (English et al., 1991). Volatile leaf terpenes have also been investigated,
principally as potential signalling molecules, as they may be used as cues by preda-
tors to ﬁnd their hosts or to prime subsequent defense reactions. The sesquiterpenes
(-)germacrene D, E-ß-ocimene, linalool, (E,)-alpha-farnesene, ß-caryophyllene are
released from hybrid poplar leaves in response to caterpillar feeding (Arimura et al.,
2004; Frost et al., 2007). Sterols and triterpenes are components of wood extractives
in P. tremuloides (Fernandez et al., 2002).

The Impact of Genomics
283
Secondary metabolites strongly inﬂuence interactions between Populus trees and
both specialist and generalist insect herbivores. High levels of phenolic glycosides
in P. tremuloides correlate with reduced feeding, altered food preferences, decreased
development, growth and reproduction, and increased mortality in a variety of
aspen-feeding Lepidoptera (Lindroth and Hwang, 1996; Lindroth, 2001). Phenolic
glycosides have been documented to inﬂuence the distributional patterns of gypsy
moth (Lymantria dispar) larvae and reduce rates of tree defoliation (Donaldson
and Lindroth, 2007). In contrast, phenolic glycosides are feeding stimulants for
specialized chrysomelid beetles that employ the compounds to manufacture their
own salicylate-based defense (Donaldson and Lindroth, 2004; Vigue and Lindroth,
2008). Surprisingly, high concentrations of condensed tannins do not appear to neg-
atively affect major lepidopteran defoliators of aspen (Hwang and Lindroth, 1997;
Osier and Lindroth, 2004; Schweitzer et al., 2008), although they may negatively
impact chrysomelid beetles (Donaldson and Lindroth, 2004).
Populus secondary metabolites also contribute to defense against mammalian
herbivores. Wooley et al. (2008) found that elk preference for trembling aspen
(P. tremuloides) genotypes was inversely correlated with phenolic glycoside
concentrations, but not tannin levels. Moreover, preferential feeding by elk can lead
to an increase in phenolic glycoside expression in aspen populations (Bailey et al.,
2007). Results from these studies are consistent with other work on cervids, show-
ing that nontannin phenolics are more important than tannins in determining diet
selection (McArthur et al., 1993). Similarly, Diner et al. (2009) reported that use of
aspen trees by porcupines was inﬂuenced by levels of phenolic glycosides, but not
tannins. However, Bailey et al. (2004) reported that tannins inﬂuence foraging by
beavers among riparian cottonwood species and hybrids.
In short, phenolic glycoside levels are clearly correlated with reduced herbivory,
while the evidence for condensed tannins is mixed. In the future, it should be
possible to directly test the roles of these compounds and learn more about their
mechanisms through the use of transgenics in which levels of one or more of the
compounds have been altered. In order to achieve this goal, however, we need an
improved understanding of the metabolic pathways and their regulation at the gene
level.
2.3 Herbivory and Induction of Defenses in Populus
Plant resistance is determined not only by the constitutive secondary metabo-
lites encountered by the herbivore, but by the response of the plant to the attack.
Havill and Raffa (1999) found that leaf damage in hybrid poplars reduced subse-
quent growth rates of gypsy moths by up to 71%. This protection could also be
induced by wounding or jasmonic acid. Hale et al. (2005) also found that feed-
ing damage by gypsy moths on hybrid poplar reduced subsequent growth of gypsy
moth, but not white-marked tussock moth, larvae. Similar induced resistance was
demonstrated with the forest tent caterpillar (Malacasoma disstria) (Robison and
Raffa, 1997). Furthermore, the extent of induced resistance varied among hybrid
poplar clones, similar to the highly variable chemistry (see Section 5). Although

284
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
the chemical basis for the enhanced resistance was not identiﬁed in these stud-
ies, the effect was systemic, i.e., observed in undamaged portions of the damaged
saplings.
These reports provide a biological context for the observation that herbivore
damage can itself inﬂuence the expression of phenolic-based chemical defenses
in Populus. Phenolic glycoside concentrations in trembling aspen increase sub-
stantially in new leaves produced immediately after a defoliation event (Stevens
and Lindroth, 2005; Donaldson and Lindroth, 2008). However, leaf damage does
not induce accumulation of phenolic glycosides in either remaining leaf fragments
(rapid induced response; Osier and Lindroth, 2001; Stevens and Lindroth, 2005) or
in leaves produced a year after defoliation (delayed induced response; Osier and
Lindroth, 2004). Responses of condensed tannins are opposite those of phenolic
glycosides. Tannin levels increase in damaged leaves as well as in foliage produced
a year after defoliation, but decrease in leaves that ﬂush immediately after a defolia-
tion event (Osier and Lindroth, 2001, 2004; Stevens and Lindroth, 2005; Donaldson
and Lindroth, 2008). The rapidly induced tannin accumulation is systemic in exist-
ing plant organs and mediated by increased transcription of genes encoding the
tannin biosynthetic pathway, with enhanced accumulation of key transcripts coor-
dinate with other inducible defense genes (Peters and Constabel, 2002; Tsai et al.,
2006). This suggests that studies of gene expression can provide important insight
into defensive secondary metabolism in Populus.
At the molecular level, pioneering work in P. trichocarpa x P. deltoides (TD)
hybrid poplar by Milton Gordon’s laboratory established that simulated leaf her-
bivory leads to the rapid induction of speciﬁc defense-related genes (Parsons
et al., 1989; Bradshaw et al., 1991). Importantly, this transcriptional response was
observed within 8 h in both the wounded and unwounded leaves on wounded
plants, indicating long-distance signalling and a systemic signal (Davis et al., 1991).
The systemic nature of the response suggests that the changes in gene expression
are important for defense against later herbivory, rather than simply contributing
to wound-repair, and provide a potential mechanism for the observed systemic
induction of resistance (Havill and Raffa, 1999). Strongly responding genes were
identiﬁed as encoding a Kunitz trypsin inhibitor (KTI) win3, a putative vegetative
storage protein (VSP) related to poplar bark storage protein, and chitinases win6
and win8 (Bradshaw et al., 1991). KTIs and other protease inhibitors are common
anti-herbivore defenses known from seeds and vegetative tissues of many plants,
and can interfere with digestive processes in herbivore guts (Ryan, 1990). Protease
inhibitors are classic inducible defense proteins and their efﬁcacy in reducing pest
insect performance when overexpressed in transgenic plants has been shown (Ryan,
1990). The effectiveness of at least some chitinases as anti-herbivore proteins has
also been documented (Ding et al., 1998; Lawrence and Novak, 2006). By contrast,
the function or biochemical activity of the VSP-like protein is not clear, despite its
consistent and strong induction by leaf damage in several later studies (Ralph et al.,
2006; Christopher et al., 2004).
Pre-genomics studies of Populus defense also led to the cloning and charac-
terization of a wound and herbivore-inducible polyphenol oxidase (PPO) in TD

The Impact of Genomics
285
hybrid poplar and P. tremuloides (Constabel et al., 2000; Haruta et al., 2001).
The wound- and herbivore-inducible expression suggested a defensive role for this
enzyme. PPOs oxidize common phenolic compounds to quinones that alkylate and
cross-link other phenolics or proteins, leading to the browning of plant extracts.
When such reactions occur in insect guts or mouthparts, they may lead to alky-
lation of dietary protein, reducing its quality for the insect. Low oxygen levels,
however, may limit its effectiveness in some insects (Constabel and Barbehenn,
2008).
The observation that strongly induced genes encode proteins with adaptive or
defensive potential is a basic principle with broad application in stress physiology.
The early molecular work in Populus conﬁrmed that trees, much like herbaceous
plants, respond to herbivore attack with rapid transcriptional changes and induction
of defense-related genes. This research provided the basis for the genomics and
microarray studies of poplar defense that followed.
3 Impact of Populus Genomics on Knowledge of Inducible
Defense Proteins
3.1 Discovery of Defense-Related Genes via ESTs and Gene Arrays
The application of genomic tools such as ESTs, micro- and macro-arrays, and
differential display to poplar defense was a natural development given the strong
inducible defense response identiﬁed earlier. A series of such studies from three dif-
ferent research groups provided two fundamental insights (Christopher et al., 2004;
Ralph et al., 2006, 2008; Major and Constabel, 2006, 2007a, b, Lawrence et al.,
2006). First, they made available a catalogue of candidate genes with potential roles
in defense (“marker discovery”). Second, the expression proﬁles of a large num-
ber of genes allowed inferences to be drawn regarding signalling and physiological
aspects of the response (“biology discovery”).
An initial “snapshot” of broader gene expression and transcriptional changes in
systemically induced TD poplar leaves was provided by a small-scale EST sequenc-
ing project and corresponding macroarray (Christopher et al., 2004). Among the
103 upregulated genes with functions in metabolism and defense, several new and
highly divergent KTI genes were discovered. Likewise, a differential display exper-
iment identiﬁed a suite of 57 caterpillar and wound-induced genes (Lawrence et al.,
2006), while exploitation of a more comprehensive EST project and a resulting
15,500 gene microarray (representing approximately one quarter of the annotated
genome) found that 1,191 genes were upregulated by forest tent caterpillar dam-
age (Ralph et al., 2006). Genes affected by herbivory have putative functions in
defense, signalling, transport, transcription, and secondary metabolism. Together,
these studies have provided a substantial list of candidate genes from both primary
and stress metabolism that need to be characterized further. Interestingly, genes
belonging to the KTI, chitinase, pop3, nucleotide phosphohydrolase (apyrase), and

286
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
VSP families were identiﬁed among the most strongly induced genes in differen-
tial screening experiments by several different laboratories. This underscores their
importance for the poplar defense response, even though a clear defensive role for
the corresponding gene product may not be apparent.
The suite of poplar herbivore-induced genes should provide many opportunities
for discovering novel herbivore defense mechanisms. For example, the pop3 gene
encodes the ortholog of P. tremula Sp1, a previously studied boiling stable protein
that may act as a chaperone (Wang et al., 2002; Dgany et al., 2004). It would be
interesting to study the effects of such a protein on insect digestive systems. Other
candidate genes for more detailed analysis encode esterase- and lipase-like proteins,
the VSP-like proteins, and the apyrase and acid phosphatase. At present, functional
studies can proceed on only one or a few genes at a time; thus the functional analysis
of novel genes is clearly a bottleneck to progress in this area. To date, only for a
handful of genes have roles with respect to herbivory been directly demonstrated
(see Section 4).
Genes encoding proteins with possible signalling functions in defense have been
of great interest to researchers in induced defense. For example, Ralph et al. (2006)
identiﬁed 40 transcription factors whose abundance increased following feeding by
forest tent caterpillar (FTC). Other inducible genes encode the octadecanoid path-
way enzymes, for example, lipoxygenase and allene oxide cyclase. These enzymes
participate in the synthesis of jasmonic acid and related molecules called jas-
monates, key regulators of defense responses in herbaceous plants (Schaller and
Stinzi, 2008). Since methyl jasmonate and jasmonic acid are highly effective induc-
ers of the defense response in Populus (Constabel and Ryan, 1998; Havill and
Raffa, 1999), it is likely that the Populus defense signalling mechanisms are sim-
ilar to those in other model plants. Grafting experiments using defense response
mutants suggested that the systemically mobile signal in tomato is jasmonic acid
or a derivative (Li et al., 2002). The poplar systemic defense signal is likely also a
jasmonate, but this has yet to be proven. Major and Constabel (2006) reported that
several genes encoding ZIM motif proteins were wound- and caterpillar regurgitant-
induced on macroarrays. Surprisingly, in tomato and Arabidopsis, a ZIM motif
protein was found to be a key regulator of jasmonate signalling, and is hypothesized
to be part of the complex that acts as a site of jasmonate perception (Thines et al.,
2007).
An important caveat to the cumulative ﬁndings on herbivore-induced defense
in poplar is the reliance of these studies on the TD hybrid H11-11, the genotype
in which induction was ﬁrst observed in M. Gordon’s laboratory (Bradshaw et al.,
1991). Whether the induced defense genes identiﬁed here are equally important
in other Populus hybrids or species remains an open question. All Populus share
very similar genomes, and as such have the same defense “toolbox”; however they
may differ in how these are utilized. For example, PPO is strongly inducible in TD
hybrids, less so in P. tremuloides, and virtually not induced in P. tremula x alba
hybrid 717 (Wang and Constabel, 2004; Haruta et al., 2001; unpublished observa-
tions). Such differences are consistent with the high level of intraspeciﬁc and inter-
speciﬁc variation observed in defense compounds within Populus (see Section 5).

The Impact of Genomics
287
3.2 Global Gene Expression Patterns and Insights into the
Populus Defense Response
Genome-level expression proﬁling has allowed for an analysis of transcriptional
changes from a global perspective, leading to insight into broader adaptive pat-
terns of the defense response. The induction by forest tent caterpillar of more than
one thousand genes on a cDNA array emphasizes the complexity of the herbivore
defense response. The large number of genes responding to this stress is similar to
that described for other model plants (reviewed by Zheng and Dicke, 2008). At the
level of transcriptional remodelling, real or simulated herbivory are clearly strong
stressors.
A major question in the ﬁeld of plant-herbivore interactions is whether the plant
response is speciﬁc to different types of damage, and to what extent plants can dif-
ferentiate between mechanical damage and herbivore feeding. Using a 569-element
macroarray in poplar, Major and Constabel (2006) showed that the transcriptional
response to wounding did not differ substantially from the response to forest tent
caterpillar (FTC) regurgitant applied to small leaf punctures. While FTC regurgi-
tant in the absence of signiﬁcant wounding was a potent inducer of defense genes,
crushing leaf margins with pliers elicited essentially the same set of genes. These
results suggest that both inducing signals are transduced by a similar pathway. Like
other lepidopteran herbivores, FTC regurgitant contains the fatty acid amino acid
conjugate volicitin (Major and Constabel, 2006), a known defense elicitor in other
plants (Felton and Tumlinson, 2008). For the highly induced genes of poplar, FTC
regurgitant may act essentially as an ampliﬁer of the wound response, perhaps by
the insect’s extracting and processing of plant-derived “self-damage” signals (Major
and Constabel, 2007b). By contrast, much greater speciﬁcity in the response to cater-
pillar feeding on hybrid poplar was documented by Arimura et al. (2004). Here, FTC
feeding, but not mechanical wounding, resulted in a dramatic release of terpenoid
volatiles from hybrid poplar leaves, indicating that the plants are differentiating
between simulated and actual herbivory (Arimura et al., 2004). In other experimen-
tal systems such as Nicotiana attenuata and Arabidopsis thaliana, clear differences
in the induction proﬁle of expressed genes in insect-damaged vs. mechanically-
damaged plants have been observed (Roda et al., 2004; Reymond et al., 2004;
Zheng and Dicke, 2008). However, the timing, extent, and repetition of mechani-
cal damage can all modulate defense reactions, and responses previously thought to
be insect-speciﬁc could be induced by a mechanical caterpillar that mimics feeding
behaviour (Mithofer et al., 2005). These observations emphasize that can be difﬁcult
to compare transcriptomic responses between very different types of damage.
The question of defense response speciﬁcity should be addressed with herbi-
vores from different feeding guilds, as has been done with Arabidopsis (de Vos
et al., 2005; Kempema et al., 2007). Populus, with its diversity of natural pests,
will be a natural system in which to do so. However, it will be essential to do
comparisons within the same poplar genotype to avoid possible differences in the
defense programs. Comparative experiments can now be carried out with standard
Populus microarray platforms that are available, and have been used to compare

288
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
pathogen and herbivore defense response in poplar (Miranda et al., 2007). Although
these defense reactions are generally thought to be distinct, a comparison of tent
caterpillar damage and Melampsora medusae (poplar rust) infection using the same
TD hybrid and 15,500 gene microarray found that many herbivore-induced defense
genes are also induced 24h after Melampsora infection. However, the genes are then
dramatically down-regulated (Miranda et al., 2007). This study illustrates the power
of large scale transcriptomics for identifying larger trends of relevance for poplar
defense, an approach can also be applied to study reactions to other poplar pests.
Expression proﬁling is also beginning to provide insight into the systemic and
whole-plant effects of the induced defense response. Phillippe and Bohlmann (2007)
reported that when sugar-exporting source leaves are wounded, the sugar-importing
sink leaves develop a transcriptional response that includes activation of sugar
metabolism genes. This observation is signiﬁcant because the systemic signal acti-
vating defense genes ﬁrst follows the strongest source-sink phloem connections
deﬁned by the vasculature of the sapling (Davis et al., 1991), although intraplant sig-
naling via released volatiles may also be involved (Frost et al., 2007). Furthermore,
jasmonate treatment of poplar saplings leads to repartitioning of the plant’s carbon
budget and stimulates increased export of carbon into sink leaves and roots (Arnold
et al., 2004; Babst et al., 2005). How altered sink strength could contribute to sys-
temic defense signalling, what signal molecules are involved, and how whole-plant
responses are modulated, are all exciting questions for future research. In addition,
since herbivory also leads to a down-regulation of transcripts encoding primary
metabolic functions such as photosynthesis (Ralph et al., 2006), we can now begin
to observe the effects of herbivore stress on primary metabolic processes. How the
plant balances growth with defense, how carbon allocation is altered by herbivore
stress, and how such metabolic reprogramming is regulated, can now be investigated
(see Schwachtje and Baldwin, 2008). As a perennial, Populus may have evolved
adaptive strategies different from those of other model plants.
3.3 Whole Genome Perspectives on Populus Defense
The elucidation of the Populus genome has facilitated evaluation of the size of gene
families in this plant relative to herbaceous plants. One expectation has been that
in perennials such as Populus, extended life span would lead to elaboration of the
stress adaptive genes. While the comparative analysis of defense gene families is
only just beginning, a ﬁrst scan of the complete P. trichocarpa genome indicates an
apparent over-representation of defense genes relative to the Arabidopsis genome
(Tuskan et al., 2006; Kohler et al., 2008). This includes both the R-genes that are
involved in recognition of pathogens, as well as classic pathogen defense genes such
as the thaumatins (55 in Populus vs 24 in Arabidopsis), ß-glucanases and chitinases
(together 131 vs 73). These are also of interest to herbivore defense, as some mem-
bers of these gene families are induced by FTC (Ralph et al., 2006). Chitinases have
been found among the most strongly and consistently herbivore-induced genes, and
at least one such gene encodes a protein with direct negative impacts on lepidopteran
pests (Lawrence and Novak, 2006).

The Impact of Genomics
289
Of the known herbivore defense response genes, the KTI gene family has been
studied in the most detail. Analyses suggest that the KTI gene family contains at
least 22 members (perhaps as many as 30) in P. trichocarpa, but their sequences
diverge so that some genes in the family share only 25% sequence identity (Major
and Constabel, 2008). Expression patterns as visualized by digital northerns and
microarrays are also divergent. The KTIs are classiﬁed as inhibitors of serine pro-
teases, but their low sequence similarity suggests that they could have distinct target
speciﬁcities, and any one KTI is likely to inhibit only a subset of serine proteases.
Differences in target protease speciﬁcity could thus explain the multiplicity of this
group of genes in Populus. This hypothesis has been tested and corroborated by in
vitro experiments (Major and Constabel, 2008). Representative KTIs taken from the
major wound-inducible KTI clades had both different target preferences and 50%
inhibitory concentrations (IC50) when tested with commercial proteases trypsin,
chymotrypsin, and elastase. Differences were also clearly apparent when tested
with total proteases in crude midgut preparations from two different lepidopteran
herbivores, FTC and bertha army worm (Major and Constabel, 2008). These data
clearly support the idea that different members of the KTI gene family are spe-
cialized against different proteases, and perhaps pest insects. Signiﬁcantly, several
orthologous KTIs in natural populations of P. tremula in Europe have molecular
signatures that indicate they are evolving rapidly and may be under positive selec-
tion (Section 5). Thus, the observed diversity of KTI genes in the P. trichocarpa
genome reﬂects biochemical diversity and appears to be strongly inﬂuenced by
selection. Such population-level studies need to be conducted with other defense
gene families, for example the chitinases and polyphenol oxidases.
Proteomic-based studies of Populus herbivore defense also beneﬁt from the avail-
ability of the P. trichocarpa genome, as such studies rely on genome-derived protein
databases. A recent proteomic analysis focused on poplar phloem exudate, to deter-
mine if phloem protein proﬁles are altered by damage to leaves (Dafoe et al., 2009).
Very few phloem exudate proteins appeared to change in abundance in response to
wounding. However, two stress-related proteins, a pop3 and a thaumatin-like pro-
tein, are induced, and their presence in sieve elements has been corroborated via
immunological methods (Dafoe et al., 2009). Their role in defense or in phloem
physiology still requires investigation, however.
4 The Impact of Genomic Analysis on Advances in
Phenylpropanoid and Other Secondary Metabolite Pathways
4.1 Genomic Analysis of Known Secondary Pathways – Insights
into Flavonoid Biosynthesis and Regulation
As outlined above, Populus genomics has been very successful in identifying
induced genes encoding proteins with potential direct defensive roles, such as pro-
tease inhibitors, enzymes, and a variety of proteins implicated in the regulation
of the defense response. Such studies also discovered herbivore-upregulated genes

290
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
with similarity to enzymes of secondary metabolism, but which could not be eas-
ily linked to speciﬁc pathways or biochemical reactions. For example, cytochrome
P450 and isoﬂavone reductase-like genes were identiﬁed as highly wound-inducible
transcripts (Christopher et al., 2004; Ralph et al., 2006), but without deeper func-
tional analysis or clearly co-expressed marker genes, their functions could not be
readily determined. With the complete P. trichocarpa genome available, more sys-
tematic studies on Populus secondary pathways have been undertaken (Tuskan et al.,
2006). The phenolic glycoside biosynthetic pathway has not yet been elucidated;
by contrast, the ﬂavonoid and condensed tannin pathway make an interesting tar-
get for comparative genomics studies, as this is well-characterized from work in
Arabidopsis (Fig. 2). As a result, a catalogue of Populus genes required for basic
ﬂavonoid structures, including ﬂavonols, ﬂavones, chalcones, anthocyanidins, and
condensed tannins, is now available (Tsai et al., 2006). Flavonoid phytochemicals
can have many ecological functions, including ultraviolet and visible light screens,
pigmentation, or signals (Harborne and Williams, 2000). For herbivore defense, the
condensed tannins (proanthocyanidins) are of greatest importance. Genes relevant
for the general phenylpropanoid pathway and lignin biosynthesis are described else-
where in this volume (Chapter10), so are not discussed here. Nevertheless, some of
the monolignol pathway-like genes are likely involved in other secondary metabolite
pathways.
Many of the gene families dedicated to secondary metabolism appear to be
expanded in the Populus genome, relative to Arabidopsis (Tuskan et al., 2006;
Tsai et al., 2006). In the ﬂavonoid pathway, for example, many of the steps are
encoded by at least two genes in Populus, while Arabidopsis has only single-
copy genes; this includes the late ﬂavonoid pathway enzymes dihydroﬂavonol
reductase (DFR), anthocyanidin synthase (ANS), and anthocyanidin reductase
(ANR), as well as ﬂavone synthase and the ﬂavonoid 3′, 5′-hydroxylase (Fig. 2).
Populus also contains three different genes for LAR (leucoanthocyanidin reduc-
tase), one of the last known steps in tannin synthesis. LAR is not present in
Arabidopsis, which unlike most species, produces only anthocyanidin reductase
(ANR)-derived tannins. For the chalcone isomerase (CHI), ﬂavanone 3 hydroxylase
(F3H) and ﬂavonoid 3′ hydroxylase (F3′H) steps, only single genes are present in
both Populus and Arabidopsis. By contrast, Populus contains six chalcone syn-
thase (CHS) genes, compared to a single gene in Arabidopsis (Tuskan et al.,
2006). Remarkably, Populus is reported to contain 11 genes identiﬁed as ﬂavonoid
O-methyltransferases (FOMTs), compared to one in Arabidopsis. Conversely,
Arabidopsis has six ﬂavonol synthase (FLS) genes vs. four in Populus. Functional
analysis was able to detect FLS activity for only one of the Arabidopsis FLS genes
(Owens et al., 2008), however, a reminder that functional prediction for enzymatic
activities based on only sequence similarity must be approached with caution.
The functional signiﬁcance of the additional copies of ﬂavonoid-related genes in
Populus is as yet unclear. The large diversity of ﬂavonoids of poplars and aspens
is likely an important factor, as is the large ﬂux of carbon into the major ﬂavonoid
end product, condensed tannin. Some of the additional genes may represent tissue-
speciﬁc isoforms that facilitate complex patterns of accumulation. RT-PCR analysis

The Impact of Genomics
291
phenylalanine
cinnamic acid
p-coumaric acid
p-coumaroyl-CoA
chalcone
flavanone
dihydroflavonol
leucocyanidin
anthocyanidin
PAL (5)
C4H (2)
4CL (5)
CHS (6)
CHI (1)
F3H (1)
DFR (2)
ANS (2)
ANR (2)
LAR (3)
condensed 
tannins
monolignols
HCT (6)
CAD
CCR
hydroxycinnamate
esters
anthocyanins
malonyl-
CoA
phenolic
glycosides
shikimic acid
F3'H (1)
F3'5'H(2)
C3H
salicylic
acid
?
epicatechin
catechin
?
FLS (4)
FNS (2)
flavones
flavonols
FOMT (11)
Fig. 2 Overview of biosynthetic pathways leading to major groups of phenolic compounds in
Populus. Phytochemicals of primary relevance to plant defense are indicated on blue panels.
Dashed arrows indicate unresolved biosynthetic steps, and the brackets indicate enzymes with
uncertain position in the pathways. Numbers in parenthesis indicate the number of genes for
that enzyme identiﬁed in the poplar genome. Abbreviations are as follows: PAL, phenylalanine
ammonia lyase; 4CL, 4-coumarate CoA Ligase; HCT, hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA shikimate/quinate
hydroxycinnamoyl-transferase, C3H, p-coumaroyl CoA 3-hydroxylase, CCR, cinnamoyl-CoA
reductase; CAD, cinnamoyl alcohol dehydrogenase; CHS, chalcone synthase; CHI, chalcone iso-
merase; F3H, ﬂavanone 3-hydroxylase; FFLS, ﬂavonol synthase; FNS, ﬂavone synthase II; DFR,
dihydroﬂavonol reductase; ANS, anthocyanidin synthase; ANR, anthocyanidin reductase; LAR,
leucoanthocyanidin reductase
of the CHS family, for example, does indicate some differential expression between
members of this expanded gene family (Tsai et al., 2006). However, many ﬂavonoid-
related genes appear to be constitutively expressed in the same tissues, such as root
tips or young leaves (Tsai et al., 2006). More precise localization of gene expression
may clarify if there is differential expression of isoforms within tissues or cell types.
For example, Kao et al. (2002) used in situ hybridisation to localize the expression
of PAL1 and 4CL2 isoforms to areas of tannin accumulation, clearly distinct from

292
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
expression of lignin-related PAL and 4CL isoforms. Expanded gene families could
also reﬂect functional specialization of isoforms to speciﬁc environmental condi-
tions or stresses such as wounding, pathogen attack, or UV light stress. LAR3 and
ANR1 isoforms, for example, are more wound-responsive than other members of
the respective gene families, although all members responded to some extent (Tsai
et al., 2006).
Alternatively, the additional copies of enzymes may display altered substrate
preferences and lead to different end products. The large number of O-methyl trans-
ferase genes could be required to methylate various Populus ﬂavonoids, for example.
For the CHS gene family, Tsai et al. (2006) speculate that the additional isoforms
may use cinnamoyl-CoA, caffeoyl-CoA, or feruloyl-CoA rather than the “standard”
p-coumaroyl-CoA as substrates. Each isoform may thus be required to produce
the respective chalcones pinocembrin, eriodictyol, and homoeriodictyol, rather than
naringenin. These chalcones have all been identiﬁed in poplar bud exudate, but the
in vitro speciﬁcity of the enzymes is not known.
A powerful approach for determining the functions of speciﬁc members of
ﬂavonoid enzyme gene families, or for identifying additional genes in ﬂavonoid
biosynthesis, is co-expression analysis. In Arabidopsis, Yonekura-Sakakibara et al.
(2007) have shown how gene expression proﬁling and co-expression with known
anthocyanin genes has helped to identify the rhamnosyl transferase gene acting
on ﬂavonoids. Their strategy was particularly successful because the co-expression
approach was applied to transgenic plants overexpressing a speciﬁc transcription
factor, the Arabidopsis PAP1 anthocyanin regulator (Tohge et al., 2005; Saito et al.,
2008). A similar approach could be useful for identifying the genes involved with
late enzymatic steps in tannin synthesis, in particular the condensation steps, and
Populus is a good system to tackle this. The recent identiﬁcation of the Populus
MYB134 gene, which drives condensed tannin accumulation when overexpressed
in transgenic aspen (Mellway et al., 2009), should facilitate progress in this area.
The publication of the genome sequence of grapevine (Vitis vinifera) (Jaillon et al.,
2007) will also provide additional opportunities for using comparative genomics to
help elucidate secondary pathways, since grape accumulates many ﬂavonoids and
phenolics also found in Populus.
It will be interesting to characterize the transcription factors regulating ﬂavonoid
pathways in Populus using a co-expression approach. Potential candidates are the
MYB, bHLH, and WD40 transcription factor genes, which are required for tannin
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis seed coats (Lepiniec et al., 2006) and thus likely impor-
tant for Populus tannin biochemistry as well. For example, the MYB134 gene was
ﬁrst identiﬁed by similarity to the Arabidopsis TT2 gene and co-expression with
tannin biosynthetic genes after stress treatments, and shown to be a key regulator
of condensed tannin synthesis in vegetative tissues of Populus. Other transcription
factor genes will undoubtedly be identiﬁed using this strategy, so that the regulatory
network controlling ﬂavonoid synthesis can ultimately be dissected. Unlike their
distribution in Arabidopsis, in Populus condensed tannins are synthesized in most
tissues and organs including leaves, roots, and bark (Lindroth and Hwang, 1996);
thus it will be possible to compare the regulatory mechanisms for tannin synthesis

The Impact of Genomics
293
in different developmental and environmental contexts. Such transcription factor
genes will provide important tools for manipulating entire secondary pathways in
transgenic plants, and for facilitating the testing of defensive and other ecological
functions of these secondary metabolites.
The regulatory genes that control ﬂavonoid biosynthesis may provide clues as
to how trees can integrate the different environmental signals and parameters that
collectively inﬂuence phenolic proﬁle and content. Many environmental factors,
including the availability of resources (e.g., CO2, light, nutrients, water) and diverse
stresses (herbivores, pathogens, UV light), shape the quantitative proﬁles of sec-
ondary compounds in Populus. While in general, levels of phenolic glycosides show
only a minimal response to differential resource availability (Kinney et al., 1997;
Hemming and Lindroth, 1999; Hale et al., 2005), levels of condensed tannins are
strongly responsive to resource availability and stress (Miranda et al., 2007; Peters
and Constabel, 2002; Harding et al., 2005; Osier and Lindroth, 2006). Consistent
with the growth-differentiation balance hypothesis (Herms and Mattson, 1992), con-
centrations of tannins typically increase under conditions of high light and high
CO2 availability, but decrease under conditions of high nutrient availability (Kinney
et al., 1997; Hemming and Lindroth, 1999; Osier et al., 2006). Increasingly, genomic
tools will afford insight into the regulation of differential responses of biosynthetic
pathways to these environmental factors.
4.2 Genomic Analysis and Discovery of Novel Pathways
and Metabolites
The portions of the phenylpropanoid pathway dedicated to lignin synthesis in
Populus have been under intense investigation (Hamberger et al., 2007) and are
described elsewhere (Chapter 10). For the major biosynthetic steps, the bona ﬁde
lignin biosynthetic genes are clearly delineated phylogenetically, and in many cases
validated with biochemical assays of gene products. For several “lignin” gene
families, however, the P. trichocarpa genome contains additional genes, often in
expanded and distinct clades; these gene products are believed to catalyse related
reactions but using different phenolic or phytochemical substrates (Tuskan et al.,
2006; Hamberger et al., 2007). For example, the cinnamoyl dehydrogenase (CAD)
gene family is greatly expanded, with 15 CAD-like genes in two subclades in
the Populus genome. Both subclades show lineage-speciﬁc expansion (Hamberger
et al., 2007), suggesting that these genes function in Populus-speciﬁc secondary
phenolic pathways. Since CAD catalyses the NADP-dependent reduction of cin-
namaldehyde to cinnamyl alcohol, one can speculate that the additional genes
reduce other types of phenolic substrates. Similar ideas apply to the cinnmoyl-CoA
reductase (CCR) gene family, which contains a large number of genes in several
clades that appear to function outside of lignin synthesis (Hamberger et al., 2007).
Two other gene families, the caffeoyl CoA O-methyl transferases (CCOMTs) and
the caffeic acid O-methyl transferases (COMTs) also have non-lignin subclades, but

294
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
in Populus these subclades are smaller than in Arabidopsis and contain four and six
members, respectively (Hamberger et al., 2007).
In the case of the hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (HCT) gene family, Populus
contains ﬁve additional genes not found in Arabidopsis. HCT is a recently discov-
ered enzyme of lignin biosynthesis (Hoffman et al., 2003) catalysing the reversible
transfer of p-coumaroyl-CoA to shikimate to generate p-coumaroyl shikimate. This
protein is very similar to the enzyme identiﬁed in tobacco that makes chlorogenic
acid (caffeoyl-quinate) (Niggeweg et al., 2004), itself not a direct lignin intermedi-
ate. Since Populus trees can accumulate substantial amounts of chlorogenic acid and
other quinate and shikimate HCDs that vary with species and section of the genus
(Tsai et al., 2006), there is likely a relation between the diversity of these chemi-
cals and the number of HCT-like genes in the genome. While the function of the
HCDs has not been demonstrated, caffeic acid derivatives are excellent substrates
for the herbivore-induced poplar PPO, and could thus contribute directly to defense
against insects (Constabel et al.2000; Wang and Constabel, 2004). HCDs may also
be important as UV light screens or antioxidants.
The discovery of lignin-related enzymes is a rich ground for functional genomics,
as the reactions catalysed are likely conserved. Delineation of the gene families can
now be followed up with gene-speciﬁc expression proﬁling that may allow for more
precise association of these genes with tissues or cells of known metabolic and phys-
iological function, or with stress responses. Hamberger et al. (2007) used expression
data from poplar microarray experiments (Ralph et al., 2006) to demonstrate the
response of several members of the CAD-like (CADL) gene families to real or sim-
ulated herbivory. The results validate the co-expression approach and provide leads
for further analysis; for example, CADL10 responded most strongly to herbivory,
while CADL3, 9, and 10 responded to artiﬁcial wounding or methyl jasmonate. One
can speculate that these genes are involved in unknown defense-related secondary
metabolite reactions or pathways. Greater knowledge of the diversity of secondary
metabolites and pathways of various Populus species is now required to move this
type of work forwards. Phytochemical databases for Populus secondary metabo-
lites as have been generated for Arabidopsis ﬂavonoids (Yonekura-Sakakibara et al.,
2008) would be immensely useful. As more whole-genome experiments are avail-
able, the power of expression proﬁling in combination with metabolomic and
phytochemical proﬁles will become apparent.
The salicylate-derived phenolic glycosides comprise a signiﬁcant amount of ﬁxed
carbon in Populus, yet very little is known about their biosynthesis beyond the
shikimic acid pathway (Tsai et al., 2006). We anticipate that genomics approaches
will facilitate identiﬁcation of relevant enzymes via identiﬁcation of the genes
involved. Indeed, several research groups are currently investigating phenolic gly-
coside biosynthesis via candidate gene (e.g., QTL) or other genomics-informed
approaches. Unlike the tannins, and despite strong evidence indicating a function in
defense against insects, the salicylate PGs appear not to be strongly wound-induced
in most Populus species and genotypes, limiting the usefulness of the expression
proﬁling approach.

The Impact of Genomics
295
5 Functional Analysis of Genes Important for Populus Defense
and Secondary Metabolism
Transcriptional proﬁling and genome mining have proven useful for identifying
genes implicated in defense and secondary metabolism of Populus. However, can-
didate genes must still be functionally tested to deﬁne their roles in plant or insect
ﬁtness, or as components of secondary metabolite pathways. In the post-genomic
era, these are typically the limiting steps, and methods facilitating higher throughput
are needed. The Gateway cloning system, with its diversity of available destination
vectors for protein expression in trasngenic plants or other organisms, greatly facili-
tates functional studies (Curtis and Grossniklaus, 2003; Karimi et al., 2007). Genetic
transformation of Populus, while relatively efﬁcient, is still time-consuming, and
only practical with a restricted set of genotypes (Han et al., 2000).
The direct testing of defense genes in transgenic Populus has been most exten-
sively applied to PPO, in a P. tremula x alba background with low endogenous PPO
activity. Early instar FTC feeding on PPO-enhanced leaves of this aspen hybrid
grew at reduced rates and experienced higher mortality compared with insects fed
control leaves. However, this response was observed only late in the season, using
egg masses of reduced vigour (Wang and Constabel, 2004). Other results with
these plants were less clear: fourth instar Lymantria dispar had decreased growth
rates on high PPO foliage, but experiments with Orgyia leucostigma showed con-
tradictory results (Barbehenn et al., 2007). Nevertheless, PPO could contribute to
defense against poplar and aspen pests in conjunction with other defenses. In trans-
genic tomato plants overexpressing PPO, enhanced resistance against leaf eating
caterpillars has been demonstrated (Constabel and Barbehenn, 2008).
Direct anti-herbivore effects of putative poplar defense proteins were also shown
using a transient infection of tomato and Nicotiana benthamiana with potato virus
X (PVX) (Lawrence and Novak, 2001, 2006). This heterologous system permits the
expression and functional testing of genes within 3–4 weeks. One disadvantage is
that Populus pests cannot be tested on tomato or Nicotiana leaves. Nevertheless,
the activity of the win3 KTI against a lepidopteran (Heliothis virescens), and the
activity of the win6 chitinase against a coleopteran (Leptinotarsa decemlineata),
were established in this manner. For gene products with direct effects on insects,
defense proteins or enzymes can be tested as recombinant proteins rather than in
transgenics, for example in in vitro assays as described for the KTIs (Major and
Constabel, 2008). It should be noted that the inhibition of gut proteases in vitro
does not in itself demonstrate that this gene product will impact the herbivore. To
test for an effect in vivo, the most active recombinant KTI was produced in large
E. coli cultures, puriﬁed, and incorporated into artiﬁcial diets for bioassays. When
consumed by FTC larvae at physiologically realistic levels, the recombinant KTI
resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in pupal weight compared to controls (I. Major,
E. Despland, C.P. Constabel, unpublished results).
For Populus secondary metabolism, few genes have been tested directly, though
there are many interesting candidates for functional analysis. Where mutants for

296
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
equivalent steps are known in Arabidopsis, complementation will be a useful tool to
establish biochemical functions, i.e. to deﬁne substrates and products. Roles for spe-
ciﬁc gene family members in particular pathways can be established using RNAi to
downregulate individual genes in transgenic Populus, combined with phytochemical
proﬁling to conﬁrm the predicted alteration. The availability of metabolite databases
and standards to facilitate the identiﬁcation of altered metabolites will be essential
for this strategy to be effective and facilitate rapid screening. A recent RNAi exper-
iment to down-regulate the p-coumaroyl CoA 3′-hydroxylase for lignin synthesis
provides an instructive example. The downregulation of this gene demonstrated
its central function for monolignol synthesis, but it also led to unexpected accu-
mulation of secondary compounds including p-coumaroyl glycosides and esters, as
well some salicylate-derived phenolic glycosides (Coleman et al., 2008). Likewise,
transgenic modiﬁcation of gai and rgl1, genes involved in gibberellin-mediated
growth physiology, simultaneously altered secondary metabolite proﬁles in Populus
(Busov et al., 2006). These experiments show how reduced carbon ﬂux through the
lignin biosynthetic pathway in leaves can lead to an increase in phenylpropanoid-
derived storage and defense compounds. Likewise, the role of the MYB134
transcription factor in condensed tannin synthesis was shown in the dramatic
accumulation of condensed tannins in MYB134-overexpressing transgenic Populus
(Mellway et al., 2009) Such transgenic experiments are essential for uncovering
metabolic interactions of primary and secondary pathways, and ultimately enhance
our understanding of metabolism and control of secondary chemistry. Plants with
modiﬁed secondary metabolite proﬁles will also be of tremendous importance in
reﬁning our knowledge of defensive and other ecological functions of secondary
metabolites. In particular, transgenic poplar or aspen with altered salicylate pheno-
lic glycosides or condensed tannins will permit the direct testing of their defensive
roles against different pests or stresses, and are already showing unexpected results
in greenhouse experiments (Mellway and Constabel, 2009). Ultimately, experiments
in natural settings can be also be carried out. The importance of testing transgenic
plants in realisitic ecological situations has been convincingly demonstrated in the
Nicotiana attenuata system developed by Baldwin and colleagues (i.e., Kessler
et al., 2004).
6 The Importance of Variation in Plant Defense and Secondary
Metabolite Proﬁles in Populus
Populus species often exhibit striking genetic variation, and in most cases, substan-
tial phenotypic plasticity (which itself is genetically determined). These character-
istics have been fundamentally important to the evolutionary success of Populus,
and provide both challenges and opportunities for understanding interactions of
these trees with the environment. The ecological importance of variation in chemi-
cal proﬁles and the value of presenting a “moving target” in terms of delaying the
evolution of resistance in insects, are widely accepted (Adler and Karban, 1994).
Genotype-dependent variation in levels of resistance to insect herbivores has been

The Impact of Genomics
297
shown for native aspen genotypes (Lindroth and Hwang, 1996) as well as different
poplar hybrids (Robison and Raffa, 1994; 1997).
In Populus, foliar levels of the phenolic glycosides and condensed tannins,
exhibit extraordinary quantitative variation (1–25% dry weight), both among and
within species. Such variation is the consequence of multiple, interacting factors,
including genetics, ontogeny, as well as environment. Striking intraspeciﬁc (clonal)
variation in concentrations of both phenolic glycosides and condensed tannins has
been reported in trembling aspen (e.g., Lindroth and Hwang, 1996; Donaldson
et al., 2006; Osier and Lindroth, 2006). Concentrations of these phenolic metabo-
lites are generally much more variable among genotypes than are those of primary
metabolites such as carbohydrates. Interspeciﬁc genetic variation can also strongly
inﬂuence types and amounts of phenolic glycosides and condensed tannins in
Populus species. For example, in the hybridising complex P. fremontii x P. angusti-
folia, P. fremontii produces very low levels of tannins and appreciable levels of the
salicylate HCH-salicortin, whereas P. angustifolia produces substantial levels of
tannins and little to no HCH-salicortin (Rehill et al., 2006). Both species, however,
produce salicortin.
An additional source of variability in secondary chemistry is a consequence of
strong ontogenetic variation (genetically-determined developmental patterns), as
individual trees of some species, such as cottonwoods, have discrete juvenile and
mature developmental zones with different chemical patterns. Foliar phenolic gly-
coside concentrations decrease, while tannins increase, with developmental age,
and the magnitude of developmental trajectory varies among species (Rehill et al.,
2006). Other Populus species, such as aspens, have less clear-cut developmental
zones within individual trees, but nonetheless show strong developmental shifts in
chemical composition with tree (or ramet) age (Donaldson et al., 2006). Marked
ontogenetic variation in biochemical traits emphasizes the importance of making
inferences about gene expression within appropriate developmental contexts, as the
inﬂuence of various environmental factors on gene expression may differ between
juvenile and mature trees. Variation due to environmental conditions, stresses, and
nutrient availability was discussed previously, but it must be noted that responsive-
ness to the environment itself varies widely within different clones and genotypes
(Harding et al., 2005; Havill and Raffa, 1999).
To determine how this broad variation at the phenotypic level is encoded by
variation in the genome at the DNA sequence level will be the next great chal-
lenge. For the chemical variation described above, the characterization of pathways
and regulatory genes will be a necessary ﬁrst step, and must take into account the
integration of developmental and environmental signals. However, rapid and eco-
nomical resequencing and single nucleotide repeat (SNP) detection methods may
permit association mapping to identify loci relevant to the generation of chemical
variability (Neale and Savolainen, 2004; Whitham et al., 2008). For defense gene
products with clearly deﬁned functions and direct ecological effects, the pattern of
variation of nucleotide sequences in different populations and species is already very
informative. The KTI genes encode inhibitor proteins that interact directly with her-
bivore proteins (gut proteases), and thus provide a direct read-out of ecologically

298
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
relevant nucleotide sequence variation. A recent study compared synonymous vs.
non-synonymous nucleotide substitution patterns in the P. tremula wound-induced
KTIs, from four different European populations (Ingvarsson, 2005). Two of the KTI
gene show signs of long-term adaptive evolution, possibly due to herbivore pressure.
Several other KTI genes also show elevated rates of non-synonymous substitutions,
implying non-neutral evolution. Given that the KTIs exhibit divergent biochemical
speciﬁcities in vitro which indicated that any one KTI is effective against only a
subset of proteases (Major and Constabel, 2008), it is tempting to speculate that
these increased non-synoymous substitution rates are the result of selection for new
inhibitor speciﬁcities.
Variation in Populus defense genes and secondary metabolite proﬁles affect
entire complexes of organisms, and thus are key determinants of the community
and ecosystem “phenotypes” of Populus (Whitham et al., 2006, 2008). When a
foundation species’ genotype inﬂuences the abundance and composition of asso-
ciated species (e.g., microbes, insects) to the extent that discrete communities
develop, community phenotypes result. Similarly, when such genetic variation gov-
erns ecosystem structure or function (e.g., nutrient cycling), ecosystem phenotypes
result. Of all plant systems, community and ecosystem phenotypes have been most
thoroughly documented in Populus and Eucalyptus. In the riparian hybridizing com-
plex P. fremontii x P. angustifolia in the western U.S.A., cottonwood genotype
inﬂuences tannin production, which in turn inﬂuences the community composi-
tion of folivorous insects as well as aquatic macroinvertebrates (Whitham et al.,
2006). Tannin concentration also affects terrestrial and aquatic litter decomposi-
tion, and terrestrial nitrogen mineralization (Whitham et al., 2006, 2008). Signiﬁcant
heritabilities of canopy insect communities, insect-bird interactions, soil microbial
communities, and soil nutrient pools reveal that community and ecosystem phe-
notypes are based on genetic variation in cottonwood chemistry (Whitham et al.,
2008). In a similar manner, aspen tannin concentrations inﬂuence litter decompo-
sition (Madritch et al., 2006). Consequently, aspen clones create spatial mosaics
of genetically-mediated ecosystem functioning across natural landscapes (Madritch
et al., 2009). In short, secondary chemistry and its variation have proven to be key
intermediates in efforts to link ecological structure and function with underlying
genomics.
7 Key Issues and Future Directions
1. Populus adaptation and responses to herbivory clearly involve large numbers
of genes, and to focus on the most important “candidate genes” will require
additional experimental approaches. In addition to high-throughput functional
analysis and detailed coexpression studies, strategies to exploit the high degree of
natural genetic diversity in Populus populations, for example, using association
mapping to determine genes of adaptive value, hold much promise. Similarly,
defense genes could be screened in wild populations for evidence of strong
selection in their evolutionary history. The identiﬁcation of genes determining

The Impact of Genomics
299
success in defense against herbivory will contribute to our understanding of
mechanisms of resistance, provide markers for future breeding programs, and
facilitate development of a toolbox of genes for potential genetic engineering of
resistant Populus genotypes.
2. The size and architecture of Populus make it a useful model for investigat-
ing whole plant aspects of induced defense responses. The systemic nature of
defense signalling and how this interacts with leaf vascular connections and
source-sink dynamics needs to be studied further, as well as the potential con-
tributions of volatiles to intra-plant signalling (Frost et al., 2007). Furthermore,
the importance of the juvenile growth phase, compared to the mature tissues, in
induced defense has not been approached at the molecular level. Likewise, how
above- and below-ground portions of the plant interact during stress responses
and pest resistance is only beginning to be investigated (Major and Constabel,
2007a), but are key elements of the ecological roles and interactions of Populus
species with the environment.
3. Phenolic constituents, particularly phenolic glycosides and tannins, play singu-
larly important roles in Populus biology, and future genome-informed research
must focus on further elucidation of the biochemical pathways and genes
involved in their synthesis and regulation. This work will require more com-
plete phytochemical proﬁles for different Populus species and hybrids of interest.
The future availability of phytochemical and metabolomic databases for Populus
would greatly accelerate work in this area, as will access to gene expression data
in standardized platforms (i.e. Affymetrix Populus arrays). When metabolomic
and gene expression data are integrated, coexpression analysis becomes a pow-
erful tool for functional genomics that is particularily suited for analysis of
secondary metabolism and its regulation (Saito et al., 2008). Dissecting the reg-
ulatory mechanisms that control phenolic metabolism will be the ﬁrst step in
understanding how the variable phytochemistry within the genus is generated,
and how the diverse developmental and environmental signals that inﬂuence
phenolic metabolism are integrated within the plant.
4. Because Populus includes numerous foundation species, functional genomic
studies of plant defense and secondary chemistry will play important roles in
the newly emerging ﬁeld of landscape genetics, which addresses spatial pat-
terns in population genetic structure and evolutionary processes. Future research
should seek to understand the molecular underpinnings of adaptive variation
in Populus secondary chemistry, and how they play out over large spatial and
temporal scales to inﬂuence the structure of, and dynamic processes within,
entire landscapes. The application of newly developed, high-throughput genome
sequencing and genotyping technologies to natural populations (e.g., Whitham
et al., 2008) will facilitate identiﬁcation of genetic polymorphisms associated
with complex adaptive traits (Neale and Savolainen, 2004).
5. Populus has emerged as the most important genus of woody plants for bio-
fuel production in North America (DOE 2006). Lignin, a product of the
phenylpropanoid pathway, poses a signiﬁcant barrier to use of Populus as feed-
stock for the production of cellulosic ethanol. Alternatively, however, ligniﬁed

300
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
tissues provide a reservoir for biomass sequestration of atmospheric carbon.
Multiple research projects, relying heavily on genomic approaches, are currently
underway to engineer poplar with altered lignin quality and quantity. The inter-
connectedness of the lignin and phenylpropanoid pathways necessitates a much
better understanding of how modulation of ﬂux in one area of metabolism can
inﬂuence associated pathways. The unexpected consequences of genetic engi-
neering on metabolic pathways emphasize that our knowledge of the regulation
of carbon ﬂux through secondary pathways is still incomplete.
Acknowledgments We thank our many students and research collaborators, whose work made
possible the advances reported here. We also thank Ken Keefover-Ring for creating Fig. 1.
R. Lindroth’s research has been supported by funding from the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(National Research Initiative), U.S. Department of Energy (Ofﬁce of Biological and Environmental
Research), and the National Science Foundation (particularly, grants DEB-0074427, DEB-
0344019 and DEB-0425908). P. Constabel acknowledges the generous support of the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) in the form of Discovery,
Genomics, and Strategic Grants.
References
Adler FR, Karban R (1994) Defended fortresses or moving targets – another model of inducible
defenses inspired by military metaphors. Am Nat 144:813–832.
Arimura G, Huber DPW, Bohlmann J (2004) Forest tent caterpillars (Malacosoma disstria)
induce local and systemic diurnal emissions of terpenoid volatiles in hybrid poplar (Populus
trichocarpa x deltoides): cDNA cloning, functional characterization, and patterns of gene
expression of (-)-germacrene D synthase, PtdTPS1. Plant J 37:603–616.
Arnold T, Appel H, Patel V et al. (2004) Carbohydrate translocation determines the phenolic
content of Populus foliage: a test of the sink-source model of plant defense. New Phytol
164:157–164.
Babst BA, Ferrieri RA, Gray DW et al. (2005) Jasmonic acid induces rapid changes in carbon
transport and partitioning in Populus. New Phytol 167:63–72.
Bailey JK, Schweitzer JA, Rehill BJ et al. (2007) Rapid shifts in the chemical composition of aspen
forests: an introduced herbivore as an agent of natural selection. Biol Invas 9:715–722.
Bailey JK, Schweitzer JA, Rehill BJ et al. (2004) Beavers as molecular geneticists: a genetic basis
to the foraging of an ecosystem engineer. Ecology 85:603–608.
Baker WL (1972) Eastern Forest Insects. Miscellaneous publication No. 1175. U.S.D.A. Forest
Service, Washington DC.
Barbehenn RV, Jones CP, Yip L et al. (2007) Limited impact of elevated levels of polyphenol
oxidase on tree-feeding caterpillars: assessing individual plant defenses with transgenic poplar.
Oecologia 154:129–140.
Bradshaw HD, Parsons TJ, Gordon MP (1991) Wound-responsive gene expression in poplars. For
Ecol Manag 43:211–224.
Busov V, Meilan R, Pearce DW et al. (2006) Transgenic modiﬁcation of gai or rgl1 causes
dwarﬁng and alters gibberellins, root growth, and metabolite proﬁles in Populus. Planta 224:
288–299.
Christopher ME, Miranda M, Major IT et al. (2004) Gene expression proﬁling of systemically
wound-induced defenses in hybrid poplar. Planta 219:936–947.
Coleman HD, Park JY, Nair R et al. (2008) RNAi-mediated suppression of p-coumaroyl-CoA
3′-hydroxylase in hybrid poplar impacts lignin deposition and soluble secondary metabolism.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:4501–4506.

The Impact of Genomics
301
Constabel CP, Barbehenn R (2008) Defensive roles of polyphenol oxidase in plants. In: Schaller A
(ed) Induced Plant Resistance to Herbivory. Springer, The Netherland, pp 253–269.
Constabel CP, Major IT (2005) Molecular biology and biochemistry of induced insect defense in
Populus. Rec Adv Phytochem 39:119–143.
Constabel CP, Ryan CA (1998) A survey of wound- and methyl jasmonate-induced leaf polyphenol
oxidase in crop plants. Phytochemistry 47:507–511.
Constabel CP, Yip L, Patton JJ et al. (2000) Polyphenol oxidase from hybrid poplar. Cloning and
expression in response to wounding and herbivory. Plant Physiol 124:285–295.
Curtis MD, Grossniklaus U (2003) A gateway cloning vector set for high-throughput functional
analysis of genes in planta. Plant Physiol 133:462–469.
Dafoe NJ, Zamani A, Ekramoddoullah AKM et al. (2009) Analysis of the poplar phloem proteome
and its response to leaf wounding. J Proteome Res 8:2341–2350.
Davis JM, Gordon MP, Smit BA (1991) Assimilate movement dictates remote sites of wound-
induced gene expression in poplar leaves. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:2393–2396.
De Vos M, Van Oosten VR, Van Poecke RMP et al. (2005) Signal signature and transcrip-
tome changes of Arabidopsis during pathogen and insect attack. Mol Plant-Micr Interact 18:
923–937.
Dgany O, Gonzalez A, Sofer O et al. (2004) The structural basis of the thermostability of SP1, a
novel plant (Populus tremula) boiling stable protein. J Biol Chem 279:51516–51523.
Dickmann DI, Stuart KW (1983) The Culture of Poplars in Eastern North America. Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI.
Diner B, Berteaux D, Fyles J et al. (2009) Behavioral archives link the chemistry and clonal
structure of trembling aspen to the food choice of North American porcupine. Oecologia
160:687–695.
Ding XF, Gopalakrishnan B, Johnson LB et al. (1998) Insect resistance of transgenic tobacco
expressing an insect chitinase gene. Trans Res 7:77–84.
Donaldson JR, Lindroth RL (2004) Cottonwood leaf beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) perfor-
mance in relation to variable phytochemistry in juvenile aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.).
Environ Entomol 33:1505–1511.
Donaldson JR, Lindroth RL (2007) Genetics, environment, and their interaction determine efﬁcacy
of chemical defense in trembling aspen. Ecology 88:729–739.
Donaldson JR, Lindroth RL (2008) Effects of variable phytochemistry and budbreak phenology on
defoliation of aspen during a forest tent caterpillar outbreak. Agric For Entomol 10:399–410.
Donaldson JR, Stevens MT, Barnhill HR et al. (2006) Age-related shifts in leaf chemistry of clonal
aspen (Populus tremuloides). J Chem Ecol 32:1415–1429.
Ellison AM, Bank MS, Clinton BD et al. (2005) Loss of foundation species: consequences for the
structure and dynamics of forested ecosystems. Front Ecol Environ 3:479–486.
English S, Greenaway W, Whatley FR (1991) Analysis of phenolics of Populus-trichocarpa bud
dxudate by GC-MS. Phytochemistry 30:531–533.
Felton GW, Tumlinson JH (2008) Plant-insect dialogs: complex interactions at the plant-insect
interface. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:457–463.
Fernandez MP, Breuil C, Watson PA (2002) Natural clonal variation of wood extractives in Populus
tremuloides. Can J For Res 32:1192–1199.
Frost CJ, Appel M, Carlson JE et al. (2007) Within-plant signalling via volatiles overcomes vas-
cular constraints on systemic signalling and primes responses against herbivores. Ecol Lett
10:490–498.
Furniss RL, Carolin VM (1977) Western Forest Insects. Miscellaneous Publication no. 1339.
U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Washington D.C.
Greenaway W, Whatley FR (1990) Resolution of complex mixtures of phenolics in poplar
bud exudate by analysis of gas chromatography mass mpectrometry data. J Chrom 519:
145–158.
Greenaway W, Whatley FR (1991) Analysis of phenolics of bud exudate of Populus ciliata by
GC-MS. Phytochemistry 30:1887–1889.

302
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
Hale BK, Herms DA, Hansen RC et al. (2005) Effects of drought stress and nutrient availability
on dry matter allocation, phenolic glycosides, and rapid induced resistance of poplar to two
lymantriid defoliators. J Chem Ecol 31:2601–2620.
Hamberger B, Ellis M, Friedmann M et al. (2007) Genome-wide analyses of phenylpropanoid-
related genes in Populus trichocarpa, Arabidopsis thaliana, and Oryza sativa: the Populus
lignin toolbox and conservation and diversiﬁcation of angiosperm gene families. Can J Bot
85:1182–1201.
Han KH, Meilan R, Ma C et al. (2000) An Agrobacterium tumefaciens transformation protocol
effective on a variety of cottonwood hybrids (genus Populus). Plant Cell Rep 19:315–320.
Harborne JB, Williams CA (2000) Advances in ﬂavonoid research since 1992. Phytochemistry
55:481–504.
Harding SA, Jiang HY, Jeong ML, et al. (2005) Functional genomics analysis of foliar condensed
tannin and phenolic glycoside regulation in natural cottonwood hybrids. Tree Physiol 25:
1475–1486.
Haruta M, Major IT, Christopher ME et al. (2001) A Kunitz trypsin inhibitor gene family from
trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.): cloning, functional expression, and induction
by wounding and herbivory. Plant Mol Biol 46:347–359.
Havill NP, Raffa KF (1999) Effects of elicitation treatment and genotypic variation on induced
resistance in Populus: impacts on gypsy moth (Lepidoptera: Lymantriidae) development and
feeding behavior. Oecologia 120:295–303.
Hemming JDC, Lindroth RL (1999) Effects of light and nutrient availability on aspen: growth,
phytochemistry, and insect performance. J Chem Ecol 25:1687–1714.
Herms DA, Mattson WJ (1992) The dilemma of plants – To grow or defend. Q Rev Biol 67:
283–335.
Hoffmann L, Maury S, Martz F et al. (2003) Puriﬁcation, cloning, and properties of an acyltrans-
ferase controlling shikimate and quinate ester intermediates in phenylpropanoid metabolism. J
Biol Chem 278:95–103.
Hwang S-Y, Lindroth RL (1997) Clonal variation in foliar chemistry of aspen: effects on gypsy
moths and forest tent caterpillars. Oecologia 111:99–108.
Ingvarsson PK (2005) Molecular population genetics of herbivore-induced protease inhibitor genes
in European Aspen (Populus tremula L., Salicaceae). Mol Biol Evol 22:1802–1812.
Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B et al. (2007) The grapevine genome sequence suggests ancestral
hexaploidization in major angiosperm phyla. Nature 449:463–U5.
Kao YY, Harding SA, Tsai CJ (2002) Differential expression of two distinct phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase genes in condensed tannin-accumulating and lignifying cells of quaking aspen.
Plant Physiol 130:796–807.
Karimi M, Bleys A, Vanderhaeghen R et al. (2007) Building blocks for plant gene assembly. Plant
Physiol 145:1183–1191.
Kempema LA, Cui XP, Holzer FM et al. (2007) Arabidopsis transcriptome changes in response to
phloem-feeding silverleaf whiteﬂy nymphs. Similarities and distinctions in responses to aphids.
Plant Physiol 143:849–865.
Kessler A, Halitschke R, Baldwin IT (2004) Silencing the jasmonate cascade: Induced plant
defenses and insect populations. Science 305:665–668.
Kinney KK, Lindroth RL, Jung SM et al. (1997) Effects of CO2 and NO3- availability on deciduous
trees: phytochemistry and insect performance. Ecology 78:215–230.
Kohler A, Rinaldi C, Duplessis S et al. (2008) Genome-wide identiﬁcation of NBS resistance genes
in Populus trichocarpa. Plant Mol Biol 66:619–636.
Lawrence SD, Novak NG (2001) A rapid method for the production and characterization of
recombinant insecticidal proteins in plants. Mol Breed 8:139–146.
Lawrence SD, Novak NG (2006) Expression of poplar chitinase in tomato leads to inhibition of
development in colorado potato beetle. Biotech Lett 28:593–599.
Lepiniec L, Debeaujon I, Routaboul JM et al. (2006) Genetics and biochemistry of seed ﬂavonoids.
Annu Rev Plant Biol 57:405–430.

The Impact of Genomics
303
Li L, Li CY, Lee GI et al. (2002) Distinct roles for jasmonate synthesis and action in the systemic
wound response of tomato. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:6416–6421.
Lindroth RL (2001) Adaptations of quaking aspen for defense against damage by herbivores and
related environmental agents. In: Shepperd WD, Binkley DB, Bartos DL, et al. (eds) Sustaining
Aspen in Western Landscapes. symposium proceedings, 13–15 June 2000, Grand Junction, CO.
Lindroth RL, Hwang S-Y (1996a) Diversity, redundancy and multiplicity in chemical defense
systems of aspen. Rec Adv Phytochem 30:25–56.
Lindroth RL, Hwang S-Y (1996b) Clonal variation in foliar chemistry of quaking aspen (Populus
tremuloides Michx.). Biochem Syst Ecol 24:357–364.
Lindroth RL, Peterson SS (1988) Effects of plant phenols on performance of southern armyworm
larvae. Oecologia 75:185–189.
Lindroth RL, Scriber JM, Hsia MTS (1988) Chemical ecology of the tiger swallowtail: mediation
of host use by phenolic glycosides. Ecology 69:814–822.
Madritch M, Donaldson JR, Lindroth RL (2006) Genetic identity of Populus tremuloides litter
inﬂuences decomposition and nutrient release in a mixed forest stand. Ecosystems 9:528–537.
Madritch MD, Greene SG, Lindroth RL (2009) Genetic mosaics of ecosystem functioning across
aspen-dominated landscapes. Oecologia. 160: 119–127.
Major IT, Constabel CP (2006) Molular analysis of poplar defense against herbivory: comparison
of wound- and insect elicitor-induced gene expression. New Phytol 172:617–635.
Major IT, Constabel CP (2007) Shoot-root defense signaling and activation of root defense by leaf
damage in poplar. Can J Bot 85:1171–1181.
Major IT, Constabel CP (2007b) Insect regurgitant and wounding elicit similar defense responses
in poplar leaves: not something to spit at? Plant Signal Behav 2:1–3.
Major IT, Constabel CP (2008) Functional analysis of the Kunitz trypsin inhibitor family in poplar
reveals biochemical diversity and multiplicity in defense against herbivores. Plant Physiol
146:888–903.
McArthur C, Robbins CT, Hagerman AE, Hanley TA (1993) Diet selection by a ruminant generalist
browser in relation to plant chemistry. Can J Zool 71:2236–2243.
Mellway RD, Constabel CP (2009) Metabolic engineering and potential functions of proantho-
cyanidins in poplar. Plant Signal & Behavior. 4: 790–792.
Mellway RD, Tran LT, Prouse MB et al. (2009) The wound-, pathogen-, and ultraviolet
B-responsive MYB134 gene encodes an R2R3 MYB transcription factor that regulates
proanthocyanidin synthesis in poplar. Plant Physiol 150:924–941.
Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R et al. (2007) The transcriptional response of hybrid poplar
(Populus trichocarpa x P. deltoides) to infection by Melampsora medusae leaf rust involves
induction of ﬂavonoid pathway genes leading to the accumulation of proanthocyanidins. Mol
Plant-Micr Interact 20:816–831.
Mithofer A, Wanner G, Boland W (2005) Effects of feeding Spodoptera littoralis on lima bean
leaves. II. Continuous mechanical wounding resembling insect feeding is sufﬁcient to elicit
herbivory-related volatile emission. Plant Physiol 137:1160–1168.
Neale DB, Savolainen O (2004) Association genetics of complex traits in conifers. Trends Plant
Sci 9:325–330.
Niggeweg R, Michael AJ, Martin C (2004) Engineering plants with increased levels of the
antioxidant chlorogenic acid. Nature Biotech 22:746–754.
Osier TL, Lindroth RL (2001) Effects of genotype, nutrient availability, and defoliation on aspen
phytochemistry and insect performance. J Chem Ecol 27:1289–1313.
Osier TL, Lindroth RL (2004) Long-term effects of defoliation on quaking aspen in relation
to genotype and nutrient availability: plant growth, phytochemistry and insect performance.
Oecologia 139:55–65.
Osier TL, Lindroth RL (2006) Genotype and environment determine allocation to and costs of
resistance in quaking aspen. Oecologia 148:293–303.
Owens DK, Alerding AB, Crosby KC et al. (2008) Functional analysis of a predicted ﬂavonol
synthase gene family in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 147:1046–1061.

304
C.P. Constabel and R.L. Lindroth
Palo RT (1984) Distribution of birch (Betula spp), willow (Salix spp), and poplar (Populus spp)
secondary metabolites and their potential role as chemical defense against herbivores. J Chem
Ecol 10:499–520.
Parsons TJ, Bradshaw HD, Gordon MP (1989) Systemic accumulation of speciﬁc messenger-
RNAs
in
response
to
wounding
in
poplar
trees.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
86:
7895–7899.
Pearl IA, Darling SF (1968) Studies on leaves of family Salicaceae. 11. Hot water extractives of
leaves of Populus balsamifera. Phytochemistry 7:1845–1849.
Perala DA (1990) Populus tremuloides Michx. Quaking Aspen. In: Burns RM, Honkala BH (eds)
Silvics of North America. Volume 2. Hardwoods. U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Washington D.C.
Peters DJ, Constabel CP (2002) Molecular analysis of herbivore-induced condensed tannin syn-
thesis: cloning and expression of dihydroﬂavonol reductase from trembling aspen (Populus
tremuloides). Plant J 32:701–712.
Philippe RN, Bohlmann J (2007) Poplar defense against insect herbivores. Can J Bot 85:
1111–1126.
Ralph S, Oddy C, Cooper D et al. (2006) Genomics of hybrid poplar (Populus trichocarpa x
deltoides) interacting with forest tent caterpillars (Malacosoma disstria): normalized and full-
length cDNA libraries, expressed sequence tags, and a cDNA microarray for the study of
insect-induced defences in poplar. Mol Ecol 15:1275–1297.
Ralph SG, Chun HJE, Cooper D et al. (2008) Analysis of 4,664 high-quality sequence-ﬁnished
poplar full-length cDNA clones and their utility for the discovery of genes responding to insect
feeding. BMC Genomics 9:57.
Rehill BJ, Whitham TG, Martinsen GD et al. (2006) Developmental trajectories in cottonwood
phytochemistry. J Chem Ecol 32:2269–2285.
Reymond P, Bodenhausen N, Van Poecke RMP et al. (2004) A conserved transcript pattern in
response to a specialist and a generalist herbivore. Plant Cell 16:3132–3147.
Robison DJ, Raffa KF (1994) Characterization of hybrid poplar clones for resistance to the forest
tent caterpillar. For Sci 40:686–714.
Robison DJ, Raffa KF (1997) Effects of constitutive and inducible traits of hybrid poplars on forest
tent caterpillar feeding and population ecology. For Sci 43:252–267.
Roda A, Halitschke R, Steppuhn A et al. (2004) Individual variability in herbivore-speciﬁc elicitors
from the plant’s perspective. Mol Ecol 13:2421–2433.
Ryan CA (1990) Protease inhibitors in plants – genes for improving defenses against insects and
pathogens. Annu Rev Phytopath 28:425–449.
Saito K, Hirai MY, Yonekura-Sakakibara K (2008) Decoding genes with coexpression networks
and metabolomics – ‘majority report by precogs’. Trends Plant Sci 13:36–43.
Schaller A, Stintzi A (2008) Jasmonate biosynthesis and signaling for induced plant defense
against herbivory. In: Schaller A (ed) Induced Plant Resistance to Herbivory. Springer, Berlin,
pp 349–366.
Schwachtje J, Baldwin IT (2008) Why does herbivore attack reconﬁgure primary metabolism?
Plant Physiol 146:845–851.
Schweitzer JA, Madritch MD, Bailey JK et al. (2008) The genetic basis of condensed tan-
nins and their role in nutrient regulation in a Populus model system. Ecosystems. 11:
1005–1020.
Stevens MT, Lindroth RL (2005) Induced resistance in the indeterminate growth of aspen (Populus
tremuloides). Oecologia 145:298–306.
Thines B, Katsir L, Melotto M et al. (2007) JAZ repressor proteins are targets of the SCFCO11
complex during jasmonate signalling. Nature 448:661–U2.
Tohge T, Nishiyama Y, Hirai MY et al. (2005) Functional genomics by integrated analysis of
metabolome and transcriptome of Arabidopsis plants over-expressing an MYB transcription
factor. Plant J 42:218–235.
Tsai CJ, Harding SA, Tschaplinski TJ et al. (2006) Genome-wide analysis of the structural genes
regulating defense phenylpropanoid metabolism in Populus. New Phytol 172:47–62.

The Impact of Genomics
305
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S et al. (2006) The genome of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
U.S. D.O.E. (2006) Breaking the biological barriers to cellulosic ethanal: a joint research agenda.
U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Science and Ofﬁce of Energy Efﬁciency and Renewable
Energy. DOE/SC–0095
Vigue LM, Lindroth RL (2009) Effects of genotype, elevated CO2, and elevated O3 on aspen
phytochemistry and aspen leaf beetle, Chrysomela crotchi, performance. Agric For Entomol.
(submitted).
Wang JH, Constabel CP (2004) Polyphenol oxidase overexpression in transgenic Populus enhances
resistance to herbivory by forest tent caterpillar (Malacosoma disstria). Planta 220:87–96.
Wang WX, Pelah D, Alergand T et al. (2002) Characterization of SP1, a stress-responsive, boiling-
soluble, homo-oligomeric protein from aspen. Plant Physiol 130:865–875.
Warren JM, Bassman JH, Fellman JK et al. (2003) Ultraviolet-B radiation alters phenolic salicylate
and ﬂavonoid composition of Populus trichocarpa leaves. Tree Physiol 23:527–535.
Whitham TG, Bailey JK, Schweitzer JA et al. (2006) A framework for community and ecosystem
genetics: from genes to ecosystems. Nat Rev Gen 7:510–523.
Whitham TG, DiFazio SP, Schweitzer JA et al. (2008) Extending genomics to natural communities
and ecosystems. Science 320:492–495.
Wooley SC, Walker S, Vernon J et al. (2008) Aspen decline, aspen chemistry, and elk herbivory.
are they linked? Rangelands 30:17–21.
Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Tohge T, Matsuda F et al. (2008) Comprehensive ﬂavonol proﬁling
and transcriptome coexpression analysis leading to decoding gene-metabolite correlations in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 20:2160–2176.
Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Tohge T, Niida R et al. (2007) Identiﬁcation of a ﬂavonol 7-O-
rhamnosyltransferase gene determining ﬂavonoid pattern in Arabidopsis by transcriptome
coexpression analysis and reverse genetics. J Biol Chem 282:14932–14941.
Zheng SJ, Dicke M (2008) Ecological genomics of plant-insect interactions: From gene to
community. Plant Physiol 146:812–817.

Part IV
Populus for the Future

Populus Breeding: From the Classical
to the Genomic Approach
Brian J. Stanton, David B. Neale, and Shanwen Li
Abstract Populus breeding is distinguished by a long history in forest tree
improvement and its frequent dual reliance on inter-speciﬁc hybridization and vari-
etal selection as the prominent domestication strategy. This chapter presents a
review of the genecology and the principal long-term improvement approaches con-
sidered in the manipulation of the genus’ key taxa, the pertinent experimental design
features of worldwide varietal evaluation programs, and the current understanding
of the morphological, physiological, and pathology components of yield and the
physical and chemical components of wood quality. The chapter concludes with an
assessment of the molecular tools being developed for an integrated translational
genomics program to improve upon present breeding and selection methodologies.
1 Introduction
Populus was the ﬁrst woody perennial to gain recognition as a model for worldwide
tree breeding programs because of the groundbreaking work in species hybridiza-
tion, polyploid breeding, and investigations into pathogen resistance during the early
part of the twentieth century (Pauley, 1949). More recently, the success that Populus
clonal testing, selection, and deployment has achieved in boosting the trend toward
worldwide varietal forestry over the last 20 years cannot be overestimated. Although
tree improvement work in Populus may be surpassed in sophistication by today’s
Pinus and Eucalyptus breeding programs, the model designation remains deserved
in view of the sequencing of the Populus genome – the ﬁrst of any tree in 2006 – and
the subsequent investigations into genotype-phenotype associations. This chapter
presents an overview of the traditional approach to applied Populus breeding and
the advent of translational genomics, surely the next stage in a truly fascinating
story.
B.J. Stanton (B)
GreenWood Resources, Global Tree Improvement Group, Portland, OR 97201, USA
e-mail: brian.stanton@gwrglobal.com
309
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_14,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

310
B.J. Stanton et al.
Domestication of the genus began in Europe, perhaps as a consequence of the
introduction of eastern cottonwood (P. deltoides) in the late eighteenth century
and the frequency with which spontaneous – and at times valuable – hybrids with
the native black poplar (P. nigra) (hybrid binomial – P. ×canadensis) occurred
under natural conditions. That led to their cultivation for timber production to fore-
stall widespread wood shortages, especially after the Second World War (Schreiner,
1959). During his tour of European Populus culture in 1952, American poplar pio-
neer Ernst Schreiner reported that 11 countries were heavily invested in Populus
controlled breeding programs, saying, “. . .poplar specialists and growers. . . gener-
ally recognize that there is an essential and continuing job to obtain better clones
for future use and to replace those that may fall prey to unusual environmental
conditions or to new diseases and insects.” His recognition was taken to heart in
Europe and elsewhere, for over the next half century catalogues of superior cul-
tivars complete with photographs and growth and form metrics were published
for four of the ﬁve continents where Populus culture had spread. This acknowl-
edgement included Europe (Koster, 1972; van Broekhuizen, 1972), North America
(Roller, 1984), South America (Arreghini et al., 2000), and Asia (Chen, 2005). At
the 23rd Session of the International Poplar Commission held in Beijing in 2008, it
was reported that over 125 elite Populus cultivars were globally in use (FAO 2008).
Populus management is unique in that its markets include a wide range of forest
products, including energy feedstock, wood chips for pulping ﬁbers and compos-
ite panels, saw- and veneer logs, agro-forestry, and phyto-remediation as well as
several other environmental applications. Presently, the worldwide Populus estate
encompasses over 5,255,000 hectares of plantations and 3,867,000 hectares of agro-
forestry and environmental plantings (FAO, 2008). The management of this estate
continues to emphasize the breeding of improved cultivars. This domestication
activity, in turn, relies upon the accumulated knowledge of Populus genecology,
the physiological and morphological components of yield, the genetics of pathogen
resistance, and the inheritance of quantitative and qualitative traits (Stanton, 2009).
While work in each of these areas has provided insights into the genetics of
adaptation and wood production, the identiﬁcation of controlling genes and the char-
acterization of selectable markers is now forging new breeding approaches that will
extend Populus’ claim as the model woody perennial (Bradshaw et al., 2000).
2 Genecology
Geographic Distribution – The genus Populus is made up of six sections, three
of which – Aigeiros (cottonwoods), Tacamahaca (balsam poplars), and Populus
(white poplars and aspens) – account for nearly the world’s entire applied breeding
work. Recent taxonomies published in the West closely agree on the total number of
species, which range from 29 (Eckenwalder, 1996) to 32 (Dickmann and Kuzovkina,
2008). But in Asia a more liberal classiﬁcaion is the rule, with 47–50 species recog-
nized in China alone (Wu and Raven, 1999; Zheng, 1985). Taxonomic rank has,

Populus Breeding
311
at times, been extended below the species level to geographic varieties to recog-
nize entities with distinct morphological or physiological features. Good examples
include the xeromorphic P. nigra var. caudina and P. tremula var. davidiana and
P. deltoides var. monilifera that at times have been used in breeding and selection
programs (Kajba et al., 2004).
Directed manipulation of the genus started with an understanding of population
variation patterns in adaptive and commercial traits within each of the genus’ key
species that, as a rule, cover expansive geographic areas (Fig. 1). In section Populus,
for instance, the transcontinental range of quaking aspen (P. tremuloides) covers
approximately 110◦of longitude and over 50◦of latitude in North America, from
Alaska’s sub-arctic region and Canada’s Northwest Territory to disjunct popula-
tions in central Mexico (Perala, 1990). Likewise, common aspen (P. tremula), its
sibling species, has the most expansive range in the genus and is found through-
out most of Europe and a substantial part of Asia. It spans 155◦of longitude from
Europe’s Iberian Peninsula east to Asia’s Kamchatka Peninsula, and 55◦of latitude
from Scandinavia to southeastern China (Boratynska and Boratynski, 1977). White
poplar (P. alba) is also found over a large expanse of Eurasia. It is spread across a
longitudinal range of approximately 115◦from Spain’s Atlantic Coast eastward to
China’s Xinjiang Uigur Autonomous Region, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, and Pakistan.
North-to-south, P. alba covers approximately 30◦of latitude found as far north as
54–58◦N latitude in Germany, Poland, and Russia and as far south as 30◦N latitude
in North Africa.
Fig. 1 World distribution of Populus species most commonly used in controlled breeding
programs
Extensive distributions also characterize P. nigra and P. deltoides of section
Aigeiros. The former is found over a large portion of Europe, the Mediterranean
basin, Central Asia, the Ukraine, Russia, and the northwest of China spanning
more than 40◦of latitude and 90◦of longitude (Boratynska and Boratynski, 1977).
Distribution of P. deltoides covers over 20◦of latitude in North America between
the Canadian prairie and the Gulf of Mexico and over 40◦of longitude between the
Atlantic seaboard and the Great Plains (Cooper, 1990). The distribution of species
in section Tacamahaca is also substantial: Black cottonwood (P. trichocarpa)
spans approximately 35◦of latitude from Cook Inlet along the Alaskan Coast
southward to the outlying populations of Mexico’s Baja Peninsula, and 45◦of lon-
gitude from the Rocky Mountains to the coast of southeast Alaska (DeBell, 1990).
Finally, Japanese poplar (P. maximowiczii) ranges throughout eastern Asia, includ-
ing Russia’s Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kuril Islands, the Provinces of Liaoning,

312
B.J. Stanton et al.
Jilin, and Heilongjuang in the northeast of China, the Korean peninsula, and the
Japanese Islands of Sakhalin, Hokkaido, and Honshu, covering 25◦of longitude
and 20◦of latitude (Chiba, 1984).1
Variation Patterns – Genetic variation in adaptive traits for each of these
species is commonplace and often associated with latitude as clines. Phenology
is perhaps the best example, and an understanding of its variation pattern has
long been a foundation of well-designed Populus breeding programs. Generally,
southerly seed sources initiate growth later in the spring and initiate the onset
of dormancy later in the fall and, as a consequence, are often less tolerant
of winter temperature extremes when compared to more northerly sources in
common garden experiments. A range-wide study of autumnal phenology in
P. deltoides provenances from 30◦to 45◦N latitude and planted at 40◦N latitude
demonstrated this phenomenon. The date of leaf abscission was closely associated
with seed source latitude in a north-to-south trend over which the date of leaf abscis-
sion grew progressively later (Ying and Bagley, 1976). The timing of autumnal leaf
abscission was also observed to vary in a northwest-to-southeast direction within
the southwestern portion of the P. deltoides range between 28◦51′ and 38◦25′ N
latitude, in which southeastern seed sources exhibited a later date of abscission than
northwestern ones (Nelson and Tauer, 1987). A similar trend was observed in the
date of autumnal bud set in an investigation of P. tremula seed sources sampled from
56◦to 66◦N latitude in Sweden where a later terminal bud set date was associated
with southerly sources (Luquez et al., 2008). The photoperiod of the genotype’s
provenance has been implicated as the controlling environmental factor. This was
evident in studies of northern and southern sources of P. trichocarpa and P. tremula
(∼34–53◦N latitude for the former and ∼56–66◦N latitude for the latter) where
the onset of the dormancy process of the southern sources responded to a shorter
day length compared with more northerly sources (Howe et al., 1995; Ingvarsson
et al., 2006).
Temperature replaces photoperiod as the controlling mechanism that triggers
spring phenological events. Seed sources originating at low latitudes require either
a more stringent chilling requirement or higher heat sums before growth is initi-
ated when compared with their counterparts from higher latitudes (Farmer, 1993).
Farmer and Reinholt (1986) illustrated the trend in a controlled chilling study of
balsam poplar (P. balsamifera) populations originating from 45◦to 55◦N latitude
where the length of time to initiate shoot growth decreased with increases in seed
source latitude.
The upshot of spring and autumnal adaptive patterns for controlled breeding pro-
grams is that selections moved south of their provenance – either as clones or as
breeding stock – may not perform as well as local sources due to the inability to
take full advantage of the growing season, while selections moved north of their
1Several authors in this text follow Eckenwalder’s (1996) taxonomy that considers P. maximowiczii
as a variety of Siberian poplar (P. suaveolens). We, however, treat P. maximowiczii as a distinct
species following the reasoning of Dickmann and Kuzvokina (2008), because it is commonly
known as such by Populus breeders worldwide.

Populus Breeding
313
provenance often exceed the performance of local selections within the constraints
imposed by temperature extremes (Farmer, 1993). This holds special importance for
breeding the all-important P. deltoides for lower latitudes of the world where inter-
speciﬁc crosses with other species endemic to low latitudes, such as Himalayan
poplar (P. ciliata) and Yunnan poplar (P. yunnanensis), may result in inter-speciﬁc
heterosis while maintaining adaptation to local photoperiods.
Intra-speciﬁc population differences are also encountered on a more limited geo-
graphic scale as the following demonstrates: (1) across 3.80◦of latitude on the
Japanese island of Hokkaido (approximately 41◦36′–45◦24′ N) southern sources
of P. maximowiczii initiate growth cessation later than northern sources (Chiba,
1984); (2) over 4.35◦of latitude across a southwest to northeast gradient in the
Paciﬁc Northwest (44◦44′ N–49◦05′ N) the growth of southwesterly sources of
P. trichocarpa remains active longer into the fall than northeastern sources (Weber
et al., 1985); (3) across 3.50◦of latitude in the north central region of the United
States P. balsamifera populations from the southeast grow faster in height and set
terminal buds later than those from the central and northwest sectors of the region
(Riemenschneider and McMahon, 1993). Local population variation in the timing of
spring growth initiation in P. trichocarpa is tied to changes in temperature gradients
within river drainages, while autumnal events are associated with both temperature
gradients and/or disease pressure dependent on the speciﬁc individual drainages
(Dunlap and Stettler, 1996). These ﬁner expressions of population variation are
as important as the broader, range-wide ones in the design of Populus breeding
programs.
Beyond phenology, genetic variation among populations within species has been
reported for a variety of growth, eco-physiological, and morphological traits that
impact Populus breeding programs. In P. trichocarpa, for example, a latitudinal
cline in the rate of photosynthesis has been reported among coastal populations
sampled between 44◦and 56◦N latitude where more northerly sources dis-
play a greater capacity to assimilate carbon dioxide as, perhaps, a compensatory
strategy for their earlier curtailment of the growing season (Gornall and Guy,
2007). Conversely, a strong differentiation of populations was not evident in the
assimilation rate of P. balsamifera provenances across a comparable range of lat-
itude (43–53◦N) (Schnekenburger and Farmer, 1989). The photosynthetic rate of
P. trichocarpa also varies on a more local geographic scale with populations
endemic to xeric environments of higher light intensity capable of superior
rates compared with those from mesic environments of lower light intensity
(Dunlap et al., 1993). An eco-physiological trait of equal importance – water use
efﬁciency – also exhibits population variation in: (1) P. trichocarpa, e. g. popu-
lations from arid, continental climates possess higher efﬁciencies than those from
moist coastal environments of mild climate (Bassman and Zwier, 1991) and (2) P.
deltoides, e. g. clones selected from dry sites exhibit lower stomatal resistances and
the ability to prolong growth under drought conditions compared to those from sites
of higher moisture availability (Kelliher and Tauer, 1980). Tolerance of autumnal
frosts and winter injury is a third example of an eco-physiological trait where local
population variation has been studied: For example, inland sources of P. trichocarpa

314
B.J. Stanton et al.
have developed higher tolerances to both factors compared to their coastal counter-
parts in the Paciﬁc Northwest (McCamant and Black, 2000). Population variation in
eco-morphological traits has similarly been reported: Crown morphology of P. tri-
chocarpa populations from xeric sites differs from those from mesic sites in terms
of individual leaf size, crown architecture, and leaf area indices. These, too, have
been exploited in selective breeding strategies (Dunlap et al., 1995).
However, eco-physiological trait differentiation may not always reﬂect local cli-
matic or edaphic selection pressures, as observed in the appreciable variation in
both photosynthetic and transpirational rates and tolerance of soil salinity among
four populations of P. deltoides var. wislizenii from a relatively restricted part of the
southwestern United States (33◦55′–36◦12′ N latitude) (Rowland, 2001; Rowland
et al., 2004). Likewise, signiﬁcant genotypic variation in the growth response of
P. trichocarpa to seasonal ﬂooding is not associated with the population of origin
(Smit, 1988).
Adaptive variation in disease resistance, historically of high importance in
Populus breeding, has been demonstrated in studies of environmental condi-
tions conducive to pathogen selection pressure. For example, populations of
P. trichocarpa from mesic environments are now known to be characterized by
signiﬁcantly higher levels of Melampsora leaf rust resistance compared with pop-
ulations native to arid regions (Dunlap and Stettler, 1996). P. deltoides populations
sampled from humid, wet sites in the southwestern portion of its range were shown
to exhibit heightened levels of Melampsora rust resistance compared to populations
from drier environments that evolved with less exposure to the pathogen (Nelson
and Tauer, 1987).
Despite the oftentimes deﬁnitive effect of source location on such a wide range
of phenological, physiological, and pathology traits, studies of the manner in which
genetic resources are organized within the genus have usually shown that a siz-
able component of variation in each of these characteristics resides within divergent
populations (Fig. 2). To illustrate, whereas variation among populations of P. del-
toides between 30◦30′ and 34◦55′ N latitude in the lower Mississippi River Valley
accounted for 5% of total phenotypic variation in growth rate, 30% of that total
was attributed to variation at the level of clones-within-populations (Foster, 1986).
Greater within- than among-population variation has also been noted in studies of
juvenile growth in P. tremuloides (Thomas et al., 1997) and in those addressing
winter dormancy and spring phenology in P. balsamifera (Farmer, 1993; Farmer
and Reinholt, 1986). Molecular data also suggested a weak differentiation among
North American populations of P. tremuloides (Cole, 2005; Yeh et al., 1995) and
Italian P. tremula populations (Salvini et al., 2001). A study of nucleotide sequence
variation at three loci in P. balsamifera further reinforces the ﬁnding that the major-
ity of genetic diversity resides within populations (Breen et al., 2009). It is believed
that ample gene ﬂow partially counters the effects of natural selection that would
otherwise allow populations to diverge (Weber and Stettler, 1981). However, there
are exceptions. Coastal P. trichocarpa populations are strongly differentiated in
photosynthetic rate across a latitudinal transect with little inherent residual vari-
ation (Gornall and Guy, 2007). Cathay poplar (P. cathayana) populations from the

Populus Breeding
315
Fig. 2 A stand of P. trichocarpa in which individual trees exhibit varying stages of spring vegeta-
tive shoot development. Such within-population variation may be an adaptation to yearly variation
in the timing of spring frosts
Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau of southeastern China show strong differentiation in micro-
satellite markers due to the topography of the region that creates distinct selection
pressures while precluding gene ﬂow (Peng et al., 2005). The manner in which
variation is distributed among the hierarchy of genetic organization is an impor-
tant consideration to building ﬁrst generation breeding populations (Breen et al.,
2009).
3 Controlled Breeding
Reproductive Biology – Populus species are dioecious, although reports of
hermaphroditism have been ﬁled for each of the three major sections (Fig. 3). Sex
appears to be determined by a single locus or a group of tightly linked genes on
chromosome XIX (Yin et al., 2008). The bisexual condition may result from a relax-
ation of the mechanism that suppresses recombination at this locus that otherwise
keeps sex-determining multigenes intact during reduction division. Male and female
reproductive structures in P. trichocarpa in the northern hemisphere are formed
April through June of the year preceding reproduction (Boes and Strauss, 1994).
Reproduction involves wind pollination of inﬂorescences that contain approxi-
mately 60 staminate ﬂowers or 35 pistillate ﬂowers (Boes and Strauss, 1994)

316
B.J. Stanton et al.
Fig. 3 Sub-gynoecious P. trichocarpa variety ‘PS-53-97’. This condition produces predominantly
pistillate inﬂorescences with occasional staminate ones borne on the same shoot (left photo).
Additionally, pistillate inﬂorescences may contain hermaphroditic ﬂowers bearing a pistil and
stamens as shown in the photo on the right
(Fig. 3). The process of controlled reproduction is well understood but requires
varying techniques and approaches for each of the genus’ major sections (Stanton
and Villar, 1996, Fig. 4). Artiﬁcial crosses are made in greenhouses using pollen
extracted from ﬂoral cuttings of male selections maintained in water culture (Seitz,
1958). Pollen mother cells of Simon poplar (P. simonii) begin meiosis within 72 h
of being forced in greenhouses and complete the process at the time that one-quarter
of the length of a staminate inﬂorescence has emerged from the bud (Wang et al.,
2009). Megagametophytes of P. tremuloides develop to the two- to four-nucleate
stage during the winter and move to the eight-nucleate stage 18 h following spring
pollination under greenhouse conditions (Fechner, 1972). Seed is produced on pis-
tillate cuttings that are set in water, grafted on to potted under-stock (Farmer and
Nance, 1968), or rooted in soil (Joennoz and Vallee, 1974). In China, controlled
breeding techniques for seed orchard trees using scaffolding or partially dislodged
and guyed trees exceed greenhouse-based techniques in cost-savings and ease of
fruit production (Zhou et al., 2008). Seed matures in one growing season, does not
undergo physiological dormancy, and germinates readily under adequate tempera-
ture and moisture conditions without stratiﬁcation. Breeding populations typically

Populus Breeding
317
Fig. 4 An indoor P. deltoides female breeding orchard. In addition to the use of a rooting hormone,
soil-warming pads attached to the propagation buckets speed the development of an adventitious
root system necessary to sustain development of the seed crop for 8–20 weeks
achieve a level of ﬂowering that is sufﬁcient to initiate selective breeding within
10 years. Asexual reproduction is quite advanced within the genus; this is exploited
using either adventitious ﬁeld rooting of 1-year-old hardwood cuttings or 2-year-old
poles (section Aigeiros and Tacamahaca), or greenhouse rooting of succulent shoots
under mist propagation (section Populus).
Inter-speciﬁc hybridization has ﬁgured prominently in poplar breeding from
its inception. Inter-sectional crosses between Aigeiros and Tacamahaca are com-
patible for the most part although reciprocal crossing effects can be problem-
atic at times. For example, both the P. deltoides × P. trichocarpa and the
P. deltoides × P. maximowiczii cross combinations are far more productive than
crosses in which the Tacamahaca parent is used as the female parent (Stanton,
2005; Zsuffa et al., 1999). The same effect has been encountered in breeding
the intra-sectional P. ×canadensis taxon: The P. deltoides × P. nigra cross is
highly fertile but the cross is wholly ineffective when attempted in the reverse,
P. nigra × P. deltoides direction, (Melchior and Seitz, 1968). Section Populus
is, for all practical breeding purposes, reproductively isolated from Aigeiros and
Tacamahaca due to incompatibility in the pollen-stigma recognition process (Gaget
et al., 1984; Villar et al., 1987). However, the use of complex hybrids of section
Populus (e.g. P. ×canescens × [P. alba × P. grandidentata]) as female parents
has shown promise in effecting inter-sectional crosses with sections Aigeiros and
Tacamahaca (Ronald, 1982). Species within section Populus are freely crossable
under artiﬁcial conditions, however.
Although arguable, most of the applied breeding work is concentrated on seven
species based on investment in controlled hybridization, the number of commercial
cultivars in use, and the area under production plantation management. These are
P. deltoides and P. nigra of section Aigeiros, P. maximowiczii and P. trichocarpa
of section Tacamahaca, and P. tremula, P. tremuloides, and P. alba of section

318
B.J. Stanton et al.
Populus. Populus breeders worldwide have used them to develop the following com-
mercial taxa: (1) P. ×wettsteinii, the intra-sectional combination of P. tremula and
P. tremuloides, (2) P. ×canadensis, the intra-sectional hybrid of P. deltoides and
P. nigra, (3) P. ×generosa the inter-sectional hybrid of P. deltoides and
P. trichocarpa, (4) Chinese white poplar (P. ×tomentosa), the intra-sectional com-
bination of P. alba and P. tremula var. davidiana2, and (5) intra-speciﬁc hybrids
of P. deltoides (Table 1). Two other taxa lacking assigned hybrid binomials –
P. nigra × P. maximowiczii and P. deltoides × P. maximowiczii – are currently
not as prevalent as the other ﬁve but are likely to soon achieve parity in terms of
breeding, cultivar development, and the signiﬁcance of their contribution to Populus
cultivation.
Breeding Strategies – First generation (F1) inter-speciﬁc hybridization combined
with reciprocal recurrent selection (RRS) of the parental species is the most fre-
quently recommended long-term improvement approach. Today RRS is being used
to develop the P. ×wettsteinii, P. ×canadensis, and P. ×generosa taxa. As an alter-
native to F1 hybridization, F2 P. ×canadensis breeding is used to develop a synthetic
hybrid species. This is noteworthy in view of computer simulations that suggest the
advanced generation approach is a more cost-efﬁcient route to genetic improve-
ment than a RRS – F1 program (Kerr et al., 2004). This assumes, however, that
there is no breakdown of hybrid vigor in the F2 generation as appears to be true
of P. ×canadensis, a cross between species of the same section, P. deltoides and
P. nigra. Advanced generation breeding of more distantly-related species may expe-
rience diminished hybrid performance owing to a number of causes, including the
disruption of co-adapted or species-speciﬁc linkages within an otherwise integrated
genome (Lester, 1973; Stettler et al., 1996).
Other breeding strategies – backcrossing, multiple-species hybridization, poly-
ploidy, somaclonal variation – are not frequently pursued as mainline, long-term
breeding approaches although they are used in short-term programs. Examples
include: (1) backcrossing F1 P. ×generosa hybrids to P. deltoides for increased
resistance to Melampsora leaf rust (Pinon et al., 2006), (2) multiple species
hybridization of the cross (P. laurifolia × P. nigra) × P. maximowiczii for increased
site adaptability (Cagelli and Lefevre, 1995), (3) screening triploid P. ×canadensis
clones for increased growth rate and ﬁber production (Zhang et al., 2004), and (4)
induction of somaclonal variation in a P. nigra var. betulifolia × P. trichocarpa
genotype through callus culture, followed by ﬁeld evaluation and selection for
Septoria canker resistance (Ostry and Ward, 2003). An amalgam of some of these
approaches is employed in developing the P. ×tomentosa taxon in China.
The popularity of F1 inter-speciﬁc hybridization is a result of the predominance
of heterosis and the ease with which it can be economically exploited by vegetative
propagation: Clonal selection captures the advantages of inter-speciﬁc hybrid vigor
once the laborious process of controlled hybridization has been completed, while
2The origin of P. ×tomentosa may be in dispute; we consider it as a ﬁrst-generation hybrid of P.
alba and P. tremula var. davidiana following the analysis of Zhang et al. (1995). We assume this
taxon is distinct from the P. ×canescens taxon, itself an inter-speciﬁc combination of P. alba and
P. tremula.

Populus Breeding
319
Table 1 Examples of commercial Populus cultivars of select taxa registered with FAO’s
International Poplar Commission
Taxon
Cultivar
Country of origin
P. ×canadensis
(Moench)
P. deltoides × P. nigra ‘Blanc du Poitou’
P. deltoides × P. nigra ‘Koltay’
P. deltoides × P. nigra ‘Luisa Avanzo’
P. deltoides × P. nigra ‘Manawatu Gold’
France
Hungary
Italy
New Zealand
P. ×generosa (Henry)
P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides ‘Beaupre’
P. deltoides × P. trichocarpa ‘Donk’
P. deltoides × P. trichocarpa ‘Generosa’
P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides ‘Hoogvorst’
Belgium
The Netherlands
United Kingdom
Belgium
P. ×tomentosa
(Carriere)
P. alba × P. tremula var. davidiana ‘Dapikongi’
P. alba × P. tremula var. davidiana ‘Jingxi’
P. alba × P. tremula var. davidiana ‘Yixiancizhu’
P. alba × P. tremula var. davidiana ‘Xizhi
Xiaiye’
China
China
China
China
P. ×wettsteinii
(Hamet-Ahti)
P. tremula × P. tremuloides ‘Astria’
P. tremula × P. tremuloides ‘Grosshansdorf’a
P. tremula × P. tremuloides ‘Vorwerksbusch’
Germany
Germany
Germany
P. deltoides (Bartram
ex Marsh.)
P. deltoides ‘Delta Gold’
P. deltoides ‘Dunav’
P. deltoides ‘Harvard’
P. deltoides ‘Jagdish’
United States
Serbia
Italy
India
No hybrid binomial
assigned
P. maximowiczii × P. nigra ‘Geyles’b
P. nigra × P. maximowiczii ‘Maxfunf’
P. maximowiczii × P. nigra ‘Rochester’
New Zealand
Germany
United States
No hybrid binomial
assigned
P. deltoides × P. maximowiczii ‘Eridano’
P. maximowiczii × P. deltoides ‘Suwon’
Italy
The Netherlands
aP. tremula × P. tremuloides ‘Grosshansdorf’ is a new varietal mixture of 14 individual clonal
selections not yet registered with IPC.
bNewly-selected cultivar of The New Zealand Institute for Plant and Food Research that will be
released in the spring of 2010.
allowing within-family selection with a high degree of precision. While heterosis
has been widely assumed in Populus breeding, it has not always been substanti-
ated with rigorous controlled studies; oftentimes conclusions are based on a limited
sampling of ﬁrst-generation families or comparisons involving only one parent.
Nonetheless, good examples of ﬁrst-generation inter-speciﬁc heterosis, presented
as the mean of the F1 family as a percentage of the bi-parental mean or the value of
just one parent, are:
1. Increases of 75 and 177% in 2-year-old stem volume in P. ×canadensis and
P. ×generosa, respectively (Dillen et al., 2009),
2. Ninety percent increase in 3-year-old stem volume of P. ×wettsteinii relative to
P. tremuloides (Li et al., 1998; Li and Wu, 1996),

320
B.J. Stanton et al.
3. Fourty four percent increase in 2nd-year stem volume of P. ×canadensis
(Marron and Ceulemans, 2006), and
4. Fifty percent increase in 4th-year stem volume of P. ×generosa relative to
P. trichocarpa (Ceulemans et al., 1992).
Other reports of F1 superiority are based on the performance of individual clones
and have been referred to as “clonal heterosis.” These, it could be argued, may be
equally attributable to transgressive segregation and not hybrid vigor. Even so, Wu
et al. (1992) reported clonal heterosis values of 107–123% in stem volume of P. del-
toides × P. simonii clones relative to their P. deltoides female parent. And, Yu et al.
(2001) reported a 290% increase in 5th year stem volume of four P. ×wettsteinii
hybrid selections compared to local P. tremula selections.
Regardless of the strength of the quantitative evidence for hybrid vigor, experi-
mentation into the morphological and physiological components of hybrid growth
and development substantiates such claims. For instance, it has been accepted for
some time that the inheritance of large leaf cells from P. trichocarpa and the greater
density of leaf cells from P. deltoides result in their F1 progeny’s increased leaf area,
which allows for greater light capture and superior yield in the P. ×generosa taxon
(Ridge et al., 1986). In the P. ×canadensis taxon, increases in leaf increment rate
and leaf area are similarly important in explaining the superiority of the F1 genera-
tion (Marron and Ceulemans, 2006), although increased production of gibberellins
may also be a controlling factor in the P. ×canadensis heterotic growth response
(Bate et al., 1988). Differences between P. ×wettsteinii and P. tremula genotypes
in the size of guard cells has been documented but is not clearly related to hybrid
vigor in the taxon (Yu, 2001).
The ﬁnancial impact of hybrid vigor is, as would be expected, of notable effect
in Populus: Economic analyses of Populus genetic improvement have demonstrated
internal rates of return approximating 13% for plantation operations with yield
increases of 10–15%, which supports using advanced generation Populus breed-
ing programs to achieve sustained advancement in heterosis (Van der Meiden,
1977). Five such long-term improvement programs illustrate the range of breeding
strategies in use throughout the world today. Three are based on F1 inter-speciﬁc
hybridization coupled with a variety of recurrent parental species selection pro-
grams; a fourth includes a combination of advanced generation techniques and poly-
ploid breeding; and the ﬁfth is an intra-speciﬁc recurrent breeding program. These
are: (1) the University of Minnesota’s Aspen-Larch Cooperative’s P. ×wettsteinii
program, (2) the Italian P. ×canadensis program led by the Poplar Research Institute
at Casale Monferrato, (3) GreenWood Resources’ P. ×generosa breeding program,
(4) Beijing Forestry University’s P. ×tomentosa’s breeding effort, and (5) the U.S.
Forest Service-Industrial P. deltoides program for the southeastern United States. A
critical element of all long-term breeding programs is the prediction of parental
breeding values. This is especially challenging when breeding F1 inter-speciﬁc
hybrids where the expense of managing multiple parental species via a reciprocal
recurrent breeding program may be prohibitive. To overcome this hurdle, a sim-
ple recurrent breeding program can be substituted for the more complicated and

Populus Breeding
321
involved reciprocal recurrent programs, especially if pure-species general combin-
ing ability estimates are a reliable gauge for general hybridizing ability (see Dungey,
2001; Nikles,1993 for a review in Pinus).
3.1 Examples of Long-Term Breeding Programs
P. ×wettsteinii – Modiﬁed Reciprocal Recurrent Selection – The P. ×wettsteinii
taxon is being developed for European plantations in Scandinavia and the Baltic
States (Rytter and Stener, 2003; Tullis et al., 2007). This taxon is also viewed favor-
ably in North America where the University of Minnesota has been hybridizing
P. ×wettsteinii since 1952 through its Aspen and Larch Genetics Cooperative in
support of the pulp and paper and the oriented strand board industries. Long-term
improvement is based upon full-sib reciprocal recurrent selection of P. tremuloides
and P. tremula for inter-speciﬁc heterosis in yield, in addition to improvements
in wood quality and Hypoxylon mammatum canker resistance (Li and Wyckoff,
1991). Breeding populations are sized at 150 individuals for each parental species
utilizing P. tremula selections from Poland, Germany, and The Netherlands, and
P. tremuloides selections from Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, and Saskatchewan.
Reciprocal crossing effects are non-existent and hybrid crosses are made in both
directions. The 300 genotypes of the two breeding populations are assigned to
25, 6 × 6 disconnected factorials to develop 900 full-sib F1 families for the ﬁrst
cycle of inter-speciﬁc progeny tests. Evaluation is conducted at age ﬁve leading to
the identiﬁcation of 100 parents of each species that are mated intra-speciﬁcally
using a circular mating design. A second evaluation of the inter-speciﬁc population
conducted at age 10 is then used to choose the top 75 parents whose intra-speciﬁc
progeny enter ﬁeld trials. (The purpose of the two-stage selection is to accelerate
the initiation of the intra-speciﬁc crosses to shorten the generation intervals; in this
sense the reciprocal recurrent selection program is modiﬁed.) One hundred and ﬁfty
selections of each species are grafted into clonal breeding orchards for use as par-
enting stock for the second cycle of ﬁrst generation inter-speciﬁc hybridization.
Disconnected factorials are again used to generate 900 inter-speciﬁc families; the
best 45 individuals are selected for clone deployment to commercial plantations.
P. ×canadensis – Semi-Reciprocal Recurrent Selection – The P. ×canadensis
inter-speciﬁc hybrid taxon is perhaps the world’s most widely planted, used in
operations on all ﬁve continents where Populus is grown. The most advanced
P. ×canadensis breeding program is conducted in Italy by the Poplar Research
Institute at Casale Monferrato in the Po River Valley (Bisofﬁand Gullberg, 1996).
Traditionally bred for the veneer industry, development of the taxon now also tar-
gets renewable energy feedstock. The main selection targets are growth rate and
Marssonina leaf spot resistance. The reciprocal crossing effect in P. × canadensis
has deﬁned the Italian strategy to the extent that parental inter-speciﬁc hybridizing
values can only be estimated for P. deltoides females and P. nigra males (Bisofﬁ,
1990). Thus, the program is known as semi-reciprocal recurrent selection.

322
B.J. Stanton et al.
The program began with 150 selections of P. deltoides and an equivalent number
of P. nigra selections that are managed as single breeding units, because interactions
between planting site and parental breeding values appear unimportant. Female P.
deltoides selections are evaluated for general hybridizing ability (GHA) in a P. nigra
polycross mating design. But because of the inability to reproduce the P. nigra ×
P. deltoides cross, general combining ability (GCA) estimates are relied upon in
the evaluation of P. nigra females using the same P. nigra pollen mix used in the
inter-speciﬁc polycross evaluation of female P. deltoides. Breeding value estimation
of P. deltoides (GCA) and P. nigra (GHA) males is based upon the common use of
a tester mating design of six P. deltoides females. As an alternative to conventional
polycross breeding, Wheeler et al. (2006) proposed combining this method with
paternity analysis for a P. deltoides × P. nigra reciprocal recurrent selection pro-
gram as a way to manage inbreeding in each of the parental species when individual
components of the pollen mixes vary insubstantially in reproductive success.
One noteworthy research ﬁnding of the Italian program has been the reason-
able correlation between parental genotypic values and GHA values for several
traits (Bisofﬁ, 1990). Genotypic values are now partially relied upon as surrogates
for breeding value estimates, because of the inability to reproduce the recipro-
cal cross. As such, clonal trials of parenting stock are important adjuncts in the
management of recurrent breeding populations, although conventional inter-speciﬁc
progeny tests still ﬁgure into the estimation of GHA values for female P. del-
toides and male P. nigra parents. The semi-reciprocal recurrent selection program
renews each generation with 300 selections of each species and a balanced sex
ratio. Improvement for growth traits emphasizes selection within full-sib families
while among-family selection is emphasized for Marssonina resistance. The Italian
program also includes a simple recurrent P. ×canadensis selection program to
develop a synthetic inter-speciﬁc hybrid species using the rationale that an addi-
tive model may be a more appropriate explanation for heterosis than one based on
overdominance.
P. ×generosa – Multiple Population Breeding – The P. ×generosa taxon has been
a staple of Populus culture in western Europe since the 1960s. In North America,
development of clonal plantations and controlled breeding began in the Paciﬁc
Northwest in the 1980s in response to a shortage of hardwood ﬁber for the man-
ufacture of high-quality communications-grade paper (Stettler et al., 1988). Drs.
Reinhard Stettler of the University of Washington and Paul Heilman of Washington
State University worked together on developing the region’s initial hybrid varieties
during the 1970–1980s. Today, GreenWood Resources manages 14,000 hectares of
Populus operations along the lower Columbia River ﬂoodplain on the windward side
of the Cascade Mountains and, on the leeward side, in the arid mid-Columbia River
basin for the production of quality saw logs on 12–15 year rotations using vari-
etal selections of the F1 P. ×generosa taxon. Long-term improvement began with
the assembly of breeding populations of both P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides. The
P. trichocarpa effort began with replicated clonal testing of 1,428 genotypes assem-
bled from 67 provenances along the windward slope of the Cascade Mountains
between 48◦56′ and 42◦56′ N latitude in Washington and Oregon leading to the
identiﬁcation of 328 superior genotypes. Paralleling this, a P. deltoides breeding

Populus Breeding
323
population was comprised of 204 second-generation clonal selections from 104 full-
sib families bred from superior ﬁrst generation clonal selections originating between
35◦14′ and 30◦36′ N latitude in Tennessee, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Genotypes
of each species are being re-tested to arrive at a ﬁnal breeding population of 144
individuals, the upper one-third of which will be assigned to one of three multilines
designed for the improvement of solidwood, bio-energy, and pulping applications.
Each multiline is managed with eight female and eight male genotypes that are
crossed intra-speciﬁcally using a circular mating design to develop superior selec-
tions – based on GCA estimates as well as genotypic values – for the second cycle of
F1 inter-speciﬁc hybridization. Parental genotypes not assigned to one of the three
multilines are managed as a single unit to allow for the creation of trait combinations
that would not occur otherwise.
P.
×tomentosa
–
Backcross,
multi-species
and
polyploid
breeding
–
P. ×tomentosa is a naturally-occurring hybrid of P. alba and P. tremula var. david-
iana (Zhang et al., 1995), although some consider it a hybrid of P. alba and
P. adenopoda. It is China’s most valuable native Populus planted throughout the
Yellow River drainage from Shanxi Province in the interior eastward to the coastal
province of Shandong. It is managed for the plywood and pulp and paper industries
and is valued for its growth rate, pest resistance, and wood quality. Few native stands
remain and today’s hybridization work relies upon backcross varieties developed
over 50 years ago. However, a concerted effort of phenotypic selection, provenance
evaluation, and family evaluation was initiated nearly 20 years ago for one of the
hybrid’s parental species, P. tremula var. davidiana (Li et al., 1999). Promising
new crosses with P. alba also have been accomplished, foreshadowing the possible
production of a second cycle of F1 P. ×tomentosa hybridization.
A national tree improvement program was launched in 1983 by Beijing
Forestry University. Initially 1,047 superior phenotypes were selected throughout
the hybrid’s natural range and established in provenance-clonal trials. This led to
the release of 12 genotypes for the commercial plywood and construction industry
with yield improvements of 40–50% (Zhu and Zhang, 1997). Continued breeding
relies on the original germplasm collection now established in breeding arboreta
and used in support of: (1) backcross hybridization of [P. ×tomentosa × P. alba
‘Bolleana’] × P. ×tomentosa primarily for the pulp and paper industry, and (2)
multi-species hybridization involving P. ×tomentosa × P. alba ‘Bolleana’ hybrids
in crosses with P. ×canescens, bigtooth aspen (P. grandidentata), Chinese aspen
(P. adenopoda), and P. tremuloides for the colder, arid region of northeastern
China and Inner Mongolia. A third approach – allotriploid breeding – is conducted
using diploid P. ×tomentosa pollen in crosses with normal haploid gametes of
P. ×tomentosa ×P. alba ‘Bolleana’ female selections (Zhu et al., 1995). Triploids
have also lately been bred using diploid P. ×tomentosa pollen in crosses with P. alba
× P. glandulosa F1 hybrid females (Wang et al., 2008). Polyploids are valued for
pulp and paper applications, because of their high cellulose-to-lignin ratio, increased
ﬁber length, and superior growth rate.
P. deltoides – Recurrent Selection for General Combining Ability – P. deltoides
is the genus’ most important species used as breeding and/or propagation stock
in North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. In North America, the

324
B.J. Stanton et al.
decline in natural regeneration along the Mississippi River in the 1960s gave rise
to a P. deltoides improvement program initiated by the U. S. Forest Service’s
Stoneville, Mississippi Experimental Station. (Inter-speciﬁc hybrids have not per-
formed well in this region, because of their susceptibility to Septoria stem canker.)
The Stoneville project began with a collection of 3,700 genotypes from provenances
of the Mississippi River between Memphis, Tennessee (35◦14′ N latitude) and
Baton Rouge, Louisiana (30◦36′ N latitude) and from the Brazos, Trinity, and
Red Rivers of east Texas and Oklahoma between 35◦57′ N and 30◦03′ N lati-
tude. These were screened in a number of replicated clonal ﬁeld trials culminating
in the identiﬁcation of 197 genotypes that were brought together and retested in
1980 in a series of cooperative industrial trials at Wickliffe, Kentucky (Westvaco
Corporation), Fitler, Mississippi (Crown Zellerbach Corporation), and Proﬁt Island,
Louisiana (Trans Match Corporation). The objective of these so-called advanced
clone trials was to determine the extent of genotype-by-environmental interac-
tions throughout the lower Mississippi River Valley when composing breeding
populations for long-term, recurrent selection and breeding (Cooper, 1980).
The goal has been a recurrent selection program for general combining abil-
ity for the production of multiple-purpose clones for pulpwood, saw timber, and
veneer (Cooper, 1976). Priority selection criteria have included adventitious root-
ing, growth rate, resistance to Melampsora leaf rust and Marssonina leaf spot,
and wood speciﬁc gravity (Robison et al., 2006). Because of an imbalanced
sex ratio in the ﬁrst-generation clonal collection, a male-in-female nested mating
design was proposed to develop the second-generation (Foster, 1984); 50 male
and 25 female selections theoretically could be mated hierarchically to generate
50 full-sib families, each represented by seven full sibs. From the resultant popu-
lation of 350 second-generation genotypes, combined selection would identify 36
genotypes for assignment to four, 4 × 5 disconnected factorials to generate 80
third-generation families of seven sibs (560 in total). Yield improvements through
the third generation were projected at 49% relative to unimproved base population
stock.
In 2000, Mississippi State University undertook a large-scale sampling of 64
provenances throughout the southeastern United States approximately between 75◦
and 90◦W longitude and 30◦and 36◦N latitude. Preliminary evaluations for leaf
rust and growth rate at multiple sites has identiﬁed new selections that compete
with the best commercial standards from the original U. S. Forest Service project
(Jeffreys et al., 2006). Furthermore, a signiﬁcant source of Melampsora rust resis-
tance has been identiﬁed within populations residing in the southeast Atlantic and
east Gulf regions (Land and Jeffreys, 2006).
4 Testing and Selection
Experimental Techniques – Populus genetic evaluation ﬁeld trials are, in nearly all
cases, clonally replicated in view of: (1) the added precision of estimating genetic
parameters and increases in genetic gain during recurrent selection (Shaw and Hood,

Populus Breeding
325
1985), and (2) the need to expedite the selection of new varieties required by
commercial ventures to substitute for the lowest-ranking varieties presently in use
(Foster and Shaw, 1988). Replication of individual genotypes has the potential for
creating very large test populations and, as a consequence, a multiple-stage eval-
uation process has been recommended to accommodate such sizable experiments
(Libby, 1987). The number of genotypes is sequentially reduced between test stages
with attendant increases in replication, spacing, test locations, and rotation (Cooper,
1976). Typically, testing begins with seedling populations that undergo combined
family and within-family selection. Selected genotypes are then clonally replicated
in ﬁrst-stage ﬁeld trials; these evaluate clones grown in small-sized plots where
inter-genotypic competition is unchecked and are usually established at multiple
sites (Riemenschneider et al., 2001). The ﬁnal stage involves a limited number of
highly-selected clones that are established in monoclonal plots of sufﬁcient size to
provide reliable growth and yield estimates.
Assuming that a ﬁxed amount of resources place a limit on the number of
experimental plants, the optimum combination of clones and ramets in preliminary
screening trials is based upon the desired degree of genetic gain, expected level of
clonal variance, and the required precision of selection. The most frequently chosen
experimental design approximates dozens to several hundred clones tested in mul-
tiple, three- to ﬁve-tree row plots, and planted using a randomized complete block
design of four to12 replicates (Ares, 2002; Hansen et al., 1992; Isik and Toplu, 2004;
Koo et al., 2007; Riemenschneider et al., 2001; Yu and Pulkkinen, 2003; Zhang
et al., 2008). Cooper (1976) reported the success of a variety of incomplete block
designs, e.g. triple, balanced, and cubic lattices, in accounting for edaphic variation
in P. deltoides clonal tests. Today, row-column designs3 are considered preferable
to the randomized complete block design for clonal evaluations based on simula-
tion studies that show increases in precision of up to 10% (Gezan et al., 2006a).
Related to the issue of optimum experimental designs is the correct number of repli-
cations and plot structure for clonal testing: Replication rates of two-to-six ramets
per genotype as single-tree plots are considered to provide the greatest experimental
efﬁciency dependent on micro-site variability and clonal repeatability (Gezan et al.,
2006b; Isik et al., 2005; Russell and Libby, 1986, Fig. 5). Statistical efﬁciencies have
also been achieved in experiments of Populus clonal adaptability to varying nutri-
tion and salinity levels through the use of analyses of covariance that account for
variation in the dimension of the propagation stock used to initiate ﬁeld trials (Fung
et al., 1998; van den Driessche, 1999). More recently, mixed model techniques have
been developed to account for the covariance of within-clone residual effects to fur-
ther increase the precision of Populus clonal comparisons (Zamudio et al., 2008).
A mid-rotation or later schedule has been the longstanding recommendation
for the timing of varietal selections for growth and yield improvement in Populus
(Mohrdiek, 1979; Zsuffa, 1975). An early report by Cooper and Ferguson (1979)
3Row-column designs are experimental designs that control or block site heterogeneity that occurs
in two directions.

326
B.J. Stanton et al.
Fig. 5 Multiple-tree plots may not lend as much experimental efﬁciency as single-tree plots
assuming the same number of ramets per clone. In this photograph of one replicate of a ﬁve-tree
row plot, little micro-environmental variation is detected among the ﬁrst four ramets in the plot.
This provides little additional accuracy compared to an independent randomization of the ﬁve trees
as single-ramet plots over a wider area
showed that rotation-age selection for height and diameter in P. deltoides resulted
in two to three times the magnitude of improvement when selections were made
at approximately one-third of a rotation length. Yet within the context of Libby’s
(1987) multiple-stage test protocol, truncation of base populations using a relatively
low level of selection intensity at preliminary stages to identify a subset that under-
goes more concentrated testing now is in vogue in many Populus testing programs.
Kumar and Singh (2001) suggested using a 60% truncation rate for P. deltoides
clonal test populations at age two to maintain a reasonable certainty that the top
clones are included in the ﬁnal age-four evaluation. Yet when viewed from the
perspective of gain-per-unit time, early selections of individual genotypes for rota-
tion performance may stand on their own merits: An evaluation of P. ×wettsteinii
demonstrated that selection of cloned genotypes for stem volume at age three was
two and one-half times as efﬁcient as selection at age nine, based on an annualized
rate of improvement (Stener and Karlsson, 2004). However, these authors also point
out that early selection in P. ×wettsteinii is compromised by the inability to evalu-
ate Hypoxylon canker resistance that does not express itself until much later during
stand development. Furthermore, inspection of P. deltoides clone trials in Argentina
in which one-third of the clonal distribution underwent signiﬁcant changes in growth
ranking between the third and 9th years concluded, as did Kumar and Singh (2001),
that early selections are best focused on groups of clones rather than individual
genotypes (Ares, 2002). Thus the mid-rotation recommendation generally remains

Populus Breeding
327
valid for growth and yield traits. Matyas and Peszlen (1997) further extended this
recommendation to the selection of wood quality traits where early stage selec-
tions for speciﬁc gravity, modulus of rupture, and modulus of elasticity proved
unreliable.
Statistical techniques employed for Populus varietal evaluation have focused
on three areas: (1) simultaneous selection for multiple traits, (2) classiﬁcation
of clonal phenotypes for extended testing, and (3) accounting for the effects of
genotype-by-environment interaction. Initially, the need to select Populus cultivars
for a multiplicity of traits was accommodated by the construction of independent
culling levels. A good example is the use of selection thresholds for growth rate,
resistance to Marssonina brunnea, and Melampsora spp. leaf diseases, stem form,
and wood quality in the selection of clones for quality veneer log production for
Portugal’s match stick industry (Monteiro, 1988). Alternatively, index selection is
now more frequently used in the evaluation of multiple criteria, especially in view
of the developing deﬁnition of Populus ideotypes that has extended the range of
target traits to several morphological and physiological variables. Riemenschneider
et al. (1992) utilized this technique where restricted indices were used to check
unfavorable correlations between growth and pathogen susceptibility that would
otherwise compromise overall genetic gains in growth rate.
The need to group Populus genotypes for extended testing has relied upon mul-
tivariate analysis techniques. For example, Tharakan et al. (2001) used cluster
analysis to select the best subset of 38 Populus and willow clones for yield tri-
als based on covariances in stem volume, growing season length, and survival.
Abrahamson et al. (1990) used the same multivariate technique to categorize the
performance of 54 clones of diverse taxa to identify an optimum class for immedi-
ate operational use in coppice rotations, as well as a separate class for extensive site
adaptability testing. Riemenschneider et al. (2001) used principal component analy-
sis to categorize best-adapted sets of clones for regional deployment. Isik and Toplu
(2004) also used principal component analysis to distinguish genotypes within a
clonal collection of P. nigra and P. ×canadensis based on co-variation in growth,
stem form, apical dominance, branching, spring and autumnal phenology.
Genotype-by-environment interactions have been reported as variously signiﬁ-
cant in Populus clonal testing but include notable occurrences where the interaction
component of variance for growth exceeded the clonal component by 85% in one
P. ×wettsteinii study (Yu and Pulkkinen, 2003), and by 51% in a study of predomi-
nately P. deltoides intra- and inter-speciﬁc varieties (Riemenschneider et al., 2001).
Yet, it has been shown several times that individual genotypes of good commercial
appeal can be found that perform well across a range of environments with striking
contrasts in climate and soils (Wu and Stettler, 1997). Broadly-adapted varieties are
often the selection objective. Analysis techniques to identify such genotypes have
made use of standard phenotypic stability parameters – slope coefﬁcients and mean
square deviations from the linear regression of genotypic means on environmental
means. This approach has been used to evaluate P. tremula var. davidiana clone
trials in Korea (Koo et al., 2007) and in the analysis of P. ×wettsteinii clonal perfor-
mance in Finland (Yu and Pulkkinen, 2003). Similar to genotype-by-environmental

328
B.J. Stanton et al.
interaction analyses, has been the treatment of P. ×generosa genotype-by-time
interactions in periodic growth increments that were analyzed using a spit-plot
design for repeated measurements to partition the interaction variance into its linear
and quadratic components to identify selections suited to short rotation management
(Stanton, 2001).
Selection Criteria – Reﬂecting the suitability of its wood for a wide diversity
of markets, Populus breeding has focused on an equally wide array of improvement
criteria. However, improvement in agronomic characteristics – yield, climatic adapt-
ability, adventitious rooting, disease resistance, etc. – invariably has been the priority
in breeding programs. Wood quality also has received attention, mostly focused
on improvements in speciﬁc gravity. This focus is expanding now to include more
routine evaluations of physical and chemical wood components in light of the esca-
lating interest in Populus biomass energy feedstock and the advent of increasingly
affordable and reliable assessment methods.
Growth rate variation in preliminary stage clone trials is usually quantiﬁed in
terms of stem height and diameter as surrogates for individual tree volume, itself an
indicator of stand yield. Between the two, stem diameter has proven over a lengthy
period to be the more important, because it is more easily and more accurately mea-
sured and has a much larger impact on the determination of stem volume (Mohn
and Randall, 1971). Clonal repeatabilities typically fall within a range of 0.40–0.70
depending whether they are calculated on an individual tree, or on a clone mean
basis and whether they are reported for an entire population or a within-family basis.
Predicted levels of gain are often substantial as illustrated in the following:
1. Selection of the top 10% of a P. ×wettsteinii clonal distribution evaluated across
multiple sites at age nine predicted a 45% increase in stem volume based on
a broad-sense heritability of 0.39 (individual tree basis) (Stener and Karlsson,
2004);
2. Selection for site-speciﬁc clone performance in P. ×tomentosa predicted a 34%
improvement in 5th-year stem volume based on the use of the topmost one-third
of the clonal distribution and a clone mean repeatability of 0.90 (Zhang et al.,
2008);
3. Selection of the uppermost 5% of the distribution of a P. deltoides × P. simonii
clonal population was associated with an estimated 51% improvement in 6th-
year volume with repeatabilities of clone mean height and diameter of 0.93 and
0.95, respectively (Wu et al., 1992);
4. Selection of the top 12% of the multiple-site clone ranking in a P. ×wettsteinii
experiment in which genotype-by-site interactions were highly signiﬁcant led to
predicted increases in 3rd-year stem diameter growth of 15% associated with a
clonal repeatability of 0.52 (clone mean basis) (Yu and Pulkkinen, 2003);
5. Selection of approximately the best 8% of the clone distribution at each of
three sites resulted in an estimated improvement in age six yield of 23–89%
(Riemenschneider et al., 2001); and,
6. Selection of approximately the top 12% of the genotype distribution in a multi-
site P. tremula var. davidiana clone trial equated to a selection differential in
12th-year stem volume of 19% (Koo et al., 2007).

Populus Breeding
329
Survival as a component of yield in short-rotation clonal plantations has a
greater impact on productivity than individual stem volume when survival rates
fall below 90% (Chambers and Borralho, 1997). Thus clonal evaluation for the
ability to undergo vegetative propagation at consistently high establishment rates
is quite important and, dependent upon the taxon in question, is an afterthought,
challenging, or frustratingly elusive. For instance, section Tacamahaca and their
inter-sectional hybrids propagate easily from un-rooted, 1-year-old hardwood cut-
tings when compared with species and intra-sectional hybrids of section Aigeiros
(Zalesny et al., 2005). On the other hand, hardwood cutting propagation of
P. deltoides is often quite variable, though good selection opportunities exist within
southerly populations with clonal repeatabilities for number of roots (individual tree
basis) varying between 0.33 and 0.53 dependent on soil type (Wilcox and Farmer,
1968). However C-effects often associated with the position from which cuttings
are taken from stock plants, will potentially confound genetic effects in any clonal
evaluation of adventitious rooting ability (Farmer et al., 1989; Zalesny at el. 2003).
Schroeder and Walker (1991) showed, for example, that cuttings taken from the
basal portion of 1-year-old nursery whips rooted with an increased frequency of
30% and produced sprouts that were 16% taller at the end of the ﬁrst season when
compared with cuttings of the same genotype cut from the distal portion of the
whip. In section Populus, vegetative propagation from hardwood stem cuttings is
extremely problematic, and cloning has resorted to either root cuttings or succu-
lent stem cuttings propagated under mist as containerized, greenhouse-grown stock
(Haapala et al., 2004; Stenvall et al., 2006). The genotype factor is again of crit-
ical importance. Stenvall et al. (2006) reported more than a ﬁvefold difference in
rooting percentage among P. ×wettsteinii clones grown from root cuttings. Haapala
et al. (2004) reported similar ﬁndings in P. ×wettsteinii using succulent cuttings
where survival varied among clones between 36 and 85% when using a hedge prop-
agation system and between 0 and 89% when using a serial propagation method.
Selection opportunities to improve the success of succulent stem cutting propaga-
tion of P. alba have been reported where the clonal repeatability for adventitious
root initiation and establishment is 0.34 (Harfouche et al., 2007).
Another class of biomass productivity components – morphological and physio-
logical characteristics – has also been extensively studied in Populus. Most notably,
these are associated with leaf area, both on an individual leaf basis as well as a whole
crown basis (Harrington et al., 1997; Li et al., 1997; Marron et al., 2007). The hope
has been that such characteristics used as indirect selection criteria might provide for
greater selection efﬁciency compared with clonal evaluations based solely on yield,
dependent on the degree of genetic control, genotypic co-variances, and the age and
cost with which they can be assessed. While an active area of research, morpholog-
ical and physiological traits have not yet played a role in applied Populus breeding;
estimates of genetic parameters will partially determine how well they fulﬁll their
potential role. To illustrate, Monclus et al. (2005) calculated a broad-sense heritabil-
ity of 0.63 for maximum seasonal leaf area in a clonal P. ×canadensis population
where variation was associated with biomass production with a linear correlation
coefﬁcient of 0.74. A similar correlation coefﬁcient of 0.84 was observed for the

330
B.J. Stanton et al.
linear relationship between individual leaf area and biomass production in a high-
density coppice system of mostly P. ×generosa genotypes (Bunn et al., 2004). Rae
et al. (2004) also demonstrated that biomass production in a P. ×generosa cop-
pice system was associated with clonal variation in individual leaf area, the number
of leaves on the dominant sprout, and leaf plastochron index that, in turn, exhib-
ited within-family, broad-sense heritabilities varying between 0.37 and 0.62. In a
limited number of P. deltoides and P. ×canadensis genotypes, Dowell et al. (2009)
presented evidence that the more productive ones were also those that could be char-
acterized by higher levels of cumulative leaf area indices throughout the course of
the growing season. Finally, Bonhomme et al. (2008) determined linear correlations
for the P. ×canadensis taxon between stem growth and several leaf traits that were
non-signiﬁcant in some instances, e. g. speciﬁc leaf area, r = 0.35, while signiﬁcant
in others, e.g. foliar nutrient contents, r = 0.62–0.50.
Orlovic et al. (1998) extended the list of potential indicators of biomass produc-
tivity to thickness of the palisade parenchyma leaf tissue and the number of stomata
on the adaxial leaf surface in P. ×canadensis both of which exhibit moderately
strong broad sense heritabilities, e.g. 0.52 – 0.62, and reasonable phenotypic corre-
lations with yield based on genotypic means, e.g. 0.66–0.84. Regardless of whether
morphological and physiological selection criteria fulﬁll a role as indirect selec-
tion criteria for segregating populations under evaluation they will be, nonetheless,
important when choosing species for inter-speciﬁc hybridization programs based on
trait complementation (Marron et al., 2007) or when deﬁning selection objectives
for speciﬁc markets or end products (Scarascia-Mugnozza et al., 1997).
Selection for pest resistance has been of great importance since the inception
of Populus breeding due to the challenge posed primarily by a range of pathogens
that infect both crown and stem. The genetics of pathogen resistance has been most
extensively studied in Melampsora leaf rust and involves both qualitative and quan-
titative components (Dowkiw and Bastien, 2007; Lefevre et al., 1998; Newcombe,
1998; Newcombe and Ostry, 2001). Qualitative resistance is expressed in the host’s
hypersensitive response to infection conditioned by major genes whose effect is
mediated by modifying genes. When the hypersensitive response is lacking, poly-
genic resistance comes into play as a quantitative expression of variation in latent
period, sporulation rate, and the number and size of uredina. Although a number
of laboratory procedures have been developed to assess the components of leaf rust
resistance, genotype selection is regularly evaluated in the ﬁeld using a categor-
ical scoring method (Fig. 6). Although not measured as a true metric character,
resistance has been invariably treated as such in quantitative analyses that report
clonal repeatabilities of 0.50–0.80 (Jokela, 1966; Thielges and Adams, 1975). Stem-
cankering pathogens are also important in Populus breeding, with Septoria musiva
and Hypoxylon mammatum recognized as the most serious threats. Resistance eval-
uation involves ﬁeld trials, but oftentimes incorporates artiﬁcial stem inoculations
to increase the reliability of genetic selections that differentiate pathogen resistance
from pathogen escape (Enebak et al., 1999; Weiland et al., 2003). Resistance to
Septoria canker may be conditioned by the thickness of the periderm and the for-
mation of necrophylactic periderm as a pathogen-containing response following

Populus Breeding
331
Fig. 6 Selection for ﬁeld resistance to Melampsora leaf rust can be decidedly effective. Pictured
are 2-year-old test ramets of a highly susceptible clone in the foreground growing alongside a
highly resistant variety in the background. The taxon is P. ×generosa and the tree spacing is
1.9 × 1.9 m
infection (Weiland and Stanosz, 2007). Hypoxylon canker resistance in P. tremu-
loides involves the development of a ligniﬁed response zone within proximity of the
infection followed by rapid development of callus tissue (Bucciarelli et al., 1999).
Unlike the Melampsora system where testing for resistance to a range of pathotypes
is important, the same consideration seems less critical in screening for Septoria
canker resistance where a more stable pathosystem may exist (LeBoldus et al., 2008;
Ward and Ostry, 2005).
Speciﬁc gravity has been the most commonly evaluated wood quality trait
included in Populus breeding programs, usually as a component of biomass yield
(Farmer and Wilcox, 1968; Olson et al., 1985) but also as an attribute of wood
quality (Mutibaric, 1971). It normally shows moderate to strong levels of clonal
repeatability that can reach as high as 0.90 (Song et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2003)
but often is coupled with a limited range of variation relative to growth variables,
e.g. coefﬁcient of genotypic variation less than 10% (Pliura et al., 2007; Song et al.,
1997). The relationship between speciﬁc gravity and radial growth is of keen inter-
est and has varied from non-signiﬁcant (Zhang et al., 2003) to weakly negative

332
B.J. Stanton et al.
(Ivkovich, 1996; Song et al., 1997), leading to the recommendation that simulta-
neous selection for clones of above average growth and speciﬁc gravity is possible.
However, negative genotypic correlations between stem volume and wood speciﬁc
gravity that are of moderate or moderately-strong effect (e. g. –0.59 to –0.74) have
led to the opposing recommendation that selection should be based on an integrated
measure of the two – dry ﬁber weight – as opposed to selection to improve both
simultaneously (Olsen et al., 1985; Pliura et al., 2007). Genetic improvement oppor-
tunities for Populus renewable energy feedstock – speciﬁc gravity, lignin content,
etc. – are now of growing interest (Davis, 2008). Frequently, these traits are being
quantiﬁed for large populations under selection using near infrared spectrometry.
Maranan and Laborie (2007 and 2008) reported correlations between near infrared
spectral data and selected wood chemical and physical properties within a range
of 0.80–0.95. Schimleck et al. (2005) also reported a similarly strong predictive
relationship, i.e. r = 0.94, for cellulose content in Populus using near infrared
spectroscopy.
5 Translational Genomics
We deﬁne translational genomics as the research and development process that
bridges the basic discovery phase and the application phase in commercial breeding
programs. This has often been neglected, because the motivation for applica-
tion is sometimes lacking among academic researchers, and the development of
genomic tools is too basic for applied programs with little or no research budgets.
Translational research is an important and active area in human medical research
and is increasingly seen as very important in agriculture and forestry. In traditional
forest tree breeding there has been little, if any, gap between the basic and applied
phases. As we saw earlier in this chapter, it was often academic researchers who
developed Populus hybrids that were quickly used in plantations. However, with the
emergence of biotechnologies and genomics sciences, it can be a long way from
the discovery of a gene to the release of a new variety or improved populations. In
the United States and elsewhere, research cooperatives have taken a quasi transla-
tional role, but these cooperatives have had difﬁculty sustaining ﬁnancial support
and many have disappeared. Notably in the United States, the Poplar Molecular
Genetics Cooperative led by Dr. Toby Bradshaw at the University of Washington
in Seattle, Washington sought to bring genomics-based breeding to application in
Populus breeding. This program was probably too early for its time and is badly
needed now that massive genomics resources are available. However there is no
infrastructure currently in place to translate this resource and knowledge base into
application.
In response to this widening gap between basic genomic discovery and direct
application in plant breeding, the United States Department of Agriculture devel-
oped the Plant Genome Coordinated Agricultural Product (CAP) as a publicly-
funded program to bring discovery to application in crop and forest tree breeding in

Populus Breeding
333
the United States. Each year, a research group focused on a single crop species is
awarded a grant of ﬁve million dollars for four years. Awards have been made for
rice, wheat, barley, Solanaceae and conifers. The conifer CAP is called the Conifer
Translational Genomics Network (www.pinegenome.org/ctgn) and is a consortium
of six universities, four tree breeding cooperatives, and the United States Forest
Service. A similar forest tree translational genomics project also was funded in
Europe. It is called NovelTree (www.noveltree.eu). A translational genomics project
for Populus has not yet been funded but planning is underway for a Populus CAP in
the United States.
Broadly deﬁned, translational genomics might include all biotechnological
approaches to tree improvement. These include traditional breeding, marker-based
breeding, and transgenic or genetically modiﬁed trees (White et al., 2007). In
this chapter, we focus entirely on marker-based breeding (see Chapter 19, White
et al., 2007). Readers are referred to a number of excellent reviews on transgenic
approaches (Strauss et al., 2004). Before marker-based breeding can be applied,
associations between genetic markers and traits of interest must be discovered. We
will ﬁrst brieﬂy review how marker-trait associations are found and summarize the
state of this knowledge in Populus. A more detailed review of this topic can be found
in Section 2.2 of this volume.
5.1 Discovery of Marker-Trait Associations
There are many approaches to discovering marker-trait associations (see Chapter 18,
White et al., 2007). These include: (1) two-point linkage analysis between a marker
and a qualitatively inherited trait such as a disease resistance gene, (2) quantitative
trait locus (QTL) mapping, and (3) association genetics. All three approaches have
been used in several Populus species and for a variety of traits, e.g. bud phenology,
water use efﬁciency, disease resistance, biomass production and others; however, the
catalog of validated marker-trait associations is very limited (see Section 2.2). The
two-point linkage approach has been used successfully a number of times to map
single genes coding for resistance to Populus leaf rust (Melampsora spp.) (reviewed
by Feau et al., 2007). QTL mapping has been used to identify map locations of QTLs
for a number of quantitative traits but, in fact, the number of validated marker-trait
associations found through QTL mapping is so limited that this knowledge base
could never support a marker-based breeding program of any kind in any species.
For the reasons described in Section 2.2, the QTL approach is rarely used in Populus.
The association genetics approach holds much more promise for identifying
marker-trait associations in Populus and other trees (Neale and Savolainen, 2004;
Neale and Ingvarsson, 2008) and is now the method of choice in Populus (Section
2.2). There are several steps in the implementation of an association genetics
research program that we will review for Populus. We will also identify gaps in the
Populus discovery stream that will need to be ﬁlled before genomic-based breed-
ing can be fully realized. The steps in the discovery process include: (1) population

334
B.J. Stanton et al.
development, (2) test site establishment, (3) candidate gene identiﬁcation, (4) rese-
quencing and SNP discovery, (5) genotyping platform development, (6) phenotypic
evaluation, and (7) tests for association and validation. The status of each of these
steps is summarized for several species and association genetics studies around the
world in Table 2.
Population development and test site establishment – To begin, association
genetics studies have been initiated in just a few Populus species (P. deltoides,
P. nigra, P. tremula and P. trichocarpa). Earlier in this chapter we described
four inter-speciﬁc taxa that are of most interest (P. ×canadensis, P. ×generosa,
P. ×tomentosa, and P. ×wettsteinii). Perhaps not so coincidentally, the parentage
of these hybrids frequently involves all of the species listed above for which associ-
ation genetics studies have been initiated. However, association genetic studies are
lacking in three other similarly important species – P. alba, P. maximowiczii, and
P. tremuloides. A resequencing and SNP discovery project is underway in P. alba
as will be discussed in the next section.
Forest tree association genetics populations can be either clonal, family-based
or both (Neale and Savolainen, 2004). There are relative merits to each pop-
ulation type (Gonzalez-Martinez et al., 2007). In Populus, clonal propagation
is easy and is used in all of the populations listed in Table 2. This not only
increases heritability but also allows for establishment of multiple test sites and
estimation of genotype-by-environment interactions, something that nearly all
studies have employed. Population sizes vary from 350 (P. tremula) to 1,100
(P. trichocarpa) in the ongoing United States Department of Energy’s Bioenergy
Science Center4 – University of British Columbia joint study. More is always
better, but these population sizes are probably of adequate power to detect
associations.
Candidate gene selection, resequencing and SNP identiﬁcation – Resequencing
and SNP discovery using ﬁrst generation sequencing technology dictated that a
candidate gene-based approach be used, because genome-wide resequencing was
not feasible. This situation has changed dramatically with the completion of the
P. trichocarpa reference genome sequence (Tuskan et al., 2006) and the release of
second generation sequencing platforms. All projects listed in Table 2 will employ
the genome-wide resequencing approach as resources become available and costs go
down. At this time, however, most are still using a candidate gene approach employ-
ing either ﬁrst or second generation sequencing platforms. The Populus genome
contains ∼45,000 genes, so ideally all genes will ultimately be resequenced. In prac-
ticality, a fewer number of genes have been or will be resequenced in these projects
simply due to limited resources. It is expected that as second generation sequencing
platforms are used and as third generation platforms become available, all projects
will resequence all 45,000 genes if not entire genomes.
4The Bioenergy Science Center is a research afﬁliation of 10 organizations operating under the
auspices of the United States Department of Energy and the leadership of the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.

Populus Breeding
335
Table 2 Summary of worldwide Populus association genetics projects
Species
Clones
Test sites
Genes
SNPs
Phenotypes
Positive
associations
Reference
Lab
P. trichocarpa
457
3
40
1,486
Lignin content, S/G ratio
37
N/A
University California,
Davis, USA, David Neale
P. trichocarpa
1,100
3
7,000
N/A
Lignin/cellulose,
water-use-efﬁciency,
phenology, wood
properties
N/A
N/A
University of British
Columbia, Canada, Carl
Douglas
P. trichocarpa
1,100
3
1,000
N/A
Lignin/cellulose
N/A
N/A
Department of Energy,
Bioenergy Science
Center, USA, Gerald
Tuskan
P. deltoides
815
1
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
University of Florida, USA,
Matias Kirst
P. nigra
612
2
40
1,237
Lignin/cellulose
N/A
N/A
University of California,
Davis, USA, David Neale
P. nigra
398
1
20
53
Phenology, biomass, leaf
development
3
N/A
University Southampton,
U.K., Gail Taylor
P. tremula
350
2
40
100
Phenology, senescence,
herbivory
4
Ingvarsson
et al.
(2008)
Umea Plant Science Center,
Sweden Stefan Jansson,
Par Ingvarsson,

336
B.J. Stanton et al.
Candidate gene selection is determined by a priori or suggestive knowledge of
which genes control certain phenotypes. Three approaches are generally used for
candidate gene identiﬁcation: (1) known function in model systems, (2) gene expres-
sion analysis, or (3) map co-location with QTLs. For some traits, pathways and
genes within pathways are quite well known, e.g. lignin and cellulose biosynthesis.
This approach was used in the joint University of California, Davis – GreenWood
Resource P. trichocarpa and P. nigra projects and the Umea Plant Science Center5
P. tremula project because resources allowed only a few candidate genes to be
sequenced using ﬁrst generation sequencing platforms. The P. trichocarpa projects
of the Bioenergy Science Center and the University of British Columbia were more
recently started and both are using second generation sequencing platforms. These
projects will sequence many more genes so candidate selection does not have to be
so restrictive.
Once genes or genomes are resequenced in a diversity panel of some kind, it
is then necessary to identify the polymorphic nucleotide position – the so-called
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Resequencing can also identify inser-
tion/deletion (indel) polymorphism but the bioinformatics associated with indels
is much more complex thus indels are often ignored. This will certainly change in
the future as human geneticists are ﬁnding that indel variation can be responsible
for much of the phenotypic variation in populations. An example of indel variation
having a large effect on the phenotype is the CAD null indel that was discovered
in loblolly pine that affects lignin properties (Gill et al., 2003). Presently, SNPs
have been reported for just three of the active association genetics projects: the
joint University of California, Davis – GreenWood Resource P. trichocarpa and
P. nigra projects, and the Umea Plant Science Center P. tremula project. The fre-
quency of the SNPs uncovered in these projects is roughly one in 100 base pairs.
Modern population genomic methods can then be applied to estimate measures of
nucleotide diversity and divergence as well as test for selection (see Section 2.2 for
a comprehensive treatment of these methods and reports in Populus).
SNP genotyping platforms – Once the SNPs have been discovered in a diver-
sity panel, each SNP can then be typed for each individual of the association
population. Full genome sequences or even candidate gene sequences, for every
member of an association population of 500–1,000 individuals has, to date, been
prohibitively expensive. Because there are a large number of high throughput
genotyping platforms on the market and these technologies change rapidly, SNP
genotyping platforms will not be discussed in detail here. The only Populus associ-
ation genetics project to date that has used one of these platforms is the University
of California, Davis – GreenWood Resource P. trichocarpa. This project used the
Illumina Golden Gate assay to type 1,536 SNPs in the full association population
5The Umea Plant Science Center located in Umea, Sweden is a research center in plant biology
formed in 1999 from the Department of Plant Physiology, Umea University and the Department of
Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.

Populus Breeding
337
of 457 clones. The other projects listed in Table 2 will use the same or similar tech-
nology. These SNP genotyping platforms can type up to 50,000 or more SNPs in
parallel at a cost less than $0.01 per data point. So it is clear that Populus associ-
ation populations will be genotyped for tens of thousands of SNPs from nearly all
Populus genes in the next couple of years. Once this task is completed, the SNP
genotype database will be somewhat complete and then all the attention focuses on
the phenotype side of the process.
Trait phenotyping – The challenges and issues associated with trait phenotyping
in association studies are not different from those in normal breeding programs, so
will not be discussed in great detail here. The trait types being evaluated in associ-
ation studies (Table 2) are much the same as have always been of interest (growth,
biomass, wood properties, disease resistance, adaptation, etc). With the increasing
interest in Populus as a feedstock for cellulosic ethanol, many studies are putting
a high priority on lignin and cellulose quantity and quality (Davis, 2008). Other
traits related to the decomposition of cellulose to simple sugars and fermentation
will also be of great interest. The molecular phenotypes, e.g. transcriptome, pro-
teome and metabolome, are also target phenotypes in association studies. By taking
an integrated “omic” approach all the way through to complex, whole plant pheno-
types, it becomes possible to take a network approach to association genetics and
begin understanding epistatic interactions at the molecular level.
Tests of association – Once genotypic and phenotypic data are in hand for all
members of an association population, it is possible to test for associations. The
type of test performed depends on the population type. For example, the transmis-
sion disequilibrium test (TDT) has often been used with human parent-offspring
data but such a test would not likely be applied in Populus. Rather, a variation on this
test, the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test (QTDT) might be used where
there is a family structure in the population (Gonzalez-Martinez et al., 2007). The
populations given in Table 2 generally lack a family structure so simple regression
(GLM) based methods are possible. However, the confounding effects of family
and population structure must be taken in to account and corrected. The other
issue that must be addressed is that of multiple testing. Generally, some type of
false discovery rate probability is determined. New methods of association testing
are being developed continuously and will certainly add to the power and pre-
cision of association testing. But, as always, advanced statistical approaches can
never make up for poor experimental design and/or poor quality genotyping and
phenotyping.
5.2 Marker-Assisted Selection
Once a large number of marker-trait associations are discovered, it will be possi-
ble to develop marker-assisted selection programs in Populus species. White et al.
(2007) distinguish between marker-assisted selection (MAS) and marker-assisted
breeding (MAB). MAS is deﬁned as the selection of superior trees based on their

338
B.J. Stanton et al.
molecular genotype, whereas MAB includes broader applications of markers, such
as quality control and breeding designs, in tree improvement programs. We will
only consider MAS in this chapter. White et al. (2007) further distinguish two gen-
eral approaches to MAS: (1) indirect selection based on genetic markers linked to
desirable QTLs, and (2) direct selection based on desirable alleles at genetic loci
controlling target traits. Grattapaglia (2007) deﬁnes approaches (1) and (2) as link-
age equilibrium and linkage disequilibrium approaches, respectively. Grattapaglia
(2007) further deﬁnes direct selection when the functional mutation (quantitative
trait nucleotide, QTN) itself can be directly selected upon. Again, we will only con-
sider the MAS linkage disequilibrium approach in this chapter. Another approach
that is being developed for application in dairy cattle and other livestock species
is called genomic selection (Dekkers and Hospital, 2002). The general idea behind
genomic selection is that a very large number of markers can be used to predict
breeding values, even if marker-trait associations are not known. This approach is
dependent on the extent and distribution of linkage disequilibrium in the genome.
In Section 2.2, Ingvarsson presented the concept of linkage disequilibrium and its
relevance to detecting marker-trait associations in Populus. Furthermore, Ingvarsson
describes the extremely low level of linkage disequilibrium found in Populus pop-
ulations such that any marker (generally a SNP) associating with or controlling a
phenotype would likely be within the genetic locus, or at an extremely close physical
distance. If haplotypes can be established for genetic loci associating with pheno-
types, full allelic discrimination is expressed at that genetic locus. Furthermore,
it is possible using standard quantitative genetic methods to estimate the size and
direction of effects of haplotypes (alleles). If haplotypes and haplotype effects are
established for large numbers of genetic loci such that a large portion of the pheno-
type variance for a target trait can be accounted for, the reagents are now in place to
practice direct MAS.
MAS will undoubtedly be combined with some form of phenotypic selection
in either a sequential and/or combined manner. In a sequential approach, a large
amount of breeding material might be screened with markers only to identify the
smaller amount of material that would be ﬁeld tested and phenotypically evaluated.
Final selections might be made using index selection with multiple traits and mark-
ers. The exact way in which MAS will be applied in Populus breeding is yet to be
developed, but it is quite certain that marker data will be abundant and inexpen-
sive to obtain. The challenge remains as to how to fully capture the value of nearly
complete information on a tree’s genotype.
6 Conclusion
One signiﬁcant advantage enjoyed by Populus breeders is the extensive knowledge
of natural variation in phenological and eco-physiological traits. Complimenting
this is the insight into the physiological and morphological determinants of yield
and pathogen resistance that characterize segregating populations. Armed with such

Populus Breeding
339
extensive knowledge, Populus breeders can look forward to widespread application
to selection programs offering greater precision and earlier schedules. However, this
expectation has not yet been fully realized in most operational breeding programs,
where evaluation and selection remains focused on integrated traits, e. g. climatic
adaptability, biomass production and pest resistance. Although this has worked
extraordinarily well to advance the number of productive and well-adapted geno-
types now used commercially, the reality is that as productive genotypes continue
to materialize future selection thresholds will increase. This presents a greater chal-
lenge to sustained genetic advancement. New methodologies are warranted, then, if
this challenge is to be surmounted, and molecular tools are rapidly approaching their
practical utility in dissecting the inheritance of complex traits that will lead to more
effective manipulation and evaluation techniques (Stanton, 2009). At the same time,
the ﬁeld of plant phenomics is developing a rich assortment of imaging techniques to
improve analyses of plant growth and performance, which should accelerate the use
of molecular tools and translational genomics programs. A recent article in Science
assessed the importance of phenomics, stating that it allows “. . . plant physiologists
to “catch up” with genomics. . .” and plant breeders to “. . . shift breeding into over-
drive.”6 This emphasis on phenotyping capability could propel Populus breeding to
the next chapter of its successful story. To take full advantage of this, comparative re-
sequencing studies of the most important species – P. deltoides, P. maximowiczii,
P. nigra, and P. trichocarpa – should now become a research imperative. Such
exploration will promote a superior understanding of between- and within-species
allelic variation and how best to recombine the variation in both intra- and
inter-speciﬁc breeding programs.
References
Abrahamson LP, White EH, Nowak CA (1990) Evaluating hybrid poplar clonal growth potential
in a three-year-old genetic selection ﬁeld trial. Biomass 21:101–114.
Ares A (2002) Changes through time in traits of poplar clones in selection trials. New For 23:
105–119.
Arreghini RI, Riu NE, Bustamente JA (2000) [Clones de Alamos. Indentiﬁcacion en Vivero.]
Nursery Identiﬁcation of Poplar Clones. Facultad de Ciencias Ararias, Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo, Argentina. 171pp.
Bassman JH, Zwier JC (1991) Gas exchange characteristics of Populus trichocarpa, Populus
deltoides and Populus trichocarpa × P. deltoides clones. Tree Physiol 8:145–159.
Bate NJ, Rood SB, Blake TJ (1988) Gibberellins and heterosis in poplar. Can J Botany 66:
1148–1152.
BisofﬁS (1990) The development of a breeding strategy for poplars. FAO/IPC Ad hoc Committee
for Poplar and Willow Breeding, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 19–23 March, 1990. FAO Library
An: 312799. 21pp.
BisofﬁS, Gullberg U (1996) Poplar breeding and selection strategies. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD
Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management
6Science, July 24 2009, Volume 325.

340
B.J. Stanton et al.
and Conservation. Part I, Chapter 6 NRC Research Press, National Research Council of
Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 139–158.
Boes TK, Strauss SH (1994) Floral phenology and morphology of black cottonwood, Populus
trichocarpa (Salicaceae). Am J Botany 81:562–567.
Bonhomme L, Barbaroux C, Monclus R, Morabito D, Berthelot A, Villar M, Dreyer E, Brignolas F
(2008) Genetic variation in productivity, leaf traits, and carbon isotope discrimination in hybrid
poplars cultivated on contrasting sites. Ann For Sci 65:503/p2–p8.
Boratynska A, Boratynski A (1977) Atlas of Distribution of Trees and Shrubs in Poland. Part 23 K
Browicz (ed). Polska Akademia Nauk, Poznan.
Bradshaw HD, Ceulemans R, Davis J, Stettler R (2000) Emerging model systems in plant biology:
Poplar (Populus) as a model forest tree. J Plant Growth Regul 19:306–313.
Breen AL, Glenn E, Yeager A, Olson MS (2009) Nucleotide diversity among natural popu-
lations of a North American poplar (Populus balsamifera, Salicaceae). New Phytol 182:
763–773.
Bucciarelli B, Ostry ME, Fulcher RG, Anderson NA, Vance CP (1999) Histochemical and
microspectrophotometric analyses of early wound responses of resistant and susceptible
Populus tremuloides inoculated with Entoleuca mammata (≡Hypoxylon mammatum). Can
J Botany 77:548–555.
Bunn SM, Rae AM, Herbert CS, Taylor G (2004) Leaf-level productivity traits in Populus grown
in short rotation coppice for biomass energy. Forestry 77:307–323.
Cagelli L, Lefevre F (1995) The conservation of Populus nigra L. and gene ﬂow with cultivated
poplars in Europe. For Genet 2:135–144.
Ceulemans R, Scarascia-Mugnozza G, Wiard BM, Braatne JH, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF,
Isebrands JE, Heilman PE (1992) Production physiology and morphology of Populus species
and their hybrids grown under short rotation. I. Clonal comparisons of 4-year growth and
phenology. Can J For Res 22:1937–1948.
Chambers PGS, Borralho NMG (1997) Importance of survival in short-rotation tree breeding
programs. Can J For Res 27:911–917.
Chen Z (2005) Applied Technology of Poplar Cultivation. China Forestry Press, Beijing.
Chiba S (1984) Provenance selection and cross breeding of Populus maximowiczii in northern
Japan. Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the Working Parties S2-02-10 Poplar Provenances
and S2-03-07 Breeding Poplar with the IPC adhoc Committee Poplar Breeding, 17th Session
of the International Poplar Commission, Ottawa, Canada October 1–4, 1984. IUFRO, pp 5–25.
Cole CT (2005) Allelic and population variation of microsatellite loci in aspen (Populus tremu-
loides). New Phytol 167:155–164.
Cooper DT (1976) Cottonwood breeding strategies for the future. Proceedings, Symposium on
Eastern Cottonwood and Related Species, pp 151–155
Cooper DT (1980) Study Plan: Cooperative Cottonwood Advanced Clonal Tests. U. S. D. A. Forest
Service, Southern Forest Experiment Station FS-SO-1402-1.19, 6pp.
Cooper DT (1990) Populus deltoides Bartr. ex Marsh. var. deltoides eastern cottonwood (typical).
Salicaceae Willow family. In: Silvics of North America. Volume 2, Hardwoods. RM. Burns,
BH Honkala (Technical coordinators). Forest Service United States Department of Agriculture,
Agriculture Handbook 654. pp. 530–535.
Cooper DT, Ferguson RB (1979) Avoid early selection for growth rate in cottonwood. Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Southern Forest Tree Improvement Conference, Mississippi State University,
pp 52–58.
Davis JM (2008) Genetic improvement of poplar (Populus spp.) as a bioenergy crop. In:
W Vermerris (ed) Genetic Improvement of Bioenergy Crops. Chapter 14 Springer, New York,
pp. 377–396.
DeBell DS (1990) Populus trichocarpa Torr. & Gray. Black cottonwood. Salicaceae Willow family.
In: Burns RM, Honkala BH (Technical coordinators) Silvics of North America. Volume
2, Hardwoods 654. Forest Service United States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture
Handbook, pp. 570–576.

Populus Breeding
341
Dekkers JC, Hospital F (2002) The use of molecular genetics in the improvement of agricultural
populations. Nat Rev Genet 3:22–32.
Dickmann DI, Kuzovkina J (2008) Poplars and willows in the world, with emphasis on silvicul-
turally important species. FAO, Forestry Department, Working Paper IPC/9-2, Rome, Italy.
135pp.
Dillen SY, Storme V, Marron N, Bastien C, Neyrinck S, Steenackers M, Ceulemans R, Boerjan W
(2009) Genomic regions involved in productivity of two interspeciﬁc poplar families in Europe.
1. Stem height, circumference and volume. Tree Genet Genomes 5:147–164.
Dowell RC, Gibbins D, Rhoads JL, Pallardy SG (2009) Biomass production physiology and soil
carbon dynamics in short-rotation-grown Populus deltoides and P. deltoides × P. nigra hybrids.
For Ecol Manag 257:134–142.
Dowkiw A, Bastien C (2007) Presence of defeated qualitative resistance genes frequently
has major impact on quantitative resistance to Melampsora larici-populina leaf rust in
P. ×interamericana hybrid poplars. Tree Genet Genomes 3:261–274.
Dungey HS (2001) Pine hybrids – a review of their use performance and genetics. For Ecol Manag
148:243–258.
Dunlap JM, Braatne JH, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF (1993) Intraspeciﬁc variation in photosynthetic
traits of Populus trichocarpa. Can J Botany 71:1304–1311.
Dunlap JM, Heilman PE, Stettler RF (1995) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus tri-
chocarpa and its hybrids. VIII. Leaf and crown morphology of native P. trichocarpa clones
from four river valleys in Washington. Can J For Res 25: 1710–1724.
Dunlap JM, Stettler RF (1996) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus trichocarpa and its
hybrids. IX. Phenology and Melampsora rust incidence of native black cottonwood clones from
four river valleys in Washington. For Ecol Manag 87:233–256.
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its implications for management and
conservation. Part I, Chapter 1 NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada,
Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 7–32.
Enebak SA, Ostry ME, Anderson NA (1999) Inoculation methods for selecting Populus tremu-
loides resistant to Hypoxylon canker. Can J For Res 29:1192–1196.
FAO (2008) Synthesis of Country Progress Reports received, prepared for the 23rd Session of
the International Poplar Commission, jointly hosted by FAO and by the Beijing Forestry
University, the State Forest Administration of China and the Chinese Academy of Forestry;
Beijing, China, 27–30 October 2008. International Poplar Commission, Working Paper IPC/6.
Forest Management Division, FAO, Rome (unpublished).
Farmer RE Jr (1993) Latitudinal variation in height and phenology of balsam poplar. Silvae Genet
42:148–153.
Farmer RE Jr, Freitag M, Garlick K (1989) Genetic variance and “C” effects in balsam poplar
rooting. Silvae Genet 38:62–65.
Farmer RE Jr, Nance WL (1968) Crossing eastern cottonwood in the greenhouse. Proc Int Plant
Propagators Soc 17:333–338.
Farmer RE Jr, Reinholt RW (1986) Genetic variation in dormancy relations of balsam poplar along
a latitudinal transect in northwestern Ontario. Silvae Genet 35:38–42.
Farmer RE Jr, Wilcox JR (1968) Preliminary testing of eastern cottonwood clones. Theor Appl
Genet 38:197–201.
Feau N, Joly DL, Hamelin RC (2007) Poplar leaf rusts: model pathogens for a model tree. Can
J Botany 85:1127–1135.
Fechner GH (1972) Development of the pistillate ﬂower of Populus tremuloides following
controlled pollination. Can J Botany 50:2503–2509.
Foster GS (1984) Eastern cottonwood tree improvement program. Crown Zellerbach Corporation,
Southern Timber, Forestry Services and Research. 10 pp. (unpublished).
Foster GS (1986) Provenance variation of eastern cottonwood in the lower Mississippi valley.
Silvae Genet 35:32–38.

342
B.J. Stanton et al.
Foster GS, Shaw DV (1988) Using clonal replicates to explore genetic variation in a perennial plant
species. Theor Appl Genet 76:788–794.
Fung LE, Wang SS, Altman A, Hutterman A (1998) Effect of NaCl on growth, photosynthesis, ion
and water relations of four poplar genotypes. For Ecol Manag 107:135–146.
Gaget M, Said C, Dumas C, Knox RB (1984) Pollen-pistil interactions in interspeciﬁc crosses of
Populus (sections Aigeiros and Leuce): pollen adhesion, hydration and callose responses. J Cell
Sci 72:173–184.
Gezan SA, White TL, Huber DA (2006a) Comparison of experimental designs for clonal forestry
using simulated data. For Sci 52:108–116.
Gezan SA, White TL, Huber DA (2006b) Achieving higher heritabilities through improved design
and analysis of clonal trials. Can J For Res 36:2148–2156.
Gill GP, Brown GR, Neale DB (2003) A sequence mutation in the cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase
gene associated with altered ligniﬁcation in loblolly pine. Plant Biotechnol J 1:253–258.
Gonzalez-Martinez SC, Wheeler NC, Ersoz E, Nelson CD, Neale DB (2007) Association genetics
in Pinus taeda L. I. Wood property traits. Genetics 175:399–409.
Gornall JL, Guy RD (2007) Geographic variation in ecophysiological traits of black cottonwood
(Populus trichocarpa). Can J Botany 85:1202–1213.
Grattapaglia D (2007) Marker-assisted selection in Eucalyptus. In: Guimaraes E, Scherf B, Sonnino
V, Dargie J (eds) Marker-assisted selection, current status and future perspectives in crops,
livestock, forestry and ﬁsh. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome,
pp. 251–281.
Haapala T, Pakkanen A, Pulkkinen P (2004) Variation in survival and growth of cuttings in two
clonal propagation methods for hybrid aspen (Populus tremula × P. tremuloides). For Ecol
Manag 193:345–354.
Hansen E, Heilman P, Strobl S (1992) Clonal testing and selection for ﬁeld plantations. In:
Mitchell CP, Ford-Robertson JB, Hinckley T, Sennerby-Forsse L (eds) Ecophysiology of
Short Rotation Forest Crops. Chapter 5 Elsevier Applied Science, London and New York,
pp 124–145.
Harfouche A, Baoune N, Merazga H (2007) Main and interaction effects of factors on softwood
cutting of white poplar (Populus alba L.). Silvae Genet 56:287–294.
Harrington CA, Radwan MA, DeBell DS (1997) Leaf characteristics reﬂect growth rates of 2-year-
old Populus trees. Can J For Res 27:1321–1325.
Howe GT, Hackett WP, Furnier GR, Klevorn RE (1995) Photoperiodic responses of a northern and
southern ecotype of black cottonwood. Physiol Plant 93:695–708.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Hall D, Luquez V, Jansson S (2006) Clinal variation in phyB2, a can-
didate gene for day-length-induced growth cessation and bud set, across a latitudinal gradient
in European aspen (Populus tremula). Genetics 172:1845–1853.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Luquez V, Hall D, Jansson S (2008) Nucleotide polymorphism and
phenotypic associations within and around the phytochrome B2 locus in European aspen
(Populus tremula, Salicaceae). Genetics, 178:2217–2226.
Isik F, Goldfarb B, LeBude A, Li B, McKeand S (2005) Predicted genetic gains and testing
efﬁciency from two loblolly pine clonal trials. Can J For Res 35:1754–1766.
Isik F, Toplu F (2004) Variation in juvenile traits of natural black poplar (Populus nigra L.) clones
in Turkey. New For 27:175–187.
Ivkovich M (1996) Genetic variation of wood properties in balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera
L.). Silvae Genet 45:119–124.
Jeffreys JP, Land SB Jr, Schultz EB, Londo AJ (2006) Clonal tests of new cottonwood
selections from the southeast. In: Connor KF (ed) Proceedings of the Thirteenth Biennial
Southern Silvicultural Research Conference. General Technical Report SRS-92. United
States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern Research Station, Ashville, NC,
pp. 229–233.
Joennoz R, Vallee G (1974) Research and development on poplar in the eastern Quebec region.
II – Results of a breeding programme on poplars. Memoire, Service de la Recherche, Ministere
des Terres et Forets, Quebec, No. 13: 36 pp.

Populus Breeding
343
Jokela JJ (1966) Incidence and heritability of Melampsora rust in Populus deltoides Bartr. In:
Gerhold HD, Schreiner EJ, McDermott RE, Winieski JA (eds) Breeding Pest-Resistant Trees.
Part II. Topic 1. Pergamon Press, New York, pp. 111–117.
Kajba D, Ballian D, Idzojtic M, Bogdan S (2004) The differences among hairy and typical
European black poplars and the possible role of the hairy type in relation to climatic changes.
For Ecol Manag 197:279–284.
Kelliher FM, Tauer CG (1980) Stomatal resistance and growth of drought-stressed eastern
cottonwood from a wet and dry site. Silvae Genet 29:166–171.
Kerr RJ, Dieters MJ, Tier B (2004) Simulation of the comparative gains from four different hybrid
tree breeding strategies. Can J For Res 34:209–220.
Koo YB, Yeo JK, Woo KS, Kim TS (2007) Selection of superior clones by stability analysis of
growth performance in Populus davidiana Dode at age 12. Silvae Genet 56:93–101.
Koster R (1972) Elf nieuwe populiereklonen: ten geleide. [Eleven new poplar clones: an intro-
duction]. English summary. Department of Silviculture, Agricultural University, Wageningen,
Holland, Communication Number 16:173–179.
Kumar D, Singh NB (2001) Age-age correlation for early selection of clones of Populus in India.
Silvae Genet 50:103–108.
Land SB Jr, Jeffreys JP (2006) Geographic origin of cottonwood from the southeast affects
Melampsora infection in 3-year-old clonal trials. In: Connor KF (ed) Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Biennial Southern Silvicultural Research Conference. General Technical Report
SRS-92. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern Research Station,
Ashville, NC, pp 431–437.
LeBoldus JM, Blenis PV, Thomas BR (2008) Clone by isolate interaction in the hybrid poplar-
Septoria musiva pathosystem. Can J For Res 38:1888–1896.
Lefevre F, Goue-Mourier MC, Faivre-Rampant P, Villar M (1998) A single gene cluster controls
incompatibility and partial resistance to various Melampsora larici-populina races in hybrid
poplar. Phytopathology 88:156–163.
Lester DT (1973) The role of interspeciﬁc hybridization in forest tree breeding. In: Fowler DP,
Yeatman CW (eds) Proceedings of the Fourteenth Meeting of the Canadian Tree Improvement
Association. Part 2. Symposium on Interspeciﬁc and Interprovenance Hybridization in Forest
Trees. Fredericton, New Brunswick, pp. 85–93.
Li B, Howe GT, Wu R (1998) Developmental factors responsible for heterosis in aspen hybrids
(Populus tremuloides × P. tremula). Tree Physiol 18:29–36.
Li H, Wen Z, Huang M, Wang M (1997) A genetic study on characteristics of crown light
interception in Populus deltoides. Can J For Res 27:1465–1470.
Li B, Wu R (1996) Genetic causes of heterosis in juvenile aspen: a quantitative comparison across
intra- and inter-speciﬁc hybrids. Theor Appl Genet 93:380–391.
Li B, Wyckoff GW (1991) A breeding strategy to improve aspen hybrids for the University
of Minnesota Aspen/Larch Genetics Cooperative. In: Proceedings of International Energy
Agency, Joint Meeting of the Task V Activity Groups on Exchange of Genetic Material,
Pest/Disease Management, and Joint Trials of Alnus, Populus, and Salix. August 22–27, 1991.
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA, pp. 1–9.
Li K, Zhang F, Bao G, Shi J (1999) Research advances in genetics and breeding of Populus
davidiana Dode in China. J For Res 10:25–30.
Libby WJ (1987) Testing for clonal forestry. Ann For 13:69–75.
Luquez V, Hall D, Albrectsen BR, Karlsson J, Ingvarsson P, Jansson S (2008) Natural pheno-
logical variation in aspen (Populus tremula): the SwAsp collection. Tree Genet Genomes
4:279–292.
Maranan MC, Laborie M-P G (2007) Analysis of energy traits of Populus spp. clones by near-
infrared spectroscopy. J Biobased Mater Bioenergy 1:1–8.
Maranan MC, Laborie M-P G (2008) Rapid prediction of the chemical traits of hybrid poplar with
near infrared spectroscopy. J Biobased Mater Bioenergy 2:57–63.
Marron N, Ceulemans R (2006) Genetic variation of leaf traits related to productivity in a Populus
deltoides × Populus nigra family. Can J For Res 36:390–400.

344
B.J. Stanton et al.
Marron N, Dillen SY, Ceulemans R (2007) Evaluation of leaf traits for indirect selection of high
yielding poplar hybrids. Environ Exp Botany 61:103–116.
Matyas C, Peszlen I (1997) Effect of age on selected wood quality traits of poplar clones. Silvae
Genet 46:64–72.
McCamant T, Black RA (2000) Cold hardiness in coastal, montane, and inland populations of
Populus trichocarpa. Can J For Res 30:91–99.
Melchior GH, Seitz FW (1968) Interspeziﬁsche kreuzungssterilitat innerhalb der pappelsektion
Aigeiros. [Interspeciﬁc cross sterility within the poplar section Aigerios], translated from
German. Silvae Genet 17:88–93.
Mohn CA, Randall WK (1971) Inheritance and correlation of growth characters in Populus
deltoides. Silvae Genet 20:182–184.
Mohrdiek O (1979) Juvenile-mature and trait correlations in some aspen and poplar trials. Silvae
Genet 28:107–111.
Monclus R, Dreyer E, Villar M, Delmotte FM, Delay D, Petit J-M, Barbaroux C, Le Thiec D,
Brechet C, Brignolas F (2005) Impact of drought on productivity and water use efﬁciency in
29 genotypes of Populus deltoides × Populus nigra. New Phytol 169:765–777.
Monteiro JM (1988) Multicriteria early poplar’s selection method for match industry, Volume I
MESMI, Sociedade. Nacional de Fosforos, SA, Coimbra, Portugal, 36pp.
Mutibaric J (1971) Comparative qualitative relationships of wood properties of euramerican
poplars. Silvae Genet 20:199–204.
Neale DB, Ingvarsson PK (2008) Population, quantitative and comparative genomics of adaptation
in forest trees. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:149–155.
Neale DB, Savolainen O (2004) Association genetics of complex traits in conifers. Trends Plant
Sci 9:325–330.
Nelson CD, Tauer CG (1987) Genetic variation in juvenile characters of Populus deltoides Bartr.
from the southern great plains. Silvae Genet 36:216–221.
Newcombe G (1998) Association of Mmd1, a major gene for resistance to Melampsora medusae
f. sp. deltoidae with quantitative traits in poplar rust. Phytopathology 88:114–121.
Newcombe G, Ostry M (2001) Recessive resistance to Septoria stem canker of hybrid poplar.
Phytopathology 91:1081–1084.
Nikles DG (1993) Breeding methods for production of interspeciﬁc hybrids in clonal selection and
mass propagation programmes in the tropics and subtropics. Regional Symposium on Recent
Advances in Mass Clonal Propagation of Forest Trees for Plantation Programmes. FAO/UN,
Los Banos, Philippines, 218–252.
Olson JR, Jourdain CJ, Rousseau RJ (1985) Selection for cellulose content, speciﬁc gravity, and
volume in young Populus deltoides clones. Can J For Res 15:393–396.
Orlovic S, Guzina V, Krstic B, Merkulov L (1998) Genetic variability in anatomical, physiological
and growth characteristics of hybrid poplar (Populus × euramericana Dode (Guinier)) and
eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides Bartr.) clones. Silvae Genet 47:183–190.
Ostry ME, Ward KT (2003) Field performance of Populus expressing somaclonal variation in
resistance to Septoria musiva. Plant Sci 164:1–8.
Pauley SS (1949) Forest-tree genetics research: Populus L. Econ Botany 3:299–330.
Peng YH, Lu ZX, Chen K, Luukkanen O, Korpelainen H, Li CY (2005) Population genetic survey
of Populus cathayana originating from southeastern Qinghai-Tibetan plateau of China based
on SSR markers. Silvae Genet 54:116–122.
Perala DA (1990) Populus tremuloides Michx. quaking aspen. Salicaceae Willow family. In: Burns
RM, Honkala BH (Technical coordinators) Silvics of North America. Volume 2, Hardwoods
654. Forest Service United States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook,
pp. 555–569.
Pinon J, Frey P, Husson C (2006) Wettability of poplar leaves inﬂuences dew formation and
infection by Melampsora larici-populina. Plant Dis 90:177–184.
Pliura A, Zhang SY, MacKay J, Bousquet J (2007) Genotypic variation in wood density and growth
traits of poplar hybrids at four clonal trials. For Ecol Manag 238:92–106.

Populus Breeding
345
Rae AM, Robinson KM, Street NR, Taylor G (2004) Morphological and physiological traits
inﬂuencing biomass productivity in short-rotation coppice poplar. Can J For Res 34:1488–1498.
Ridge CR, Hinckley TM, Stettler RF, Van Volkenburgh E (1986) Leaf growth characteristics of
fast-growing poplar hybrids Populus trichocarpa × P. deltoides. Tree Physiol 1:209–216.
Riemenschneider DE, Berguson WE, Dickmann DI, Hall RB, Isebrands JG, Mohn CA, Stanosz
GR, Tuskan GA (2001) Poplar breeding and testing strategies in the north-central US:
Demonstration of potential yield and consideration of future research needs. The For Chron
77:245–253.
Riemenschneider DE, McMahon BG (1993) Genetic variation among lake states balsam poplar
populations is associated with geographic origin. For Sci 39:130–136.
Riemenschneider DE, McMahon BG, Ostry ME (1992) Use of selection indices to increase tree
height and to control damaging agents in 2-year-old balsam poplar. Can J For Res 22:561–567.
Robison TL, Rousseau RJ, Zhang J (2006) Biomass productivity improvement for eastern
cottonwood. Biomass and Bioenergy 30:735–739.
Roller K (1984) A guide to the identiﬁcation of poplar clones in Ontario. Ontario Ministry of
Natural Resources. 98pp.
Ronald WG (1982) Intersectional hybridization of Populus sections Leuce-Aigeiros and Leuce-
Tacamahaca. Silvae Genet 31:94–99.
Rowland DL (2001) Diversity in physiological and morphological characteristics of four cotton-
wood (Populus deltoides var. wislizenii) populations in New Mexico: evidence for a genetic
component of variation. Can J For Res 31:845–853.
Rowland DL, Sher AA, Marshall DL (2004) Inter- and intra-population variation in seedling per-
formance of Rio Grande cottonwood under low and high salinity. Can J For Res 34:1458–1466.
Russell JH, Libby WJ (1986) Clonal testing efﬁciency: the trade-offs between clones tested and
ramets per clone. Can J For Res 16:925–930.
Rytter L, Stener L-G (2003) Clonal variation in nutrient content in woody biomass of hybrid aspen
(Populus tremula L. × P. tremuloides Michx.). Silva Fenn 37:313–324.
Salvini D, Anzidei M, Fineschi S, Malvolti ME, Taurchini D, Vendramin GG (2001) Low genetic
differentiation among Italian populations of Populus tremula L. (Salicaceae) estimated using
chloroplast PCR-RFLP and microsatellite markers. Forest Genet 8:81–87.
Scarascia-Mugnozza GE, Ceulemans R, Heilman PE, Isebrands JG, Stettler RF, Hinckley TM
(1997) Production physiology and morphology of Populus species and their hybrids grown
under short rotation. II. Biomass components and harvest index of hybrids and parental species
clones. Can J For Res 27:285–294.
Schimleck LR, Payne P, Wearne RH (2005) Determination of important pulp properties of hybrid
poplar by near infrared spectroscopy. Wood Fiber Sci 37:462–471.
Schnekenburger F, Farmer RE Jr (1989) Genetic variance in growth of balsam poplar under
16- and 8-hour photosynthetic periods. For Sci 35:903–919.
Schreiner EJ (1959) Production of poplar timber in Europe and its signiﬁcance and applica-
tion in the United States. United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Agriculture
Handbook Number 150:124pp.
Schroeder WR, Walker DS (1991) Effect of cutting position on rooting and shoot growth of two
poplar clones. New For 4:281–289.
Seitz FW (1958) Fruhtreibversuche mit bluhreisern der aspe [Forcing tests with ﬂowering shoots
of aspen], translated from German. Silvae Genet 7:102–105.
Shaw DV, Hood JV (1985) Maximizing gain per effort by using clonal replicates in genetic tests.
Theor Appl Genet 71:392–399.
Smit BA (1988) Selection of ﬂood-resistant and susceptible seedlings of Populus trichocarpa Torr.
& Gray. Can J For Res 18:271–275.
Song W, Zhang Z, Xu J (1997) Study on inheritance and variation of wood basic density of Populus
tomentosa Carr. clones. J Beijing For Univ (English edition) 6:8–18.
Stanton BJ (2001) Clonal variation in basal area growth patterns during stand development in
hybrid poplar. Can J For Res 31:2059–2066.

346
B.J. Stanton et al.
Stanton BJ (2005) The effect of reciprocal hybridization on reproduction of the intersectional cross,
Populus × generosa. For Genet 12:131–140.
Stanton BJ (2009) The domestication and conservation of Populus genetic resources. FAO Forestry
Division Working Paper IPC/9-4a, Rome, Italy. 92pp.
Stanton BJ, Villar M (1996) Controlled reproduction of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and its Implications for Management and
Conservation. Part I, Chapter 5. NRC Research Press, National Research Council of Canada,
Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 113–138.
Stener L-G, Karlsson B (2004) Improvement of Populus tremula × P. tremuloides by phenotypic
selection and clonal testing. For Genet 11:13–27.
Stenvall N, Haapala T, Pulkkinen P (2006) The role of a root cutting’s diameter and location on the
regeneration ability of hybrid aspen. For Ecol Manag 237:150–155.
Stettler RF, Fenn RC, Heilman PE, Stanton BJ (1988) Populus trichocarpa × Populus deltoides
hybrids for short rotation culture: Variation patterns and 4-year ﬁeld performance. Can J For
Res 18:745–753.
Stettler RF, Zsuffa L, Wu R (1996) The role of hybridization in the genetic manipulation of
Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus
and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. Part I, Chapter 4. NRC Research Press,
National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 87–112.
Strauss SH, Brunner AM, Busov VB, Ma C, Meilan R (2004) Ten lessons from 15 years of
transgenic Populus research. Forestry 77:455–465.
Tharakan PJ, Robison DJ, Abrahamson LP, Nowak CA (2001) Multivariate approach for integrated
evaluation of clonal biomass production potential. Biomass and Bioenergy 21:237–247.
Thielges BA, Adams JC (1975) Genetic variation and heritability of Melampsora leaf rust
resistance in eastern cottonwood. For Sci 22:278–282.
Thomas BR, MacDonald SE, Dancik BP (1997) Variance components, heritabilities and gain esti-
mates for growth chamber and ﬁeld performance of Populus tremuloides: Growth parameters.
Silvae Genet 46:317–326.
Tullus A, Tullus H, Vares A, Kanal A (2007) Early growth of hybrid aspen (Populus × wettsteinii
Hamet-Ahti) plantations on former agricultural lands in Estonia. For Ecol Manag 245:118–129.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez
D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J,
Chen G-L, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Dejardin A, dePamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis S, Ehlting J,
Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger
B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones S,
Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C, Kirkpatrick R,
Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple J-C, Locascio P, Lou Y, Lucas
S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O, Pereda V,
Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C, Ritland
K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui A, Sterky F, Terry
A, Tsai C-J, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas
C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D (2006) The genome of black cottonwood,
Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 313:1596–1604.
van Broekhuizen JTM (1972) Morfologische beschrijving en identiﬁcatie van een aantal nieuwe
handelspopulieren. [Morphological description and identiﬁcation of a number of new com-
mercial poplar]. English summary. Department of Silviculture, Agricultural University,
Wageningen, Holland, Communication Number 16: 180–189.
Van der Meiden HA (1977) Economics of poplar breeding. Third World Consultation on
Forest Tree Breeding, Canberra, Australia 21–26 March, 1977. FAO/IUFRO. FO-FTB-77-5/4:
1125–1131.
van den Driessche R (1999) First-year growth response of four Populus trichocarpa × Populus
deltoides clones to fertilizer placement and level. Can J For Res 29:554–562.

Populus Breeding
347
Villar M, Gaget M, Said C, Knox RB, Dumas C (1987) Incompatibility in Populus: structural and
cytochemical characteristics of the receptive stigmas of Populus alba and P. nigra. J Cell Sci
87:483–490.
Wang J, Kang X, Wei Q, Wang S (2009) Pollen development and ﬂoral morphology of Populus
pseudo-simonii. For Stud China 11:99–104.
Wang J, Kang X, Zhu Q (2008) Variation in pollen and its cytological mechanism in an allotriploid
of Chinese white poplar. In Abstracts of Submitted Papers prepared for the 23rd Session of the
International Poplar Commission, Beijing China. Working Paper IPC/5, Forestry Management
Division, FAO, Rome, p. 193. (unpublished).
Ward KT, Ostry ME (2005) Variation in Septoria musiva and implications for disease resistance
screening of poplars. Plant Dis 89:1077–1082.
Weber JC, Stettler RF (1981) Isoenzyme variation among ten populations of Populus trichocarpa
Torr. et Gray in the Paciﬁc Northwest. Silvae Genet 30:82–87.
Weber JC, Stettler RF, Heilman PE (1985) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus tri-
chocarpa and its hybrids. I. Morphology and phenology of 50 native clones. Can J For Res
15:376–383.
Weiland JE, Stanosz GR (2007) The histology of hybrid poplar clones inoculated with Septoria
musiva. Plant Dis 91:1524–1530.
Weiland JE, Stanosz JC, Stanosz GR (2003) Prediction of long-term canker disease damage from
the responses of juvenile poplar clones to inoculation with Septoria musiva. Plant Dis 87:
1507–1514.
Wheeler N, Payne P, Hipkins V, Saich R, Kenny S, Tuskan G (2006) Polymix breeding with pater-
nity analysis in Populus: a test for differential reproductive success (DRS) among pollen donors.
Tree Genet Genomes 2:53–60.
White TL, Adams WT, Neale DB (2007) Forest Genetics. CABI Publishing, Cambridge, MA,
682pp.
Wilcox JR, Farmer RE Jr (1968) Heritability and C effects in early root growth of eastern
cottonwood cuttings. Heredity 23:239–245.
Wu ZY, Raven PH (eds) (1999) Flora of China. Vol. 4 (Cycadaceae through Fagaceae). Science
Press, Beijing, and Missouri Botanical Garden Press, St. Louis, pp. 139–162.
Wu R, Stettler RF (1997) Quantitative genetics of growth and development in Populus. II. The
partitioning of genotype × environment interaction in stem growth. Heredity 78:124–134.
Wu R-L, Wang M-X, Huang M-R (1992) Quantitative genetics of yield breeding for Populus short
rotation culture. I. Dynamics of genetic control and selection model of yield traits. Can J For
Res 22:175–182.
Yeh FC, Chong DKX, Yang R-C (1995) RAPD variation within and among natural populations of
trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) from Alberta. J Hered 86:454–460.
Yin T, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Zhang X, Sewell MM, Woolbright SA, Allan GJ, Kelleher CT,
Douglas CJ, Wang M, Tuskan GA (2008) Genome structure and emerging evidence of an
incipient sex chromosome in Populus. Genome Res 18:422–430.
Ying CC, Bagley WT (1976) Genetic variation of eastern cottonwood in an eastern Nebraska
provenance study. Silvae Genet 25:67–73.
Yu Q (2001) Can physiological and anatomical characters be used for selecting high yielding
hybrid aspen clones? Silva Fennica 35:137–146.
Yu Q, Pulkkinen P (2003) Genotype-environment interaction and stability in growth of aspen
hybrid clones. For Ecol Manag 173:23–35.
Yu Q, Tigerstedt PMA, Haapanen M (2001) Growth and phenology of hybrid aspen clones
(Populus tremula L. × Populus tremuloides Michx.). Silva Fenn 35:15–25.
Zalesny RS Jr, Hall RB, Bauer EO, Riemenschneider DE (2003) Shoot position affects root
initiation and growth of dormant unrooted cuttings of Populus. Silvae Genet 52:273–279.
Zalesny RS Jr, Riemenschneider DE, Hall RB (2005) Early rooting of dormant hardwood cuttings
of Populus: analysis of quantitative genetics and genotype × environment interactions. Can J
For Res 35:918–929.

348
B.J. Stanton et al.
Zamudio F, Wolﬁnger R, Stanton B, Guerra F (2008) The use of linear mixed model theory for the
genetic analysis of repeated measures from clonal tests of forest trees. I. A focus on spatially
repeated data. Tree Genet Genomes 4:299–313.
Zhang T, Copes DL, Zhao S, Huang L (1995) Genetic analysis of the hybrid origin of Populus
tomentosa Carr. Silvae Genet 44:165–173.
Zhang S, Qi L, Chen C, Li X, Song W, Chen R, Han S (2004) A report of triploid Populus of the
section Aigeiros. Silvae Genet 53:69–75.
Zhang Z, Wang Z, Lin S, Zhang Z (2008) Comparison and early selection of new clones in Populus
tomentosa. For Stud China 10:162–167.
Zhang SY, Yu Q, Chauret G, Koubaa A (2003) Selection for both growth and wood properties in
hybrid poplar clones. For Sci 49:901–908.
Zheng W (editor) (1985) Sylva Sinica. Volume 2. Section 52. Salicaceae China Forestry Publishing
House, pp. 1954–2006.
Zhou Z, Liu Z, Hou K, Sun X, Zhang J, Shen B (2008) Improvement of controlled pollination
techniques of poplar. For Stud China 10:137–141.
Zhu Z, Lin H, Kang X (1995) Studies on allotriploid breeding of Populus tomentosa B301 clones.
Scientia Silvae Sinicae 31: 499–505. [English summary].
Zhu Z, Zhang Z (1997) The status and advances of genetic improvement of Populus tomentosa
Carr. J Beijing For Univ (English edition) 6:1–7.
Zsuffa L (1975) Some problems of hybrid poplar selection and management in Ontario. For Chron
51:240–242.
Zsuffa L, Lin D, Payne P (1999) One-way crossing barriers in some interspeciﬁc crosses of
Aigeiros and Tacamahaca poplars. For Chron 75:833–836.

Conservation Genomics
Elena Hidalgo, Santiago C. González-Martínez, Christian Lexer,
and Berthold Heinze
Abstract Conservation of Populus genetic resources can be deﬁned at three lev-
els: conservation of all Populus species, conservation of the variation present within
species, and the conservation of the key evolutionary processes that will enhance
further evolution of Populus species. In this context, genomics, the study of an
organism’ entire genome, can be considered as a powerful tool that would allow
us to reach an integrated view of the genetic variation to be conserved. In par-
ticular, the application of principles and methodologies of population genomics
to Populus hold great potential to answer some of the most relevant questions
in poplar, aspen and cottonwood conservation genetics, such as how much func-
tional variation is currently present and how to conserve it. Here, we review recent
progress in applied conservation genetics in Populus and we sketch the potential for
conservation genomics to transform this ﬁeld in the very near future.
1 Introduction
The increasing loss of biological diversity – biodiversity for short – is a globally
discussed fact. This loss manifests itself not only in terms of species numbers, but
also on the level of ecosystem diversity (diversity of habitats) and genetic diversity
(diversity of genes and genotypes within populations and individuals of the same
species). The level of biodiversity is often used as a measure of the health of a
biological system. Consequently, the loss of genetic variability (also called genetic
erosion) is generally expected to reduce the ability of species to adapt to changing
environments. Increased inbreeding depression and reduced ﬁtness may also limit
their evolutionary potential. The reasons why biodiversity decreases on all levels are
multiple, but human-associated factors such as habitat loss, introduced species, over-
exploitation or environmental pollution are often cited. There are also stochastic
E. Hidalgo (B)
Departamento de Producción Vegetal y Recursos Forestales, ETS Ingenierías Agrarias,
Universidad de Valladolid, Palencia, Spain
e-mail: ehidalgo@pvs.uva.es
349
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2_15,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

350
E. Hidalgo et al.
factors of demographic, catastrophic, or environmental origins (for instance, forest
ﬁres or river ﬂoods) that reduce genetic biodiversity. To minimize the risks of genetic
erosion, it is often necessary to counteract actively. The science of ﬁnding the factors
that result in a decline in ﬁtness or that cause extinction (at the species or population
levels) and of establishing and executing management regimes aimed at diversity
preservation is called “conservation genetics”.
The ﬁrst step in conservation genetics is to characterize the remaining diversity.
From a methodological point of view, molecular characterization of individuals,
populations and species, evolutionary genetics (studying the mechanisms of evo-
lution), population and quantitative genetics, breeding science, phylogeny and
systematics converge with the single goal of delineating measures for preserving
the evolutionary potential of organisms.
The main ﬁelds of activity and questions in conservation genetics (Pearse and
Crandall, 2004) are listed below. We will try to give answers to these for Populus
species towards the end of this chapter:
• How many species? A clear taxonomic treatment is the basis of any conservation
measure. Molecular methods can help in deﬁning genera, species and subspecies,
but not on a stand-alone basis – traditional taxonomy and close interdisciplinary
interaction are necessary.
• How many populations? A population is usually deﬁned as an independent
breeding unit, a group of individuals that mainly interbreed among them-
selves over many generations, with only occasional contributions from other
populations (immigration). It is necessary to know where to draw a line
between populations in order to tackle conservation measures population by
population.
• What are the relevant life-history traits and the reproductive biology of the
species (mating systems, reproductive success, pollen and seed dispersal, migra-
tion patterns), including any reproductive barriers between species and natural
and anthropogenic hybridization (genetic contamination)?
• Which populations to conserve? Measuring the levels of genetic diversity
(deﬁned as number and distribution of alleles and genotypes) within and between
populations to identify threatened populations (those with a low genetic diversity,
or with special adaptations) as conservation targets, also taking into account the
genetic basis of adaptive traits.
• How to deal with them? Establishing and executing a viable management plan
for maintaining the genetic variability of the species is often the most difﬁcult
task, as socio-economic factors can often override scientiﬁc evidence. The usual
approaches are selection of “in situ” genetic reserves, sampling for the establish-
ment of “ex-situ” germplasm collections, development of breeding work within
the “ex-situ” collections, and restoration of populations in the wild.
There is growing awareness that genomics, the study of an organism’s entire
genome, and functional genomics, the study of the transcribed and/or translated
portion of the genome, have the potential to transform conservation biology (Ryder,
2005; Kohn et al., 2006). In this context, we may deﬁne conservation genomics

Conservation Genomics
351
as a tool box that allows us to extend traditional conservation genetics to reach
an integrated view of the genetic variation to be conserved, at different scales of
organization. Whereas traditional molecular conservation genetics often stopped at
the point where neutral genetic variability was studied and conserved (Frankham
et al., 2004), as a supposed surrogate for genome-wide variation, the promise of
“conservation genomics” is to identify the molecular determinants of detrimental
and adaptive variation (Kohn et al., 2006) and on this basis improve management
strategies. In long-lived species such as poplars, aspens, and cottonwoods, this can
be achieved most easily by taking advantage of the suite of concepts and method-
ologies circumscribed as population genomics (Luikart et al., 2003; Storz, 2005;
Stinchcombe and Hoekstra, 2008), which we shall outline further below. By drawing
from these methodologies, conservation genomics can bring conservation genetics
closer to understanding genetic determinants of relevance for an organism’s pheno-
type and ﬁtness, and closer to useful options for managing populations in order to
conserve their evolutionary potential.
To further circumscribe “conservation genomics”, a deﬁnition analogous to the
one for biological diversity, as outlined above, applied to the particular case of
poplars, aspens and cottonwoods, may be useful. Likewise, conservation genomics
of Populus would be concerned with the conservation of the genomes of all Populus
species, conservation of the variation present in the individual species’ genomes,
and conservation of the potential for further evolution of genomes in Populus
species by maintaining opportunity for evolutionary processes to act on these
genomes.
Special features of the Populus genome that deserve attention in this respect
are its particular architecture, characterized, for instance, by many duplications
(Tuskan et al., 2006), the high level of heterozygosity and nucleotide diversity (much
higher than other forest trees; Ingvarsson et al., 2008), and the functional diversity
presented by many species that have special adaptations to a great variety of envi-
ronments. Indeed, the species from this genus have been selected as tree models
not only because of their genetic characteristics (see preface and previous chap-
ters), but also because within the genus there is a wide degree of variation regarding
adaptation to different environmental conditions (e.g. tolerance to drought, salt, and
other abiotic stresses, or resistance to pests and pathogens), and in their habit of
growth. This variability offers interesting possibilities to study evolution in response
to new environmental conditions (increased temperature, drought, or CO2) and for
the isolation of genes of ecological or economical importance. In addition, popu-
lation processes that are thought to maintain the evolutionary potential in poplars,
aspens and cottonwoods are the predominant dioecious mating system (thus, they
are often obligate outcrossers), the persistence of large and continuous popula-
tions in some species vs. fragmented and isolated ones in others (metapopulation
structure), the large pollen and seed dispersal distances, their exposure to shifting
patterns of climate and other environmental factors, and a relatively rapid population
turnover (compared to many other tree species).
Here, we review recent progress in applied conservation genetics in Populus, and
we sketch the potential for conservation genomics to transform this ﬁeld in the very
near future.

352
E. Hidalgo et al.
2 Conservation of Genetic Diversity in Populus – Traditional
Approaches
Populus is a tremendously diverse genus, including over 30 species of aspens,
poplars and cottonwoods for some authors (Taylor, 2002) or many more
for others – for example, the Flora of China (http://ﬂora.huh.harvard.edu/
china/mss/intindex.htm) lists 134 species for China only -, divided into six sec-
tions (Eckenwalder, 1996) and distributed throughout the Northern Hemisphere.
Taxonomic issues are apparent in this genus, as no full molecular phylogeny of
Populus has been published yet, despite several attempts at partial phylogenies in
the past. This is discussed in more detail in Section 1.2 of this volume.
Molecular markers provide a convenient tool to study genetic variability in
organisms with such long generation times, which make common garden test-
ing unpractical and tedious (although in this respect, Populus sp. are still at an
advantage against other tree species due to their faster turnover and cloning capa-
bility). A wide range of molecular markers are normally employed (variation in
cpDNA and mtDNA, often found in gene spacers and introns, anonymous mark-
ers like AFLPs and others, RFLPs, nuclear and cytoplasmic SSRs, and SNPs, see
reviews in Heinze, 1998a; Krutovsky and Neale, 2006). Although the application
of new generations of markers may even be seen as a fashion (Schlötterer, 2004),
isoenzymes, microsatellites or SSRs and SNPs are currently regarded as the most
useful ones, as they are widespread in the nuclear genome and codominant. In
Populus, a database that includes thousands of SSR loci has been developed by
the International Populus Genome Consortium (www.ornl.gov/ipgc). Other genetic
tools that are currently under development in the framework of various international
consortia include resources for ESTs (Sterky et al., 2004), genome-wide sequencing
or SNP genotyping (see, for instance, www.evoltree.eu or dendrome.ucdavis.edu/
pbgp/).
Isoenzyme studies in Populus are numerous (e.g. Culot et al., 1995; Legionnet
and Lefèvre, 1996; see review in Heinze, 1998a and in previous chapters of this
volume). RAPDs and other anonymous markers have also been adopted readily by
researchers studying Populus populations (RAPDs: e.g. Chong et al., 1994; Yeh
et al., 1995; Su et al., 1996; Rajagopal et al., 2000; Sánchez et al., 2000; Saito et al.,
2002; AFLPs: e.g. Arens et al., 1998; Winﬁeld et al., 1998; Smulders et al., 2008b).
Most of these studies were concerned with the study of population genetic structure
and diversity and the identiﬁcation of related clusters of populations. However, clus-
tering based on dominant markers is only a very coarse tool; it performs poorly in
many situations, as, for instance, when a population is recently admixed from two
equally distant sources. Microsatellites have allowed a better assessment of rela-
tionships among populations (e.g. Krystufek, 2001; Cole, 2005; Lexer et al., 2005;
Namroud et al., 2005; Pospíšková and Šálková, 2006, van Loo et al., 2008; Smulders
et al., 2008b). As microsatellites are codominant and often highly polymorphic, they
are also amenable to new approaches for the identiﬁcation of origin and assignment
of individuals to populations (see further below).
The relevance of studies of genetic variation for conservation has been
emphasized especially in Europe, where the native black poplar (Populus

Conservation Genomics
353
nigra) has been the focus of a network of experts in the European Forest
Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN, Bioversity International, www.
bioversityinternational.org) for more than a decade (Cagelli and Lefèvre, 1995;
Frison et al., 1995; Lefèvre et al., 1998; Lefèvre et al., 2001a, b, Kajba et al., 2002;
Heinze, 2005). Research using molecular markers in this species has shown: (a)
high differentiation among river basins but often some similarity along river courses,
(b) large gene ﬂow and dispersal distances, with populations from different catch-
ments but relatively close to each other often showing similar allele frequencies, (c)
no signiﬁcant difference in pollen (wind-) or seed (wind and waterﬂow-) mediated
gene ﬂow, and (d) notable levels of genetic diversity and no or very little introgres-
sion from non-native poplars (Imbert and Lefèvre, 2003; Smulders et al., 2008a,b,
Heinze, 2008). The European black poplar is therefore a paradigmatic example of
a species whose conservation depends more on socio-economic factors, such as use
and management of riparian systems, than on its standing genetic resources.
One fact of relevance to genetic conservation in diploid organisms, such as
poplars, aspens, and cottonwoods, is the distinction between allelic and geno-
typic diversity. Allelic diversity can be biased by linked alleles within individuals
(genotypes) due to vegetative propagation. Poplars often propagate asexually (veg-
etatively) from dormant primordia (roots and shoots) or by means of cladoptosis
(abscission of shoots that can be carried on watercourses and subsequently root else-
where). Several authors have studied the extent of clones in various Populus species
(e.g. Legionnet et al., 1997; Rottenberg et al., 2000; Barsoum, 2001; Peltzer, 2002;
Barsoum et al., 2004; Suvanto and Latva-Karjanmaa, 2005, van Loo et al., 2008,
and most recently Brundu et al., 2008; Ally et al., 2008 and Mock et al., 2008),
which often ranges from some tens (maximum distance of ~60 m in aspen; Suvanto
and Latva-Karjanmaa, 2005) or hundreds of metres (~100–200 m in grey and white
poplar from Central Europe; van Loo et al., 2008) up to a few kilometres (in white
poplar from the Iberian Peninsula; our own unpublished results).
Finally, although the genetic diversity in plants is located mainly in nuclear DNA,
there is also some variation in cytoplasmic DNA, plastids and mitochondria, which
are maternally inherited (Keim et al., 1989; Radetzky, 1990; Mejnartowicz, 1991;
Paige et al., 1991; Rajora et al., 1992; Rajora and Dancik, 1992). This variation
can be exploited for species identiﬁcation (Vornam et al., 1994; Heinze, 1998b)
and also to reconstruct maternal (i.e. seed dispersed) lineages. Thus, cytoplasmic
DNA markers, alone or combined with nuclear markers, can be used to indicate the
amount and the direction of introgression between species (see further below).
3 Hybridization and Genetic Conservation
Many Populus species hybridise under natural conditions, or when female ﬂowers
are pollinated with pollen collected from another species (see review by Stettler
et al., 1996 and Section 1.2 of this volume). In fact, the cases where species within a
section would not hybridise spontaneously when brought into contact are rather the
exception than the rule. Hybridization across section boundaries, e.g. between mem-
bers of Aigeiros and Tacamahaca, is commonly observed in nature, and exploited

354
E. Hidalgo et al.
in breeding (Stettler et al., 1996). This is the case despite a series of reproduc-
tive barriers that have been described in Populus, both at prezygotic or postzygotic
stages. The main mechanisms described as prezygotic barriers are ﬂowering asyn-
chrony, pollen competition, or interspeciﬁc prefertilisation incompatibility (Stanton
and Villar, 1996). For instance, a study in Belgium has shown that functional traits
such as ﬂowering phenology are unlikely to introgress into native P. nigra from
the cultivar, P. nigra “Italica”, simply because asynchronous ﬂowering cannot lead
to “massive” introgression (Vanden Broeck et al., 2003a, b). Among postzygotic
barriers, the most important ones reported are hybrid inviability and poor survival,
hybrid breakdown and hybrid sterility (see Vanden Broeck et al., 2005, for a review).
Hamzeh et al. (2007) have described a seemingly similar case of asymmetrical intro-
gression in North America that does not involve any apparent reproductive barriers
though. Hybrid breakdown appears to affect ﬁtness traits due to linked gene com-
plexes, which are disrupted in further generations of hybrids. This would explain
the fact that some parts of the genomes are more permeable than others to introgres-
sion. In this way, introgression can be an important mechanism for the transmission
of functional traits and collective evolution (as described by Morjan and Rieseberg,
2004). Determining whether cases of natural introgression are detrimental or ben-
eﬁcial for the evolutionary potential and integrity of Populus species is crucial for
their conservation.
Introgressive hybridization and gene ﬂow from domesticated species into their
wild relatives is often regarded as detrimental for the persistence and evolution
of wild populations. The availability of species-speciﬁc markers has allowed to
asses the level of introgression for the European black poplar, Populus nigra.
Introgression of concern to conservationists occurs between black poplar and com-
mercial hybrids, e.g. P. x canadensis. The main concern regarding this source of
introgression is the potential introduction of maladapted genes into the native pop-
ulations. More important, however, may be that the restricted number of genotypes
represented by exotic clones will, through interbreeding, become over-represented
in the genepool of wild P. nigra. Such an outcome would represent a reduction
in effective population size with an associated loss of diversity and probably, a
loss of adaptive potential. Molecular marker studies have shown that in situations
where female black poplars grow in close proximity to both hybrid and non-hybrid
males, little evidence of introgression from P. x canadensis is detected (Fossati
et al., 2003; Heinze, 2008; but see Benetka et al., 1999, 2002). However, if there
are no male P. nigra trees within pollinating distance, the female black poplars will
cross with the male P. x canadensis in the vicinity (Vanden Broeck et al., 2004;
Ziegenhagen et al., 2008). “Lonely females” seem to pose an extra risk for intro-
gression (Eckenwalder, 1982). The introduced hybrid poplars do not therefore pose
a major threat to native black poplars provided there is enough pollen available
from male black poplars. Thus, every situation has to be judged on a case-by-case
basis.
There are a number of studies that have tried to assess the magnitude of
anthropogenic hybridization and introgression in Populus species or hybrid com-
binations (e.g. Heinze, 1997; Benetka et al., 1999; Vanden Broeck et al., 2004;

Conservation Genomics
355
Meirmans et al., 2007; Ziegenhagen et al., 2008; Heinze, 2008), but only with a
sufﬁciently high number of diagnostic markers, introgression in generations fur-
ther beyond F2 and BC1 can be reliably assessed. Such high numbers of markers
are only now becoming available (Meirmans et al., 2007), and it will be interest-
ing to see whether the long history of clonal cultivation has left such a low-level
imprint in the genomes of native species as recent studies, using a low number
of markers, suggest. The current evidence indicates that although only low levels
of introgression are detected in natural poplar populations, cultivated poplars are
reproductively active along several river systems in Europe and that they may com-
pete with the native species in establishment in riverine habitats (Vanden Broeck
et al., 2005). This fact may pose a greater concern to conservation of native stocks
than the potential impoverishment of gene pools by introgression into the native
species.
Following Allendorf et al. (2001), conservation programmes for Populus species
should consider the following questions:
• Are the “threats” that introduced cultivars (among them, hybrids) pose for
natural populations relevant in any case? The examples of P. nigra cited
above have not yet given direct evidence for the maladaptation of introgressed
trees.
• Is there an acceptable low proportion of admixture/hybridization? We have
argued into this direction in the past (Heinze and Lickl, 2002), but the evolution-
ary consequences of even “a few percent” of introgression are largely unknown.
Genomics offers a toolbox to assess the effects of introgression of a few genomic
regions into the genetic background of another species. By comparisons with nat-
ural hybrid zones, where such later introgressants may be common (see further
below for the P. tremula/P. alba example in Europe), phenotypic and functional
tests will inform us about the magnitude (if any) of this “low-level” introgression
(Lexer et al., 2007).
• Can parental individuals be rescued from admixed populations? The efforts by
EUFORGEN and its networks for P. nigra (1994–2005) and later, for Social
Broadleaves (2005–2009), have actually shown that this is a viable option, as
parents can be tested for their genetic “purity” and collected by vegetative propa-
gation in gene banks (Storme et al., 2004). Trees raised by vegetative propagation
from such collections have now been widely planted in restoration projects across
Europe.
4 Population Genomics Provides New Tools for Populus
Conservation
The genomic resources now available in Populus species hold the potential to trans-
form conservation genetics in poplars, aspens and cottonwoods. We shall now focus
on the power of population genomics to identify and manage functionally relevant

356
E. Hidalgo et al.
variation in Populus. Conservation genomics of Populus can proﬁt greatly from con-
cepts and methodologies recently developed and tested in other groups of animals
and plants (e.g. Luikart et al., 2003; Campbell and Bernatchez, 2004; Beaumont,
2005; Storz, 2005; Stinchcombe and Hoekstra, 2008), including application of the
population genomics approach to natural interspeciﬁc hybrid populations (Buerkle
and Lexer, 2008). Most population genomics research carried out so far was moti-
vated by an interest to understand basic principles in evolutionary genetics rather
than advancing conservation management (but see González-Martínez et al., 2006;
Namroud et al., 2008). A particularly exciting aspect of applying these technologies
to forest trees such as Populus is that in forestry there is a long tradition of translat-
ing conservation genetics into management practice. Variation in functionally and
ecologically relevant, ﬁtness-related traits and genes is of direct relevance to forest
management (White et al., 2007). Thus, forest trees such as Populus have a poten-
tial to become text book examples for translating population genomics research into
forest tree conservation practice.
Population genomics refers to the use of a large number of molecular genetic
markers, preferably with known genomic locations, to disentangle two different
sources of present-day patterns of genetic variability in natural populations: demo-
graphic history on one hand, and different forms of selection on the other (Luikart
et al., 2003). Separating the effects of demographic history from those of selection
is possible because the former will affect all or most loci in the genome, whereas
the latter will only affect loci and genomic regions that are direct or indirect targets
of selection (Luikart et al., 2003; Schlötterer, 2003; Storz, 2005; but see Hahn’s,
2008 commentary to Begun et al., 2007, the ﬁrst population genomic study based
on whole-genome analysis). Different approaches have been developed to identify
loci with genealogies that depart from genome-wide neutral expectations, indica-
tive of recent positive selection. For instance, measures of population divergence
such as FST can be estimated for each locus in a population genomic dataset, and
comparison of such single-locus FST estimates to genome-wide neutral expectations
can then reveal “outlier” loci or genomic regions potentially subject to divergent or
balancing selection (Beaumont, 2005). Non-anonymous, codominant genetic mark-
ers such as microsatellites and SNPs (i.e. markers based on DNA sequence data)
are ideal to develop approaches based on detection of “outlier” loci (e.g. Namroud
et al., 2008; Eveno et al., 2008). This type of work is often carried out with dominant
genetic markers such as AFLPs (e.g. Wilding et al., 2001; Campbell and Bernatchez,
2004), or with datasets combining both dominant and codominant markers (Scotti-
Saintagne et al., 2004), but AFLP fragment homoplasy can produce a reduction of
up to 15% in the power to detect selective loci using these approaches and caution
is recommended with this type of markers (Caballero et al., 2008). In respect to
statistical methodologies, detection of outlier loci can be carried out using either
frequentist or Bayesian analysis of FST (Beaumont, 2005), or using population split
models that allow a more reﬁned modelling of population history and demography,
e.g. different population divergence times and population bottlenecks of different
strengths (Vitalis et al., 2001).
In addition to FST-based approaches, outlier loci under positive selection can also
be detected by a hitchhiking mapping of recent selective sweeps, which involves the

Conservation Genomics
357
detection of loci or genome regions with greatly reduced genetic diversity in partic-
ular local populations (Schlötterer, 2003). An important aspect of this approach is
that, by restricting the analysis of diversity to pairs of populations, between-locus
differences in mutation rates are taken into account; these differences among loci
will be cancelled out because the ratio of diversity between two local populations
is used in the tests, rather than diversity in one local population per se (Schlötterer,
2003).
A different but related population genomic approach makes use of the increased
genetic and phenotypic variation often found in interspeciﬁc hybrid populations
(Lexer et al., 2004). Just as loci or genome regions under selection are expected to
exhibit genealogies that differ from the bulk of the genome in pairwise population
comparisons (see above), loci under selection are also expected to exhibit unusual
behaviour in admixed populations or interspeciﬁc hybrid zones (Barton and Gale,
1993; Rieseberg et al., 1999). These differences among loci can be detected simply
by comparing introgression frequencies at each locus to genome-wide expectations
(Rieseberg et al., 1999). A more accurate approach suitable for codominant markers
such as microsatellites or SNPs, recently applied to Populus, involves the compari-
son of genotypic clines to neutral expectations calculated speciﬁcally for each locus
(Lexer et al., 2007; Buerkle and Lexer, 2008). By obtaining neutral expectations for
each locus, differences in mutation rates and diversities among loci can be taken
into account in the analysis. Also, by estimating genotypic clines separately for
homozygotes and heterozygotes it becomes possible to examine the genetic basis of
ﬁtness differences, e.g. simple dominance relationships among alleles at loci under
selection (Lexer et al., 2007). This suite of methodologies is curently being devel-
oped further, e.g. to account for “multiple testing” issues (Gompert and Buerkle,
unpublished results).
Studies of admixed populations or hybrid zones typically operate in settings with
high linkage disquilibrium (LD) – it takes several generations of recombination to
break up the chromosomal blocks derived from each parental population in nat-
ural hybrids (Buerkle and Lexer, 2008). The hybrid zone approach is of special
interest in hybridizing species pairs that are ecologically divergent. In such cases, a
proportion of loci or genome regions that deviate from neutrality in natural hybrid
populations will do so because of ecological selection (Lexer et al., 2004), hence
such “natural interspeciﬁc mapping populations” may be used to identify loci of
ecological relevance (Buerkle and Lexer, 2008). As demonstrated with experimen-
tal hybrid lineages in Helianthus (wild annual sunﬂowers), a fair proportion of the
quantitative trait loci (QTL) that are polymorphic between species can be expected
to be polymorphic also at the within-species level (Lexer et al., 2005). Thus, stud-
ies of interspeciﬁc hybrid zones can potentially reveal candidate regions or loci
under selection in natural populations that can then be followed up by studies at
the intraspeciﬁc level.
An important aspect of all of these approaches is that they can easily be com-
bined with QTL and association mapping studies (dealt with in Section 2.2 in
this volume). Indeed, it is often desirable to combine population genomics and
association mapping work because population genomic analysis can detect candi-
date loci under selection but does not reveal the traits affected by them, whereas

358
E. Hidalgo et al.
association mapping can reveal linkage of the same loci or genome regions to
speciﬁc phenotypes (González-Martínez et al., 2006; Stinchcombe and Hoekstra,
2008). The intimate relationship between population genomics and association map-
ping becomes intuitively obvious in genomic scans of interspeciﬁc hybrid zones,
where loci experiencing strongly reduced interspeciﬁc gene ﬂow (=loci under neg-
ative selection) will also tend to be in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with genomic
regions controlling interspeciﬁc phenotypic differences (Kim and Rieseberg, 1999;
Buerkle and Lexer, 2008). Nevertheless, population genomics work can also yield
valuable insights even in the absence of information on genotype-phenotype asso-
ciations, despite a recognized higher power of the latter to detect loci underlying
adaptive traits. In addition, the costs of population genomics projects are likely to
decrease at a more rapid pace in the future than the costs of association mapping
(which involves extensive genetic testing in common garden experiments).
First indications in Populus for the potential of conservation and population
genomics came from experimental crosses. Indeed, QTL mapping studies (reviewed
in Section 2.2) indicate the presence of extensive genetic correlations among growth,
developmental, and ecological traits in the form of linkage and/or pleiotropy.
Speciﬁc regions of the Populus genome seem to control (at least in hybrids) multi-
ple phenotypic traits of potential relevance for conservation management, including
traits that may be expected to be targets of selection in natural populations. Indeed,
a large linkage mapping study in a cross between P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides
revealed large-scale heterospeciﬁc segregation distortions of molecular genetic
markers, suggestive of positive selection (Yin et al., 2004b). One question relevant
for Populus conservation genomics now is whether the genetic signature of positive
selection on speciﬁc loci or genome regions is also detectable in natural populations.
We suggest that Populus population and conservation genomics will greatly
beneﬁt from three ongoing developments: (a) the increase in throughput and reduc-
tion in costs of sequencing and genotyping brought about by novel, non-Sanger
based DNA sequencing approaches, (b) the increasing ease with which expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) can be generated and utilized in genomic scans for local
adaptation (e.g. Vasemägi et al., 2005; Namroud et al., 2008), which facilitates can-
didate gene approaches with very large numbers of loci (i.e. genome-wide) and
(c) the increasing knowledge of variation in recombination rates and levels of LD
across the genomes of wild Populus species. With respect to the latter, we expect
that not all regions of the Populus genome will be equally difﬁcult to scan for the
genetic signature of local adaptation. Indeed, LD has recently been shown to be
greatly increased in regions of the Populus genome containing resistance genes
to Melampsora rust (Yin et al., 2004a). A more recent study indicates strongly
suppressed recombination across more than 700 kb of DNA surrounding multiple
nucleotide-binding site/leucine rich repeat (NBS-LRR) type resistance genes at the
proximal end of chromosome 19 (Yin et al., 2008). We suspect that more discov-
eries such as this are waiting to be made in the genomes of wild Populus species.
Such high-LD regions could represent ideal starting points for pilot projects into the
population and conservation genomics of Populus species. Increased LD as found
on chromosome 19 of Populus should facilitate the detection of the signature of

Conservation Genomics
359
local adaptation because genetic hitchhiking between markers and selected loci
will extend across larger chromosomal distances there (Suter, 2008). Of course,
increased LD will make it more difﬁcult to identify the exact genes or nucleotide
positions under selection. Nevertheless, increased LD in particular genome regions
should greatly facilitate initial screens for non-neutral variation in natural popula-
tions, which we believe to be important at this early stage of Populus conservation
genomics.
5 Conservation Genetics and Genomics in Forest Management
and Restoration Ecology
Thanks to recent progress and on-going work in the ﬁeld, the questions put forward
by Pearse and Crandall (2004) in conservation biology and genetics, introduced
earlier in this chapter, can now be readily tackled for many Populus species:
• How many species? A number of useful tools are available to tackle this question;
most of them concern chloroplast DNA. The full chloroplast DNA sequences of
two Populus species, P. alba (Okumura et al., 2004; Ueda et al., 2007) and P. tri-
chocarpa (Tuskan et al., 2006) can be downloaded from GenBank and used for
identifying regions of sequence variation useful for phylogenies; the latter chloro-
plast sequence may turn out as a future “gold standard” in chloroplast sequencing,
given its high coverage of 400 x (Tuskan et al., 2006, supplementary material).
We have recently discovered a highly variable intron in a chloroplast gene that
helps in deﬁning species (B. Fussi and B. Heinze, unpublished results).
• How many populations? Microsatellite analysis, coupled with assignment
and structuring algorithms like those implemented in STRUCTURE (Falush
et al., 2007), is straightforward in many Populus species. There is a tremen-
dous amount of microsatellite loci available (International Populus Genome
Consortium, www.ornl.gov/ipgc), and useful results have recently been obtained
e.g. with P. nigra in large parts of its European range (Smulders et al., 2008b),
seven microsatellite loci). A related program, NEWHYBRIDS (Anderson and
Thompson, 2002) is very useful for identifying introgressed individuals and
assessing their status viz. F1, F2 or backcross (Smulders et al., 2008a).
• Which population does an individual come from? This is a very interesting ques-
tion in Populus conservation and breeding. Chloroplast and assignment methods
as those mentioned above may help in ﬁnding the source populations for many
of the widespread or interesting clones, e.g. the long-disputed origin of the
Lombardy poplar, P. nigra “Italica”, the also column-shaped and widespread
female P. nigra “Thevestina”, the only P. simonii clone in central Europe (a male),
the only historic introduction of a (male) P trichocarpa clone, called “Senior”, in
Germany (Müller and Sauer, 1974), and other examples. Furthermore, it would
be extremely interesting to somehow “dissect” the genetic make-up of historic P.
x canadensis varieties and analyse their maternal (P. deltoides-derived) ancestry

360
E. Hidalgo et al.
for their geographic origin. This may help in deﬁning zones within the natural dis-
tribution range of P. deltoides of special interest to breeders in certain countries,
possibly reducing the need for full tests of many geographic zones for suitabil-
ity to their special climatic conditions. The crucial missing factor in such ideas,
however, is that full-range molecular surveys are only in their infancy in many
Populus species (but see Smulders et al., 2008b, Cottrell et al., 2005).
• How much functional variation? Kohn et al. (2006) argue that the use of enhanced
surveys of genomic variation in endangered species will serve to better manage
their functional genetic variation. Surveys of functional genetic variation have
a long tradition in Populus, though molecular analyses have only come into
the picture more recently. Phenolic compounds have long been studied in var-
ious Populus species (e.g. Böritz, 1962; Greenaway, 1991). Lindroth and Hwang
(1996), Hwang and Lindroth (1997) and Osier et al. (2000) have shown that
some of these compounds – which are under strong genetic control – interact
with insect herbivores. Philippe and Bohlmann (2007) have recently reviewed the
molecular and genomic side of this ﬁeld. Ingvarsson (2005) has analysed varia-
tion in protease inhibitor genes in P. tremula. Legionnet et al. (1999) have studied
resistance levels in P. nigra against leaf rust fungi, and found that a large part of
the variation was between regions and stands, in contrast to patterns observed
with neutral (isozyme) genetic markers (Legionnet and Lefèvre, 1996). Stevens
et al. (2007) argue that although there is genetic variation in both resistance and
tolerance, there is no evidence for a trade-off between these two “strategies”,
in their analysis of foliar chemistry in trembling aspen (P. tremuloides). Such a
trade-off would have been predicted by many as one possible explanation for the
maintenance of genetic variation in these functional traits.
The genus Populus offers a wide range of opportunities for the development
of conservation genetics and genomics approaches, from narrow endemics – e.g.
P. ilicifolia in Southern Kenia and P. monticola in Southern Baja California and
East-Central Sonora (Mexico) – to species with highly fragmented populations, e.g.
P. euphratica across Northern Africa and South-Eastern and Central Asia. On the
other hand, species with large distribution ranges and wide ecological amplitudes
may be, at present, undergoing adaptive differentiation or even ecological specia-
tion. This is possibly the case of P. alba, where there are emerging subspecies all
around the Mediterranean (B. Fussi and B. Heinze, unpublished results) that deserve
in-depth study.
A logical sequence of priorities to be addressed for any poplar, aspen or
cottonwood endangered population/species emerges:
1. Determine the level of clonality in populations (and maybe even between them,
as dispersal can be large in Populus). Rottenberg et al. (2000) have described uni-
sexual populations of Populus euphratica, a widespread but highly fragmented
species, that probably originate from founder effects by a few, or maybe even
a single individual. Smulders et al. (2008b) have found many clonal duplica-
tions in P. nigra in Great Britain and Belgium. In natural stands of several

Conservation Genomics
361
Populus species, intricate patterns of interspersed clones were found, and there
was evidence for somatic mutations to accumulate (Heinze and Fussi, 2008).
2. Determine the risk of hybridization and introgression from non-native sources.
Thorough population surveys are needed to assess this risk; ﬂowering phenol-
ogy observations will greatly enhance them. DNA techniques will play best
in detecting “low-level” or cryptic hybridization and introgression, as pheno-
typic differences are often obvious in ﬁrst generation hybrids, but not necessarily
beyond the ﬁrst generation.
3. Determine the uniqueness of the populations in terms of neutral genetic distance
and variation, as well as in terms of adaptive and detrimental functional vari-
ation. Common garden tests (and in the near future adaptive markers, such as
SNPs) will serve to assess the functional variation, as Populus species can efﬁ-
ciently be propagated vegetatively. Farmer (1970), Dunlap and Stettler (1996),
and more recently Luquez et al. (2008) provide examples of such collections.
In the absence of common garden (or provenance trial) studies, ﬁeld observa-
tions can help in quantifying functional variation, but it is difﬁcult to imagine
achieving the same level of accuracy in the ﬁeld, where information about pop-
ulation history is often the crucial missing item and the effects of genetic and
environmental variation cannot be separated.
4. Identify the molecular genetic basis of non-neutral population variation in endan-
gered species and populations. This whole book is concerned with this topic,
although we are not aware of any example yet where the question has been
answered satisfactorily in a conservation setting. We are hopeful however to see
many such examples in the near future.
Traditional and newly-developed genetic tools could give answers, in the near
future, to questions of major importance for poplars, aspens and cottonwoods such
as: (a) How great are levels of standing variation and how is genome-wide genetic
variation distributed within and among populations? (b) What are the adaptive
consequences of natural and anthropogenic introgression? (c) How should natural
hybrid zones be conserved in a shifting climate? Is it necessary to conserve several
hybrid swarms, e.g. in P. x canescens, or would they be re-created instantly once the
parental species come into contact? (d) Can rates of evolution and mutation be esti-
mated or directly be calculated from the increasing body of molecular genetic data?
However, as the ﬁnal goal of conservation is to conserve the evolutionary potential
of species, any static approach will be fundamentally ﬂawed, and conservation goals
can only be achieved for a given timeline target, but never once and for all time.
Glossary
• Adaptative genetic variation: genetic variation that affects ﬁtness.
• Admixture: the mixing of genomes of divergent parental taxa; usually quantiﬁed
by an admixture proportion or “hybrid index”.

362
E. Hidalgo et al.
• Biodiversity: the variation of life at all levels of biological organization.
• Collective evolution: Evolution mediated by the spread across hybridizing species
of globally advantageous alleles.
• Comparative genomics: evolutionary relationship between the genes and proteins
of different species, and its applications to infer their structure and functions.
• Ecosystems diversity: diversity in a given unit area, ranging from a particular
ecosystem to the entire Earth.
• Functional diversity: variation of genes and proteins with respect to function,
often a consequence of environmental heterogeneity.
• Genetic diversity: diversity of genes within a species, i.e. the genetic variability
among the populations and the individuals of the same species.
• Genetic erosion: loss of genetic diversity in small and/or isolated populations.
• Genetic hitchhiking: the process by which an evolutionarily neutral or in some
cases deleterious allele or mutation may spread through the gene pool by virtue
of being linked to a beneﬁcial mutation.
• Hitchhiking mapping: a population genetics approach for the identiﬁcation of
genomic regions carrying a favorable mutation.
• Hybrid zones: regions where the ranges of two interbreeding species meet. For a
hybrid zone to be stable, the offspring produced by the cross (the hybrids) have
to be less ﬁt than members of the parent species.
• Introgression: movement of alleles of one taxon into the genetic background
of another through reproduction between hybrids and members of one or both
parental species,
• Linkage disequilibrium: statistical association between genotypes at different
loci, or between a phenotype and a focal locus, such that one can predict
probabilistically the genotype of the second locus (or phenotype) on the basis
of the genotype at the ﬁrst (from Buerkle and Lexer, 2008)
• Species diversity: diversity among species in an ecosystem.
References
Allendorf FW, Leary RF, Spruell P, Wenburg JK (2001) The problems with hybrids: Setting
conservation guidelines. Trends Ecol Evol 16(11):613–622.
Ally D, Ritland K, Otto S (2008) Can clone size serve as a proxy for clone age? An exploration
using microsatellite divergence in Populus tremuloides. Mol Ecol. 17:4897–4911.
Anderson EC, Thompson EA (2002) A model-based method for identifying species hybrids using
multilocus genetic data. Genetics 160(3):1217–1229.
Arens P, Coops H, Jansen J, Vosman B (1998) Molecular genetic analysis of black poplar (Populus
nigra L.) along Dutch rivers. Mol Ecol 7:11–18.
Barsoum N (2001) Relative contributions of sexual and asexual regeneration strategies in Populus
nigra and Salix alba during the ﬁrst years of establishment on a braided gravel bed river. Evol
Ecol 15(4–6):255–279.
Barsoum N, Muller E, Skot L (2004) Variations in levels of clonality among Populus nigra
L. stands of different ages. Evol Ecol 18(5–6):601–624.

Conservation Genomics
363
Barton NH, Gale KS (1993) Genetic analysis of hybrid zones. In: Harrison RG, Price J (eds) Hybrid
zones and the evolutionary process. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Beaumont M (2005) Adaptation and speciation: What can FST tell us? Trends Ecol Evol 20:
435–440.
Begun DJ, Holloway AK, Stevens K, Hillier LW, Poh YP et al. (2007) Population genomics:
Whole-genome analysis of polymorphism and divergence in Drosophila simulans. PLoS Biol
5:e310. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050310.
Benetka V, Mottl J, Vackova K, Pospíšková M, Dubsky M (1999) Estimation of the introgres-
sion level in Populus nigra L. populations by means of isozyme gene markers. Silvae Genet
48(5):218–223.
Benetka V, Vackova K, Bartakova I, Pospíšková M, Rasl M (2002) Introgression in black
poplar (Populus nigra L. ssp. nigra) and its transmission. J For Sci (Prague) 48(3):
115–120.
Brundu G, Lupi R, Zapelli I, Fossati T, Patrignani G, Camarda I, Sala F, Castiglione S (2008) The
origin of clonal diversity and structure of Populus alba in Sardinia: Evidence from nuclear and
plastid microsatellite markers. Ann Botany. 102:997–1006.
Buerkle CA, Lexer C (2008) Admixture as the basis for genetic mapping. Trends Ecol Evol.
23:686–694.
Böritz S (1962) Papierchromatographische Differenzierung einiger Arten und Sorten der Gattung
Populus. Der Züchter 32:24–33.
Caballero A, Quesada H, Rolán-Alvarez E (2008) Impact of AFLP fragment size homoplasy on
the estimation of population genetic diversity and the detection of selective loci. Genetics 179:
539–554.
Cagelli L, Lefèvre F (1995) The conservation of Populus nigra L. and gene ﬂow with cultivated
poplars in Europe. For Genet 2:135–144.
Campbell D, Bernatchez L (2004) Genomic scan using AFLP markers as a means to assess the
role of directional selection in the divergence of sympatric whiteﬁsh ecotypes. Mol Biol Evol
21:945–956.
Chong DKX, Yang RC, Yeh FC (1994) Nucleotide divergence between populations of trembling
aspen (Populus tremuloides) estimated with RAPDs. Current Genetics 26:374–376.
Cole CT (2005) Allelic and population variation of microsatellite loci in aspen (Populus tremu-
loides). New Phytol 167(1):155–164.
Cottrell JE, Krystufek V, Tabbener HE, Milner AD, Connolly T, Sing L, Fluch S, Burg K, Lefèvre
F, Achard P (2005) Postglacial migration of Populus nigra L: Lessons learnt from chloroplast
DNA. For Ecol Manag 206(1–3):71–90.
Culot A, Vekemans X, Lefèvre C, Homes J (1995) Taxonomic identiﬁcation and genetic structure
of populations of the Populus tremula L., P. alba L. and P. x canescens (Ait.) Sm. complex using
morphological and electrophoretical markers. In: Baradat P, Adams WT, Müller-Starck G (eds)
Population Genetics and Genetic Conservation of Forest Trees. SPB Academic Publishing, The
Netherlands, pp. 113–119.
Dunlap JM, Stettler RF (1996) Genetic variation and productivity of Populus trichocarpa and its
hybrids. Phenology and Melampsora rust incidence of native black cottonwood clones from
four river valleys in Washington. For Ecol Manag 87:233–256.
Eckenwalder JE (1982) Populus x inopina hybr. nov. (Salicaceae), a natural hybrid between the
native North American P. fremontii s. Watson and the introduced Eurasian P. nigra L. Madroño
29:67–78.
Eckenwalder JE (1996) Systematics and evolution of Populus. In Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD Jr,
Heilman PE, Hinckley TM (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and
Conservation. NRC Research Press, Natural Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada,
pp. 4–32.
Eveno E, Collada C, Guevara MA, Léger V, Soto A, Díaz L, Léger P, González-Martínez SC,
Cervera MT, Plomion C, Garnier-Géré PH (2008) Contrasting patterns of selection at Pinus
pinaster Ait. drought stress candidate genes as revealed by genetic differentiation analyses.
Mol Biol Evol 25:417–437.

364
E. Hidalgo et al.
Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK (2007) Inference of population structure using multilocus
genotype data: Dominant markers and null alleles. Mol Ecol Notes 7(4):574–578.
Farmer RE Jr (1970) Genetic variation among open-pollinated progeny of Eastern Cottonwood.
Silvae Genet 19(5/6):149–151.
Fossati T, Grassi F, Sala F, Castiglione S (2003) Molecular analysis of natural populations of
Populus nigra L. intermingled with cultivated hybrids. Mol Ecol 12(8):2033–2043.
Frankham R, Ballou JD, Briscoe DA, McInnes KH (2004) A Primer of Conservation Genetics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Frison E, Lefèvre F, de Vries S, Turok J (compl) (1995) EUFORGEN Populus nigra Network –
Report of the 1st meeting, 3–5 October 1994. International Plant Genetic Resources Institute,
Rome, Italy, Izmit, Turkey, 52 p.
González-Martínez SC, Krutovsky KV, Neale DB (2006) Forest-tree population genomics and
adaptive evolution. New Phytol 170:227–238.
Greenaway W, English S, Whatley FR, Rood SB (1991) Interrelationships of poplars in a hybrid
swarm as studied by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Can J Botany 69:203–208.
Hahn MW (2008) Towards a selection theory of molecular evolution. Evolution 62:255–265.
Hamzeh M, Sawchyn C, Perinet P, Dayanandan S (2007) Asymmetrical natural hybridiza-
tion between Populus deltoides and P. balsamifera (Salicaceae). Can J Botany 85:
1227–1232.
Heinze B (1997) A PCR marker for a Populus deltoides allele and its use in studying introgression
with native European Populus nigra. Belgian J Botany 129(2):123–130.
Heinze B (1998a) Biochemical and molecular genetic methods available for the characterization
of Populus nigra L. In: Turok J, Lefèvre F, de Vries S, Alba N, Heinze B and Van Slycken J
(compl) Populus nigra Network. Report of the forth meeting, 3–5 October 1997. International
Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Rome, Geraardsbergen, Belgium, pp. 42–70.
Heinze B (1998b) PCR-based chloroplast DNA assays for the identiﬁcation of native Populus nigra
and introduced poplar hybrids in Europe. Forest Genetics 5(1):31–38.
Heinze B (2005) Common action plan for Populus nigra In:Koskela J u.a. (compl) Populus nigra
Network. Report of the seventh (25–27 October 2001, Osijek, Croatia) and eighth (22–24 May,
2003) meetings. International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Rome , Treppeln, Germany,
pp. 112–114.
Heinze B (2008) Genetic traces of cultivated hybrid poplars in native black poplar (Populus nigra)
offspring in Austria. Preslia. 80:365–374.
Heinze B, Fussi B (2008) Somatic mutations as a useful tool for studying clonal dynamics in trees.
Mol Ecol. 17:4779–4781.
Heinze B, Lickl E (2002) Rare, but steady, introgression in Austrian black poplar as a long-term
risk? In: van Dam B, Bordács S (eds) Genetic Diversity In River Populations of European Black
Poplar – Implications for Riparian Eco-system Management. Csiszár Nyomda, Budapest, pp.
169–175.
Hwang S-Y, Lindroth RL (1997) Clonal variation in foliar chemistry of aspen: Effects on gypsy
moths and forest tent caterpillars. Oecologia 111:99–108.
Imbert E, Lefèvre F (2003) Dispersal and gene ﬂow of Populus nigra (Salicaceae) along a dynamic
river system. J Ecol 91(3):447–456.
Ingvarsson PK (2005) Molecular population genetics of herbivore-induced protease inhibitor
genes in European aspen (Populus tremula L., Salicaceae). Mol Biol Evol 22(9):
1802–1812.
Ingvarsson PK, Garcia MV, Luquez V, Hall D, Jansson S (2008) Nucleotide polymorphism and
phenotypic associations within and around the phytochrome B2 Locus in European aspen
(Populus tremula, Salicaceae). Genetics 178:2217–2226.
Kajba D, de Vries SMG, Lefèvre F, Heinze B, Rotach P, Turok J (2002) EUFORGEN Populus
nigra Network: Towards in situ and ex situ implementing conservation strategies. In: van Dam
B and Bordács S (eds) Genetic Diversity in River Populations of European Black Poplar –
Implications for Riparian Eco-System Management. Csiszár Nyomda, Budapest, pp. 163–167.

Conservation Genomics
365
Keim P, Paige KN, Whitham TG, Lark KG (1989) Genetic analysis of an interspe-
ciﬁc hybrid swarm of Populus: Occurrence of unidirectional introgression. Genetics 123:
557–565.
Kim S-C, Rieseberg LH (1999) Genetic architecture of species differences in annual sunﬂowers:
Implications for adaptive trait introgression. Genetics 153:965–977.
Kohn MH, Murphy WJ, Ostrander EA, Wayne RK (2006) Genomics and conservation genetics.
Trends Ecol Evol 21(11):629–637.
Krutovsky KV, Neale DB (2006) Forest genomics and new molecular genetic approaches to mea-
suring and conserving adaptive genetic diversity in forest trees. In: Geburek T, Turok J (eds)
Conservation and Management of Forest Genetic Resources in Europe. Arbora Publishers,
Zvolen, Slovakia, pp. 369–390.
Krystufek V (2001) Population genetic analysis of Populus nigra in Austria using nuclear and
chloroplast DNA markers. PhD dissertation. University of Vienna, Austria.
Lefèvre F, Barsoum N, Heinze B, Kajba D, Rotach P, de Vries SMG, Turok J (2001a)
EUFORGEN Technical Bulletin: In situ Conservation of Populus nigra. International Plant
Genetic Resources Institute, Rome, Italy, 58 p.
Lefèvre F, Kajba D, Heinze B, Rotach P, De Vries SMG, Turok J (2001b) Black poplar: A model
for gene resource conservation in forest ecosystems. For Chron 77:239–244.
Lefèvre F, Legionnet A, de Vries S, Turok J (1998) Strategies for the conservation of a pioneer tree
species, Populus nigra L., in Europe. Genet Select Evol 30:S181–S196.
Legionnet A, Faivre-Rampant P, Villar M, Lefèvre F (1997) Sexual and asexual reproduction in
natural stands of Populus nigra. Botanica Acta 110:257–263.
Legionnet A, Lefèvre F (1996) Genetic variation of the riparian pioneer tree species Populus nigra
L.1. Study of population structure based on isozymes. Heredity 77:629–637.
Legionnet A, Muranty H, Lefèvre F (1999) Genetic variation of the riparian pioneer tree species
Populus nigra. II. Variation in susceptibility to the foliar rust Melampsora larici-populina.
Heredity 82:318–327.
Lexer C, Buerkle CA, Joseph JA, Heinze B, Fay MF (2007) Admixture in European Populus hybrid
zones makes feasible the mapping of loci that contribute to reproductive isolation and trait
differences. Heredity 98:74–84.
Lexer C, Heinze B, Alia R, Rieseberg LH (2004) Hybrid zones as a tool for identifying adaptive
genetic variation in outbreeding forest trees: Lessons from wild annual sunﬂowers (Helianthus
Spp.). For Ecol Manag 197:49–64.
Lexer C, Rosenthal DM, Raymond O, Donovan LA, Rieseberg LH (2005) The genetics of species
differences in the wild annual sunﬂowers, Helianthus annuus and H. petiolaris. Genetics
169:2225–2239.
Lindroth RL, Hwang SY (1996) Clonal variation in foliar chemistry of quaking aspen (Populus
tremuloides) Michx. Biochem Syst Ecol 24:357–364.
Luikart G, England PR, Tallmon D, Jordan S, Taberlet P (2003) The power and promise of
population genomics: From genotyping to genome typing. Nat Rev Genet. 4:981–994.
Luquez V, Hall D, Albrectsen B, Karlsson J, Ingvarsson P, Jansson S (2008) Natural phenolog-
ical variation in aspen (Populus tremula): The SwAsp collection. Tree Genet Genomes 4(2):
279–292.
Meirmans PG, Lamothe M, Perinet P, Isabel N (2007) Species-Speciﬁc Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism Markers for Detecting Hybridization and Introgression in Poplar. Can J Botany
85:1082–1091.
Mejnartowicz M (1991) Inheritance of chloroplast DNA in Populus. Theor Appl Genet 82:
477–480.
Mock K, Rowe C, Hooten M, DeWoody J, Hipkins V (2008) Clonal dynamics in western North
American aspen (Populus tremuloides). Mol Ecol. 17:4827–4844.
Morjan CL, Rieseberg LH (2004) How species evolve collectively: Implications of gene ﬂow and
selection for the spread of advantageous alleles. Mol Ecol 13:1341–1356.

366
E. Hidalgo et al.
Müller R, Sauer E (1974) Urteilsgrundlagen für die trichocarpa-Pappel: Versuch einer
Analyse auch der bisherigen Pappelwirtschaft. W. Schmidt-Strassenhaus über Neuwied/Rhein:
Wirtschafts- und Forstverl. Euting.
Namroud M-C, Beaulieu J, Juge N, Laroche J, Bousquet J (2008) Scanning the genome for
gene single nucleotide polymorphisms involved in adaptive population differentiation in white
spruce. Mol Ecol 17:3599–3613.
Namroud M-C, Park A, Tremblay F, Bergeron Y (2005) Clonal and spatial genetic structures of
aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.). Mol Ecol 14(10):2969–2980.
Okumura S, Yamashita A, Kanamoto H, Hattori M, Tomizawa K (2004) Complete structure
of the chloroplast genome of Populus alba. Nippon Shokubutsu Seiri Gakkai Nenkai oyobi
Shinpojiumu Koen Yoshishu 45th 111.
Osier TL, Hwang SY, Lindroth RL (2000) Within- and between-year variation in early season
phytochemistry of quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) Clones. Biochem Syst Ecol
28(3):197–208.
Paige KN, Capman WC, Jennetten P (1991) Mitochondrial inheritance patterns across a cot-
tonwood hybrid zone: Cytonuclear disequilibria and hybrid zone dynamics. Evolution 45:
1360–1369.
Pearse DE, Crandall KA (2004) Beyond FST: Analysis of population genetic data for conservation.
Conserv Genet 5(5):585–602.
Peltzer DA (2002) Does clonal integration improve competitive ability? A test using aspen
(Populus tremuloides [Salicaceae]) invasion into prairie. Am J Botany 89:494–499.
Philippe RN, Bohlmann J (2007) Poplar defense against insect herbivores. Can J Botany 85:
1111–1126.
Pospíšková M, Šálková I (2006) Population structure and parentage analysis of black poplar along
the Morava River. Can J For Res 36(5):1067–1076.
Radetzky R (1990) Analysis of mitochondrial DNA and its inheritance in Populus. Curr Genet
18:429–434.
Rajagopal J, Bashyam L, Bhatia S, Khurana DK, Srivastava PS, Lakshmikumaran M (2000)
Evaluation of genetic diversity in the Himalayan poplar using RAPD markers. Silvae Genet
49(2):60–66.
Rajora OP, Barrett JW, Dancik BP, Strobeck C (1992) Maternal transmission of mitochondrial
DNA in interspeciﬁc hybrids of Populus. Curr Genet 22:141–145.
Rajora OP, Dancik BP (1992) Chloroplast DNA inheritance in Populus. Theor Appl Genet
84:280–285.
Rieseberg LH, Whitton J, Gardner K (1999) Hybrid zones and the genetic architecture of a barrier
to gene ﬂow between two sunﬂower species. Genetics 152(2):713–727.
Rottenberg A, Nevo E, Zohary D (2000) Genetic variability in sexually dimorphic and monomor-
phic populations of Populus euphratica (Salicaceae). Can J For Res 30:482–486.
Ryder OA (2005) Conservation genomics: Applying whole genome studies to species conservation
efforts. Cytogen Genome Res 108:6–15.
Saito Y, Shiraishi S, Tanimoto T, Yin L, Watanabe S, Ide Y (2002) Genetic diversity of Populus
euphratica populations in northwestern China determined by RAPD DNA analysis. New For
23(2):97–103.
Schlötterer C (2003) Hitchhiking mapping – functional genomics from the population genetics
perspective. Trends Genet 19:32–38.
Schlötterer C (2004) The evolution of molecular markers – Just a matter of fashion? Nat Rev Genet
5:63–69.
Scotti-Saintagne C, Mariette S, Porth I, Goicoechea PG, Barreneche T, Bodenes C, Burg K,
Kremer A (2004) Genome scanning for interspeciﬁc differentiation between two closely
related oak species [Quercus robur L. and Q. petraea (Matt.) Liebl.]. Genetics 168:
1615–1626.
Smulders M, Beringen R, Volosyanchuk R, Vanden Broeck A, van der Schoot J, Arens P, Vosman
B (2008a) Natural hybridisation between Populus nigra L. and P. x canadensis Moench. Hybrid

Conservation Genomics
367
offspring competes for niches along the Rhine river in the Netherlands. Tree Genet Genomes
4(4):663–675.
Smulders MJM, Cottrell JE, Lefèvre F, van der Schoot J, Arens P, Vosman B, Tabbener HE,
Grassi F, Fossati T, Castiglione S, Krystufek V, Fluch S, Burg K, Vornam B, Pohl A, Gebhardt
K, Alba N, Agúndez D, Maestro C, Notivol E, Volosyanchuk R, Pospíšková M, Bordács S,
Bovenschen J, van Dam BC, Koelewijn HP, Halfmaerten D, Ivens B, van Slycken J, Vanden
Broeck A, Storme V, Boerjan W (2008b) Structure of the genetic diversity in black poplar
(Populus nigra L.) populations across European river systems: Consequences for conservation
and restoration. For Ecol Manag 255(5–6):1388–1399.
Stanton BJ, Villar M (1996) Controlled reproduction of Populus. In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD,
Heilman PE and Hinckley TM, (eds) Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management
and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Natural Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, pp. 113–138.
Sterky F, Bhalerao RR, Unneberg P, Segerman B, Nilsson P, Brunner AM, Charbonnel-Campaa L,
Lindvall JJ, Tandre K, Strauss SH, Sundberg B, Gustafsson P, Uhlen M, Bhalerao RP, Nilsson
O, Sandberg G, Karlsson J, Lundeberg J, Jansson S (2004) A Populus EST resource for plant
functional genomics. PNAS 101(38):13951–13956.
Stettler RF, Zsuffa L, Wu R (1996) The role of hybridization in the genetic manipulation of
Populus In: Stettler RF, Bradshaw HD, Heilman PE, Hinckley TM, (eds) Biology of Populus
and Its Implications for Management and Conservation. NRC Research Press, Natural Research
Council Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 87–112.
Stevens M, Waller D, Lindroth R (2007) Resistance and tolerance in Populus tremuloides: Genetic
variation, costs, and environmental dependency. Evol Ecol 21(6):829–847.
Stinchcombe JR, Hoekstra HE (2008) Combining population genomics and quantitative genetics:
Finding the genes underlying ecologically important traits. Heredity 100(2):158–170.
Storme V, Broeck A, Ivens B, Halfmaerten D, Slycken J, Castiglione S, Grassi F, Fossati T,
Cottrell JE, Tabbener HE, Lefèvre F, Saintagne C, Fluch S, Krystufek V, Burg K, Bordács
S, Borovics A, Gebhardt K, Vornam B, Pohl A, Alba N, Agúndez D, Maestro C, Notivol E,
Bovenschen J, Dam BC, Schoot J, Vosman B, Boerjan W, Smulders MJM (2004) Ex-situ con-
servation of Black poplar in Europe: Genetic diversity in nine gene bank collections and their
value for nature development. Theor Appl Genet 108(6):969–981.
Storz J (2005) Using genome scans of DNA polymorphism to infer adaptive population divergence.
Mol Ecol 14:671–688.
Su X, Zhang Q, Zhang W, Bian Z, Zsuffa L (1996) The genetic variability and phylogenetic
relationship in Populus ussuriensis Kom. and its relatives. Scientia Silvae Sinicae 32:118–124.
Suter L (2008) Genetic analysis of reproductive isolation and sex chromosome evolution in
European Populus. Master thesis, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew and ETH Zurich.
Suvanto LI, Latva-Karjanmaa TB (2005) Clone identiﬁcation and clonal structure of the European
aspen (Populus tremula). Mol Ecol 14(9):2851–2860.
Sánchez N, Grau JM, Alba N, Manzanera JA, Bueno MD (2000) Genetic characterisation of
Populus tremula regions of origin in Spain using RAPD ﬁngerprints. Silvae Genet 49(2):66–71.
Taylor G (2002) Populus: Arabidopsis for forestry. Do we need a model tree? Ann Botany-London
90:681–689.
Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U, Putnam N, Ralph S,
Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A, Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez D,
Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V, Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J,
Chen G-L, Cooper D, Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Dejardin A, dePamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I, Duplessis S, Ehlting J,
Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M, Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger
B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y, Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones
S, Jones-Rhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjarvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C, Kirkpatrick
R, Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J, Leple J-C, Locascio P, Lou Y,
Lucas S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C, Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O,

368
E. Hidalgo et al.
Pereda V, Peter G, Philippe R, Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C,
Ritland K, Rouze P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui
A, Sterky F, Terry A, Tsai C-J, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K, Wessler
S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Van de Peer Y, Rokhsar D
(2006) The genome of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science
313(5793):1596–1604.
Ueda M, Fujimoto M, Arimura S, Murata J, Tsutsumi N, Kadowaki K (2007) Loss of the rpl32
gene from the chloroplast genome and subsequent acquisition of a preexisting transit peptide
within the nuclear gene in Populus. Gene 402(1–2):51–56.
Vanden Broeck A, Cox K, Quataert P, Van Bockstaele E, Van Slycken J (2003a) Flowering phe-
nology of Populus nigra L., P. nigra cv. italica and P. x canadensis Moench. and the potential
for natural hybridisation in Belgium. Silvae-Genet 52:280–283.
Vanden Broeck A, Quataert P, Van Slycken J, Roldán-Ruiz I, Van Bockstaele E (2003b) Pollen
competition in Populus nigra females revealed by microsatellite markers. For Genet 10(3):219–
227.
Vanden Broeck A, Quataert P, Van Slycken J, Storme V, Boerjan W, Cottrell JE, Van Bockstaele E
(2004) Gene ﬂow between cultivated poplars and native black poplar (Populus nigra L.): A case
study along the river Meuse on the Dutch-Belgian border. For Ecol Manag 197(1–3):307–310.
Vanden Broeck A, Villar M, Van Bockstaele E, Van Slycken J (2005) Natural hybridization
between cultivated poplars and their wild relatives: Evidence and consequences for native
poplar populations. Ann For Sci 62:601–613.
van Loo M, Joseph JA, Heinze B, Fay MF, Lexer C (2008) Clonality and spatial genetic structure
in Populus x canescens and its sympatric backcross parent P. alba in a Central European hybrid
zone. New Phytol 177(2):506–516.
Vasemägi A, Nilsson J, Primmer CR (2005) Expressed sequence tag-linked microsatellites as a
source of gene-associated polymorphisms for detecting signatures of divergent selection in
atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Mol Biol Evol 22:1067–1076.
Vitalis R, Dawson K, Boursot P (2001) Interpretation of variation across marker loci as evidence
of selection. Genetics 158:1811–1823.
Vornam B, Herzog S, Preisig-Müller R, Hattemer HH (1994) Restriction fragment length polymor-
phisms of a chloroplast photosystem II gene from poplar and their use for species identiﬁcation.
Genome 37:747–750.
White TL, Adams WT, Neale DB (2007) Forest Genetics. CABI International, Wallingford, UK.
Wilding CS, Butlin RK, Grahame J (2001) Differential gene exchange between parapatric morphs
of Littorina saxatilis detected using AFLP markers. J Evol Biol 14:611–619.
Winﬁeld MO, Arnold GM, Cooper F, Le Ray M, White J, Karp A, Edwards KJ (1998) A study of
genetic diversity in Populus nigra betulifolia in the Upper Severn area of the UK using AFLP
markers. Mol Ecol 7:1–8.
Yeh FC, Chong DKX, Yang RC (1995) RAPD variation within and among natural pop-
ulations of trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) from Alberta. J Hered 86:
454–460.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Jawdy SS, Boerjan W, Tuskan GA (2004a) Genetic and phys-
ical mapping of Melampsora rust resistance genes in Populus and characterization of linkage
disequilibrium and ﬂanking genomic sequence. New Phytol 164:95–105.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Riemenschneider D, Tuskan GA (2004b) Large-scale heterospe-
ciﬁc segregation distortion in Populus revealed by a dense genetic map. Theor Appl Genet
109:451–463.
Yin TM, DiFazio SP, Gunter LE, Zhang X, Sewell MM, Woolbright SA, Allan GJ, Kelleher CT,
Douglas CJ, Wang M, Tuskan GA (2008) Genome structure and emerging evidence of an
incipient sex chromosome in Populus. Genome Res 18(3):422–430.
Ziegenhagen B, Gneuss S, Rathmacher G, Leyer I, Bialozyt R, Heinze B, Liepelt S (2008) A
fast and simple genetic survey reveals the spread of poplar hybrids at a natural Elbe river site.
Conserv Genet 9(2):373–379.

Index
A
ABA responsive elements (ABRE), 227
Abaso, 21
Abies, 4
Abiotic stress responses
drought stress avoidance strategy,
232–239
hormonal signaling during drought stress,
model, 239
signaling at cellular and tissue level
cellular defences activation,
228–229
water limitations, 226–228
water shortage, cellular consequences,
226
tree-speciﬁc adaptation measures
drought, growth responses, 229–230
hydraulic architecture changes,
230–232
Abscisic acid (ABA)
as abscission inducing agent, 233
in Populus wood formation, 220–221
signaling water limitations, 226–228
See also Wood
Abscission
as drought stress avoidance, 232–233
by seasonal drought stress, 235–239
stress induced, 234–235
See also Abiotic stress responses
Acephala applanata, 255
Activation tagging effectiveness,
in Populus, 124
Adaptive traits, 29–30
Affymetrix platforms, 141, 143
AFR regulators, 85
AGAMOUS (AG) gene, 164
AG co-orthologs, expression, 165
Agilent platforms, 141
Agrobacterium rhizogenes, 121
Agrobacterium strains
biology, pioneering advances in, 5
transformation procedures and protocol,
121
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, 120–121
AGL1 strain, 123
nopaline strains,C58 and LBA4404,
120–123
octopine strains, like EHA105, 123
Aigeiros, 45
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) gene, 179
Allocation patterns, 46–47
Allometric relationships, analysis, 47–48
Allozyme
diversities, 91
markers, 22–26
Amanita muscaria, 259
1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase
genes (ACO), 236
Angiosperms, 4
tree model system, 1990s, 68
Anthocyanidin reductase (ANR), 291
Anthocyanidin synthase (ANS), 291
Antisense-mediated gene suppression, 117
Antisense technology, 117
AP/ERF transcription factor families, 85
AP/ERF transcription factors, 85
APETALA1 (AP1) gene, 159
APETALA2 (AP2) gene, 158
Aquaporins, 55
Arabidopsis spp.
A/B/C-function, deﬁned, 164
FLC gene, 159
ﬂoral signal, 161–162
LBs in, 189
RNA silencing pathways, 157–158
SEP gene, 164
temporal signal, 158
See also Perennial life
S. Jansson et al. (eds.), Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics
and Genomics: Crops and Models 8, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1541-2,
C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
369

370
Index
Arabidopsis thaliana
as alternative model system, 68
analysis of gene sets from Populus and,
81–82
genome
comparison, 78
duplicated, 114
sequence, 5–6
as model plant, 3
not good for arboreal traits study, 4
mutation rate, 92
phenylpropanoid enzymes in, 84
in planta methods, 125
See also Populus
Arabis aplina, 162
Arborea (Laval University, Quebec), 6
ARBORKNOX1 (ARK1), 213
ARBORKNOX2 (ARK2), 213
ARBORKNOX1 gene, 174
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi, 248
and Populus, association, 255–258
ARF5 (MONOPTOROS) genes, 83
ARF5/MP gene, 83
ARF transcription factor families, 85
ARK2 overexpression, 213
ArrayExpress database, 142
Array platforms, 141
and cross-species utility, 141
Artiﬁcial or synthetic miRNAs, role in
PTGS, 118
Aspens
Arabidopsis AtCBF1, overexpression, 186
difference from hybrid poplars,
204–205
gene expression analysis, 178
genes in cambial dormancy, 182
and hybrid poplars, difference,
204–205
See also perennial life; Populus
Association mapping (AM), 95, 102–103
and candidate gene approach, 102
ATP-dependent ATP Binding Cassette (ABC)
class, 85
Autumnal leaf senescence, regulation,
182–183
Autumnal senescence
ESTs up-regulation/down-regulation,
237–238
AUX/IAA interacting proteins, 83
AUX/IAA regulators, 85
Auxin Efﬂux Carrier family, 85
Auxins, in wood formation, 55, 216–218
See also Wood
Auxin Response Factor (AFR) transcription
factors, 83
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) gene, 158
Axillary vegetative meristems, formation, 160
B
BAC-based physical maps advances and
synteny test, 84
BAC clones, comparison of sequences, 71
BAC end sequences (BES), 72
Bacillus subtilis model, bacterial spore
formation, 3
BAC minimum tiling path, 11
BAC physical map, 69
See also Populus trichocarpa genome
project
Bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC) library,
71
BARK STORAGE PROTEIN (BSP) gene, 182
Beauveria bassiana, 264
Beavis effect, 102
Beijing Forestry University’s P. ×tomentosa’s
breeding program, 318
Betula, 4
Betula papyrifera Marsh., 259
Biennials, vernalization treatment, 156
Biolistic approaches, 121
Biomass equations, for clones, 48
Biomass estimations, 47
Biomass yields and growth, 39–44
Birch, see Betula
Black cottonwood, see Populus balsamifera L.
BLAST2GO web resource, 142
BLASTN hits, 74
BLASTN searches, 80
BLAST search tools, 136
BLAT search tools, 136
BpMADS4 gene, 182–183
Brassica napus, 158
Breeding and selection for pest resistance,
328–329
Breeding program and approaches
biomass productivity, 327
controlled breeding, 313–322
F1 inter-speciﬁc hybridization, 317, 318
genecology, 308–313
genetic and varietal evaluation, 322–325
hybrid vigor impact, 318
intra-speciﬁc recurrent breeding program,
318
long-term breeding programs, 318–322
Populus cultivars, registered with FAO’s
International Poplar
Commission, 313

Index
371
speciﬁc gravity, evaluated wood quality
trait, 328
testing and selection, 322–329
translational genomics, 329–336
See also Reproductive development, in
Populus
Breeding strategies, of Populus, 313, 315–318
Bud dormancy release, in Populus, 187
Bud phenology, genetic control, 103–106
Burkholderia cepacia Bu72, 8
bZIP transcription factor, (FLOWERING
LOCUS D (FD), 159
C
CACTA elements, 80
Caffeic acid O-methyl transferases (COMTs),
293
Caffeoyl CoA O-methyl transferases
(CCOMTs), 293
CALCINEURIN B-LIKE PROTEIN 9
(AtCBL9), 239
Cambium
dormancy, 181–182
features, 202
function, genetic regulation, 212
global gene expression across, 212–215
See also Perennial life
Canadian forestry, focus on conifers, 6
Candidate gene approach, 102
Canopy establishment, inﬂuence of
competition, 45–46
Carbon neutral renewable energy source, 40
Cartagena Protocol on Biodiversity, 12
Castanea dentata, 249
CatFisher, 142
CBF genes, 187
CBL-INTERACTING PROTEIN KINASE 10
(CIPK10), 239
CDNA arrays, 141
Cellular defences, activation, 228–229
Cellulose macroﬁbrils, 208
CENTRORADIALIS (CEN) gene, 160
CENTRORADIALIS-LIKE1 (CENL1) gene,
177–178
Chaetomium spirale, 265
Chalcone isomerase (CHI), 291
Chalcone synthase (CHS), 291
Chilling, 191
Chilling-induced removal, of callose, 188
China, controlled breeding techniques of
Populus, 314
Cinnamomum zeylanicum, 248
Cinnamoyl dehydrogenase (CAD), 293
Cinnmoyl-CoA reductase (CCR), 293
Classiﬁcations, Populus, 18, 21–22
and inconsistencies, 21–22
CLAVATA1-3 (CLV1-3)-WUSCHEL (WUS)
system, 172
Clonal selection, for improvement, 45
Clone number 383-2499, 69
Clonostachys rosea, 264
CLOVER, 139
CLV3 gene, 174
CMap resources, 140
Coalescent theory, 98
Commercial purposes usage, 40
Complementation, 113
Complex traits dissection
association mapping and, 102–103
incidence of segregation distortion,
101–102
linkage mapping and genome dynamics,
100–102
Conifers, 4
Conservation genomics, 347–349
genetic diversity conservation, 350–351
hybridization and genetic conservation,
351–353
population genomics for, 353–357
Conservation programmes for Populus sp.,
considerations, 353
CONSTANS (CO) gene, 177
CONSTANS/FLOWERING LOCUS T (CO/FT)
gene, 159
Coordinated Agricultural Product (CAP), 330
Coppicing, impact on growth, 44
Cortinarius sp., 258
Cottonwoods, see Populus angustifolia
CTAB-based protocol, 70
Cyclin A2 (CYCA2), 214
Cytokinins, 55, 123
in wood formation, 219
See also Wood
Cytoskeleton, role, 238
D
DATFAP, annotation-based approach to
identify TFs, 139
Defense, in Populus
mutualisms, 250–255
endophyte association, 262–263
evolutionary history and fossil record,
265–268
fungal symbionts, 264–265
mycorrhizal fungi association, 255–261
plant symbiont communities, 261–264

372
Index
Defense, in Populus (cont.)
proteins and genomics impact, 288–289
defense-related genes discovery,
285–286
gene expression patterns and defense
responses, 286–288
and secondary metabolism, 280–284
application of genomic tools, 285–289
biosynthetic pathways, to phenolic
compounds, 290
functional analysis of genes, 294–296
future perspectives, 298–299
importance of variation, 296–298
and phenylpropanoid, genomic analysis,
289–294
variations and secondary metabolite
proﬁles, 296–298
Dehydrins, in overwintering, 186
See also Freezing tolerance, in Populus
DELLA proteins, role, 180
2,4-Diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), 253
Dicer, 117
Dihydroﬂavonol reductase (DFR), 291
Diploidization process, 76
Diploid species, nucleotide polymorphism, 92
DIURNAL database, 139
Diurnal project, 139
DNA-based vectors, microprojectile
bombardment use, 121
DNA extraction protocol, 70
Domestication, 46, 307
Dominant negative mutations, 117
Dormancy
in cambium, 181–182
cycles, 135, 175
in Aspen, 176
feature, 176
deﬁnition, 174–175
genetic control, 103–106
locus, 175–176
release
cell biology and biochemistry, 188–190
chilling and vernalization, 191
gibberellins, 190–191
phenology, 187–188
in SAM, 180–181
See also Perennial life
Dormancy sphincter complexes (DSC), 180
DP-E2F-like (DEL) gene, 214
Drought stress avoidance, abscission, 232–233
by seasonal drought stress, 235–239
stress induced abscission, 234–235
See also Populus
E
Eco-dormancy, deﬁnition, 175
Ecogenomics model plant, Populus as, 280
Eco-TILLING approach, 67
Ectomycorrhizal species, associated with
Populus, 258
Ectomycorrhizal spp. and Populus,
association, 258
Ectomycorrhizal symbiosis, 259–260
Ectopic approaches, 117
Ectopic gene expression, 113
Ectopic overexpression, in Populus, 160
Effective population size, concept, 92
EFP browser, 142–143
ELEMENT database, 139
Elite cottonwood hybrids, 157
Endoconidioma populi, 263
Endo-dormancy, deﬁnition, 175
Endophyte and Populus spp., association,
262–263
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), role, 189
Enhancer and gene traps, 124
Enterobacter sp. 638, 8
Epichloë festucae, 250
Epigenetic mechanisms, role, 158
Escherichia coli, as model prokaryotic
microbe, 3
EST databases, Populus
launch, 6
types, 137–139
Ethylene
inhibitory substances, 55
in wood formation, 220
See also Wood
Eucalyptus
breeding programs, 307
genome, 68
species, 4, 5
Eudarluca caricis, 252
Eudicot genome sequence, 68
EUGENE, 8
EuGène, 81
Euphrates poplar, see Populus euphratica
European black poplar, see Populus nigra
European FACE experiment, 44
Exogenous application, of plant hormones, 233
Expressed Sequence Tag (EST), Populus,
137, 356
F
FD ortholog PtFD1 overexpression, 159–160
Festuca arundinacea, 253
FgenesH, 8

Index
373
FgenesH Genewise, 81
Fine roots, deﬁned, 44
Fingerprinted contigs (FPC), 72
Flacourtiaceae family, 20
Flavanone 3 hydroxylase (F3H), 291
Flavonoid O-methyltransferases (FOMTs), 291
Flavonol synthase (FLS), 291
Floral meristems, in P. trichocarpa
inﬂorescence, 161
Flowering
acropetal order, 163
development and sex determination,
162–166
E class genes study, 164
initiation, 156–162
See also Reproductive development, in
Populus
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) gene, 159, 191
FLOWERING LOCUS D (FD) gene, 159
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) gene, 177
Forest management and restoration ecology
conservation genetics, 357–359
See also Conservation genomics
Forest tent caterpillar, see Malacasoma disstria
Forest tree genomics projects, 6
Fossil records, Populus, 20
Four-fold degenerate nucleotide sites
(4DTV), 76
Free Air Carbon Dioxide Enrichment
(FACE), 258
Freezing tolerance, in Populus
dehydrins and proteins, 186
environmental regulation, 183–184
gene expression regulation, 185
osmotic adjustments and dehydration,
184–185
transcriptional regulation, 186–187
Fremont cottonwood, see Populus fremontii
FRIGIDA (FRI) gene, 191
FRUITFULL (FUL) gene, 159
FT and LEAFY genes, ﬂowering, 127
FT overexpression, 159
Full-length (FL) cDNA information, 73
Fungal symbionts, of Populus spp., 264–265
G
Gain-of-function mutations, 123
Gateway cloning technology, 115
Genecology, Populus, 308
species distribution, 308–313
Gene content and genomics, 81–82
duplicate genes retention, 82–83
prediction methods, 81–82
synteny with other species, 83
Gene-directed transgenesis, 113
Gene discovery
gene tagging in, 209–210
microarray proﬁling of gene
expression, 211
Gene expression regulation, in freezing
tolerance, 185
See also Perennial life
Gene function determination, transgenics
approach, 210–211
Gene Ontology (GO)
database, 142
hierarchy, 138
General combining ability (GCA), 319
General hybridizing ability (GHA), 319
Generalized mutagenesis, 113
Gene redundancy, 117
Gene silencing, 113
Gene tagging, 114
Genetic and quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
studies, 47
Genetic diversity, 91–92
conservation, 350–351
See also Conservation genomics
Genetic improvement of Populus, economic
analyses, 318
Genetic redundancy, 114
Genetic variation, of Populus,
309–313
Gene trap tagging, in gene discovery,
209–210
Genome Canada, 6
Genome mining, in Populus defense and
secondary metabolism, 294–295
Genome sequence and shotgun results
BAC based MAP, 71–73
genotype selection, 69–70
map-based assembly, 74–75
peritelomeric portion of LG_XIX,
74–75
scaffolds, 74–75
sequence assembly, 70–71
template preparation and contamination,
70–71
See also Populus trichocarpa genome
project
Genome sequence, Populus, 155
sequencing efforts, 68
sequencing strategy, 69
use EST and full-length (FL) cDNA
information, 73
signiﬁcance, 67–68

374
Index
Genome structure, 76–77
comparison with grape genomes, 77–78
repetitive portions and comparison with
other genomes, 79–81
Geographic distribution, of Populus, 308–309
GEO repository, 142
Gibberellins (GA), 55, 156, 190–191
alteration, 56
chilling releasing effects, 190–191
in Populus
stem, 179–180
wood formation, 216–218
role in wood formation, 218–219
Global gene expression patterns, in Populus
defense response, 286–288
Global transcriptome analysis, 234
Glomus intraradices, 253, 255
Glomus mosseae, 251
Glucan-synthase gene, upregulation, 181
Gold standard method, for gene function
study, 113
GoSLim gene ontology categories, 82
GRAIL, 8
GrailExp6, 81
GRAMENE, provide BioMart service, 137
GRAMENE resource, 136, 139
Grapevine, see Vitis vinifera
GreenWood Resources’ P. ×generosa breeding
program, 318
Growth, 56–57
and allocation patterns, 46–47
average above-ground biomass yields,
42–43
biomass yields, higher in coppiced
Populus, 44
canopy establishment, inﬂuence of
competition, 45–46
clonal selection, for improvement, 45
coppicing impact on, 44
hybridization, 22
interspeciﬁc, for improvement, 45
objectives of, 45
hybrid vigor or heterosis, 45–46
relationships between yield vs tree
dimensions/canopy/ leaf traits, 47
roots, 44–45
species variety illustration, different
ages/stages of development, 39
weed control
and Populus plantations, 41
risks from diseases and pests, 44
weed control and Populus plantations, 41
See also Reproductive development, in
Populus
Gymnosperms, and experimental
disadvantages, 4
Gypsy moth, see Lymantria dispar
H
Habitat, Populus, 16–18
Haldane’s rule, 165, 166
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, 23, 26
Hebeloma crustuliniforme, 259
Hebeloma mesophaeum, 258
Herbivory and defense induction, in Populus,
283–284
See also Defense, in Populus
High-density Populus plantations, in different
parts of world, 41
HISTONE1-3 (HIS1-3), 236
Homologous recombination (HR), 120
Hybridization, 22
and genetic conservation, of Populus,
351–353
interspeciﬁc, for improvement, 45
objectives of, 45
See also Conservation genomics
Hybrid poplars and aspen, difference, 204–205
Hybrid Populus clones, drought-response
characteristics, 54
Hybrid vigor or heterosis, 45–46
Hydraulic architecture adaption, to drought,
230–232
Hydropisphaera fungicola, 263
Hydroxycinnamate derivatives (HCDs), 282
Hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (HCT), 293
Hypoxylon mammatum, 318, 328
I
Induced systemic resistance (ISR), 251
Inducible expression, in poplar, 126
Inocybe lacera, 258
Insertional mutagenesis, 113, 123
Internal transcribed spacer (ITS), 258
Italian P. ×canadensis program, 318
J
JAZZ assembler, 70
J. Craig Venter Institute (formerly the Institute
for Genome Research, TIGR), 138
JGI gene model ID, 141
JGI genome browser, 140
JGI Populus gene models, 139
Joint Genomes Initiative (JGI) web
resource, 136

Index
375
K
KANADI gene, 215
Knock-out or knock-down manipulation,
genes, 113
KNOX gene, 179
Knuﬁa endospora, 263
KTI gene, 288–289
Kunitz trypsin inhibitor (KTI), 284
L
Laccaria amethystea, 258
Laccaria bicolor, 252, 255
Lactarius sp., 258
Larix, 4
Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA), 239
Leaf abscission, 233, 235–236, 239
See also Abscission
Leaf rust, by Melampsora spp., 41
Leaf spot, by Marssonina spp., 41
Leaf-to-apex signalling
in dormancy development, 173
role, 178–179
See also Perennial life
Leaf traits, and productivity, 50–51
LEAFY (LFY) gene, 160
Leucine-rich repeat (LRR), 251
Life history, Populus, 18–20
asexual reproduction, 19–20
ﬂowering and fertilization, 19
site-speciﬁc biases in sex ratio, 19
See also Reproductive development, in
Populus
Lignin biosynthetic pathway, 117
Lignocellulosic cell wall biogenesis, 135
Linkage disequilibrium (LD), 71, 95–97
BAC contigs showed co-localization, 96
Linkage disequilibrium mapping, 102
Linkage groups, genes comparison, with
signiﬁcant alignments, 77
Linkage maping, 100–102
Lipid bodies (LBs), 189–190
Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements
(LINEs), 80
Long Terminal Repeat (LTR) Gypsy, 80
LTCOR12 gene, 229
Lymantria dispar, 282, 295
M
MADS box transcription factors, 85
Maize
RNA silencing pathways, 157–158
temporal signal, 158
Malacasoma disstria, 283
Management, Populus, 308
Map assembly, 72
Map-based assembly of Populus genome,
portion representation, 75
Map co-linearity, species of Populus, 100
Mapping populations, in Populus, 100–101
Marker-assisted breeding (MAB), 335
Marker-assisted selection (MAS) programs, in
Populus sp., 335
Marker-trait associations, discovery, 330–331
Marssonina brunnea, 324
“Maturation effects,” 5
Medicago truncatula, for symbiotic nitrogen
ﬁxation, 3
Melampsora larici-populina, 48, 265
Melampsora medusae, 287
Melampsora spp., 324
Meristems, in Populus, 172–174
See also Perennial life
Meselson effect, 23
Metabolomics, in Populus, 143–144
Microarray platforms, for Populus, 141–142
Microarray proﬁling of gene expression, in
gene discovery, 211
Microsatellites, 91
availability, populus, 26
diversity and differentiation in, 27–29
MiPlantBrowser, 140
MiRBase, 140
MiRNA databases, 140
MiRNA precursors, designed, 118
MiRNAs biogenesis, genes mutations, 158
Model Organism Database (MOD), 147
Model or reference organisms, deﬁned
criteria for selection of, 3
Modulus of elasticity (MOE), 205
Modulus of rupture (MOR), 205
Molecular biology, Populus, 68
Molecular clock hypothesis, 100
Monoclonal plantations, 41, 44
Morphology, Populus, 15–16
Motif ﬁnding tools, 139
M. populi BJ001, 8
Multiple gene knock-downs, transgenic
approaches, 114–115
Muscodor albus, 248, 264
Mutator-Like Elements (MULEs), 80
MYB134 transcription factor, role, 296
Mycorrhizal fungal diversity, 249
Mycorrhizal fungi, 255
ectomycorrhizal symbiosis and impact on
root morphology, 256
history and fossil record, 265–268

376
Index
Mycorrhizal fungi (cont.)
mycorrhiza-induced secreted proteins,
model, 257
Mycorrhizas, in plantation forestry, 258–259
Myorrhiza-induced, cysteine-rich, small,
secreted proteins (MISSPs), 252
N
“Narrow-leaved, thin-twigged” species, 21
Native species, 39
Natural genetic diversity,
clones/species/hybrids, 39
NBS-LLR resistance genes, 97
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
repository, 142
NCBI, ofﬁcial repository for ESTs, 137
NCBI Populus Genome Viewer, 136
NCBI Populus trichocarpa genome
viewer, 138
NEWHYBRIDS program, 357
See also Conservation genomics
Nicotiana benthamiana, 121, 295
NimbleGen platforms, 141
Nisqually-1, 7
clone number 383-2499, 69
genotype, ironies with, 89–70
haploid genotypes, 71
Nisqually River, 7
NIST mass spectral library, 143
Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), 120
North-American cottonwoods, 20
North-American plains cottonwood, see
Populus deltoides
North-American quaking aspen, see Populus
tremuloides
Nuclear transformation, using organogenic
systems, 121
Nucleotide-binding site/leucine rich repeat
(NBS-LRR), 356
Nucleotide binding site (NBS), 251
Nucleotide diversity, in Populus, 29
Nucleotide polymorphism, 92–95
reductions in population size, 95
surveys, 94
O
Oleosins, role, 189
Oligo arrays platforms, 141
Orgyia leucostigma, 295
Oriented strand board (OSB), 206
OrthologID database, 139
Ortholog predictions, 139–140
Orthomap database, 139
Oryza sativa, for monocot biology, 3
Osmotic adjustments, in freezing tolerance,
184–185
See also Perennial life
Overwintering initiation, in Populus, 171–172
See also Freezing tolerance, in Populus;
Perennial life
P
Paper birch, see Betula papyrifera Marsh.
Para-dormancy, deﬁnition, 175
Pedigrees, sex determination locus, 166
Perenniality, deﬁned, 171
Perennial life
dormancy, 174–175
locus, 175–176
freezing tolerance
dehydrins and protective proteins, 186
environmental regulation, 183–184
gene expression regulation, 185
osmotic adjustments and dehydration,
184–185
transcriptional regulation, 186–187
meristems, 172–174
photoperiod induced overwintering,
177–183
release from dormancy
cell biology and biochemistry, 188–190
chilling and vernalization, 191
gibberellins, 190–191
phenology, 187–188
seasonal growth, 171–172
PERPETUAL FLOWERING1 (PEP1)
gene, 162
Phenolic secondary metabolites, 281–283
Phenology, refers, 52–53, 187
See also Dormancy
Phenylpropanoid-derived phenolics, 281
Phenylpropanoid metabolism, 68
Phialocephala fortinii, 255
Phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein
(PEBP), 159
Photoperiod, overwintering initiation, 171, 177
apex events, 178–179
dormancy at SAM and cambium, 180–182
GA levels in stem, 179–180
leaves and stem events, 182–183
sensing, by leaves, 177–178
PhyB2 gene, 101–102
PhyB2 SNPs, 102
Physcomitrella patens, 84
Physcomitrella patens genome, 68
Physiological growth factors, 49
PHYTOCHROME A (PHYA) gene, 182

Index
377
Phytochromes (PHY), 177
Phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA)
inhibitory substances, 55
roles to regulate plant growth, 56
transgenic strategies, 56
Phytoremediation, 259
Picea, 4
PICKLE (PKL) gene, 179
Piloderma sp., 258
Pinus, 4
Pinus breeding programs, 307
Piriformospora indica, 250–251
Pisolithus microcarpus, 266
Plant-fungal symbiosis, 248–250
Plant Genome Database project, 138
Plant Genome Database’s Populus Genome
Browser, 136
Plant repetitive elements, 80
Plant reproductive success, mechanisms, 156
Plants distributions, determinants, 39
Plant Transcript Assemblies, 138
PlantTribes database, 139
Polymorphism and heterozygosity, in
Populus, 23
PopARRAY, 140
PopArray database, 139, 141
PopCEN1-RNAi transgenics, 160
inﬂorescences in, 166
PopGenIE, provide BioMart service, 137
PopGenIE resource, 143
GO TermFinder tool at, 142
tool for InterPro domains, 142
tool for KEGG or KOG categories
identiﬁcation, 142
Poplar Gene Index (PplGI), 138
Poplar Genome Steering Committee, 6
Poplar mosaic virus (PopMV), 120–121
Poplars, see Populus
Population genomics, for Populus conservation,
353–357
See also Conservation genomics
Population structure, low levels in Populus, 92
Populus alba, 158
Populus angustifolia, 20, 21, 157
Populus balsamifera, 20, 45, 55
Populus, as model tree, 3, 31
accepted by committee in 2002, 7
advantages, 4–5
breeding and technology, 12–13
characteristics, 205
classes of phenylpropanoid-derived
phenolics in, 281
classiﬁcations, 18, 21–22
consensus cladogram, 18, 21–22
class of phenolic secondary
metabolites, 281
cryopreservation-based germplasm, 145
databases, 138
diverse habitats, 16–18
as “Ecogenomics” model plant, 280
ectomycorrhizas, transcript proﬁling,
259–260
efforts in early 1990s, 6
EST resource, in Sweden, 6
EST sequencing, performed on P.
tremula, 6
events responsible for selection, 5
experiments to proﬁle gene expression and
results, 135–136
fossil records of, 20
future research, 12–13
gene model choice, 8–9
genetics, 68
genetic variations
adaptive genetic variation, 29–30
deviations caused by heterozygote
deﬁciency, 23
markers and RFLP, diversity and
differentiation, 22–26
nucleotide diversity, 29
occurrence of triploids, 26
polymorphism and heterozygosity, 23
tri-nucleotide microsatellites, 29
variable microsatellites, diversity and
differentiation, 26–29
genome browser, 136
genome program, 6
genome sequencing, female clone
Nisqually-1
ab initio gene prediction algorithms, 8
genomics resources, 135–136
databases and browsers, 136–137
EST collections and databases, 137–139
germplasm contacts, 146
miRNAs databases, 140
ortholog predictions, 139–140
promoter motif analysis, 139
QTL databases and browsers, 140
resequenced by JGI, 11
sequencing, female clone Nisqually-1,
8, 136
transcription factors (TFs),
databases, 139
germplasm, 144–145
herbivory and defense induction, 283–284

378
Index
Populus, as model tree (cont.)
hybridization role, naturally occurring
hybrids, 22
hybrid used for transformation (T89), 6
hydroxycinnamate derivatives (HCDs), 282
“Jamboree set” of genes, 10
LC-MS-based approaches, 144
life history, reproduction, 18–20
mapping populations, derived from
interspeciﬁc intersectional crosses,
101
metabolomics, 143–144
microarrays use, 135
morphology, 15–16
neutral genetic markers, differentiation
among populations, 30
Nisqually-1 planting, 10
per generation mutation, 92
proteomics, 143–144
repeated, functional genes, 114
role in riparian ecosystems, 135
scientiﬁc interest in, 10
secondary metabolites of Populus, effects
on herbivores, 280–283
sequencing, 143
similarity with orthologous Arabidopsis
genes, 8
sister lineage, Salix (willows) relationships,
20–21
transcriptomics studies, 135, 141–143
Populus association genetics projects, 332
Populus BAC library, 69
Populus balsamifera, 206, 209
Populus deltoides, 20, 45, 51, 158, 209, 307
Populus euphratica, 16, 358
Populus fremontii, 20
Populus Genome Annotation Jamboree in
Walnut Creek, 10
Populus Integrative Genome Browser, 136
Populus lasiocarpa, 16
Populus LFY (PTLF) gene, 160
Populus maximowiczii, 258
Populus mexicana, 21
Populus nigra, 20, 45, 307
Populus simonii, 21
Populus-speciﬁc public database (UPSC-
BASE), 142
Populus tomentosa, 228, 265
Populus tremula, 6, 250, 262
Populus tremuloides, 6, 17, 20, 262
Populus trichocarpa (black cottonwood), 6, 15,
20, 29, 45, 51, 55, 216, 230
Populus trichocarpa genome project, 67
and Arabidopsis as representative
eudicots, 68
association genetics and QTL mapping, 67
Auxin Response Factor (AFR) transcription
factors, 83
characterization of repeat composition, 79
diversiﬁcation of genes encoding
enzymes, 84
gene content, and prediction methods for
homology-based, and EST-based
methods, 81
genes encoding transporters,
comparison, 85
genome sequencing efforts and strategy,
68, 69
genome shotgun results, 69, 71–75
BAC-based physical map, 71–73
genotype selection, Populus, 69–70
map-based assembly, 74–75
sequence assembly, 70–71
sequencing strategy, 69
sequencing template preparation and
contamination, 70–71
genome structure, 76–77
grape genomes comparison with, 77–78
LG_II genome assembly, show overlap
BACFPC map to same site, 72
LINEs in, 80
Nisqually-1 sequence, as reference, 67
data for SNP discovery, 67
pedigrees for, 69
phenylpropanoid enzymes, 84
repeat composition, and sequenced
genomes comparison, 79–81
retention of duplicated genes, 82–83
sequenced genomes, and gene family
composition comparison, 84–85
synteny with other species, 83
TBLASTN searches, 79
transformation systems, 68
transposable elements in, 80
See also Populus
Populus varietal evaluation, statistical
techniques, 324
Populus x euamericana, 234
Positional cloning of genes, lack of
progress, 100
Posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS), 117
Potato virus X (PVX), 295
P. putida W619, 8
Productivity, determinants, 48, 56–57
abiotic and biotic factors role, 49–50
branch orientation role, 52

Index
379
gas exchange role, 48–49
leaf area, size and traits role, 50–51
light interception and CO2 assimilation, 48
phenology, 52–53
phytohormone ABA role, 55–56
relationship between photosynthesis and
biomass yield, 49
role of branching pattern, 51–52
stomata role, 54–55
water relations and, 53–54
See also Growth
Proleptic branches, 51
Protease inhibitors, 284
Proteomic approaches, in Populus wood
formation study, 211–212
Proteomics and metabolomics developed, for
Populus, 6
Protoplast transformation, 121
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens, 253
PTFD, 139
PtFLC2 expression, 162
PttACO1 gene, 220
Putative PD-associated protein (PPAP), 189
Q
QTL tracks, 11
Quantitative genetic approaches, in Populus
wood formation study, 208–209
Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL), 208, 331
Quantitative Trait Nucleotides (QTNs), in
Populus, 102
Quantitative transmission disequilibrium test
(QTDT), 334–335
R
Radial growth response to drought stress,
229–230
Radial growth response, to drought stress
Raf Kinase Inhibitor Protein (RKIP), 159
Reciprocal recurrent selection (RRS), 315
Recombination-based cloning systems, 115
RECON program, 80
Regression coefﬁcients, 48
RepeatMasker library, 80
Reporter gene, 124
Repressor of ga1-3 (RGA), 180
Reproductive biology, of Populus, 313–315
Reproductive development, in Populus
AG co-orthologs, PTAG1 and PTAG2, 165
AP3 homolog, 165
epigenetic mechanisms, role, 158
FLC homologs, 159
ﬂowering
induction and organogenesis, 156
initiation, 156–157
pathway genes, 159
gene expression patterns, 165
gibberellins (GA), 155
juvenility/maturity, 157–160
maize
RNA silencing pathways, 157–158
temporal signal, 158
multiple aspects, 155
paclobutrazol role, 158
plant reproductive success,
mechanisms, 156
RNA silencing pathways, 157–158
SEP1/2/3 homologs, 165
sex determination and ﬂower development,
162–166
temporal signal, 158
transitions to reproductive phase, 160–162
vegetative phase change, in plants, 156
Re-sequencing data, usage, 143
Responses to abiotic stress, 225–226
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms
(RFLP), 23
Rib meristem (RM), 173
Riparian species, phreatophytic, 16
RNA induced silencing complex (RISC), 117
RNA interference (RNAi), 211
RNAi technologies, 120, 123
Rol gene cassette, 125
Root systems, role in growth, 44–45
Royal Institute of Technology, KTH, 6
Russula sp., 258
S
Salix caprea, 253
Salix hultenii var. angustifolia, 258
Salix sachalinensis, 258
Salix (willows), relation with Populus, 4,
20–21
Scleroderma bovista, 258
Secondary metabolites of Populus, effects on
herbivores
SELF PRUNING (SP) gene, 178
SEPALLATA (SEP) genes, 164
SEP1/2/3 homologs, expression, 165
Septoria musiva, 328
Sequence capture technology, 143
Sequence divergence patterns, 97–100
phylogenetic trees, relationship between
species, 99
probability of congruence and incongru-
ence, 98, 100
at synonymous sites, 98

380
Index
Sequencing technologies, 140
for understanding methylation role, 143
Sex determination, in Populus, 162–166
Shoot apical meristem (SAM), 172
Shoot apical meristem (SAM), dormancy,
180–181
SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM), 213
Short-day (SD), 159
dehydrins accumulation, 186
induced acclimation, 183
induced gene expression, 185
osmotic adjustments, 184–185
Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs), 117
Shotgun sequencing
assembly, 70
“ mega-genome,” 7–8
Simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers, 74
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 297,
333–334
Single Sequence Repeats (SSRs), 91
SiRNAs biogenesis, genes mutations, 158
S. maltophilia, 8
Smith-Waterman alignments, 76
SNP polymorphisms, 71
Soil organic matter (SOM), 258
Solexa short-read platform, 11
Species variety illustration, different
ages/stages of development, 39
Speciﬁc leaf area (SLA), 51
Splice acceptor sequence (SA), 124
S. proteamaculans, 8
SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING
PROTEINLIKE (SPB) gene, 158
SSR markers, 91
Stem canker, by Septoria spp., 41
Stomata, role in CO2 uptake and water
relations, 54–55
Sulfate Permease (SulP) family, 85
SUPERFAMILY database, 139
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences in
Umeå, 6
Sylleptic branches
difference between proleptic and, 52
plasticity of, 51
role in growth, 51
Symplasmic ﬁelds (SFs), 172
Synteny, 83
Systemic acquired resistance (SAR), 251
T
Tacamahaca, 21, 45
TBLASTN searches, 79
T-DNA tagging, 114
TERMINAL FLOWER1(TFL1) gene, 160, 177
The Institute for Genomic Research, 80
Thelephoraceae spp., 258
Thelephora terrestris, 258
Theobroma cacao, 261
Thidiazuron (TDZ), 123
TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies, 140
Tissue patterning, regulation, 215–216
See also Wood
Tobacco rattle virus (TRV) vector, 120
TOUCAN, 139
Transcriptional gene silencing (TGS), small
RNAs induce, 119
Transcriptional proﬁling, usage, 228, 294–295
Transcription factor families, 85
Transcript proﬁling, of Populus ectomycor-
rhizas, 259
Transformation, for genetic analysis, 113–114
callus induction step, 123
co-cultivation conditions role, 123
factors affecting efﬁciency, 123
importance of, 114
knock-down gene modiﬁcations generation,
approaches
micro RNAs (miRNAs) and siRNAs
overexpression, 118–119
Virus Induced Gene Silencing (VIGS),
120–121
Zinc-Finger Nucleases (ZFN), 119–120
morphological abnormalities, 116
obstacles to, 125–127
in poplar
with Agrobacterium, procedure and
methods, 115–117, 121–123
protocols, in vitro shoot
organogenesis, 123
postgenomic challenges, 115
role in mitigating obstacles in
experiments, 114
transgenic modiﬁcations approaches,
117–118
use for mutagenesis, 123–124
See also Populus
Transgenic approaches, in Populus wood
formation study, 209–211
Transgenic loss-of-function gene modiﬁcation,
117, 118
Transgenic modiﬁcation, of trees, 56
approaches, 117–118
Translational genomics, deﬁnition, 329–330
Transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), 334
Tree breeding, in Populus wood formation
study, 208–209

Index
381
TreeGenes database, 140
Treenomix (University of British Columbia,
Vancouver), 6
Trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides
Michx.), 259
Trichocladium canadense, 263
Trichoderma harzianum, 253
Trichoderma virens, 252
Tuber sp., 258
Turanga, 21
Ty3/Gypsy elements, 80
Typical balsam poplars
P. balsamifera, 21
P. trichocarpa, 21
U
Umeå University, 6
University of Minnesota’s Aspen-Larch
Cooperative’s P. ×wettsteinii
program, 318
U.S. Forest Service-Industrial P. deltoides
program, 318
Utility, Populus, 204–207
V
Vascular cambium, role, 174, 203
Vegetative phase change, in plants, 156
Vegetative storage protein (VSP), 284
Venturia populina, 265
VERANALIZATION (VERN1) gene, 191
Vernalization, 191
VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3)
gene, 191
VIGS vectors, 120
Virus Induced Gene Silencing (VIGS),
120–121
Vitis vinifea, 68, 292
W
Water
deﬁcit tolerance, deﬁnition, 230
requirements and growth, 53–54, 57
shortage, cellular consequences, 226
See also Abiotic stress responses
Weed control
and Populus plantations, 41
risks from diseases and pests, 44
Wetlands, 16
White poplars, 16
Willow, see Salix
Wine grape (Vitus) genome, compared with
Populus, 77–78
Winner’s curse, 102
Wood, 201
chemical composition, 203
features, 201
formation, 201–202, 231
auxin role, 216–218
development, 202–204
environmental affects, 207–208
and genetic regulation, 212–216
gibberellin (GA) role, 218–219
hormonal regulation, 216–221
study, genetic and genomic approaches,
208–212
role, 201
tissue patterning, regulation,
215–216
uses, 204–207
“Word” length, 70
Wright-Fisher model, 92–93
WU-BLASTN, 71
WU-BLAST option, 80
WUSCHEL (WUS) gene, 213
Y
YABBY gene, 215
Z
Zeatin, 123
Zinc-Finger Nucleases (ZFN),
119–120

