
The Generation of Archytas
Plan of the Chapter
We will survey the early history of Greek mathematics through two
generational events: this chapter, “The Generation of Archytas,” followed
by the next chapter, “The Generation of Archimedes.” This is a substan-
tive claim: Greek cultural life was generally organized by such isolated,
generational events. This is the claim of the ﬁrst section, “The Hypothesis
of Generational Events.” Following this general historical statement, the
section “What Little We Know” surveys the evidence for Greek mathe-
matics in the ﬁrst half of the fourth century.
The mathematical achievement of the generation is surveyed through its
three key ﬁgures, with a section on each. First, Archytas: we follow his
spectacular solution to the problem of ﬁnding four lines in continuous
proportion – and we delve, brieﬂy, into Greek mathematical musical
theory or “harmonics.” Then, Theaetetus, for a brief glimpse of the
Greek treatment of irrationality, followed by Eudoxus, perhaps the most
important mathematician of this generation.
To close the survey, the section “Assessing the Landscape” considers the
entire group of mathematicians active in this period; the section “The
Making of Mathematics” brings forward the nature of the common
achievement of the generation as a whole – mathematics, as a genre.
Finally, “Coda: The Final Contribution of the First Generation” concludes
on one particular result, achieved right at the end of this generation and
destined to shape much of the future of mathematics: the discovery of
conic sections.
The Hypothesis of Generational Events
The social history of science is annoying. If I explain the rise of Greek
mathematics in terms of “the motivation to project one’s identity as an

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

author,” “the rise of literacy,” or “the proliferation of genres,” there’s a
strong sense that I’m missing the simplest and most important point. Why
did people do mathematics in the late ﬁfth through the early fourth
century? Because, to them, it was fun. This is the intuition of many
readers today – most important, of many working mathematicians.
I hope it’s clear that I agree. If, as social historians of science, we lose
sight of this point, we are not merely disrespectful but simply wrong. In
fact, we miss an important social observation. Absent special incentives,
you would expect people to do pleasurable things; this determines, then,
what mathematics gets done. They didn’t need to worry about tenure,
and so Greek mathematics is tilted to such mathematical questions that
provide – to the mathematically inclined – direct intellectual satisfaction.
More to the point, they were not schoolteachers. They were authors, seeking
fame – and so, reaching for the more remarkable results. This, after all, is
what made people of the following centuries go back to Greek mathematics
and try to extend it. The intellectual attractiveness of Greek mathematics –
forced upon it, as it were, through the absence of institutional support – is
an important part of its signiﬁcance as a historical presence.
And so, we need a social history. Of course, people do the things they
like doing – among the options they have. Social history tells us what the
options are, and by the late ﬁfth century, those have dramatically changed.
Born around the year , you would be surrounded by books. They
come with their authors marked prominently, names from far abroad,
suddenly gaining the fame once allowed only to successful public performers
(are you not tempted to imitate them?). They touch on all subjects. Here is a
transcribed speech on the human body (the author says that all men are
made of ﬁre and water! It must be against that other book I read last month,
which said all men are made of four humors!) Here is the history of the
recent war, written by an eyewitness. Here is a treatise on political theory,
arguing against Athens’ democracy. And here is a papyrus roll dedicated to
the measurement of the circle (would you believe this is possible?) – but
wait, of course this is wrong; I could do better than that author!
And so, many more try. I imagine that, in the ﬁnal few decades of the
ﬁfth century, no more than a handful of mathematical works got written.
Through the ﬁrst few decades of the fourth, there were probably dozens of
mathematical authors who, taken together, produced many dozens of
works between them (possibly, even a few hundred): a very substantial
mathematical library. This is the subject of this chapter.
This chapter is concentrated on a few decades. The ﬁrst few decades of a
new development are always signiﬁcant, setting the stage for what follows.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

But once again, I think there is a more speciﬁc story to be told. Because
ancient science (and, with few exceptions, ancient culture as a whole) did
not develop stable, impersonal institutions, it was hard for any cultural
trend to persist. Many ancient cultural events can be seen as generational.
More precisely, what we often ﬁnd is perhaps a generation and a half – a
passing fashion or, perhaps, a response to some powerful presence that,
after a while, loses its power. We recall: Thales of Miletus is said to have
argued, very early on (around the beginning of the sixth century?), some-
thing that posterity remembered as all is water. In the ensuing generation,
Anaximander of Miletus would argue (as transcribed by posterity) that all
is the unlimited; Anaximenes of Miletus, that all is air. This is the gist of the
information we have based on Aristotle, and it is probably false in many
ways, but one thing is clear: here was a powerful voice – that of Thales –
and a generation of local, immediate responses. And then – silence. For a
long while, we hear of no more philosophers in Miletus, and elsewhere,
wise people seem to be engaged with rather diﬀerent concerns. A powerful
voice – a set of echoes – and then, more or less, silence.This pattern
seems to be repeated very often in ancient cultural life. A prominent
master is followed by a prominent disciple but with no obvious continu-
ation into a third generation. Parmenides of Elea, and then Zeno of Elea.
Leucippus, and then Democritus. In the early third century in Alexandria,
there was a ﬂourishing of scientiﬁc pursuits of all kinds (which will, of
course, greatly interest us in the following chapter). Perhaps chief among
this is medicine, where the foundations of modern anatomy and physiol-
ogy are laid by Erasistratus and Herophilus. They seem to dissect, even
vivisect, not only animals but also humans. A deeply disturbing scientiﬁc
breakthrough! Modern historians of medicine are often puzzled by the fact
that this ﬂourishing is so brief. If so much new knowledge is gained, why
stop cutting? For in fact, immediately thereafter and then for several
centuries, apparently no one else in the Greek world pursued the practice
of dissection and vivisection. But perhaps this is not so surprising. This is
simply how ancient science worked. A handful of leading practitioners,
competing against each other and inﬂuenced by each other, working
simultaneously in the same place, contributing to the same ﬁeld. For a
while, this was the thing to do. But then, those leading practitioners got
I’m using a familiar example, but a new study suggests that perhaps Anaximander and Anaximenes
were not so proximate in time to Thales after all (in which case Thales is more like Pythagoras, a
distant inspiration and no more to later “Thalenas” . . .); see P. Thibodeau, “The Chronology of the
Early Greek Natural Philosophers,” preprint, , www.researchgate.net/publication/_
The_Chronology_of_the_Early_Greek_Natural_Philosophers_-_Part__of_.
The Hypothesis of Generational Events

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

old, died. And so, quite naturally, things changed. You see, Herophilus
and Erasistratus did not set up a research center with funds dedicated to
anatomical research. And so: new people would make their names in
diﬀerent, new ways.
There are, of course, exceptions to this rule. Tragedy and comedy
persisted, especially in the city of Athens, original and vibrant for at least
two centuries. Later on, the same city of Athens had four continuous
philosophical traditions – Stoic, Aristotelian, Academic, and Epicurean –
once again stable for about two centuries. In both cases, this continuity
was based on a social institution. The Athenian state supported dramatic
competitions beginning at about the years (for tragedy) and (for
comedy). Eventually, starting at around the year , there were four
schools of philosophy, actual institutions with their own properties and
rules (each school had a ﬁxed place; each school had a leader – scholarch –
serving for life, a new one elected when the old one died). This kind of
institutional stability is the exception in ancient culture and was never
approximated in mathematics.
And so, there is nothing too surprising about the hypothesis proposed
here. At around the year , a whole generation of authors started to
produce mathematical works. They were all impressed by a few original
contributions; they were probably aware of each other and aware of the
signiﬁcance of the moment as a new development. It must have been
exciting. And then, the ﬁrst signiﬁcant authors – and even their immediate
followers – got old; something of the original excitement was gone. By
midcentury, new work continued to be produced, but the pace could have
slowed down, and the sense of a meaningful moment was lost. For a while,
at least, fewer new authors would be attracted to this ﬁeld; other pursuits
became more fashionable instead. This, then, is the ﬁrst generation of
Greek mathematics.
What Little We Know
What have we got in support of this hypothesis? This, too, will be a
question we will keep returning to throughout the chapter. The problem
of evidence is, in this case, especially acute. Not a lot remains, and what we
have to go by is mostly names. Of those, however, we have quite a few.
In the following table, I list the attested individuals who I think were
born between and and are likely to have authored works in the
exact sciences. For each individual, I provide an extremely speculative
range of dates for activity, based on the assumption that, unless we are

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

told that the individual was active at an especially young or old age, he
would have been active at around the age of thirty to sixty. This operation
is indeed very speculative, but its overall contours are relatively solid, and
for one reason primarily: most individuals in this list can be related, in
various ways, to the securely dated (–) Plato. “Born between
and ” could also mean “having the living Plato as a presence in
your life.” Perhaps this is relevant.
An added word on the evidence: as noted on pages –, in his
commentary to the ﬁrst book of Euclid’s Elements (ﬁfth century ), the
Neoplatonist philosopher Proclus wrote a very lengthy introduction that,
among other things, contained a brief history of early geometry up to the
time of Euclid. Scholars usually think that this is a résumé of the history of
geometry written by Eudemus, the younger member of the school of
Aristotle, whom we have met already for his testimony on Hippocrates
of Chios. If so, this is excellent, almost contemporary evidence, even if
mediated. In the accompanying table, I put the mark “Eud.” next to those
individuals who are attested in the list from Proclus. I underline the
notation – “Eud.” – in the cases where our only information for this
individual derives from that list. I add two more marks. “Pl.” means that
we have reason to believe that the individual was in some contact with
Plato, and this reason does not depend on Proclus’s authority. “Pl.-Pr.”
means that we believe this individual was in some contact with Plato,
based on Proclus’s (biased) authority alone.
Author
Decades
Eud.
Pl./Pl.-Pr.
Archytas
–
Eud.
Pl.
Leodamas of Thasos
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Neoclides
–
Eud.
Theaetetus
–
Eud.
Pl.
Amphinomus
–
Pl.
Bryson
–
Silanion
–
Pl.
Zenodotus
–
Leon
–
Eud.
Eudoxus
–
Eud.
Pl.
Amyntas of Heraclea
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Euphranor
–
Helicon of Cyzicus
–
Pl.
Hermodorus of Syracuse
–
Pl.
Polemarchus
–
Philip of Opus
–
Eud.
Pl.
Xenophilus
–
What Little We Know

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Athenaeus of Cyzicus
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Callippus
–
Dinostratus
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Hermotimus of Colophon
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Menaechmus
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
Theudius
–
Eud.
Pl.-Pr.
The table lists twenty-three names. In general, even in extremely well-
attested ﬁelds, such as Greek tragedy, no more than a third to a half of the
original authors are now still attested.Now, later Greek writers did have a
signiﬁcant interest in the history of mathematics (Eudemus wrote a
history! Proclus cited it!) But we are looking at a very early moment in
history: much has been lost from memory before our sources got down to
transcribing what they knew. In fact, not a single mathematical work
survives from this era: everything still depends on small fragments. It
would be surprising if we were to know even one-ﬁfth of all the mathe-
maticians active in this time, and so there were probably more than
a hundred.
All that remains of the mathematics of the era is fragments – and we will
look more closely at some of those. But a larger amount of mathematics
survives, so to speak, regurgitated. We will get to know Euclid in the
following chapter, but we should note here that approximately eighteen
books are now extant under his name. (By the word book, I mean here the
ancient sense, which could be either a single work or a segment of a work,
roughly the equivalent of a single papyrus roll. Euclid’s book The Elements
has thirteen such “books”; there are, by one count, ﬁve other single-book
works ascribed to Euclid.) There are also two extant books by Autolycus.
Both Euclid and Autolycus were active, I believe, right at the end of the
fourth century : all of a sudden, our evidence begins to explode just
then. But we can say more. Those twenty extant books by Euclid and
Autolycus are all, evidently, not so much original works as compilations.
They survey and arrange past knowledge, and this past knowledge was
probably produced by the authors listed in the previous table.
There were, I argue, more than a hundred individuals writing mathe-
matics, from Archytas to Theudius. But the great bulk ought to have been
very minor (indeed, we know literally nothing about most of them!), likely
the authors of no more than a tiny mathematical contribution. If so, it
For a detailed argument for such claims, see R. Netz, Scale, Space and Canon in Ancient Literary
Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), Chapter . (Tragedy is discussed on
–, –.)

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

might be that each mathematician could have written, on average, say, not
much more than the equivalent of two books – let us say, then, not much
more than two hundred books produced throughout the entire period.
Furthermore, there ought to have been considerable overlap in the con-
tents of those books (many of them would introduce the very same
material, treated in some variation). If so, as an order of magnitude, the
extant works of Euclid and Autolycus should represent something like
percent of the original mathematical contributions made throughout
the era. There is a lot that we do know, then, and a lot that we don’t. As we
survey the mathematical achievement of the era, we will look at the
fragments of the original authors; we will consider the evidence of Euclid
and Autolycus; and we should try to keep our minds open when consid-
ering the possibilities for the dark matter, now completely lost. History
should account for that, too.
The ﬁrst impression is that there were many mathematicians at the time
– and that many of them had something to do with Plato. The pattern of
the evidence is reassuring. Although a lot of our names depend on one
lucky ﬁnd – the survival of a testimony from Eudemus’s early history – we
would have had many of those names even without this piece of fortune.
And although Proclus, the Neoplatonist philosopher, had all the motiva-
tion to ascribe bogus connections to Plato, it is reassuring that many of
those connections are, in fact, independently veriﬁable. Surely, there were
many other mathematicians, further away from Plato, of whom we know
less. There is a Plato-centric, Athens-centric bias in our evidence for the
period. Elsewhere, for instance, Proclus quotes a small testimony about
Andron and his student Zenodotus, who, in some sense, are said to have
belonged to the “school of Oenopides.”Now, Oenopides, together with
his compatriot Hippocrates of Chios, was, as we recall, one of the earliest
pioneers of mathematics. I ﬁnd it extremely unlikely that there would have
been another, otherwise unattested, later mathematician by the same
name, and so the likelihood is that we look at two individuals, one perhaps
from the late ﬁfth century, the other from the early fourth, both from the
same place. Chios – where mathematics perhaps was born! – could have
remained, for several decades, as its own mathematical center, now attested
by a single passage.
It seems much clearer that later in the fourth century, there was a center
of astronomical practice in Cyzicus, further to the north of the Aegean
world. This center was probably inspired (led?) by Eudoxus, and if so, it
In Proclus’s commentary on Euclid, .–..
What Little We Know

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

was at least indirectly connected with Plato and with Athens; we revisit
Cyzicus in Chapter .
In our extant sources, we see many in touch with Plato in Athens, but
we also see Chios and Cyzicus, and there ought to have been rather smaller
centers such as these (all of them, now, among the invisible, dark matter of
history). But perhaps many of those were rather like Cyzicus? That is, even
if not directly attached to Plato, would they still be indirectly tied to the
main ﬁgures who do seem to have Athenian connections? If it was a
network, surely Plato was not far from its center.
We can add a little more. The tiny piece of information we have attested
for the mathematicians of Chios is a meta-mathematical, or philosophical,
position concerning the nature of “theorems” and “problems.” As for the
school of Cyzicus, one of the best-attested facts about it was a criticism leveled
against it, from a philosophical point of view, by Epicurus (who stayed, at the
time, at Lampsacus, not far from the city of Cyzicus; we return to this in
Chapter ). On the other hand, the school had a lasting inﬂuence through its
impact on Aristotle, who adopted the model of homocentric spheres and gave
it a prominent role within his own teaching. And so: even away from Plato,
mathematicians, in this era, seem to be in dialogue with philosophy. Indeed,
three of the mathematicians of the era seem to stand out (and we shall look
more closely at their contributions): Archytas, Theaetetus, and Eudoxus. Both
Archytas and Eudoxus were known, in antiquity, not just for their mathe-
matics but also for their philosophy. Although Theaetetus did not leave a
mark as a philosopher (did he die too young?), he is now remembered, above
all, as a character in Plato’s dialogues, one of them named after him!
One of the important questions for us, in this chapter, is whether
mathematics, at this point, is even distinct from philosophy. But what
we see already is that those who engage in mathematics, in this era, are as
likely to contribute to philosophy and certainly as likely to communicate
with philosophers – so much so that the entire network of authors could
have had, at its center, not a mathematician but rather the mathematically
curious philosopher, Plato.
And is this, perhaps, yet again, a function of the numbers? I suggested
that, compared with the ﬁfth century, numbers could have exploded. But
even so, we ﬁnd – even including the dark matter! – perhaps somewhat
more than a hundred mathematical authors emerging through half a
century. Two per year? Three? Although this adds up to a substantial
community, at each given moment, each individual mathematician would
have known no more than a handful of colleagues – especially at ﬁrst. It is
likely that when Archytas started writing, there were not many other

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematical authors. And so, his imagined audience was composed of
those of his coevals who, although not mathematicians themselves, were at
least potentially curious about the kind of arguments a mathematician had
on oﬀer. The imagined audience, then, would be made of what we call
“philosophers” (a very signiﬁcant group in numerical terms, even in this
early stage). Some of those philosophical authors would indeed be riveted
by the new writings in the genre of mathematics. One of those – Plato –
will reach prominence. As this nexus fastens, early on in the fourth
century, the character of the generational event is formed. Even as there
are more mathematical authors, they already emerge into a particular
dialogue, set in place by authors and readers such as Archytas and Plato,
and the mathematics produced in this generational event would often
continue to be written with a philosophical audience in mind.
This is already a hypothesis, and an interpretation, for which the broad
statistics are no longer suﬃcient. Time to bring in a more detailed sense of
the mathematics of the fourth century. Let us follow the three main names
mentioned previously, in order: Archytas, Theaetetus, Eudoxus.
Archytas
Archytas was born in Tarentum, a city in southern Italy (a region that –
along its coast – was, in this era, predominantly Greek). Like Athens,
Tarentum was a democracy, although possibly of a somewhat more
“aristocratic” cast. For sure, Archytas was a member of the Tarentine elite,
in fact, something like the de facto leader of the city (what comes to mind
is the role of Pericles in Athens). More than this: the second quarter of the
fourth century was the heyday of Tarentum. It became the focal point of
all the cities of southern Italy (what comes to mind, again, is the control
Athens had, in the ﬁfth century, over much of the Aegean Sea).
Throughout his lifetime, then, Archytas was one of the most powerful
individuals in all of the Greek world. Members of this topmost layer of the
Greek elite always enjoyed relations of friendship – in the Greek context, a
formal social relation – that cut across the borders of individual city-states.
It seems clear that Archytas had this kind of formal friendship relation, in
particular, with Plato. Quite a ﬁgure, then! Remarkably, until recently,
there was no monograph dedicated to Archytas, but this lacuna has been
admirably ﬁlled by Huﬀman, whose book from is titled Archytas of
This phenomenon of friendship is well outside the scope of this book but worth pursuing for anyone
interested in ancient Greek culture. See G. Herman, Ritualized Friendship and the Greek City
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Tarentum: Pythagorean, Philosopher and Mathematical King. And for once,
the long academic subtitle is apt. Archytas cannot be summed up brieﬂy,
and wide ambition – political, cultural, intellectual – seems to be essential to
his career.
It is clear that Archytas wrote multiple books (indeed, later grammarians
saw him as the model of prose of his native dialect, Doric). None survives,
and the testimonies are tiny. What we can now say with certainty is that in
the ﬁelds of the exact sciences, Archytas made important contributions to
music theory and geometry. A probable case can be made that he made
similarly important contributions to number theory and optics. Because so
little is extant, and even in that small evidence, we see traces of such a wide
footprint, it is most likely that Archytas wrote across many mathematical
ﬁelds. It is also clear that he was a superb mathematician. Only one
testimony is at all substantial – but this is spectacular.
We need to go back. Recall Hippocrates of Chios: he had discovered
that the problem of scaling a solid is reducible to the problem of ﬁnding
four lines in continuous proportion. To restate from the earlier discussion
(p. ): if you wish to scale a solid in the ratio A:D, set out A and D as line
segments, and then you need to ﬁnd two more, B and C, such that
A : B :: B : C :: C : D:
When this is accomplished, we know the ratio in which the side of the
solid needs to be adjusted: the ratio is A:B (in modern terms, A:B is the
cubic root of A:D).
This is where we left oﬀ, several decades back, with Hippocrates of Chios.
Let us now start to think about how such a problem might be tackled.
Someone (Hippocrates himself?) certainly reduced, early on, the simpler
problem of how to scale a plane area into a problem in proportion. Think of
it as doubling the square. Suppose you are given a square whose side is
A. What is the side B, such that the square on B is twice the square on A?
Even before we solve this scaling problem, we can reduce it to a problem in
proportion, as follows. To double the square whose side is A, ﬁnd the line
C such that it is double A. Then ﬁnd B that satisﬁes the following:
A : B :: B : C:
And B is the side you require.
So, to scale a plane, you need to ﬁnd one mean proportional. I imagine
that Hippocrates of Chios ﬁrst realized this and then went on to realize the
extension of the same idea: that the scaling of solids can be reduced to the
ﬁnding of two mean proportionals.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Further, it is perhaps meaningful that the very ﬁrst occurrence of
mathematics in a Platonic dialogue, in the Meno, has Socrates teaching
Meno’s slave how to double a square. In the dialogue, this is done in a very
elementary – indeed, Babylonian – way that could not be generalized to
scaling a plane ﬁgure by any factor. In fact, the elementary way of teaching
is intentional – this is perhaps the paradigmatic example of “Socratic”
teaching, Socrates gradually extracting the result out of the slave’s own
mouth. In all likelihood, this elementary, Babylonian manner – adding up
the pieces of which the square is made – was indeed not far from the way
in which Greek schoolteachers would tackle such a question.
This is a signiﬁcant dialogue, the one that establishes a key idea for
Plato’s philosophy: knowledge of mathematics is at least a metaphor for
true knowledge – that of the forms. It is quite likely that Plato, writing the
Meno in about, say, , was at least somewhat inﬂuenced by
Archytas’s philosophy, and he was also likely familiar with Archytas’s
ﬁnding of two mean proportionals – thus, the lesson could be a subtle
Platonic allusion to a great mathematical achievement.
Let us ﬁrst look, then, at how the Greeks (once again, already
Hippocrates?) would have gone about ﬁnding the single mean propor-
tional, that is, how they solved Meno’s problem.
This involves perhaps the key insight of Greek geometry, namely: there
is a tight connection between the two separate ﬁelds of quantity and
geometrical form. Speciﬁcally: “proportion,” a quantitative relation, is
almost the same as “similarity between ﬁgures,” a statement of geometrical
form. In practice, similar triangles are easiest to ﬁnd, and as usual, it is best
to deal, speciﬁcally, with right-angled triangles. So, let’s have two similar
right-angled triangles, such as the following, with some of the sides marked
as A, B, C, D:
A
B
C
D
Figure 
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

When we say that they are “similar,” we mean that they have exactly the
same shape, simply scaled diﬀerently. If so, it is also true that
A : B :: C : D:
Shape, turned into quantity; quantity, turned into shape.
Suppose now we want to have
A : B :: B : C:
The way to do that would be to “glue” the two triangles: to have, say, the
same side appear twice, as the greater side in the smaller triangle but also as
the smaller side in the greater triangle:
We know something about this conﬁguration! If we glue the two
triangles like this, we get a new, third triangle. We also know that
the sum of interior angles in a triangle is ﬁxed. (As an aside: anyone
interested – as Hippocrates of Chios was – in the relation between the
angle and the arc of a circle it subtends would come to recognize this ﬁxed
sum.) It is thus easy to note the various angles, all equal to each other:
A
C
B
Figure 
Note in particular that the top angle in the new, glued-up triangle
must, once again, be a right angle.
And what do we know about right angles? That they lie on the diameter
of the circle!
So now, remember our original task. We were given the line segment
A (side of the original square) and the ratio A:C (the ratio in the area
between the two squares). We are looking for a B that would satisfy
A : B :: B : C:
And now it is obvious how to achieve this through similar right-
angled triangles.
Put A and C together, along a single line; draw a circle with that single
line as diameter; raise a perpendicular from the point where A and C meet;

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this will hit the circle to produce our B. The perpendicular within the
semicircle is the mean proportional.
C
A
B
Figure 
I imagine Hippocrates of Chios did all that, or, if not him, someone
very close to him in time. It’s one of those results that quickly falls prey to
the hunters, who are moving into the new territory of elementary geomet-
rical proofs. (As noted earlier, many of those results are now extant, reused
as pieces of the mosaic that is the works of Euclid: in this case, this has
become Elements, Book , proposition .)
The next one, however, had to wait for a really skillful master, Archytas.
As usual, our evidence is extremely mediated. In the sixth century ,
Eutocius of Ascalon set out to write commentaries on authors such as
Archimedes and Apollonius. As part of those commentaries – on
Archimedes’s Second Book on the Sphere and the Cylinder – Eutocius
included an extended excursus with many solutions to the problem of
scaling a solid (more on Eutocius in Chapter ). One of these solutions is
said to be “by Archytas, as is told in Eudemus’s history.” It is provided in
full mathematical detail. Good! However, this solution does not have some
of the features that we would have expected from Archytas’s own writing.
He was the model of Doric prose, but it’s not in Doric. He must have used
some archaic phrases that we ﬁnd in Hippocrates in Chios (and even in
Aristotle), but the language we see is essentially the same as what we ﬁnd
from Euclid onward. Someone – whether Eudemus or an intermediary
source used by Eutocius – must have modernized Archytas’s proof. And
yet, all scholars agree that, in outline at least, this is indeed by Archytas.
Why? This will be clearer once we’ve described the idea for the solution.
This is, in fact, extremely complicated.
Archytas’s solution may be read in the catalogue of solutions provided by Eutocius, which is part of
my translation of Eutocius’s commentary. R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and
Commentary, vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A
I
G
d
E
L
D
D
Z
O
Q
M
B
P
K
a
Figure 
Even our diagram becomes much more congested than anything we have
seen so far. Indeed, I will change letters referring to the proportion to lowercase,
so as to accommodate Archytas’s ﬁgure! So: remember that we are assigned a
ratio between two lines, such as a:d, and that we seek b, c that satisfy
a : b :: b : c :: c : d:
In this diagram, d – “the greater given line segment” – is the diameter of
the circle, AD.
In this diagram, a – “the smaller given line segment” – is an arbitrary
smaller line ﬁtted from point A to meet the circumference of the circle, as
the line segment AB.
Drop a perpendicular down from B, and you get the points E, Z (I will
explain where Q comes from in the following discussion).
Now I ask you to do some mental gymnastics. The line AB is extended
to point P so that we have a right-angled triangle APD.
And now we gain liftoﬀ: the ﬁgure begins to project into space. This
triangle APD is rotated around the axis AD to produce a cone. (You can’t
really see that cone in Figure .) Note, in particular, that through this
rotation, point B draws a semicircle in space: BMZ.
Further, we imagine a cylinder set up orthogonally on the circle ABDZ.
(You can’t see that cylinder either.) Note that point K is understood to be
on the surface of that cylinder.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Finally, a copy of the semicircle ABD is lifted up so that it becomes
orthogonal to the original circle. It is allowed to rotate in such a way that
point A remains ﬁxed, but point D is allowed to move, as long as it
remains on the original plane of the original circle – the plane of the paper,
so to speak. (It is because of this rotation that the capital letter D appears
twice in the diagram.) In this diagram, this appears as the semicircle on
which are the points A, Q, I, D, K.
And so, we have three objects in space. One is the cylinder set up on the
circle ADBZ. Another is the cone made from the rotating triangle APD.
And ﬁnally, we have the rotating semicircle, such as AKD.
What is point L? It is crucial to the argument. You remember that the
cone was produced by rotating the triangle APD around the axis AD. We
essentially rotate the side of the triangle AP, keeping point A ﬁxed, keeping
the side at the same ﬁxed distance from the axis AD. Well, at some point,
this rotating line AP becomes the line AL.
How do we pick this position in the rotation of the line AP so that it
becomes AL?
Indeed, how do we pick the position in the rotation of the upstanding
semicircle?
We pick both simultaneously:
You will notice that point K is shared by the rotating semicircle
AKD and by the rotating side AP. In fact, point K is also on the
surface of the cylinder that stands above the circle. This is how we decide
how to pick the point where to stop the rotations of the semicircle and of
the cone. There is precisely one combination where the two meet so that
they share a point on the surface of the cylinder, and this is the position
chosen for this diagram. To restate this: point K is the servant of three
masters:
It is on the surface of the cylinder on the circle ADBZ.
It is on the arc of the rotating semicircle AD.
It is on the surface of the cone produced by the rotation of APD.
(The argument for why such a point exists, and exists uniquely on
a given side of the diameter, is subtle but also quite simple, and in the
proof as it is now handed, it is just taken for granted; I leave it as an
exercise.)
Once we have point K, it is not diﬃcult to understand what point
I means: it is simply the point on the original circle, immediately beneath
point K. This, in turn, clariﬁes what Q is: it is simply the intersection of
the two lines IA, BE. And now it is also clear what M means: it is simply
the point in the triangle ALD (which is APD rotated – so, a point on the
surface of the cone), immediately above the point Q.
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Everything is in place, and it is time to assert the conclusion:
AB : AI :: AI : AK :: AK : AD:
The two line segments AI, AK are the two mean proportionals between
AB, AD. In the original terms of our task, they are the b and c required
between the two given lines a and d; AI, speciﬁcally, solves the problem
(and can be described as the “cubic root” of AD).
The formal proof is diﬃcult, but we can see, as follows, why this is true. The
key argument is that AMQ, AMI, AKI, and AKD are all right-angled triangles.
M
A
Q
I
D
K
Figure 
AQM and AIK are right-angled for a rather obvious reason – MQ, KI
were raised up as perpendiculars. AKD is right-angled because it lies on
a diameter.
The proof is diﬃcult because of one thing and one thing only: we need
to show that AMI, too, as constructed, is a right-angled triangle. I linger on
it because, although complicated, it is still reminiscent of the mathematics
of Hippocrates of Chios. This is historically telling. And so, consider just
this arrangement from the basic circle:
B
Q
A
I
Z
Figure 

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Simple considerations from angles show that the two triangles AQZ,
BQI are similar. This will be true for any triangles produced by chords
cutting each other in a circle. Hence, we can derive a proportion:
AQ : BQ :: QZ : QI, which can translate into an equality between two
rectangles:
AQ  QI ¼ BQ  QZ:
(This is, once again, true in a general sense: the rectangles produced by two
chords in a circle cutting each other are equal to each other. This result is
proved – in a more roundabout way, the reasons for which will be made
apparent in the following chapter – in Euclid’s Elements .. You recall
that Hippocrates of Chios is said to have contributed to the Elements – was
it with results such as these?)
Now, the basic idea of the solution to the problem of ﬁnding a single
mean proportional is that a right-angled triangle, encased in a semicircle,
gives rise to a rectangle, equal to a square. For instance, in this case, BMZ is
a semicircle produced by the rotation of the cone, and it encases a right-
angled triangle:
Q
Z
B
M
Figure 
Speciﬁcally, we know that BQ  QZ ¼ MQ2. However, we have just
learned that BQ  QZ ¼ AQ  QI. So that:
AQ  QI ¼ MQ 2:
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And now, from the converse of our solution for ﬁnding a single mean
proportional, we know that, because of the previous equality, in a
triangle marked by the labels AQIM, the angle AMI must be right-
angled:
M
A
Q
I
D
K
Figure 
Now, indeed, we have established four triangles in sequence, all right-
angled, all similar: AQM, AMI, AIK, AKD. This was the entire point of
the exercise, construction, and proof taken together: ﬁt those right-angled
triangles, somehow, in space.
Archytas’s solution is a fantastically complicated three-dimensional
exercise in extending the simple, plane result, which is now known as
Elements .. In Elements ., you take the two sides, produce two
right-angled triangles, and stick them within a third, to get three lines in
continuous proportion. In Archytas’s solution, you take the two sides,
produce right-angled triangles, and stick them together with a third and a
fourth, to get four lines in continuous proportion. It is a reasonable story:
Archytas’s solution was found as he was looking to extend a solution he
already knew for a single mean proportional – ﬁnding how one can ﬁt
triangles in space to get the same kind of conﬁguration. It is, in fact, hard
to do – hence the spatial gymnastics.
This is one reason to believe that this solution, handed down under the
name of Archytas, was indeed the ﬁrst oﬀered: it is the most direct way of
extending the idea of the planar solution into space.
I lingered on this proof because it is fantastic and because it is important
to see how easy it is to envisage it, coming early on: it is the most diﬃcult
combination of the most basic ideas. We can see this because so much
survives. We should probably assume the same for the remainder of
Archytas’s oeuvre – where almost nothing is extant.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

So, is it possible that something similar takes place in Archytas’s
music? Once again, our evidence is highly mediated. Boethius, a Latin
author of the ﬁfth century , wrote an introduction to music, and in it,
he cited a single proposition, stating that it was found by Archytas. Now,
centuries after his life, many spurious works circulated in antiquity under
the name of Archytas – a part of the overall invention of “Pythagoreanism”
(more on this in Chapter ). In a lot of this, music does play a role:
Pythagoreanism, for reasons that we will explore in the following discus-
sion, was closely related to the scientiﬁc study of music. However, such
spurious works tend to be more metaphysical or, indeed, almost mystical,
and the very dry, technical character of this proof inspires conﬁdence.
This, then, is another signiﬁcant piece of mathematics we may quite
conﬁdently ascribe to Archytas:“A superparticular proportion cannot be
divided into equal parts by the interpolation of a mean proportional
number.”
This is strange, so let us go through this slowly. A “superparticular ratio”
is, we would say, a ratio whose lowest form in integers is (n þ )/n, that is,
the ratio of two consecutive integers, for instance, :, :, :. The claim
is that there is no integer q such that
n þ 1 : q :: q : n:
This might seem obvious: after all, there is no integer between and , so
obviously, there is no integer q such that :q::q:. But remember that :is
simply the expression, in smallest numbers, of a ratio that can be expressed
in bigger multiples as well. Is it no longer obvious, then, that no integer q
can be ﬁtted between, say, and :
120 : q :: q : 60:
This, in fact, was my ﬁrst intuition: the fact there is no integer q such that
:q::q:does not preclude the possibility that there would be some integer
q such that :q::q:.
This intuition is false, and a fairly sophisticated argument, now extant as
Euclid’s Elements ., proves that if there are mean proportional integers
between any given two integers, there would also have to be similarly
located mean proportional integers between the smallest version of the
same ratio. In other words, if we have :q::q:, it must follow that there
is some other integer p satisfying :p::p:, which proves that there is no
Boethius, De Inst. Mus. ..
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

such q integer that can be positioned between and and, in general,
there can be no mean proportional between integer numbers that are in a
superparticular ratio. Archytas almost certainly proved such a result,
though, to be fair, in this case, I am less sure that we have his original
proof. I will not say much more about this line of development here, but it
should be clear that, anticipating such results directly related to music
theory, authors such as Archytas must have developed a certain amount of
pure number theory: this is indeed now known mostly through Euclid’s
Elements, Books –(there is very little Greek number theory other-
wise, perhaps because the ancient Greeks hardly ever pursued it, in fact,
other than in the context of music).
Of all of this, we have no more than the slightest indications. Still,
the very fact that Archytas provided a proof of this kind is meaningful.
Surely, he belongs, then, to a group of authors who founded music theory.
This indeed goes to the heart of “Pythagoreanism,” to Archytas’s inﬂuence
on Plato – and to the nature of the mathematics emerging in
this generation.
I mentioned a key insight of Greek geometry: quantitative ratios and the
similarity of ﬁgures are related. Ratio – and shape. Somehow, Greeks
stumbled across another, much more surprising relation: ratio – and sound.
This involves, speciﬁcally, not the ratios between line segments but the
ratios between numbers.
Certain musical pitches combine well; others do not. If we play in quick
sequence notes that are an octave, a ﬁfth, or a fourth apart (that is, a
middle C followed by either a high C, a middle G, or a middle F), the
result is pleasing to the ear. If we play in quick sequence a middle C,
followed by a middle sharp G, this is less pleasant. The octave, the ﬁfth,
and the fourth are harmonies, in a way in which other sound combinations
are not.
Apparently, someone in the years in which Archytas grew up came
up with the following identiﬁcation of such harmonies: the octave is like
the ratio :; the ﬁfth is like the ratio :; the fourth is like the ratio :
(this is useful, then, in explaining why, as a ﬁfth and a fourth are
composed, the result is an octave.) Pleasing sound relations, many
Greeks came to believe, are deﬁned by ratios of the form n þ :n, with
small values for n.
It is hard to know what was meant by this identiﬁcation to begin with,
although later on, the ancient Greeks would prove it experimentally by
taking a string and stopping it at a bridge. (A bridge placed at the
bisection of the string yields a note that is higher by an octave; placed

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

two-thirds of the way, and the note goes up by a ﬁfth; three-quarters, and
it goes up by a fourth. We now explain all of this as a function of
wavelengths: a pitch higher by an octave is, in fact, of half the wave-
length.Of course, the ancient Greeks never came up with this explana-
tion, so the most fundamental observation, for them, was arithmetical
rather than physical.) This is more evident to us on an instrument such as
a violin or a guitar, on which one plays diﬀerent pitches by stopping the
string at diﬀerent positions, but the most common type of string instru-
ment in antiquity was the lyre – more like a harp. The tautness of each
string was adjusted separately to produce its own ﬁxed sound. The
discovery of the numerical basis of musical harmony is thus something
of a mystery.
We should bring in another name, that of Philolaus: we have not
discussed him yet because, in all likelihood, he was not a mathematician.
But Philolaus might be considered one of the most inﬂuential philosophers
in antiquity. I explain: to the extent that we cease believing that there was a
speciﬁc branch of metaphysics, promulgated by Pythagoras in the sixth
century – which is what most scholars today suggest we should, and
which is what I have argued in the preceding chapter – then we have to
ﬁnd how this metaphysics became promulgated by someone else. In all
likelihood, then, Philolaus was the creator of what we understand as
Pythagoreanism.
Philolaus was perhaps roughly the coeval of Socrates (and so, a gener-
ation older than Plato and Archytas). He was still more of a sage than a
writer; he seems to have written only one book that pertained to many
sides of his wisdom. Part of the very point of such books was to make
outrageous claims – Parmenides, for instance, argued that reality is single
and unchanging. Philolaus claimed that everything is made by being
limited, and that this is, speciﬁcally, provided by number. Perhaps what
he had in mind can be stated as follows. We might think we see some
concrete, material things in front of us, but to the extent that we see
anything intelligible, it is because it has some deﬁnition and structure
(being limited), and this is, ultimately, some kind of arithmetical relation.
For all of this, the strongest example may well have been that of music:
what makes intelligible sounds – intelligible song! – is the numerical
structure organizing musical harmonies.
The physics of musical sound is truly fascinating. Speaking as a nonspecialist, I personally enjoyed
A. H. Benade, Horns, Strings and Harmony (New York: Dover, ).
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Whether or not Philolaus was the discoverer of the ratios underlying
musical harmony, he is the earliest author known to refer to them. He
described more of the structure of the octave in numerical terms, correctly
noting that because the ﬁfth is :, whereas the fourth is :, their gap
(what we call a “tone”) is :. This is as far as any mathematics can be
squeezed out of the extant fragments (though, admittedly, not much is
extant), and so the likely account is that his treatise evoked and extolled the
power of numbers to structure reality, taking music and harmonics as the
key example, but did not contain anything we need to call “mathematics.”
If so, it is quite possible that Archytas’s innovation was to turn harmonics
into its own science.
Suppose you wish to know how the octave can be divided into integer
ratios; it is very important to know, then, that there are no integer ratios
that divide the octave evenly. No q such that :q::q:! Nor, for that matter,
are there any integers that divide the ﬁfth, the fourth, or the tone (no :q:
q:, :q:q:, :q:q:, either). It may well be even that Philolaus was
unaware of this and so implied a naive structure of the octave: was
Archytas correcting an oversight by Philolaus?
Indeed, the task of the Greek harmonicist was especially diﬃcult. We
are accustomed to a nearly equal-spaced octave. The Greeks, like many
other civilizations, enjoyed more complex harmonic structures. Indeed,
they typically tuned their instruments (and trained their voices) to hit the
key harmonies of the fourth, the ﬁfth, and the octave (to repeat: this is like
middle C, middle F, middle G, higher C), but they were simply not
interested in dividing the remaining gaps as evenly as possible. There
would be two notes inside the fourth – but these were not expected to
divide evenly the ratio :. The Greeks often had their “D” about a
quartertone above C (ﬂatter than a C-sharp!), their “E” about a quarter-
tone above their “D” (so, about a C-sharp!) – leaving a gap of about two
tones, unoccupied by any musical pitch, between their “E” (a little above
our C-sharp) and their (and our) F. More than this: they had a variety of
such tunings – completely diﬀerent ways of occupying positions in the
space of possible pitches, chosen by the musician prior to a performance.
A good musical theory was supposed to account not for a single tuning but
for the totality of all possible systems.
Once :, :, and :have been established, the question remains how
to account for the remaining ﬁne-grained pitch relations. The task, then, is
to ﬁnd several series of three integer ratios that, multiplied together,
produce the ratio of the fourth or :. Two of these should be very near
unity; the last one should be closer to :. These four notes between (what

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

we call) C and F are four “chords” (the key model is always that of a
stringed instrument), hence the name of the entire exercise: “the division
of the tetrachord.” It is clear now that this task is not trivial. An extended
passage by Porphyry – an ancient philosopher from the third century 
(more on him in Chapter ) – quotes the Archytean system in detail.
Porphyry quotes Archytas’s physical theories of sound and also the num-
bers (but no proofs) for the division of the tetrachord. Archytas, it turns
out, provided three possible tunings for the pitches within the fourth:
28 : 27, 36 : 35, 5 : 4
28 : 27, 243 : 224, 32 : 27
28 : 27, 8 : 7, 9 : 8
We should combine the report from Boethius together with the one from
Porphyry. They are both mediated, but they support each other to provide
a coherent picture. Archytas must have produced a complicated mathe-
matical ediﬁce, with both abstract arguments concerning numerical ratios
as such and concrete numerical calculations, all in the service of a physical
or even a cosmological theory of music. And it is indeed intriguing that
this all ends up with the division of the tetrachord – quite literally, the
division of one bigger ratio (:) by the insertion of two numerical values
in between. The division of the tetrachord is not at all the same as the
ﬁnding of two mean proportionals between two given lines. The motiva-
tion and the mathematical tools are entirely diﬀerent. One gives rise to
sophisticated geometry; the other gives rise to sophisticated number
theory. But the two do resonate, quite directly, in fact – they are the
discrete and continuous solutions to the same problem of ﬁnding four
terms in proportion. Both also combine sophistication with conceptual
simplicity: this is what one can accomplish, starting with very little – other
than enormous ingenuity.
We have seen geometry in some detail, and we have good indications for
harmonics, even for some number theory. Our evidence, from here on,
runs nearly dry. We do have a few brief reports that ascribe to Archytas
certain views on optics. There are also two Euclidean books on optical
themes, one on the general ﬁeld of perspective and the other on the
formation of images in mirrors. Most likely, then, some fourth-century
authors must have written on such questions, and so the hints we have in
the literature could imply that Archytas made mathematical contributions to
For a full survey of Archytas’s system, see A. Barker, Greek Musical Writings, Vol. II: Harmonic and
Acoustic Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
Archytas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this ﬁeld, as well. If so, Archytas would likely originate the ﬁeld.The essence
of the treatment of optics, in the Euclidean works as in subsequent Greek
mathematical works, is the reduction of the phenomena of vision to the
properties of rays of light (or rays of vision), conceived strictly as geometrical,
straight lines. If so, the hypothesis that this ﬁeld is due to Archytas is an
attractive one, obviously on par with that for music. Past philosophers had
considered the relation between sounds and numbers; Archytas turned this
into a mathematical science. Similarly, past philosophers had considered the
relation between vision and rays passing into the eye or emanating from the
eye; Archytas’s originality consisted, once again, in turning this into a fully
ﬂedged mathematical science, the rays becoming geometrical lines.
We have a few fragments and testimonies from Archytas of a more
purely philosophical character. But even in discussing questions of, let us
say, epistemology, mathematics seems to be front and center. Porphyry,
once again, quotes from Archytas:
Those concerned with the mathēmata seem to me take distinctions well,
and it is not at all surprising that they have correct understanding about
individual things as they are. For having made good distinctions concerning
the nature of wholes they were likely also to see well how things are in their
parts. Indeed concerning the speed of the stars and their risings and settings
as well as concerning geometry and numbers and not least concerning
music, they handed down to us a clear set of distinctions.
Or another quotation, from Stobaeus:
Logistic [~calculation] seems to be far superior indeed to the other arts in
regard to wisdom and in particular to deal with what it wishes in a more
manifest way than geometry.
With both quotations, we see Archytas engaged with the ranking of the
sciences; mathematics, especially the mathematics of number, turns out to
be the top science. We are reminded of Philolaus, again, and of Plato.
Philolaus started from Pythagoras: this archaic sage had promulgated a way
of life, leading, through purity, toward the otherworldly. Philolaus took
this way of life and made it into a metaphysical claim – that underlying
apparent reality there is that other, purer version, made of the abstract
structures of numbers: a metaphysical claim supported by the supreme
The argument was ﬁrst developed in M. F. Burnyeat, “Archytas and Optics,” Science in Context 
(): –. This article is among the Suggestions for Further Reading in this chapter; it is a rare
example of a mostly speculative argument that appears to be almost certainly true.
The two following quotations are from what is known as Archytas’s Fragments , . See
C.
Huﬀman,
Archytas
of
Tarentum:
Pythagorean,
Philosopher
and
Mathematician
King
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –, –.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

example of music. Archytas, in turn, took this claim to its natural conclu-
sion: to properly have knowledge, then, one ought to become a mathema-
tician and study the mathematical structures underlying reality. Impressed,
Plato took over from Philolaus the idea of an otherworldly reality, and he
took over from Archytas the idea that mathematicians, indeed, have an
insight into that reality. Plato, however, reserved the ultimate insight into
the highest of all realities – the forms – to philosophy alone. Archytas was a
mathematician, Plato a philosopher: each ranked his own discipline higher.
The emerging division between the disciplines becomes clear – as does their
proximity in this vision, shared by the philosopher and the mathematician.
Many mathematicians, as well as philosophers, took notice.
Theaetetus
Theaetetus is one of Plato’s greatest dialogues. It is framed as a eulogy
following Theaetetus’s recent death in battle. Two of his old friends,
Terpsion and Euclid (not the same as the mathematician), recall a con-
versation Socrates, when very old, had with Theaetetus, when just a child.
It is not really clear in which battle Theaetetus died, but the date usually
taken by scholars – – makes sense because this dialogue otherwise
appears, for various stylistic and philosophical reasons, to belong to Plato’s
later work. Because Athenians could easily soldier on well into their forties
– and Theaetetus, for once, did not merely have Athenian contacts but was
a citizen – and because the protagonist of the Theaetetus is clearly a bright
kid, we seem to get a ﬁrm grasp of Theaetetus’s chronology. Born in
around –, dead in ? But perhaps such historiographical weight
should not be put on this work of ﬁction.
Past historians of mathematics did not have such scruples, and the
dialogue has been squeezed for the last drop of historical implications. In
particular, to start oﬀa conversation, Socrates asks Theaetetus what he did
today in school. Theaetetus is very glad to answer – he is, in fact, glowing
with satisfaction. Theodorus, his teacher, presented the kids with proofs
that, eﬀectively (I will immediately qualify this), the square roots of many
numbers from to are irrational. Theaetetus then worked out for
himself that, in fact, this is true for any nonsquare integer.
There is now a considerable literature trying to reconstruct Theodorus’s
mathematical achievement (somehow capable of showing that the square
roots of , , . . . are irrational, but not further) and the manner in which
Theaetetus generalized it. This literature culminates with Knorr’s ﬁrst book,
from , The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements, which is a classic – well
worth reading even today. But notice that this assumes that Plato’s point, in
Theaetetus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this passage, was to record the recent history of mathematics. That’s evi-
dently not what Plato is doing here. He is, generally speaking, the author of
philosophical narratives, and the exchange should be understood in terms of
its narrative and philosophical functions. In narrative terms, it should create
in our mind the image of a bright, enthusiastic kid who is yet charmingly
modest. (For instance, Theaetetus insists on sharing the credit for his
discovery with a friend of his, although the clear impression is that he
himself put in all the work.) In philosophical terms, the topic emphasizes
the need for knowledge, generalization, and classiﬁcation. (Theaetetus’s
breakthrough was to identify various classes of numbers.) The dialogue then
picks up such topics directly and seeks to generalize a statement – by way of
various classiﬁcations – concerning the nature of knowledge.
It would make sense, in narrative terms, for all of this to occur against the
background of Theaetetus’s real, historical mathematical contribution. Once
again, we can now bring in the evidence of a late ancient scholar. Pappus,
active in the fourth century , wrote a commentary to the Book of
Euclid’s Elements, which is a study of irrationals. (Pappus’s commentary is
now extant only in Arabic – the ﬁrst example of this kind of transmission
we encounter in this book; it is, in fact, quite common.) Pappus ascribes
to Theaetetus – once again, on Eudemus’s authority! – a very speciﬁc,
otherwise-unattested classiﬁcation of irrationals. Had it not been for the
authority of Eudemus, this would have been highly suspect. (Perhaps later
authors have foisted upon Theaetetus a certain classiﬁcation of irrationals,
just because this somehow echoed the famous dialogue?) But Eudemus
was too early; the classiﬁcation described by Pappus is too speciﬁc. It is still
possible that Pappus failed to recognize a complete fabrication, but more
likely than not, he reports a historical truth. This, then, is the historical
kernel we can more or less extract from the combination of Plato’s and
Pappus’s evidence: sometime between, say, and , Theaetetus of
Athens classiﬁed irrationals. Nothing less; nothing more.
But that’s not nothing! Theaetetus classiﬁed irrationals – this is an
extremely valuable kernel of historical knowledge!
What does this even mean? Now, when we use the word irrationals,
these are, for us, a certain class of numbers. This is because the word
number has expanded its meaning considerably since ancient times. For the
Greeks, “number” meant what we think of as a positive integer (usually –
not always – the Greeks excluded the number itself, which was not so
much a number as the “unit” by which numbers are measured).
For the English translation, we still use: W. Thomson, The Commentary of Pappus on Book of
Euclid’s Elements (Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ).

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

So, the Greeks surely did not have “irrational numbers.” What is an
irrational, to them, then? This is a category not of number but of ratios
between line segments.
Suppose I have two line segments, whose ratio is the same as :. This
means that there is some smaller line segment that ﬁts exactly three times
into the smaller (“measures it three times”) and exactly four times into the
greater (“measures it four times”). Because the two lines standing in the ratio
:possess in common such a line – that measures both of them – we call
them commensurable (co-measure-able). It is also immediately clear that two
lines are commensurable if and only if they stand in the ratio of two integers.
If we take a certain ﬁxed line as our basic measure, then we can deﬁne
lines that are incommensurable with it as “irrational.”
Perhaps one’s ﬁrst intuition is that if you look hard enough and are willing
to go for really small common measures, you will ﬁnd one that measures any
two lines – perhaps the immediate intuition is that all lines should be
commensurable with each other. This is, in fact, wrong, and the Greeks
probably knew this early on, based on considerations very close to those we
have just pursued, concerning Archytas. Remarkably, this will bring together
the two pieces of mathematics we have surveyed for him: the geometry of the
duplication of the cube and the harmonics of ﬁnding single means
between integers.
To begin with, recall that Plato’s Meno asked how to double the square
(perhaps in an oblique reference to Archytas’s doubling of the cube?). We
have discussed the scaling of a square by an arbitrary ratio on pages –,
which the ancient Greeks solved by similar triangles. But Plato considers
the simple, school-like, basically Babylonian case of, speciﬁcally, doubling a
square. This is very easy to achieve by a particular conﬁguration (which is
the content of the lesson packed into the Meno):
1
1
Figure 
Theaetetus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The sides of the original square are marked by the length . The area of
the original square is ; the square on the double of the original side
has the area ; and the square on the diagonal, quite obviously, has the
area , or twice the original square.
If so – already going beyond the scope of Plato’s Meno – the diagonal of
the square is what we would call √of the side of the square. It appears
that Greeks were aware, perhaps very early on, that with the side of the
square taken as the basis of measurement, the diagonal is irrational.
How do we know that? This now becomes a little like Archytas’s
music theory.
Assume the opposite – that the side and the diagonal are commensurable.
This is tantamount to the claim that they are in the ratio of two integer
numbers, say, m:n. Let us also assume that m:n are the smallest such integers
standing in this ratio – the key concern for Archytas’s arithmetic! So, m:n are
not like :, but like :. They are m:n – the smallest such numbers.
We also know, by Pythagoras’s theorem (always the very same basic
tool!), that m¼ n. Now, because nis the double of something (it is the
double of m), it is an even number. There is no way for a square number
to be even without its root being even as well (odd times odd is odd, not
even). So, n itself is an even number. Indeed, because n is an even number,
it follows that nis divisible by . (An even number is twice something; its
square is therefore four times the something squared.) But we have m¼
nor m¼ n/. Now, because nis divisible by , it follows that n/is
divisible by or, in other words, is even.
m2 ¼ n2=2, and n2=2 is even:
We have learned, then, that mis even. By the logic applied before, we’ve
also learned that m itself is even. We have therefore established that both m
and n are even, contradicting our preliminary hypothesis that m and n are the
smallest integers of their ratio. (If they are both even, we just need to divide
them both by to get smaller integers with the same ratio. If they are both
even, they are not like :, but like :.) Something is incurably wrong
about our initial assumption, and in other words, no two integers can be
found to display this ratio. The diagonal of the square is irrational.
I do not know who was the ﬁrst Greek to observe this. The observation
is ingenious but simple; it could well have come about in the very ﬁrst
years of Greek mathematical writing. (As noted on pages –, it was
once suggested by modern scholars that this, the discovery of irrationality,
could have come as a shock, and a crisis, to Greek mathematicians; this is
almost certainly wrong and nothing but a modern fantasy. The Greeks

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

preferred surprising results!) We only know about this result now because it
is tucked in as a kind of appendix at the end of Book of Euclid’s
Elements. This is a huge book – propositions! – that does not discuss
any particular irrationals at all. Instead, it is all about classifying types of
irrationals. The most basic category is that of “lines commensurable in
square only.” (So, to take an example – but note that Euclid does not
provide any examples – whereas the side and the diagonal of the square
are incommensurable, the squares set up on the side and the diagonal are
commensurable – they are, in fact, in the ratio :. The side and the
diagonal, then, are commensurable in square only.) Now, take two lines that
are commensurable in square only (my example, in modern terms: with
lengths , √). Set up the rectangle contained by the two lines (the area of
this rectangle is obviously, in our terms,  √, or simply √), then ﬁnd the
square equal to that rectangle, and ﬁnally, ﬁnd the side of this square (so, in
our terms, the root of √or √). So, is this new side of a square
commensurable with the original side? (Is √rational?) No, it is not! In
fact, it belongs to a category of irrationals, called medial, deﬁned in Elements
.in the manner described previously (the side of the square equal to a
rectangle contained by two lines commensurable in square only). Such
medial lines have their own properties. For instance (Elements .,
somewhat rephrased): if you take the square on a medial line, and you
ﬁnd a rectangle equal to that square, then, if one side of that rectangle is
rational, so would be the other. Throughout Book , Euclid ﬁnds a rich
classiﬁcation of irrationals, with complicated interrelations between the
categories – only to admit, in the ﬁnal proposition, that the classiﬁcation is
not exhaustive. The purpose of all of this is unclear to us (and this area of
mathematics is not taken up again, later than Euclid, by any extant work;
it appears that there were no more than a few extensions of this theory – all
now lost – even in antiquity itself; a dead end). Why pursue this at all?
Perhaps, if one is inclined to bring order into seemingly unstructured
ﬁelds, and one is inclined to do so by way of classiﬁcation, one would
engage with the project of Euclid’s Elements, Book .
Euclid himself does apply Book once, inside of his Book . This
book is a study of the ﬁve regular solids (the pyramid, the cube, the regular
octahedron, the regular dodecahedron, the regular icosahedron). Medieval
scholia now found within the text of Book , as well as Byzantine
sources, tell us that Theaetetus was the original author of the type of
material now in Book . Weak and late evidence, but taken together
with the nexus between Book and Book , it begins to carry some
signiﬁcance. Indeed, Plato’s Timaeus makes the choice to construct the
Theaetetus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cosmos out of those regular solids – and it is tempting to see in this yet
another tribute to Theaetetus.
How does Book feed into Book , a classiﬁcation of irrationals into a
study of regular solids? This comes about because in Book , the focus of
attention is on ﬁnding the ratio between a given regular solid’s edge
(obviously, in a regular solid, all the edges are equal to each other) and the
radius of the sphere circumscribing it. This ratio is then classiﬁed as a type of
irrational. There is no obvious reason to engage in this classiﬁcation or to be
interested in this particular ratio, but it should perhaps be borne in mind
that a rather natural way of trying to square the circle is to consider the ratio
of the side of a regular polygon and the radius of the circle. Considering the
same for regular solids and the sphere is, then, a very natural extension. The
result can be conceptually and visually striking: see Plate .
There is considerable preparation that has to go into the study of such
ratios within the regular solids, and this part of Book is among the
most beautiful pieces of geometry in all of the Elements (so, quite the
opposite of the dryness of Book ) – for instance, Elements ., a study
of the proportions inside the regular pentagon (the building block of the
regular dodecahedron). I paraphrase one part of the argument.
A
E
B
H
D
C
Figure 
Suppose you have a pentagon ABCDE inscribed in a circle, and two
lines drawn in, such as AC, BE, cutting each other at H. Then:
EB : EH :: EH : BH:
(This is what is known, to modern readers – not a Greek term! – as the
“golden ratio.”)

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is proved as follows. Because the pentagon is regular, all sides are
equal, and all angles lying on equal arcs are equal as well. We have, then,
(angle BAH) ¼ (angle ABH), and therefore (through basic techniques
related to the sum of angles in a triangle):
angle AHE
ð
Þ ¼ 2  angle BAH
ð
Þ:
But also (because of the arcs):
angle EAC
ð
Þ ¼ 2  angle BAC ¼ angle BAH
ð
Þ:
We thus ﬁnd
angle AHE
ð
Þ ¼ angle EAC
ð
Þ:
And so, HE ¼ AE (an elementary result: in triangles, equal angles go with
equal sides, and vice versa).
Furthermore, because
angle ABE
ð
Þ ¼ angle AEB
ð
Þ,
but also,
angle ABE
ð
Þ ¼ angle BAH
ð
Þ,
it can be shown that if we take the two triangles, ABE, ABH, they both
share the same equal two angles (angles ABE, AEB in the triangle ABE;
angles ABE, BAH in the triangle ABH). The remaining third angle must
be equal, and the two triangles must be similar. Therefore:
EB : BA :: AB : BH:
But we have established
AB obviously, the same as EA
ð
Þ ¼ EH; and so we may rephrase the proportion:
EB : EH : EH : BH:
The golden ratio, in a pentagon, found so easily. And once again,
the very same techniques: triangles inscribed in a circle, angles adjusted
to determine similar shapes, similar shapes turned into proportions.
All of this, then, fantastically built as the scaﬀolds of three-dimensional
solids. It is easy to imagine this done by a young mathematician, impressed
with the work of Archytas, belonging, once again, to the circle of Plato.
We glimpse very little of Theaetetus’s mathematics. We see that it could
have been brilliant. And we also see that it sought to ﬁnd, within a
seemingly
intractable
and
even
inexpressible
mess,
a
rational
classiﬁcation system.
Theaetetus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Eudoxus
Diogenes Laertius tells us that Eudoxus died at age ﬁfty-three– and
although Laertius likes to repeat fanciful stories, he is often reliable for his
bare facts. Indications from Eudoxus’s fragments imply that he died later
than Plato – so, later than – but evidently not much later. The
parameters are therefore, once again, surprisingly clear. Eudoxus was born
in Cnidus (across the Aegean from Athens) in around or . This
was, perhaps, as Archytas’s works began to circulate and as Plato wrote the
Meno. By the time Eudoxus became an adult, mathematics was already an
established genre; Archytas’s – and Theaetetus’s – work mostly done; Plato
at the height of his fame. Among Laertius’s stories, there is one where the
young Eudoxus comes to study with Plato in around . Shall we trust
Diogenes Laertius? Why not? Plato was already the most famous philos-
opher in the Greek world. Indeed, Aristotle – roughly Eudoxus’s coeval
and certainly a member of Plato’s circle – on a couple of occasions, runs
into philosophical debate with Eudoxus. Just like Archytas, then, Eudoxus
was known as a philosopher, and most probably, he did belong to
Plato’s circle.
It is clear that his writings in the exact sciences – and beyond – were
extensive. In the sheer terms of his mathematical achievement, Eudoxus
could well have been as signiﬁcant as Archytas, if not more so. If I survey
him more brieﬂy, it is only because we shall return to him later in this
book: in Chapter , as an inspiration for Archimedes, and in Chapter , as
a founder of mathematical astronomy.
Indeed, relatively much is known. We have signiﬁcant fragments from a
major contribution to geography, although nothing suggests that this had
any speciﬁcally mathematical geography. More likely, this was a more
descriptive exercise. If so, it was somewhat comparable to a couple of
reported works in descriptive astronomy, providing a geographical tour of
the night’s sky. These works are well attested: Aratus, a later poet, took this
tour and turned it into verse, and his poem is still extant; Hipparchus, a
later mathematician and astronomer (on whom, more in Chapter ),
criticized Aratus’s version, in part so as to criticize Eudoxus, along the
way providing more information on Eudoxus’s project.Clearly, Eudoxus
Diogenes Laërtius, Lives of the Philosophers ...
There is no English translation of Hipparchus’s commentary to Aratus (one of the major remaining
lacunae in the translations of ancient Greek works). Aratus’s “Phaenomena” was one of the most
successful poems in antiquity: for translation, I use G. R. Mair, Callimachus: Hymns and Epigrams.
Lycophron. Aratus (Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ).

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

observed the sky, and clearly, also, his descriptive astronomy – whatever we
may say for his descriptive geography – involved at least some numerical
values and calculations. In fact, he certainly made at least one other, and
more theoretical, contribution to astronomy: a treatise known as On Speeds
tried to account for the aberrant motions of the planets. We shall revisit
this material again in Chapter , but a few words are in order here. It is
clear that Eudoxus presented a geometrical model that was meant to
account for the motions of the planets (a category that, for the Greeks,
included the sun and the moon as well). The key idea was that although
the ﬁxed stars were carried by a single rotating sphere, the planets were
each carried by several rotating spheres, nested within each other, each
moving at its own speed, around its own pole. The combination of those
diﬀerent poles and speeds could give rise to various patterns, approximat-
ing the aberrant motions of the planets. There is some debate concerning
the intended numerical precision of such models. What is clear is that
however numerical, Eudoxus – and his followers in the circle of astrono-
mers established in Cyzicus – produced a geometrical model of astronomy:
the trajectory of stars, as the trace produced by points, drawn by the
rotation of spheres. We are reminded of Archytas, likely producing a
geometrical model of optics (vision – the result of lines of vision, or light,
converging at the point of the eye). At an even more abstract level, we are
reminded of Archytas and his arithmetical model of music. Reality – and
underneath it, and somehow explanatory of it, a more abstract structure.
The comparison between music and astronomy might seem fanciful, but it
was embraced by Plato and by many later philosophers, and it is quite
possible that Plato, in his late years, was inﬂuenced, in this regard, by
Eudoxus. If so, Eudoxus – whatever his actual intentions – deepened the
commitment of a certain group of philosophers to a metaphysics where an
underlying abstract and ﬁxed mathematical structure explains the apparent
material and aberrant structure of the universe.
The interest in more abstract structures is perhaps to be seen in
Eudoxus’s contributions to pure mathematics, as well. Eudoxus was the
ﬁrst to prove that the cone was one-third of the cylinder containing it. This
achievement – now extant as a series of propositions in Book of
Euclid’s Elements
– would loom large, in particular, for the work of
Archimedes. We shall revisit it in detail as we bring in Archimedes’s project
of measurement. I therefore just note now that we will see how Eudoxus’s
measurement of the cone seems to have been motivated by an interest in
rigorous proof: seeking a way to bypass, so to speak, inﬁnity. It is likely
that we can see the trace of Eudoxus’s engagement with abstract logical
Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

structures involving inﬁnity in another of Euclid’s books, namely, Book v.
This is what I will concentrate on in this chapter.
The evidence is weak – once again, merely a scholium in the transmitted
text of Euclid, stating that this book was the discovery of Eudoxus – but
there is no special reason to deny it. Aristotle seems to be aware of
something like this book – and seems to know it as a fairly recent
accomplishment. In general, it is the kind of book that should come
relatively late, not because it takes so much for granted but, to the
contrary, because it assumes so little. This is a study in foundations, taking
terms that one could easily use without reﬂection – but then, insisting on
deﬁning them and demonstrating their properties. This is what mathema-
ticians do, after much else has been done already. And this is, to the
Greeks, the most foundational topic of all: proportions, in full generality.
We have seen proportions applied in music, geometry, and arithmetic.
Book deﬁnes proportion and shows that all those properties – which
previous mathematicians took for granted – were in fact correctly assumed.
The key deﬁnition (usually given as number ) is astonishing:
magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the ﬁrst to the second and the
third to the fourth, when, if any equimultiples whatever be taken of the ﬁrst
and third, and any equimultiples whatever of the second and fourth, the
former equimultiples alike exceed, are alike equal to, or alike fall short of,
the latter equimultiples respectively taken in corresponding order.
This is so abstract that it can only be legible to a modern reader with the
aid of notation.The claim is that for four magnitudes, a, b, c, and d, they
are in proportion
a : b :: c : d
if and only if for any integers m, n:
ma > nb $ mc > nd
ma < nb $ mc < nd
ma ¼ nb $ mc ¼ nd:
This is also in some ways (but not in all) equivalent to a sophisticated nineteenth-century deﬁnition
of real numbers: Dedekind’s account of real numbers as cuts in the set of rational numbers. (The set
of rational numbers is, precisely, the set of all ratios between integers; Eudoxus’s deﬁnition of a
general ratio can be used to deﬁne the general ratio – equivalent in a sense to our “real number” – in
terms of divisions of this set.) See Appendix .of L. Corry, A Brief History of Numbers (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, ). (I recommend this book as a whole in the Suggestions for Further
Reading.)

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And even this is opaque without a concrete example. Suppose I say a:b::c:d.
This means, for instance, that if I take a:b, they stand in a certain relation: a
is greater than, equal to, or smaller than b. (To take a speciﬁc case: suppose
my four-term relation is between , , , and . a is , b is , and a > b.)
Now, change this by a certain combination of two factors (to take another
speciﬁc case: say, by multiplying a by and b by ; so, the factor m ¼ , the
factor n ¼ ). Perhaps this relation has changed; perhaps not. Perhaps they
are now equal; perhaps the order of size has ﬂipped. (In fact, in the example
provided, the becomes a , and the becomes a on the other, so the
relation did, in fact, ﬂip.)
But now I apply the same multiplication to c and d. (In this speciﬁc
case, then, these are c ¼ and d ¼ , and I multiply c by and d by .)
Once again, I do not know what the new relationship is. But suppose that
they follow the same order as a and b (that is, suppose that following the
new multiplication, d will become greater than c – and indeed is greater
than !). This is good! If this will be true, no matter which factors m and n
I pick, I am allowed to say, based on Eudoxus’s deﬁnition, that the four
terms are in proportion.
You might be inclined to say: of course :and :will have the same
pattern of relations of size under multiplications by various factors. This is
because they have the same ratio! Eudoxus perhaps will not dispute this (it
is not clear that his deﬁnition is taken ontologically, as the identiﬁcation of
the essence of what makes a proportion). The point is that he has provided
a mathematically determined equivalent to the pre-theoretical expression
“being in proportion.” This term has been analyzed into the simple terms
of multiplication, equality, greater than, and smaller than. At some abstract
level, “proportion” and a certain set of simpler terms are equivalent.
Because the terms used in the deﬁnition have clear mathematical
signiﬁcance – we know what it means to multiply and to state equalities
and inequalities between mathematical magnitudes – the deﬁnition can, in
fact, be applied. For instance, to state that four terms are not in proportion
is to state that there is at least one couple of factors where the order of size
between the terms in the two ratios is not the same: we know what this
means, then. Book quickly unpacks the deﬁnition, ﬁrst through some
truly elementary results – for instance, ., equal magnitudes have, to the
same magnitude, the same ratio, and then to more complicated results, for
instance, .: from a:b::c:d, derive a:c::b:d. It is possible that no one has
proved any of those results in the past, and it is possible that no one has
even noticed the statements such as .. It is also possible, of course, that
Eudoxus has joined a more robust ﬁeld of research into the foundations of
Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proportion, and that his contribution is simply the only one that is now
known in detail. There is a passage in Aristotle where he states that
proportion was once deﬁned – before Eudoxus, then? – through a diﬀerent
mechanism. The earlier contribution implied by Aristotle seems to imply a
narrower, purely geometrical study of proportion. (There is a large litera-
ture on this topic, which I mention in the Suggestions for Further
Reading.) We see the peak alone of an ancient range – but we notice,
once again, the proximity of mathematics to philosophy.
The logical, almost philosophical motivation is palpable. One is
reminded of Book . Theaetetus’s classiﬁcation of irrationals, implied by
Book , is so cumbersome, so little motivated – why would a mathema-
tician, capable of ﬁnding charming results such as the golden section in the
pentagon, devote so much eﬀort to such a dead end? Perhaps because of
the sheer metaphysical fascination of bringing order to the seemingly
unordered. Book is less tedious, but its results are even less surprising.
Do we even care about the results? Are they there because, ultimately, the
working mathematician needed them?
I am not so sure that there was even an urgent sense of need to prove
such basic assumptions. This is because in the practice of Greek mathe-
matics, an important set of results involves ratios’ inequality: for instance,
that from a:b > c:d, one can deduce a:c > b:d. This is harder than the
results concerning ratios’ equality or proportion. Once we get to this
complexity, it does indeed become crucial to distinguish the valid results.
And yet, Book , as it now stands, is almost entirely conﬁned to the very
basic, the level that requires proof only if one is truly pedantic, and it does
not engage with ratios’ inequalities at all. And yet, future mathematicians
seem to have been content to take the results concerning proportion
inequality for granted! After Eudoxus, mathematicians are content to take
for granted that if a:b > c:d, then a:c > b:d. I therefore suspect that prior
to Eudoxus, mathematicians were content to take for granted that if a:b::c:
d, then a:c::b:d.
The deﬁnition is its own point, and its point is philosophical. In fact,
the deﬁnition plays with philosophical ﬁre. It is nonconstructive. That is,
there is no ﬁnite, doable procedure that can establish that four terms are in
proportion. A single counterexample will establish that the four terms are
not in proportion, but to verify that they are, one needs to check all
equimultiples – all the possible ms and ns, all inﬁnitely many of them,
twice over – in order to conclude that a, b, c, and d are, in fact, in
proportion. This does not mean that the deﬁnition cannot be applied by
the mathematician – but the very willingness suggests an explicit

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

assumption of the existence of a mathematical reality, preceding human
construction. I do not believe that a mathematician conversing with Plato
would fail to notice this, and therefore I suspect that Eudoxus, in fact,
meant this. The deﬁnition is not the tool to derive the results (we trust the
results regardless). To the contrary: the deﬁnition is the point. The
function of the results is to verify the deﬁnition. (We ﬁnd that the deﬁnition
allows us to prove the basic results we expect to be true for proportion, and
so we conclude that the deﬁnition is indeed correct.)
The deﬁnition seems to carve out, with supreme analytical precision,
something deep about the nature of proportion – proportion, as it were, is
a kind of extension of the concept of equality. But it is, precisely, an
inﬁnite extension, one that, for better or worse, escapes veriﬁcation –
which is necessary because the deﬁnition is required to cover ﬁnite as well
as inﬁnite cases, rationals as well as irrationals. The quest is for supreme
generality and abstraction. As far as we can tell, later mathematicians did
not extend or attempt to revise Book . Just like Book , it is, for the
Greeks, something of a mathematical dead end. But philosophers paid
attention immediately. Aristotle seems to refer to Eudoxus’s deﬁnition,
and he does this not as an aside but to make a fundamental claim:
deﬁnitions should be produced in their full generality. As far as Aristotle
was concerned, Eudoxus made a contribution to the theory of deﬁnition as
such. Was this a correct interpretation? Was this Eudoxus’s intention? At a
more basic level: Was Aristotle, in a sense, the intended audience?
Assessing the Landscape
Our portraits of the better-known ﬁgures are already speculative, based, as
they are, on tiny, mediated fragments. But we must become even more
speculative than that. Our task is to understand the shape of mathematics,
as a whole, through the fourth century – and so, we ought to try to
guess what it is that we know even less or do not know at all. The bias of
the sources is our enemy: it preserves so little. But if we understand this
bias, it can become our friend – that which the bias tended to obscure is
what we have lost the most.
The main bias of our sources is clear. The single most important source
of information is Eudemus’s history of geometry, in the brief summary
preserved by Proclus and in the various other sources that repeat fragments
from that work. As far as the brief summary goes, this has a very particular
bias. Proclus writes a commentary to Euclid’s Elements, and his entire
point, in the introduction, is to put this work into context. His manner of
Assessing the Landscape

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

abbreviating Eudemus, in this introduction, is to list a few mathematicians
and then state that they had contributed to the Elements or compiled
certain parts of the Elements. It is an open question whether this means
that those authors actually compiled works in the manner of Euclid’s
Elements, but one thing is clear: this emphasis on Euclid has nothing to
do with the focus of the work of early mathematicians. Indeed, how could
it? We have evidence that connects the three major ﬁgures surveyed
previously with the contents of the Elements: Books (Eudoxus), –
(Archytas?), (Theaetetus), (Eudoxus again), (Theaetetus
again). The remaining books are the more obvious “tools,” the kind of
mathematical results that are proved because they are, in fact, required for
future applications. The only way they could have been written down at
all, as their own separate books, is if someone had, indeed, already prior to
Euclid, produced a compilation of elementary results. Perhaps they did;
perhaps not. But this could not have been the focus of mathematical
activity, which instead ought to have been dedicated to various mathe-
matical applications. More squaring of the circle, more duplication of the
cube? The latter, especially, will be mathematically important; I shall
return to it in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.
An even more important bias is not Proclus’s but, already, that of
Eudemus. Everything suggests that his history was a sober survey of pure
geometry. This is useful: thanks to him, we get a very precise sense of how
Hippocrates squared his lunules, how Archytas duplicated his cube. But a
much larger amount of early Greek mathematics than we can now see
must have been less pure and less technical. This is only glimpsed – but it
is glimpsed often enough to suggest a lost pattern. Silanion was a sculptor
who was famous for his portrait of Plato; apparently, he was also the author
of a book on symmetries and proportion in the human body. This was not
a new kind of writing – already, the sculptor Polyclitus, in the ﬁfth
century, wrote a book explaining the measurements of one of his statues.
This is an entire genre that is now almost entirely submerged. Bryson and
Antiphon both produced quadratures of the circle that Aristotle (undoubt-
edly correctly) considered badly false. Apparently, one or both were also
philosophers (everything is obscure about such episodes: more than one
person going by the same name, some more mathematical; others more
philosophical). How likely are we to know about the bad or simply false
mathematics produced by less professional authors? Xenophilus of
There is little recent scholarship on such authors, who can only be approached with a high dose of
speculation. The most sympathetic treatment of Bryson and Antiphon (too sympathetic, I suspect)

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Chalcidice is said to have been a Pythagorean and a teacher of the greatest
(and nonmathematical) musical theorist of antiquity, Aristoxenus. This
Aristoxenus – a follower of Aristotle, although not much younger than him
– vehemently opposed what he saw as the Pythagorean eﬀort to mathe-
matize music (we will mention him again brieﬂy in Chapter as we survey
Ptolemy’s astronomy; we will revisit harmonic theory, as well). Surely,
Xenophilus was a mathematical author, but would we even know about
him had it not been for his chance association with Aristoxenus? Indeed, if
pushed to hazard a guess, it would be that the ﬁeld of mathematical music
is among the least represented in our attestation. With rare exceptions,
Hellenistic authors were no longer interested in it, and what came to be
remembered from the fourth century was the contributions by two out-
standing individuals – Archytas and Aristoxenus. But Archytas was very
early and so simply could not report on the many musical theorists who
oﬀered their own models, whereas Aristoxenus had no interest in reporting
the details of minor authors he despised.
Sculptors, and others, playing with proportions; philosophers, reﬂecting
upon mathematics and oﬀering their own contributions; musical theorists,
dividing the tetrachord – there ought to have been dozens of authors active
in the penumbra of mathematics. Our evidence now has, on the one side,
well-attested authors who clearly had a philosophical audience in mind,
but yet their identity was that of “mathematicians”; on the other side, well-
attested authors who clearly were interested in mathematics, and yet their
identity was that of “philosophers.” But the less attested, and so likely also
the unattested, could well have fallen, in many cases, in between.
“Mathematics” was real enough as a category (I shall return to discuss this
later in the chapter), but it subsisted on one end of a well-populated
spectrum.
If so, there is no reason why the mathematicians we do know could not
have at least dabbled in philosophy. Perhaps it was common for the same
person to contribute to both genres. Archytas and Eudoxus certainly did;
among the more minor, we may mention Amphinomus, Hermodorus,
Philip of Opus, and Zenodotus, for all of whom we have at least some
report of a philosophical allegiance. And if so, the evidence concerning the
contents of the works of the main mathematicians should be considered, as
well, in terms of its potential continuity with philosophy.
remains A. Wasserstein, “Some Early Greek Attempts to Square the Circle,” Phronesis ():
–.
Assessing the Landscape

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We see evidence for the mathematization of at least three physical
domains: musical harmony, vision, the stars. For each, there is consider-
able evidence of philosophical speculation preceding (and subsequent to)
the eﬀorts of mathematization. But it is not just that mathematicians enter
a philosophical domain. The very act of mathematization could be seen, in
and of itself, as a philosophical claim: Perhaps that the underlying structure
of the universe is to be understood on mathematical, more abstract terms?
Over and above such speciﬁc pushes toward abstraction, we see an
interest in generalization, deﬁnition, and classiﬁcation. Is this not the
point of Archytas’s general theory of numbers, of Theaetetus’s general
theory of irrationals, of Eudoxus’s general theory of proportion?
Even more speciﬁcally, the one theme that binds the entire spectrum
together – the results in pure mathematics together with the more philo-
sophical reﬂections – is that of harmony and proportion. We imagine Plato
sitting down to his portrait by Silanion; in between sittings, Silanion is
busy with his own work, ﬁnding the symmetries and numbers in the
human body – perhaps as Plato was busy writing his great work, the
Republic, whose starting point is the claim that there is a fundamental
analogy (so, a proportion) between the individual soul and the city. Their
conversation could touch upon the apparent limits of proportion – in the
phenomenon of irrationality. Plato would recall his transformative meet-
ings with Archytas; the rush of excitement, reading Archytas’s ﬁnding of
four lines in proportion; above all, the realization that music, deep down,
was made of numbers in proportion.
We have started out this chapter from sociology. Of course, the ancient
Greeks did mathematics because they liked the contents of the discipline.
But people do not simply do what they like; they choose what to do from
the available options, and starting with the ﬁnal years of the ﬁfth century
, mathematical authorship became a new option. This is part of the
story underlying the ﬂourishing of mathematics in the fourth century. But
we have gradually seen a more detailed sociological account. It involves,
speciﬁcally, networks of actors. People act together: learning from
each other, writing to each other. The network to which you belong
determines what you can do. Archytas was a pivotal member of Greek
elite networks – if nothing else, because he was the most respected citizen
in a major city. He belonged to a speciﬁc southern Italian network of
Pythagoreans – followers of an otherworldly way of life. Several of them,
recently, turned to a rather speciﬁc metaphysics, identifying the other-
worldly with numbers and proportion, all based on the model of
proportion, newly identiﬁed as the ground for musical harmony.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archytas went further. With his far-reaching networks, he was aware of
new ways of writing about mathematics and was in touch with new
philosophical authors. His work pursued the project of musical
Pythagoreanism as rigorous, technical mathematics. As such, it had an
enormous inﬂuence on Plato, another member of the network of the
Greek elite but also a central actor in, perhaps, the most signiﬁcant cultural
network of the time – those Greeks who decided to pursue philosophy in
the tradition inspired by Socrates.
The nexus of Archytas and Plato – bringing together the previously
unrelated traditions of musical Pythagoreanism, on the one hand, and
Athenian philosophizing, on the other hand – came to be the center of a
new network that endured for decades, perhaps sustained primarily by
Plato’s authority, persevered for the duration of the lifetime of Plato’s
direct circle.
The point is not that mathematicians, at this time, were instructed by
philosophers – as if Plato told Archytas what to believe. Why should
Archytas follow? The point, rather, is the continuity of audiences. And
so, because philosophers from Plato onward were so interested in what
mathematicians had to say, it is only natural that as mathematicians
decided what to write, they would consider that particular audience.
Plato inﬂuenced Archytas, I suggest, not by what he told him but simply
by listening.
The Making of Mathematics
The generation would end. And yet, mathematical continuity did not.
Mathematics, from now on, exists as a clearly deﬁned identity.
Now, I did argue that throughout this period, mathematics and
philosophy were placed on a single spectrum, the one merging into the
other. This would seem to imply that there was no clearly demarcated
“mathematics.” But the continuum of social interaction coexisted with
sharply demarcated genres. This is typical for the survival of culture in
antiquity as a whole. There were few institutions in antiquity and so little
continuity based on them. But the Greeks were habituated – from their
performative literature – to the idea that certain contents went along
together with certain forms; there were certain genres of epos, of lyric, of
drama, even of speech and of Socratic dialogue. To write a certain thing
was to write in a certain way. And this was the impersonal continuity,
preserving culture through generations and centuries. By the year ,
there would have been many dozens of works in circulation, in thousands
The Making of Mathematics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of copies, all written in a closely related form. This form will deﬁne the
future of the ﬁeld. Mathematics emerges – and stays put – as a set of
implicit rules for how mathematics should be written.
So far in this chapter, I have oﬀered abbreviations or paraphrases of
Greek mathematical arguments. Indeed, no mathematics from this era
survives in its original, unmediated form. And yet, this much is clear:
Euclid and Autolycus, writing a few decades later, already assume a very
ﬁxed genre; even earlier, many of the references by Aristotle to mathemat-
ics are explicit enough to get a sense of a form of writing that is almost
identical to that of Euclid. It thus makes sense to read Euclid as an
indication of what mathematics could have been like, already, in the
mid-fourth century. Let me quote, now, a simple proposition in its
original form. Because it is relatively simple, it is unrepresentative (many
propositions will have a more complex structure). I chose one that,
although simple, already displays some important structures. This is
Elements ., which I cite through Heath’s translation.
G
C
B
E
D
A
F
Figure 
Parallelograms that are on the same base and in the same parallels are equal
to one another.
Let ABCD, EBCF be parallelograms on the same base BC and in the same
parallels AF, BC.
I say that ABCD is equal to the parallelogram EBCF.
For, because ABCD is a parallelogram, AD is equal to BC. For the same
reason, EF is equal to BC, so AD is also equal to EF.
And DE is common; therefore, the whole AE is equal to the whole DF.
But AB is also equal to DC; therefore, the two sides EA, AB are equal to the
two sides FD, DC, respectively, and the angle FDC is equal to the angle
EAB, the exterior to the interior; therefore, the base EB is equal to the base
FC, and the triangle EAB will be equal to the triangle FDC.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Let DGE be subtracted from each.
Therefore, the trapezium ABGD that remains is equal to the trapezium
EGCF that remains.
Let the triangle GBC be added to each.
Therefore, the whole parallelogram ABCD is equal to the whole
parallelogram EBCF.
Therefore, parallelograms that are on the same base and in the same
parallels are equal to one another, which it was required to prove.
This is very distinctive writing. Not only is it unlike Homer or
Euripides, but it is also, evidently, very much unlike Plato. When a
Greek wrote in this precise genre, then, even if his audience might have
consisted of philosophers, they had no doubt that what they read was,
speciﬁcally, mathematical.
The most distinctive thing is, obviously, the combination of diagrams and
letters. This is pervasive in all extant Greek mathematical writing and is one
of the clearest things reﬂected in Aristotle’s references to mathematics.
Mathematical texts come as brief, distinct passages, each making an indi-
vidual claim. Each is followed by a drawing, which is a simple network of
lines, some straight, some curved. The drawing is interspersed with letters of
the Greek alphabet, typically (with some exceptions) set next to some of the
points of intersection in the drawn network. (In the diagram before us, each
point where two lines meet gets its own letter. In some other diagrams, some
of the intersections are missed; rarely, points are at positions other than
intersections, and in appropriate contexts – referring to more abstract,
quantitative objects – letters might be set not next to points but next to
lines or inside areas.) These letters act as the written equivalent of a hand
gesture. To write down “BC” is equivalent to pointing your hand at the
particular line segment bounded by the points of intersection marked in the
diagram by the letters B and C. The diagram thus has two faces. On the one
hand, it makes the text concrete, and its reading becomes a reenactment, in
the reader’s mind, of the author’s direct presence, pointing to a piece of
drawing. On the other hand, it is consciously literate, not merely a written
form but, indeed, one that explicitly refers to letters as its tool of choice.
There is only one layer of the individual mathematical argument that
does not use Greek letters: the very external one, the peel of the onion – in
Euclid’s case, this is generally the ﬁrst and last sentence, which form a
precise repetition. In this case, this is “Parallelograms that are on the same
base and in the same parallels are equal to one another.” This is the point
of the proposition, a general claim, true not only for this conﬁguration but
The Making of Mathematics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

generally: whenever parallelograms have property X, they are equal. How is
this generalization obtained? One constructs a particular case and assumes
merely the property X – you are not allowed to take anything else for
granted about these parallelograms. If, with this alone, you manage to
prove in this particular case that those parallelograms are indeed equal, then
you have, implicitly, proved this generally because, after all, you could
repeat the very same argument whenever property X holds: nothing in
your argument relied on anything other than the basic assumption, and so
you could surely repeat it.
Thus, you are entitled to a general statement, not referring to a partic-
ular diagram. Such general statements become a ﬁxed phrase one can recall
and use elsewhere – a “formulaic expression.” For an example of what
I mean, I cite a brief passage from the previous argument: “and the angle
FDC is equal to the angle EAB, the exterior to the interior.” There is the
echo here of a ﬁxed phrase, “the exterior to the interior,” which was coined
a few propositions back. I cite now the general statement of an earlier
proposition, underlining the repeated words (I.):
A straight line falling on parallel straight lines makes the alternate angles
equal to one another, the exterior angle equal to the interior and
opposite angle, and the interior angles on the same side equal to two
right angles.
It is evident that Euclid, in proposition , seeks to repeat the verbal
structure available from proposition .. After all, in proposition , he is
interested in comparing the triangles EAB, FDC, and he just stated, in this
order (from left to right – the more common order in Greek references to
diagrams), that the pair of sides EA, AB is equal to the pair FD, DC. It
would be natural to have the angles stated in the same order, from left to
right, but this is now reversed; the right angle, FDC, is said to be equal
to the left angle, EAB. Why? So that we can assert that the exterior is equal
to the interior, and not vice versa. And why? Because this is what we have
extracted out of the argument of the preceding proposition .: a certain
result, in a certain verbal formulation. There is, in fact, a good reason for
this: no one in antiquity would have referred to it as “..” I have been
using this kind of shortcut throughout this chapter so far; it is a very
convenient way of making references. It is also a modern way, perhaps
made more natural by the format of the book (which invites readers to
turn pages back and forth until one ﬁnds the looked-for position). Until
the fourth century , most ancient books were in roll form, designed
more naturally for a single, sequential reading. How would one recall texts,

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

then? As one always did elsewhere: by recalling them. Greek literate culture
would always remain close to the practices of performance, poetic or
rhetorical, and to know anything well would be to know it as remembered
speech. A Greek mathematician would be marked, among other things, by
having this stored in his or her memory: a hundred or so ﬁxed phrases,
with the main results one always resorted to, again and again – quite
literally, at the tip of one’s tongue.
There would be more stored like this. A key fact about this form of
writing – once again, one of its distinctive features – is its reliance on a
ﬁxed set of formulaic expressions. This is a subtle point – because the
formulaic character of Greek mathematics, itself, is subtle. This is not like
the explicit symbolism used in modern mathematics. And yet, when we see
utterances such as the following:
Let DGE be subtracted from each.
Therefore, the trapezium ABGD that remains is equal to the trapezium
EGCF that remains.
Let the triangle GBC be added to each.
Therefore, the whole parallelogram ABCD is equal to the whole
parallelogram EBCF.
we should note the repetitive structures, such as “let X be subtracted/added
from/to each,” “therefore . . . therefore,” and the ﬁxed terms, such as “the
X that remains” or “the whole X.” Such expressions are not transparent in
and of themselves, and although I imagine readers can piece together what
they mean, it must be clear that the Greek mathematical reader did not
need to do so. To him or her, the expressions were perfectly transparent
because they were always used in the same context, with the same meaning.
We can see a number of repetitions even within the conﬁnes of this small
proposition, but in a book such as Euclid’s Elements, expressions are
repeated hundreds of times. In this proposition, for instance, the key claim
concerning the particular diagram is preceded by the words “I say that”;
the ﬁnal restatement of the general claim is completed with the added
words “which it was required to prove.” Each of those expressions occurs
exactly once in this proposition, but also, each of those expressions is
repeated (with small variation) in nearly every proposition of the work as a
whole. In general, there are but a few hundred phrases repeated again and
again – out of which the entire fabric of Greek mathematics is produced.
Once you are familiar with this stock of phrases, a Greek mathematical text
fully makes sense. Try to recall your ﬁrst days in middle school, struggling
The Making of Mathematics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to make sense of what “x” meant (remember how hard it was to ﬁgure out
that x þ does not equal x?). This is how diﬃcult the language of Greek
mathematics now strikes you. Now, of course, as a grown-up, an expres-
sion such as x þ reads itself: it is an obvious way of representing its
mathematical idea. Understand, then, that to the mind of a professional
Greek mathematician – which simply means one who immersed himself or
herself in the writings of the mathematical genre – the expressions
of Greek mathematical language are as transparent and as easy to read as
“x þ .” This, a Greek would feel – this system of formulaic expressions –
is precisely how those mathematical ideas are naturally represented.
How do we use algebraic symbolism? We use it to make veriﬁable
computations. We know that from
A þ B ¼ C,
we may deduce
A ¼ C  B,
because – once we’ve trained to use this method – we can inspect the
formula and see the equivalence, left and right, of the equation, B removed
from each. This is a kind of visual-typographic veriﬁcation, based on
familiarity with a certain visual-typographic set of rules.
The ancient Greeks worked diﬀerently: they veriﬁed claims by refer-
ence to two separate sets of rules. They had a system of veriﬁcation based
on the diagram, as well as a system of veriﬁcation based on formulaic
expressions. Let us go back to the same phrases (adding in the immediate
context):
G
C
B
E
D
A
F
Figure 
The triangle EAB will be equal to the triangle FDC.
Let DGE be subtracted from each.
Therefore, the trapezium ABGD that remains is equal to the trapezium
EGCF that remains.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Let the triangle GBC be added to each.
Therefore, the whole parallelogram ABCD is equal to the whole
parallelogram EBCF.
How do we verify the equality of the trapezia? By referring to the
diagram, where we can see that the two equal triangles are indeed each
composed of the trapezium together with the subtracted triangle. (This is a
particular conﬁguration that, typically in Greek mathematics, is simply
seen in the diagram; generality is only slightly harmed, in that in principle,
one can repeat variations of the same argument.)
How do we verify the equality of the parallelograms? By referring
to the diagram, where we can see that the two equal trapezia, once
the same triangle is added to each, indeed become the required
parallelograms.
How do we know which is equal to which? By ﬁlling in the correct slots
in the formulaic expressions “. . . which remains,” “. . . common.”
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant feature of this proposition is its division
into steps. One could, after all, have removed one common triangle and
added in another simultaneously, moving at once from triangles to paral-
lelograms. This would have been just as valid. But it would have been less
transparent. This, after all, is what Descartes learned from his mathematics
(ultimately, that is, from the Greeks!): divide problems so that the indi-
vidual steps become, each, clear and distinct. Each time, we do a single,
simple visual operation or operate on a single, simple, formulaic expres-
sion. We take the complexity of a mathematical train of thought and
divide it into components until each individual component is at exactly the
right size for our visual and verbal intuitions – trained, of course, by our
familiarity with the mathematical idiom. And at this point, each proposi-
tion becomes not merely convincing but, indeed, compelling. It is impos-
sible to understand and not to assent. And this is why Greek mathematical
arguments are characterized not just by generality but also by necessity.
This combination of generality and necessity makes mathematics an
outlier in the entire universe of argumentation. Nothing else can be made
so persuasive; all the more reason, within a culture that values the power of
argument, to keep such arguments separate from others, maintained in
their own genre. And all the more reason, indeed, for philosophers, such as
Plato, to take notice.
This, then, is not a very diﬃcult historical question. Quite naturally, once
the genre was in place, it would not be changed. Indeed, it would largely
survive into the many successor civilizations that inherited their mathematics
The Making of Mathematics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

from the Greeks, all the way down to early modern Europe. Which is
important, in and of itself: the emphasis on persuasion – ultimately, the
legacy of the democratic Greek polis – would survive through many later
monarchic civilizations. It remains what most mathematicians emphasize to
this day.
But it becomes even more interesting to try to pinpoint the creation of
the genre. After all, this was one of the most lasting events in the history of
science as a whole! We can be certain that the genre was in place by the end
of the generation studied here. I am not sure that it was in place in the ﬁfth
century. In particular, looking at the extensive fragment we have from
Hippocrates of Chios, I am not sure that he used Greek letters as
diagrammatic labels (there are indications in the text that suggest that he
could have referred to unlabeled diagrams). It is at least possible that the
full form of Greek mathematics emerged later than Hippocrates.
On the other hand, once someone has written a substantial, inﬂuential
piece of mathematics, with its own genre, it is hard to see why the
immediate readers would wish to change this. For instance, one of the
interesting features of Greek mathematical writings is that in number
theory – as well as music – one relies on labeled diagrams, just as one
does in geometry. The same is true, indeed, in the study of irrationals and
of general proportion. This is strange and remarkable because, in such
ﬁelds, the line-and-point diagrams of Greek mathematics are nearly use-
less. Had there been important authors in the early tradition, using labeled
diagrams for geometry but avoiding them for arithmetic or music theory,
I would imagine that such a bifurcation could have stuck. But that’s not
what we see: instead, the reliance on labeled diagrams is universal.
I thus assume that the early inﬂuential authors already used the labeled
diagram for both arithmetic and music. In other words, I think this ought to
be true for Archytas, especially because in his case (unlike that of Hippocrates),
it is simply inconceivable that he could have presented his argument for the
duplication of the cube without the use of lettered diagrams. An Archytas
without the labeled diagram in geometry is impossible. But an Archytas with
the labeled diagram in geometry but not in arithmetic would be signiﬁcant
enough, as an inﬂuence on later authors, for this practice to remain bifurcated.
It is not bifurcated; hence, Archytas must have labeled his arithmetical
diagrams as well. Now, everything in this chapter so far coheres around a
picture with Archytas as the central, most inﬂuential node in the network of
this generation of mathematicians. They all read Archytas.
In the ﬁrst decades of the fourth century, Plato, in Athens, would record
the memory of Socrates, broadcasting it throughout the Greek-speaking
world, returning, again and again, to the very same form of writing. The

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

genre was not unique to Plato – others commemorated Socrates as well,
through recalling his words in conversation. Plato’s legacy was the one that
endured and came to deﬁne the genre, setting the terms, in many ways, for
philosophy as a whole and for the more speciﬁc genre of philosophical
dialogue. Many more would try to write in the same form – if none could
quite rival the original author.
I imagine Archytas, through the same decades, doing something a little
similar, returning, several times, across diﬀerent disciplines, to the same form
of writing: in geometry, in number theory, in music, probably in optics,
perhaps several times in each. Time and again, he would keep to the same
verbal texture, always writing discrete pieces of text referring to their separate
diagrams, labeled by Greek letters. He was not the only one doing so, and in
many ways, he simply continued writing rather like Hippocrates of Chios
and the few others of Hippocrates’s pioneering generation (although the
form used by Archytas was even more speciﬁc, even more regimented).
Those who read Archytas, however, knew that everyone else interested in the
same ﬁeld was reading the same works by Archytas, and so, to write in a style
other than that of Archytas would be a marked departure. And for what?
Clearly, the arguments were eﬀective. And so, the genre began to pursue its
own conservative logic. This is my proposed reconstruction.
What the Greek mathematical genre assumes is the existence of a
specialized audience, one willing to immerse itself in writing of a special
format, concerned with special, esoteric subject matters. And so we go
back to sociology, to networks, to questions of scale. The Greek mathe-
matical genre was formed when a certain group cohered around interests,
shared in diﬀerent ways by its members. Suﬃciently many people,
acquainted with each other, late in the ﬁfth century or early in the fourth
century, became interested in number, shape, the stars, vision – perhaps,
above all, music. My own guess is that the realization that harmony is, in
fact, number could have catalyzed interest in this cluster of topics. Inspired
by this – Pythagoreanism? – a dialogue ensued – perhaps between Archytas
and Plato? – giving rise to a new form of writing. And this, in a nutshell,
was the ﬁrst generation of Greek mathematics.
Coda: The Final Contribution of the First Generation
Perhaps inﬂuenced by original ideas due to Eudoxus himself, Menaechmus
– active, most likely, somewhat after the middle of the century – came up
with a transformation of the problem of doubling the cube.
We recall that the doubling of the cube – or more generally, the scaling
of a solid – was already transformed, by Hippocrates of Chios, into the
Coda: The Final Contribution of the First Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

problem of ﬁnding two lines between two given lines so that the four lines
are in continuous proportion:
A : B :: B : C :: C : D:
Now, one of the techniques pursued in this period – one that, as usual,
gained the attention of philosophers no less than of mathematicians – was
to approach problems through analysis. In this context, analysis means that
we solve a problem by assuming it solved – and then thinking through the
implications of such a solution.
Let us assume, then, that we have already obtained a series of lines such
that A:B::B:C::C:D. Think of what this implies. First of all, we may ignore
the middle terms and just focus on A:B::C:D. This is interesting!
Proportions can be transformed into shapes. Speciﬁcally, A:B::C:D implies
that the two rectangles – the one contained by A, D and the one contained
by B, C – are equal to each other.
C
D
A
B
Figure 
(A expands into B by the same ratio that D shrinks into C, with the two
canceling each other so that the two rectangles are equal.)
This is interesting because the lines A, D – the extremes of this
proportion – are the “given” or known elements. This means that we also
know the magnitude of the rectangle contained by B, C. We do not know
what B and C are, but we have a strong constraint: they must combine as a
rectangle to have a ﬁxed area.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

By the same logic, we can also conclude that the rectangle contained by
A, C is equal to the square on B. Once again, A is a given line: and so, what
we learn is that B, C, have another interesting internal structure. The
rectangle contained by C and a given line (namely, A) is equal to the
square on B. To repeat: we do not know what B, C are, but they must
conform to a relation where, as one of the lines – namely, C – is doubled,
so is the square on the other one, B. B scales, we ﬁnd, as the square on C.
Our two conditions are geometrical – having to do with rectangles and
squares – and they are best seen as a geometrical conﬁguration in a
diagram. I reproduce it, once again, from Eutocius’s catalogue of solutions
to the problem of doubling the cube; this appears to have been
Menaechmus’s solution. (In Figure , the given lines are A, E, and the
two lines found between them are B, G.)
Q
K
D
Z
H
A
B
G E
Figure 
The rectangle KQZD is of a ﬁxed area; speciﬁcally, it is assumed to be
equal to the rectangle contained by the two lines (shown on the side) A, E.
This rectangle may be imagined as a transformable rectangle by moving
the point Q along the curve so that the two sides of the rectangle always
remain parallel to KD, DZ. (This curve obviously never touches the two
lines, KD, DZ, because the rectangle’s area is ﬁxed and because, were the
curve to touch KD or DZ, the rectangle’s area would then become .) For
the time being, we simply postulate the existence of such a curve, which we
may call the “equal-rectangle-preserver.”
This solution is translated into English in R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and
Commentary, vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
Coda: The Final Contribution of the First Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Further, the square on the line QZ is assumed equal to a rectangle
contained by the line DZ and the ﬁxed line A. It is assumed that as we
move along the other curve shown in Figure – the one drawn through
the points Q, D – we ﬁnd new positions of Q0, Z0, such that the new Q0Z0,
squared, is always equal to the rectangle contained by the new Z0D and the
ﬁxed line A. In our symbolism:
Q
Q'
Z'
K
D
Z
H
A
B G E
Figure 
QZ2 ¼ ZD  A
Q0Z02 ¼ Z0D  A:
QZ may be varied, along this curve, together with DZ. Whichever
variation of QZ we get, squared, will always scale with which variation of
DZ we get, the line. For the time being, we simply postulate the existence
of such a curve, which we may call the “square-to-line-scaler.”
The idea now is clear. In terms of the previous diagram, we are given
A and E and are asked to ﬁnd B, G so that A:B::B:G::G:E. This is how
we proceed, then. We draw two orthogonal lines. We draw the equal-
rectangles-preserver between them so that the rectangle it preserves is equal
to the one contained by the two given lines A, D. We draw the square-to-
line-scaler through the intersection of the two orthogonal lines so that the
squares it obtains will be equal to a rectangle whose ﬁxed side is equal to A.
The point at which the equal-rectangle-preserver intersects the square-
to-line-scaler solves the problem. We draw everything, ﬁnd the intersec-
tion Q, and complete the rectangle; obviously, the two mean proportionals
between A, E must be the lines KD, DZ.
Now, there is a lot that we still miss for this to count as a satisfactory
solution! It would be nice to ﬁnd that the curves in question could be
geometrically constructed (that is, not just postulated). It would also be
nice to prove that the curves are indeed determined by the terms provided.

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Somehow or other, Menaechmus did. You can get those curves, specif-
ically, by cutting a cone.
Cut a cone one way, and you have a hyperbola. This is also an equal-
rectangles-preserver; it can be determined by the magnitude of the rectan-
gle it contains between two given asymptotes.
Cut a cone another way, and you have a parabola. This is also a line-to-
square-scaler, and it can be determined by the combination of its vertex
and the length of the ﬁxed parameter of its rectangle.
And so, one can indeed solve the doubling of the cube by the intersec-
tion of a parabola and a hyperbola.
All those names are modern. We will return to all of this in the
following chapter – and try to suggest, then, how, in fact, Menaechmus
could have discovered that the conic sections display the required proper-
ties. Indeed, I left the discovery of the conic sections to the end of this
chapter for two reasons. First, because it did, as a matter of fact, come right
near the end of this period. (Eudoxus was the youngest of the major
authors of the fourth century; Menaechmus, his even younger follower.)
But second, because this would be the core of mathematics for the
following generation. Mathematics pivoted from the generation of
Archytas to the generation of Archimedes, and it pivoted, speciﬁcally,
around the conic sections. And so, I ask for your patience. The story of
the discovery of the conic sections would become clearer, as we bring in
the evidence of their transformation, in the hands of later mathematicians.
But this should be noted, already, in the conclusion of this chapter – as
we bid farewell to the ﬁrst generation of Greek mathematics. What conic
sections do, in general, is display an array of proportions. The interest in
proportions, for an author such as Archytas, could well have sprung from
metaphysical sources. This, certainly, is what mattered to Plato, reﬂecting
on the mathematics emerging throughout his lifetime. But now, at around,
say, or , when both Archytas and Plato were dead, active mathe-
maticians come across a new streak of potential geometrical discovery
concerning proportion, highly technical and satisfying and of little obvious
metaphysical import. This will ﬁt right into the mathematical work of the
next important group of mathematicians.
Suggestions for Further Reading
Until recently, scholars of Greek mathematics were especially fascinated by
this generation, where so little is known but so much is hinted. There is, in
particular, a tradition of trying to use the hints in Euclid’s Elements so as to
reconstruct the process through which its contents were discovered. This
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

tradition culminates in R. W. Knorr, The Evolution of the Euclidean
Elements (Boston: Springer, ). Speciﬁcally, Knorr engaged with the
discovery of irrationality, explicitly focusing on the indications in Plato’s
dialogue, the Theaetetus. Another wonderful book with similar ambitions
is D. H. F.Fowler, The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, ). There, the focus is not so much on irrationality as such as on
the treatment of proportion, explicitly focusing on the meager indications
we have for a pre-Eudoxean deﬁnition. More recent scholarship tends to
focus on the better-attested mathematics of the generation of Archimedes,
and I will have more books to recommend for further reading there. I did
write, myself, on the genre of Greek mathematics, especially in R. Netz,
The Shaping of Deduction in Greek Mathematics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ).
Scholars today are indeed skeptical about the meaning of the few hints we
have for early mathematics. For a good early critique of Knorr’s use of
such sources as Plato’s dialogue the Theaetetus, see M. F. Burnyeat, “The
Philosophical Sense of Theaetetus’ Mathematics,” Isis (): –.
Burnyeat has contributed in other ways to our understanding of the interface
of mathematics and philosophy. M. F. Burnyeat, “Archytas and Optics,”
Science in Context (): –, for example, provides not only the
evidence for Archytas’s contribution to optics but also a sense of what Plato
could have liked – as well as disliked – about it. There is also a more general
treatment of Plato and mathematics in M. F. Burnyeat, “Plato on Why
Mathematics Is Good for the Soul,” Proceedings of the British Academy 
():–; for this ﬁeld, of foundational signiﬁcance is G. Vlastos,
“Elenchus and Mathematics: A Turning-Point in Plato’s Philosophical
Development,” American Journal of Philology (): –.
This is mostly about Plato. For the other side of the encounter – the
Pythagoreans of southern Italy – the key reference is two books by Carl
Huﬀman: C. Huﬀman, Philolaus of Croton: Pythagorean and Pre-Socratic
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), and C. Huﬀman.
Archytas of Tarentum: Pythagorean, Philosopher and Mathematician King
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ). Greek theoretical reﬂec-
tion on music is a major ﬁeld, largely alien to our own ways of thinking.
The best entry point is A. Barker, Greek Musical Writings, Vol. :
Harmonic and Acoustic Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
). Finally, there are few accessible treatments of Eudoxus’s deﬁnition
of proportion. This – together with the Greek treatment of irrationality –
is best understood within the long history of the concept of number, for
which an excellent introduction is L. Corry, A Brief History of Numbers
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, ).

The Generation of Archytas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

