
The Generation of Archimedes
Plan of the Chapter
This chapter is a kind of rondo, with Archimedes as its main theme.
In outline, with ﬁve subchapters:
I
Prelude to Archimedes
II
Enter Archimedes
III
Response to Archimedes: Apollonius
IV
Archimedes’s Physics
V
Response to Archimedes: The Generation
And now, to the detailed plan of the chapter.
I
Prelude to Archimedes
I suspect that there was a hiatus, of sorts, between the generation of
Archytas and that of Archimedes. We start with “A Brief Glance at the
In-Between,” the years between the two generations, and take a closer look
at one indispensable ﬁgure in “Euclid, the In-Between Mathematician.”
Then, to prepare for the survey of the generation of Archimedes, I propose
a historical account: how the science of this era could have become, to a
certain extent, autonomous. This argument is based on the changing
geography of Greek culture, and the section is titled “Athens and
Alexandria: The Making of a Dual Mediterranean.”
II
Enter Archimedes
With this, our main business begins. “Archimedes the Historical Person” is
a section presenting the biographical information on this author (which,
for once, is signiﬁcant). “The Works of Archimedes” surveys the corpus
(about twenty-ﬁve attested, about ten extant!). We need to choose our

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

focus. The chapter ﬁrst looks closely at Archimedes’s pure geometry and
begins to consider the response to Archimedes, then returns to
Archimedes’s more physical works and the response to them, and ﬁnishes
with an assessment of the generation as a whole. For the pure geometry, we
begin with a particular moment: “The Challenge of Archimedes” – the set
of tasks proposed to Conon and gradually revealed to Dositheus. I focus in
particular on one example: the area of the spiral. I provide an overview of
Archimedes’s proof of this measurement in the section “Closer to the
Spiral.” The following section, “Eudoxus, Inspiration to Archimedes,”
discusses the origins of this proof in one of the major achievements of
Eudoxus (which I put aside in the preceding chapter). We may then
understand Archimedes as taking his cue from a speciﬁc moment of the
previous generation – but making it much more central to his own
approach and perhaps subtly transforming it in the process.
III
Response to Archimedes: Apollonius
We understand something of Archimedes’s pure geometry – and may
consider the response to it. The most important mathematician to respond
to Archimedes’s achievement was Apollonius, and so the following section
is “Archimedes, Inspiration to Apollonius.” One work alone is extant in
Greek – but what a work! We turn to the scope of Apollonius’s conics in
the section “Enter the Conics,” which once again goes back in time. We
return to Menaechmus’s discovery of conic sections – and see how they
were reinvented by Apollonius. A particularly intriguing possibility is
covered in “Archimedes: Conversing with Apollonius?” – that is, can it
be that Archimedes himself shows awareness of some of Apollonius’s work?
Can we get a sense of the working of the generation as a generation?
IV
Archimedes’s Physics
To follow this, then, brings us back to “Archimedes: Conversing with the
Physical World?” An entire series of works by Archimedes involves what
we think of as “physical” and speciﬁcally the tool of (what Archimedes
called) the “center of the weight.” Is this tool physical – or geometrical?
How was mathematical physics invented? This is a very long and detailed
section, surveying the most sophisticated mathematics we will see in this
book. It is divided into four smaller subsections, each on the main treatises
dealing with the center of the weight: I discuss more brieﬂy On Balancing
Planes and Quadrature of the Parabola and then survey in a little more

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

detail Method and On Floating Bodies. This is followed by “A Syracusan
Coda: And More, on the Physical Sciences” – going back to Archimedes’s
death, his myth. He certainly used no burning mirrors on the Romans –
but he may have been a major ﬁgure in the growth of ancient optics,
perhaps his greatest lost contribution.
V
Response to Archimedes: The Generation
Against the background of Archimedes’s achievement, surveyed nearly in
full, we may ﬁnally consider its impact. The two last sections are “The
Generation of Archimedes” – with a more detailed sense of the responses
of the many authors in this generation, beyond Archimedes and
Apollonius – and “The Signiﬁcance of Ludic Proof,” a note on the
historical meaning of this generation.
I.
Prelude to Archimedes
A Brief Glance at the In-Between
Even in the moment of eﬄorescence around such ﬁgures as Archytas,
Theaetetus, and Eudoxus, the concrete foothold of mathematics was
limited. There were no more than several dozens of mathematical authors
active during, say, –. And it seems that there were rather fewer
who were active after that peak.
Here are the mathematicians whose activity was likely later than
Eudoxus’s but earlier than Archimedes’s (by which I mean that they were
likely born later than but earlier than ):
Autolycus
Aristotherus?
Euclid
Hipponicus
Aristyllus
Timocharis
Aristarchus
Dionysius
Pheidias
Conon
Perhaps not that much should be made of the precise numbers. I have nine
to ten names in this century of mathematicians (“nine to ten” because
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Aristotherus is a particularly ﬂimsy reference). The same list, for the
preceding ﬁfty years, had twenty-three. So, a ratio of :, but perhaps this
could be attributable to our sources. Eudemus, Aristotle’s pupil, wrote a
history of geometry, and so the mathematicians he commemorated had a
better chance of being remembered later on. There was no similar history
of later generations.
So, how do we know about those few authors? It varies. In the case of
Autolycus and Euclid, their works are extant. (Those of Euclid range
widely; Autolycus’s extant works involve basic astronomy.) There is a
tradition that Euclid worked for the ﬁrst Ptolemy, and indeed, it seems
as if later mathematicians take his works for granted – hence his dating to
this era. We date Autolycus because a biography of a philosopher,
Arcesilaus, mentions that Autolycus was among his teachers. The same
philosopher also had another teacher in mathematics – which is all we hear
of the otherwise-anonymous Hipponicus. Aristyllus and Timocharis are
cited by later astronomers for their observations: it appears that they
surveyed the ﬁxed stars, and it is a standard assumption that they did so
in the service of the early Ptolemaic kings. Aristarchus, once again, is
extant, and he was even famous in antiquity. (He proposed, among other
things, a heliocentric model! His extant work is a brilliant astronomical
exercise, calculating the distances and sizes of the sun and moon – on all of
this, more in Chapter .) Dionysius, too, is only known (and dated) thanks
to a few observations, in this case of a planet (Mercury). We are sure that
Pheidias is earlier than Archimedes; Archimedes mentions him as his
“father.” He is cited for a measurement – alongside that of Aristarchus –
of the size of the sun. Conon, too, is mentioned by Archimedes (we will
see much more of that in the section titled “The Challenge of
Archimedes”). Conon is most famous, otherwise, from Callimachus’s
mention of him in a poem: something of a court astronomer, perhaps,
Conon was the one who identiﬁed a group of stars as the reappearance, in
heaven, of a lock from Queen Berenice’s hair! (This subtle, ironic move
combines poetry and astronomy in a manner very typical of the age.)
We have a reference ascribing to a certain Aristotherus a critique of a certain cosmological feature of
an astronomical theory, as well as some references to Aristotherus as a teacher of Aratus (on whom,
see p. ). The biographical tradition on Arstus is especially suspect, and one wonders if it may not
be the source of the reference to cosmological critique, in which case, all we can learn is that a certain
Aristotherus (a philosopher?) was said to be associated with Aratus. The evidence is summed up in
G. L. Irby-Massie and P. Keyser (eds.), Encyclopedia of Ancient Natural Sciences (London: Routledge,
).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

What matters, then, is not the fact that relatively few names are men-
tioned but that, even with such small numbers, a pattern emerges. All the
authors for whom any interest can be established are interested in astron-
omy. (Even Euclid is no exception: his corpus does include basic astronom-
ical works, although we cannot be certain of their authenticity. Even
Aristotherus is dated to this era because of his name being mentioned –
by late and unreliable sources – in connection with the astronomy of
Autolycus and the astronomical poet Aratus.) For a surprising number of
authors, it is possible to detect the traces (no more) of the Ptolemaic
monarchy: Timocharis, Aristyllus, and Conon were perhaps something akin
to court astronomers? Euclid, perhaps, commissioned by the kings?
We note, perhaps, falling numbers, an interest in astronomy, and
courtly connections. Perhaps, all might be related. If, indeed, philosophers
lost interest in mathematics – at the end of a generation where the very
point of doing mathematics used to be to talk to such philosophers – then
it is natural that mathematicians might get discouraged. The new inter-
locutors are laypersons, and it is perhaps not surprising that of all the forms
of ancient mathematics, the one that always captured most people’s
imagination was the mathematical study of the sky (of which, more in
Chapter ). This ﬁeld will, in time, give rise to the most successful court
science of antiquity – that of astrology – but already in the Ptolemaic
courts, pre-astrological research into the sky was suﬃciently fascinating to
justify the patronage of the courts. It was as such, then, that mathematics
survived through the lean years. It would ﬂourish again when a genius –
Archimedes – broke upon the scene. Then – and perhaps because of the
excitement he himself generated – there would suddenly be more mathe-
maticians, perhaps enough for this new generation to ﬁnd interlocutors
within the mathematical profession itself. This is when mathematics, more
than ever, becomes almost an autonomous, self-suﬃcient pursuit.
Euclid, the In-Between Mathematician
Transitional, perhaps somewhat less creative, and yet, this is also the
generation of the one Greek mathematician you’ve likely heard of:
Euclid. Does he deserve his fame?
Of course he does. In the preceding chapter, I did – I hope, with
caution – what many scholars in the past have done again and again:
ransacked Euclid’s Elements for evidence of the previous generation.
Clearly, this work is composed of materials produced by past mathemati-
cians. But it is a supremely well-crafted composition, and it is no less clear
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that this work is much more than the cut and paste of past works. Nothing
in the Elements is simply due to Archytas, Theaetetus, or Eudoxus; the
Elements are due to Euclid – a source of caution, then, in using the
Elements for the recovery of the earlier history of Greek mathematics.
The ﬁrst thing to note is that this is a very big work. It is divided into
thirteen “books” – with “book” meaning something like “the typical
length of a single papyrus roll.” In practice, the sizes vary. Most books
are fairly short – Book has propositions, but Book , in particular –
the mammoth classiﬁcation of incommensurables, perhaps based on that
of Theaetetus – has propositions! Each has its own mathematical
scope:
Book 
Triangles and parallelograms
Book 
Quantitative relations between lines and the rectangles
they deﬁne
Book 
Circles
Book 
Regular polygons inscribed in circles
Book 
Proportion theory
Book 
Application of proportion to geometry
Books –
Study of numbers (Proportions involving numbers,
prime numbers, even and odd numbers – this sequence
is not as neatly divided into books as the rest of the
Elements.)
Book 
Incommensurables
Book 
Elementary solid geometry
Book 
Cones and cylinders
Book 
Regular solids
The architectural achievement is palpable, literally building up from
scratch: rectilinear ﬁgures built up in Books and , circles in Book ,
combined in Book . So far, without proportion theory, which is intro-
duced in Book . Proportion and geometry are combined in Book 
(which provides some of the most important tools in Greek geometry). At
this point, a pause is reached, and the other main forms of Greek
mathematics are pursued: ﬁrst numbers, then incommensurables. The
ﬁnal section recapitulates plane geometry, with solids: Book closely
follows Book ; Book , with its treatment of curvilinear solids, recalls
Book concerning the circle. And as Book studied the inscription of

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

regular polygons inside the circle, so Book studies the inscription of
regular solids inside the sphere – applying, along the way, a few results
from Book .
Many of the books are provided with evident capstones, adding to
the sense of structure. Book builds to the so-called Pythagorean
theorem. Book ends twice: First in ., which proves, in our terms,
that there are inﬁnitely many prime numbers. Then a new beginning is
made with odd and even numbers, leading to the second capstone – the
construction of perfect numbers. (Those are numbers equal to the sum of
their factors, such as ¼ þ þ .) Book , a sort of capstone to the
whole, ends with the proof that the constructed ﬁve regular solids (pyra-
mid, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, icosahedron – you might know
them as the dice used in Dungeons and Dragons) are the only
ones possible.
Euclid does not use explicit references from one proposition to another.
As noted on page , the ancient Greeks relied not on textual markers such
as “See Book , proposition ” but instead on the verbal echoes of
formulaic expressions. Indeed, one of the key functions of Euclid’s
Elements must have been to put, in one place, all the important formulaic
expressions for such cross-references. But with or without such references,
Euclid’s Elements is structured by the relation of logical dependence.
Results are built up in an iterative way. Nothing is left for later in the
book (it never happens, for instance, that a requirement for a claim made
in Book is delayed until Book ). The way in which Books –add up
to Book to make Book , which then, together with Books and ,
feeds into Book – this is a very large-scale architecture, unique among
extant Greek mathematics. It stands to reason that most of the Greek
mathematics we have lost would have been, if anything, more modest in
scale and ambition; against the background of the Greek mathematics
available at his time, Euclid must have stood up quite prominently.
Alexandria was famous for its lighthouse of unprecedented scale. So was
the Elements.
The architecture is paramount, and it drives the mathematics. Especially
signiﬁcant is the choice to postpone proportion theory to Book . One can
only speculate that Euclid felt that starting with abstract proportion theory
would be wrong – mathematics, after all, was primarily about concrete
geometrical objects, and Eudoxus’s proportion theory was too abstract. If
proportion theory is delayed to Book , and if one obeys the strict
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

principle that results are allowed to depend, logically, only on previously
established results, this creates genuine constraints on the manner in which
the most basic geometry of Books –must be developed. Consider, for
instance, the most central result of all – Elements .or, once again,
Pythagoras’s theorem.
Similarity between ﬁgures is, we noted, at the heart of Greek geometry:
it brings together quality (similar shapes) and quantity (proportion
between sides of those similar shapes). Speciﬁcally, using similarity for
the ﬁnding of a single mean proportion (p. ) suggests a very straightfor-
ward way of proving Pythagoras’s theorem.
A
D
C
B
Figure 
To recall, we work as follows: to ﬁnd the mean proportional between
the two lines AB, BC, we lay them side by side and set up a circle with the
bisection of AC as the center. The perpendicular up from B hits the circle
at BD, and then BD is a mean proportional between AB, BC because the
two triangles ABD and DBC are similar to each other as well as to the
whole triangle ADC.
More than this: the triangle ADC is a right-angled triangle. As we consider
the similarities in this conﬁguration, we may note several proportions:
AC : AD :: AD : AB (hypotenuse to smaller side in similar right-angled
triangles)
AC : CD :: CD : BC (hypotenuse to bigger side in similar right-angled
triangles)
At this point, we do the thing Greek mathematicians do all the time and
convert a proportion into a concrete geometric relation (we noted this
most recently in the context of Menaechmus’s discovery of the conic
sections). If we have
AC : AD :: AD : AB,

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this also means that the rectangle contained by AC, AB is equal to the
square on AD. And from
AC : CD :: CD : BC,
we can also deduce that the rectangle contained by AC, BC is equal to the
square on CD.
Draw the two equalities on the diagram, and the conclusion follows: the
square on the hypotenuse AC (divided into two rectangles, the one
contained by AC, AB and the one contained by AC, BC) is equal to the
sum of the squares on AD, CD because it is equal, respectively, to a
rectangle directly underneath it.
B
A
D
C
Figure 
I assume this is how the Greeks most naturally would prove
Pythagoras’s theorem. I believe so not only because this is a reasonable
story, based on what we know about early Greek mathematics, but also
because as we read Euclid’s actual proof, we can see this similarity-and-
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proportion argument visible, as it were, peering at us from behind
Euclid’s words.
B
A
H
G
D
F
E
C
Figure 
Suppose you start from the proof, but you must avoid proportions.
What to do then? Euclid might have considered the same diagram with
fresh eyes. How do we show that each square is equal to the rectangle
beneath it? Let us concentrate on just one pair, the one to the left. We
need to show, then, that the square AEFD is equal to the rectangle ABGH.
Although the two have nothing directly in common with each other, it is
easy to see triangles that are related to the two. In particular, if we join
HD, EC, we have two triangles HAD, CAE that are obviously equal
to each other (HA ¼ CA, AD ¼ AE, and the angle in between – HAD,
CAE – is the same, simply rotated counterclockwise). All we need to show,
then, is that triangles between two parallel lines (such as HAD, between
the two parallel lines HA, GD, or CAE, between the two parallel lines AE,
CF) are always half of the parallelogram on the same base between the
same parallels (such as the parallelogram ABGH or the parallelogram
AEFD). This, then, is the argument through which Euclid proves
“Pythagoras’s theorem”: in his proposition I., the capstone to Book .
Notice, however, that he needs, as noted, an important assumption:

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

triangles are half the parallelogram within the same parallels as them. This,
Euclid indeed achieves earlier, in proposition ..
But how to show the general relation between triangles and parallelo-
grams? The key result required is proposition ., which essentially states
that the diameter of a parallelogram divides it into two congruent triangles.
This is a straightforward enough result, indeed, if we can show that in a
parallelogram such as ABCD, the angle ABC is equal to the angle BCD.
C
A
D
B
Figure 
This, Euclid could not directly prove. Therefore, true to his architectural
commitment – making sure everything is proved, based on previous results –
he made the deliberate choice to introduce a special assumption, right in the
introductory section of his ﬁrst book. This was not a proved theorem but
instead, simply a postulate – an assumption, stated as a requested fact:
If a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the
same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced
indeﬁnitely, meet on that side on which are the angles less than the two
right angles.
This is known as Euclid’s parallels postulate or Euclid’s postulate .
Based on this assumption, it is straightforward to obtain Euclid’s proposition
., which shows, among other things, that “a straight line falling on
parallel straight lines makes the alternate angles equal to one another,” and
through this, to prove ., hence ., hence .or Pythagoras’s
theorem.
Euclid’s parallels postulate deﬁnes what we now call Euclidean geometry
(in non-Euclidean geometries, the two straight lines may fail to meet
even if the angle is less than two right angles; or in other versions, they
may meet, regardless of the angles). I believe Euclid came to this postulate
– and came to position it so prominently – because of a practical
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consequence of his architecture. He needed to show Pythagoras’s theorem,
but he had to avoid similarity and proportion – the most natural tool that
brings quality and quantity together. He thus had to work directly with the
quantitative relations between triangles, based on congruences and thus
based on the equalities between angles.
This reminds us that even Pythagoras’s theorem depends, ultimately, on
the parallels postulate. In non-Euclidean geometries, the relation between
the squares on the sides of a right-angled triangle varies (if, indeed,
multiple right-angled triangles are even possible, which is not the case in
all non-Euclidean geometries). This has surprisingly many consequences
and means, eﬀectively, that our normal measurement techniques fail in
non-Euclidean geometries. This is a very deep observation; I am not sure
Euclid would have made it so prominent had he not committed himself to
his particular grueling exercise in large-scale architecture. He did, with big
consequences. The parallels postulate was there, made prominent within
Euclid’s structure. The urge to “correct” Euclid, to prove the postulate
instead of merely assuming its truth, was overwhelming, and many later
mathematicians – Greek, Islamic, and eventually modern European –
would pursue this path until, ﬁnally, the postulate, in its resilience, gave
birth to the non-Euclidean geometries, together with an entirely new
conception of space and of what geometry is about.
But we are pushing ahead – and doing so anachronistically. For Euclid
himself, the issue was not the nature of geometry. It was a particular task of
arrangement: get lots of mathematics together, in a particular architecture.
Just what did this task mean, historically, for Euclid himself?
For this question, I will take my ﬁrst hint from two contemporary
mathematicians: Aristyllus and Timocharis. These astronomers are almost
entirely unknown, save for a few reports of observations cited by later
astronomers: this or that star, observed in this or that position. Such
observations, put in the hands of historians of astronomy, can be made
eloquent. A few involve the moon and so can be dated – we thus know
that they were active from the very beginning of the third century (and so,
just as the Ptolemaic kings become established). Most intriguing is the
possibility that Timocharis’s observations are all south of the zenith in
Alexandria, whereas Aristyllus’s are all north.The implication is of an
explicit division of labor in a systematic eﬀort of mapping. This is usually
taken to be a survey of the skies – perhaps with the aim of producing a
globe? – commissioned by the kings. Perhaps it is relevant to mention,
For more on such observations, see Y. Maeyama, “Ancient Stellar Observations: Timocharis,
Aristyllus, Hipparchus, Ptolemy – the Dates and Accuracies,” Centaurus , no. ():
–.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

then, that physicians active in Alexandria at the time, such as Herophilus
and Erasistratus, were naming and surveying the entire body, based on
dissections of bodies that were likely provided by the kings. Even closer to
home, it is clear that the Ptolemaic kings engaged in massive book-collection
eﬀorts (there were many big libraries in Alexandria, but the royal library
must have been particularly big). The greatest author of early Alexandria was
a poet-scholar, Callimachus, and his greatest claim to fame was the Pinakes, a
survey – in books, putting Euclid to shame – of past literature. Was it,
in some sense, a catalogue of the royal library? Once again, precise proof
eludes us, but what we see, with greater clarity, is a pattern. Aristyllus and
Timocharis, looking at the sky; Herophilus and Erasistratus, looking at the
human body; Callimachus, looking at literature. This is the look from the
outside – from the new vantage point of Alexandria. There is a project of
producing exhaustive surveys, perhaps as royal commissions. It seems likely
to me that Euclid was tasked with a similar assignment.
The metaphor of the catalogue is distinct from that of foundations. If
indeed, Euclid’s project should be put alongside those of Aristyllus and
Timocharis, Herophilus and Erasistratus, Callimachus – then it should be seen
as a catalogue that is only incidentally a study into the foundations of Greek
mathematics. And this, indeed, becomes clearer as we bring in two further
sources of evidence. First, the actual uses of Euclid’s work. If his Elements were
a catalogue, what were they a catalogue of? Second, Euclid’s larger project: for
after all, even his extant corpus extends further than the Elements alone.
What is the Elements a catalogue of? The ﬁrst to realize the signiﬁcance
of this question – and to provide a persuasive answer – was Ken Saito. Let
us look at a pair of results in the Elements, .and .. Elements .
asserts (paraphrasing) that if C bisects AB, and D is somewhere on CB:
rectangle ADHK
ð
Þ þ square LHGE
ð
Þ ¼ square CBFE
ð
Þ:
A
D
B
M
F
G
E
L
N
H
O
P
C
K
Figure 
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And .asserts (paraphrasing) that if C bisects AB, and D is some-
where on the continuation of CB:
rectangle ABHK
ð
Þ þ square LHGE
ð
Þ ¼ square CDFE
ð
Þ:
C
B
D
M
O
H
P
N
F
G
E
K
A
L
Figure 
It is obvious that the two propositions are nearly identical. Why have
both? Scholarship, prior to Saito, ﬁxed on two observations. First, the
claims here are very similar to algebraic identities (.is rather like (a þ b)
(a – b) ¼ a– b; .is rather like (a þ b)¼ aþ ab þ b). Second, the
treatment of such algebra-like results in terms of operations on rectangles is
reminiscent of Babylonian mathematics. This, then, belongs right in the
tradition of Neugebauer, discussed on pages –: Greek mathematics
was originally inﬂuenced by Babylonian geometrical algebra!
Saito, following Unguru, no longer believed in the historical existence of
such “geometrical algebra.” And so, Saito asked himself this: not where
those results came from, but where they were going. If Euclid put the two
results in the Elements, this is because, for some reason, he needed both.
What was this need?
And here comes Saito’s simple observation – so simple that it must be
the correct solution to our problem. In works such as Apollonius’s Conics,
one often has to apply results such as Elements .and .. And they
come up in distinct circumstances: some circumstances call for the appli-
cation of the one, others call for the application of the other. A line is
bisected; sometimes, a point is taken on the line itself, and sometimes, it is
taken on the continuation of that line. In either case, it is often useful to

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

know the consequences in terms of the equalities of rectangles. Hence,
there are occasions when .comes in handy, others, when .does: not
because they say such diﬀerent things but because they are applied in
diﬀerent circumstances.
What the Elements is, Saito argues, is a catalogue of circumstances
waiting to happen. It is the mathematician’s toolbox. I imagine Euclid in
Alexandria, at work on the Elements, perhaps not unlike Callimachus in
Alexandria, at work on the Pinakes: surrounded by books. Euclid was
going through the many dozens – or was it two hundred or more? – of
mathematical books produced throughout the preceding century or longer.
He picked, along the way, the tools required for this mathematics, then
built the tools, together, within a cathedral.
This is clearly not the only thing Euclid did. A catalogue implies a
certain reverence toward the past. (The same, indeed, is true of
Callimachus.) It also seems that some eﬀort was put toward preserving
the past, even when the expectation of future applications was slim.
Perhaps Book is there (standing on its own, not just as a prelude to
Book ) to commemorate Eudoxus; Book , for the sake of Theaetetus’s
memory. If so, perhaps, after all, the Elements should be used, within
measure, as a historical resource? Perhaps the parts of Euclid most likely to
reﬂect Euclid’s past are those that were least applied in Euclid’s future.
But this historical interest is localized and qualiﬁed. That Euclid’s
project was primarily that of gathering the tools becomes clear from a
consideration of some of his other extant works. The Data is usually taken
to be authentic, and in this case, the sense of tool collection is evident.
There is relatively little architecture, and instead, we ﬁnd the accumulation
of fairly simple results, none too interesting individually, although many
are useful. What is this usefulness? In general, a very basic technique of
Greek mathematical study and proof is that of mathematical analysis. (We
have caught a glimpse of this technique already in Menaechmus’s solution
to the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals.) In mathematical
analysis, you seek to prove a result, but even before you do so, you engage
in a thought experiment: Supposing the result obtained, what else would
follow? The Data provides a set of tools for answering such questions: If
this is given, what is given as well? So, for instance, proposition : if the
ratio between the sides in a triangle is given, the shape of the triangle is
given as well. A central result, underlying so many applications in Greek
mathematics! Fundamentally, then: Euclid’s Data is something that one
applies. It is an extra toolbox, one more set of applications waiting to
happen.
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

There are a few more works ascribed to Euclid, and it is hard to tell how
valid the ascriptions are. Perhaps it became a habit, among medieval
copyists, perhaps even in antiquity itself, to assume that very elementary
works are due to Euclid. And still: we do have ascribed to him elementary
treatises in mathematical astronomy, in mathematical music, in optics, in
catoptrics (the study of reﬂections); he certainly also wrote an elementary
treatise (now lost) on conic sections. A few works are attested and were
apparently somewhat more ambitious (he had to gain his fame as a
mathematician, somehow, so as to become the compiler in chief ):
Divisions, Porisms, Surface Loci, even a collection of fallacies. (What a pity
that the last has been lost!)
What is typical to all such works is that they appear to be motivated,
once again, by a certain impetus to classify and to exhaust. Divisions, for
instance (which survives in a much-transformed Arabic translation), pro-
vides a series of solutions to tasks of the following character: given a
rectilinear ﬁgure, draw a line that divides the ﬁgure in a required ratio.
(We will note later on how Archimedes solves a much harder problem of
this kind, involving the division of the sphere.) Those are simple solutions,
perhaps already achieved, at least in part, by past mathematicians. Euclid
adds them up, arranges them, and goes through them one by one.
Autolycus, perhaps contemporary with Euclid, is extant, and his own
work is also such a compilation, in the elementary techniques of geomet-
rical astronomy (more on this in Chapter ). Aristarchus’s extant work,
however – once again, to be discussed in Chapter – is a brilliant piece of
geometrical ingenuity. Perhaps we are unlucky in terms of the works that
survive from the generation in between. Perhaps there were, originally,
more Aristarchuses, fewer Euclids and Autolycuses. I doubt this. The
evidence we do have suggests that, quite possibly, at least as far as pure
mathematics is concerned, the generation, itself, conceived of itself in such
terms: the heir – and not much more? – to the brilliant achievement of the
generation of Archytas, brokering such past achievements for new patrons.
Soon, mathematics will emerge to do much more. In particular, math-
ematics seems to cast itself in a new, autonomous mold. This means, above
all, that – in contrast to the generation of Archytas – mathematics will
become independent from philosophy. How to account for this? I argue
that this goes back to a general divergence in Hellenistic culture, in turn
dependent on a long-term trend in Greek culture – the canonization of
Athens – and the variety of responses to this canonization, in the city and
outside it. Mathematics will come to be a very non-Athens thing; philos-
ophy will come to be a very Athens thing. This is my claim: and so, we

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

need to delve, once again, into the trajectory of the history of the Greek
city-state – going right back to the ﬁfth century.
Athens and Alexandria: The Making of a Dual Mediterranean
Cleisthenes gave Athens a new democratic constitution in . From
then on, to get things done, you had to stand up in front of your co-
citizens and persuade them. Soon after, it was Athens that led the Greeks
against Persia – and many cities now looked to Athens for inspiration or,
whether they liked it or not, came under its tutelage. Previously, perhaps,
what happened in Athens stayed in Athens. But now, everyone noticed.
Tragedies, comedies, speeches by the likes of Pericles, conversations by the
likes of Socrates – what happened in Athens was moments of people
speaking and performing in public. And what happened in Athens was
instantly famous everywhere. Athens became the stage of Hellas.
Literary canons have a certain staying power. Suppose you are educated
by reading Euripides (the most famous tragedian), Plato (the most suc-
cessful author of Socratic conversations), Demosthenes (a somewhat later
Athenian orator), Menander (a somewhat later still Athenian comic
author). This was much of the education of literate Greeks, from as soon
as the new literary canon, centered on Athens, was formed. And so,
whether they knew Athens and its democracy directly or not, they con-
tinued to value the excitement produced by performance, to treasure
certain public friction. After all, it all went back to engaging competitions:
Who is going to win the ﬁrst prize for tragedy? Will we choose peace or
war – the two options espoused by competing orators? Is Socrates, ﬁnally,
to be defeated in debate? Generations after generations of Greek children
were reared on such verbal competitions, and so it was just taken for
granted, for such readers, that this was what culture was mostly about. It
was about words in violent encounters, ﬂung out by strong individuals
who mark themselves against each other in contest, rooted in the experi-
ence of the city in continuous political debate.
Meanwhile, political realities were changing. As new powers emerged in
the periphery of the Greek world – above all, the kingdom of Macedon –
Athens could not form, as it once did, a strong enough alliance against
them. By the mid-fourth century, Macedon dominated Greece. Athens
tried twice to resist and was defeated twice in battle, in and .
Following its ﬁnal defeat, even its constitution was ﬁnally broken. Some
form of democratic public ceremony would continue to be performed – in
Athens and in many other Greek cities. But from the late fourth century
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

onward, monarchy, not democracy, became the central form of Greek
political life.
Those new kings ruled, indeed, over vast territories. Alexander of
Macedon used his new power base in Greece to drive an expedition into
the empire of Persia itself, and by the time the expedition was over – in
– Macedonians ruled over the entirety of the landmass between the
Indus and the Mediterranean, all the way out into the Balkans, as well
as Egypt. Following Alexander’s death, a war broke out between his
generals – warlords, chasing the spoils of the empire. Several new king-
doms ensued, and following the initial chaos of civil war, the new order of
the Hellenistic era was surprisingly stable. Of course, the Near East always
had kingdoms. What was new about the Hellenistic kingdoms was that
they were all now ruled, for the ﬁrst time, by monarchs focused on the
Mediterranean. Egypt, in particular, was transformed. The Nile valley was
the most fertile and internally connected region in the ancient world (no
other river could compare as a means of transportation). It was a self-
suﬃcient world unto itself, its wealth sucked up by governing monarchs
setting up the antiquities we still admire. The new Macedonian rulers were
known as the Ptolemaics (all male kings were called Ptolemy; the one
exception was the last queen, Cleopatra, whose death in is often
taken to be the symbolic end of the Hellenistic era). They sought to suck
Egypt’s wealth into a Mediterranean world. Previous Egyptian capitals
were set on the Nile, but the Ptolemaic capital was on Egypt’s
Mediterranean coast, in the new foundation city of Alexandria. This was
the most signiﬁcant boomtown of antiquity. The cornerstones were laid in
; ﬁfty years later, it was already the biggest city in the
Mediterranean, far overshadowing Athens itself.
The key thing is that the Athenian canon could not, now, be replaced.
Everyone grew up on a literary canon that reinforced that culture was this:
charged, violent, public debate. But there was little opportunity for this
kind of behavior in a kingly court. The habits of culture – the historical
pathway – can sometimes become entrenched, and then, when a gap opens
up between the past and the present, one must overwrite the other. The
compelling power of the Athenian canon was such that, even in the face of
monarchic realities, it kept shaping the basic expectations of what culture
was about. And so, because kingly courts could not create rivals to past
public debates, it was the past public debates that were destined to remain.
The Greeks, from this point onward, would stick with the same canon. As
centuries would pass, the ﬁxed position of that canon became even more
entrenched. The Romans could not dislodge it and indeed found

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

themselves imitating the same Athenian canon; it would be bequeathed
further on and would ultimately provide the foundation for modern
European culture. The original choice made in the fourth century – to
canonize Athens – would never be undone.
But notice the consequence: the Greeks now had a cultural memory
that was in sharp contrast to present realities. Hence, ultimately, the
Hellenistic bifurcation.
Suppose you are away from Athens but heir to a culture dominated by
the memory of Athenian performances. What is one’s place, precisely? The
city of Alexandria, in particular, was a city of expats. In its early genera-
tions, almost everyone was an immigrant. Daniel Selden wrote a famous
article on this civilization of Alexandria, titled “Alibis” (looking at the
major poet of the new city, Callimachus). One was away. In this cultural
position, it is natural to become reﬂective, self-aware of one’s position
relative to past culture. As one became reﬂective and aware of genre, it
became common to engage in the deliberate hybridization of genre.
Perhaps the most remarkable tendency, from our perspective, is the
hybridization of pure poetry with more technical prose. One of the most
successful works produced in Alexandria was Aratus’s Phaenomena, a work
that, among other things, took Eudoxus’s astronomical map and put it
into verse! This, indeed, already comes close to mathematics itself. The
relation is reciprocal. Eratosthenes, an Alexandrian poet and mathemati-
cian, wrote a poem on the duplication of the cube; Archimedes produced a
complex problem in numerical calculation as a puzzle in verse (this is
known as the Cattle Problem). In more general terms, when one’s culture
emphasizes a reﬂective, self-aware play with genre, it is perhaps natural that
one would emphasize such values as irony and surprise. Indeed, the poetry
of the Hellenistic era came back into fashion in the late twentieth century.
You see, the Hellenists were postmodernists. (Perhaps, literally so: they
followed, after all, on the heels of Athens’ breathtaking modernity.) Can
mathematics be ironic and surprising? I would argue that it can and that
such, in fact, was the mathematics of the generation of Archimedes.
What matters is not only what mathematics was like but also what it
ceased to be. We therefore need to turn to Athens of the Hellenistic era.
This, too, had to contend with a meaningful past. In Alexandria, the point
was that one was no longer in Athens; in Athens, one was all too Athenian.
Stripped of its political power but enshrined as a cultural model, Athens
could not but fall back upon its cultural memory. It was partly a theater
D. L. Selden, “Alibis,” Classical Antiquity (): –.
I. Prelude to Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

district, partly a college town, and in both ways, it ended up, above all,
conservative. First in tragedy and then also in comedy, one no longer
favored new productions. What the audience wanted was revivals of the
classics. And so it was, again and again: Euripides and Menander. And the
same happened with philosophy, too. Following the topsy-turvy of philo-
sophical innovation throughout the fourth century, each generation bring-
ing forth multiple new doctrines, the city of Athens came to establish four
philosophical schools, now ﬁnally as fully ﬂedged institutions. The school
would have a master, and many active philosophers surrounding him;
many students, from across the Mediterranean, now came to Athens, to
the extent, indeed, that philosophy almost disappeared elsewhere. Why
settle for less than the place of Socrates’s own memory? One could go to
the Academy (based on Plato’s memory), to the Lyceum (based on the
fame of Aristotle), or to two somewhat more recent schools, the Epicurean
Garden and the Stoa. The four schools diﬀered greatly in the details of their
philosophical doctrine but resembled each other in their growing attention
to minutiae internal to the school’s own philosophy. It matters, after all,
whom you talk to (this is the sociological point we emphasized in the
preceding chapter). The members of the Athenian philosophical schools –
much like the members of contemporary academic departments – ended up
talking, above all, to each other. For once, here was a ﬁxed institution, with
its own clear identity. If you were a Stoic, what mattered was the other
Stoics, the members of your own immediate group, with whom you
cohabited and together with whom you had spent so many hours learning
the works of the schools’ founders. Naturally, you would spend almost all of
your life debating the detail of the founders’ work.
What you did not do so much, then, was converse with others. Plato
spoke with Archytas, shaping the encounter of an entire generation. But
throughout the Hellenistic era, philosophers spent much less time on such
conversations with outsiders, and they ceased, in particular, to be much
interested in science. The heirs to Plato came to emphasize the dialectics of
his dialogues, and so they turned ever more to methodology, argument –
indeed, to skepticism (we shall return to notice this particular chain of
changing Platonism in Chapter : Plato will eventually once again be
signiﬁcant for the history of mathematics, as, in fact, he still is today).
The heirs to Aristotle focused almost entirely on ethics and on moral
persuasion. The Epicurean Garden was founded upon Epicurus’s shrill
hatred of the sciences; from this, it didn’t budge. The Stoics were attached
to the naive science of their own founder, Zeno of Citium, and were only
obliquely engaged with any new developments. And so, with the

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

philosophers no longer in contact with anyone outside of Athens, it is
perhaps not very surprising that those outside of Athens drifted away, in
turn, from philosophy. One could perhaps choose to become a philoso-
pher, and then one would go to Athens and dedicate oneself to one of the
schools. But if your passion was science, you would neither go to Athens
nor care very much about what the Athenians had to say. Alexandria, with
its erudite, subtle poetry, was closer. The science of the Hellenistic era was
subtle, surprising, poetic – and unphilosophical. What a contrast to the
generation of Archytas!
II.
Enter Archimedes
Archimedes the Historical Person
Now, for a change in pace. A lot of mathematics will be accomplished over
the next few decades, and for once, a lot is known.
A few precise dates, even. The most precise is Archimedes’s death – 
– at the fall of his city, Syracuse. Recall that Archytas’s Tarentum was
the leading Greek city of its time in the south of the Italian Peninsula.
Archimedes’s Syracuse was the leading Greek city of Sicily. Both areas –
southern Italy and Sicily – were mostly Greek-speaking areas; both cities
were Doric cities in the Greek west, perhaps meaningful.
Among our extant sources for the death of Archimedes is Polybius, a
sober historian who lived through the second century while the memory of
the events was still fresh. (We will revisit Polybius in the following
chapters; he is an important early example for the transformation of
Greek culture under Roman inﬂuence.) Thanks to him, we can be
conﬁdent that Archimedes made an important contribution to the defense
of Syracuse, speciﬁcally by his careful siting of catapults.
The age of Archimedes at death is often reported by modern historians
as seventy-ﬁve.This ﬁgure is based on a statement by Tzetzes, a Byzantine
poet from the twelfth century. It is patent that Tzetzes knows no more
than we do, and the precise age is certainly a poetic embellishment that
needs to be discarded. Polybius, however, does refer to Archimedes as
being an old man during the siege, which suggests he ought to have been at
least about sixty years old. On the other hand, he was also clearly very
active as a military engineer – which suggests he was, perhaps, not much
The best synthesis of the biographical evidence concerning Archimedes remains E. J. Dijksterhuis,
Archimedes (Princeton, : Princeton University Press, []), Chapter .
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

older than sixty. He was most likely born around , perhaps a bit later.
We can add some more to that. For reasons we will consider in the later
discussion, the bulk of Archimedes’s work can be dated to the years
following the death of Conon. As mentioned earlier, we know about one
historical incident in the life of Conon – an astronomer, he named a region
of the sky the “Lock of Berenice,” referring to a Ptolemaic queen. The
circumstances of this naming are known and can be dated to . The
balance of likelihood is that this naming was not quite Conon’s last gasp of
life, and so he died probably closer to or even later. The likelihood,
then, is that the bulk of Archimedes’s work was produced throughout the
years –. (Remember that he spent the last two years of his life in
active war.) It is typical of Greek authors to emerge fully only in somewhat
older age, when they have accumulated the status of respected elders
(although a few mathematicians must have emerged somewhat younger:
so Theaetetus, as well as Eudoxus). There is nothing surprising, then, in
the notion that Archimedes’s work was produced, or at least published,
primarily in his ﬁfth and sixth decades of life. He evidently was a patient
author; we will see some direct evidence for this.
We glimpse something extraordinary: the course of a mathematician’s life.
Even with Archytas – an important political leader! – we did not have such
precision. But there is much more: a series of anecdotes that reveals, at the
very least, how the ancients perceived Archimedes. As I did with Thales and
Pythagoras, my role here is primarily that of a buzzkill. The stories probably
are fabricated. They should be read, however, for the light that such
fabrication may cast on the reality from which they have been carved. Let
me go through some of the stories that circulated fairly early on:
.
The most famous anecdote (and the one that Galileo used to launch
his own career): Archimedes once pondered the case of the goldsmith,
suspected of mixing silver with the gold he was assigned for his job
(pocketing the extra gold). Archimedes found his clever solution –
based on the properties of solids immersed in liquids – while in the
public bath. In his excitement, he ran out naked, crying, “I have
found it! I have found it!”
.
The king once asked Archimedes to help launch the biggest ship in
the world, in competition with those of Alexandria. Archimedes
Each of these stories is told in many variations – as such stories are. A sensitive historical and literary
reading is found in M. Jaeger, Archimedes and the Roman Imagination (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, ). (This, however, only concentrates on the reception in Latin.)

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

devised a mechanism to obtain this end, and as he was pulling on it
and launching the ship, he remarked, “Give me a place to stand and
I shall move the earth.”
.
As the Romans were besieging his city, Archimedes devised machines
to protect the city; these were so eﬀective that the very sight of a rope
would drive the Romans away. The Roman general remarked: “Let us
stop ﬁghting this geometrical Briareus . . . who plays with our sam-
buca” (a pun on an ancient war machine whose name also suggested a
musical instrument).
.
As the city fell, Archimedes told the Roman soldier who had come to
take him, “Move away from my diagrams,” whereupon the soldier
killed him in rage.
In general, when we read the biographies of ancient authors, it becomes
clear that these are not even intended to be fully historical and that instead,
the biographers concoct anecdotes, based on the contents of the authors’
works. This is clearly the case here. The story of the crown is a clear echo of
Archimedes’s study of solids immersed in liquids, On Floating Bodies. (As
Galileo pointed out, the anecdote drastically ﬂattens the actual mathemat-
ical achievement of On Floating Bodies.) The story of the launching of the
ship is a clear echo of Archimedes’s studies concerning balances, among
which we now know, extant, On Balancing Planes. (The principle of the
balance, obtained in On Balancing Planes, is here transformed into the
principle of the lever, although, once again, this is at some remove from
the actual instrument envisaged in the launching of the ship, which must
have been the pulley.) Both are works in mathematical physics, which the
stories tend to make even more engaged with the concrete world; this is
what such stories do. And yet, there is also a sense of Archimedes as the
author of abstract, abstruse mathematics, at a remove from the world: the
Archimedes who does not pay attention to the soldier, concentrating on
his diagrams. All four stories involve the ﬁgure of the wise man, face to face
with raw political power. This is simply the stuﬀof anecdote and, indeed,
the stuﬀof the Greek cultural imagination (everything was about words, in
violent, political encounter). But the image of Archimedes, somehow in
touch with political power, probably had something to do with historical
reality. One of his extant works, the Sand-Reckoner, is addressed to King
Gelon of Syracuse, and after all, Archimedes did have a prominent position
in the defense of his city. He was probably, at the very least, close to the
court. Certainly a member of the elite, he also enjoyed one of the
important advantages of this status – namely, contacts. Recall Plato and
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archytas: members of the Greek elite were always not just creatures
of their own city but also members of relations of friendship that
extended beyond political borders. Archimedes dedicated one extant
work to King Gelon, but he also dedicated another to Eratosthenes, a
librarian in Alexandria; we have an entire extant correspondence with
Dositheus (more on this in the later discussion), and he refers again and
again to his previous correspondence with Conon. It is likely that all
three were related to the Ptolemaic court. A patriotic Syracusan,
Archimedes was deﬁnitely part of the international culture based
on Alexandria.
The key fact is that so much can be gleaned from the extant writings.
With the generation of Archytas, we have only fragments. Much more is
available from the authors in between the generations – we have extant
works from Euclid, Autolycus, and Aristarchus, but these are all entirely
impersonal and (in the cases of Euclid and Autolycus) largely derivative.
But a large corpus survives from Archimedes, and with him, we pass to a
diﬀerent kind of writing. Indeed, the main body of the treatises is written
in the same genre enshrined at least since Archytas – the same diagrams,
the same formulaic language. But preceding many of the treatises, we have
extant letters introducing the mathematical achievement: for once, the
mathematician speaking in his own voice. This will be typical for much of
the mathematics of this generation, and such letters are signiﬁcant, already,
in their social implication. The generation of Archytas may have been
launched by the encounter between Plato and Archytas. The generation of
Archimedes was launched by Archimedes addressing Conon, a mathema-
tician colleague. And out of a letter, from one mathematician to another,
an entire tradition of the writing of mathematics emerged: the
mathematicians’ mathematics.
That letter to Conon, and its aftermath, will provide our entry into
Archimedes’s mathematics. But before we get to that letter, we need to
introduce the scope of the achievement – and of the evidence.
The Works of Archimedes
The survey must start from a series of works sent to Dositheus. This is
because all are introduced by detailed letters that help us ﬁx a chronolog-
ical sequence:
.
Quadrature of the Parabola (abbreviated as QP)
.
Sphere and Cylinder, Book (SC )

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

.
Sphere and Cylinder, Book (SC ) (The titles are misleading: the
two books on SC share a subject matter, and SC assumes certain
results proved in SC , but the two are essentially independent
treatises.)
.
Spiral Lines (SL)
.
Conoids and Spheroids (CS)
All ﬁve books engage with the measurement of curvilinear objects: the
segment contained between a straight line and a parabola (), the surface
and volume of a sphere (and ), the area contained between and a spiral
and its line of origin – and the length of the spiral (), volumes of conoids
of revolution (). We shall return to discuss some of these in depth,
especially Spiral Lines, which I will take as something of the paradigm of
Archimedean measurements.
The introductions to the works in the series refer, from its beginning, to
Conon’s death. A few other works by Archimedes appear to postdate this
sequence. If we assume that it comes fairly early following Conon’s death
and that the works were spaced apart by, say, at least two years
(Archimedes emphasizes the passage of time), we can envisage this
sequence through the years –or so.
Another extant work is addressed to Eratosthenes:
.
The Method (Meth.)
The standard English translation of this title is somewhat misleading
(in the original, it means, rather, “the approach,” “the line of attack”).
The main thrust of the work is to review previously published work,
mostly related to the series to Dositheus, and provide alternative proofs,
based on a certain technique to which we will turn later on, when we
discuss the treatise in detail. Archimedes explicitly states that he relied
on such alternative proofs for the very ﬁnding of his previously pub-
lished results, so he probably knew the contents of the work early on,
but the publication of the work must have come late in his career,
probably closer to . To a comparably late date, we can probably
assign also:
.
On Floating Bodies (FB and )
This is Archimedes’s hydrostatics (and much more), a work divided into
two volumes (which, however, are, in this case, merely the two segments of
a single work). The work, in its current state, is not addressed to any
individual. It does assume signiﬁcant mathematical results, obtained
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

through works by Archimedes that are no longer extant. It must come
from Archimedes’s ﬁnal years (once again, we will revisit this in detail
later on).
Other extant works are harder to date. These include the following:
.
On Balancing Planes (PE and )
Archimedes’s statics (and much more) is once again a single work, divided
into two volumes – and in fact, it is, in many ways, parallel in structure to
On Floating Bodies. In general, it seems likely that FB was designed to be
an echo of PE. (We note how Archimedes plots his career, with works
building up in sequences.) This would make PE earlier than FB – which,
however, does not teach us much. In all likelihood, it is later than QP
(because in PE , Archimedes relies on the measurement of the area of the
parabolic segment). It is hard to say anything about the dates of the
remaining extant works:
.
Measurement of Circle (DC)
.
Sand-Reckoner (Aren.)
.
Cattle Problem (Bov.)
The ﬁrst is a brief study of, well, the measurement of the circle (with
Archimedes’s good approximation of p). It is very brief and perhaps
mutilated, and at any rate, it contains no introduction. It is somewhat
simple for Archimedes, and so past scholars tended to assume it was early –
indeed, why not start with the most famous problem of them all, the
squaring of the circle? (I will return to say a little more about the overall
strategy of this treatise on pages –.) The second is the one addressed
to King Gelon – a medley of sorts, involving both the theory of calculation
and astronomy. Gelon was born about and died in , so this, once
again, tells us nothing about the date. The third is a poem containing an
arithmetical problem, surviving through a collection of Greek poetry; it is
probably genuine, but it is hard to situate it any further.
What we do note is that even just counting the extant works,
Archimedes has written a lot. We also note two major themes: the
measurement of curvilinear ﬁgures and the physical world. We note the
planned structuring of works across an entire career. And we also note that
there is a lot that is harder to classify!
This becomes clearer as we bring in other works that Archimedes
certainly produced but that are now known only in fragmentary form or
through intermediate testimony:

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

.
Stomachion (Stom.)
This is the most extant of all the nonextant works by Archimedes. A brief
testimony survives in Arabic, but – much more signiﬁcant – the ﬁrst page
survives within the Archimedes Palimpsest (on which, of course, more later
in this chapter and in Chapter ). This fragment was fully read only very
recently, and it now seems possible that the treatise involves the counting
of the number of ways in which a certain geometrical task may be fulﬁlled
(a combinatorial study, then, although mostly a simple calculation, based
on geometrical observations). This is somewhat reminiscent of:
.
Semi-Regular Solids
Pappus reports in detail the result obtained by Archimedes, according to
which there are exactly thirteen semiregular solids. What are these? Well,
the ﬁve regular solids (the topic of Elements ) are such where all the
faces are the same regular polygon; all the faces meet in exactly the same
vertex combination. A cube is a simple example (six squares, with each
vertex having three squares orthogonal to each other). In semiregular
solids, the demand that all faces be the same regular polygons is relaxed,
and one has, instead, various regular polygons as faces. It is still required,
however, that they meet, always, in exactly the same vertex combination.
The rhombicuboctahedron – with each vertex as the meeting of three
squares and one triangle – is probably the easiest to picture (see the
following image), but many of the forms are much harder, and one
wonders if Archimedes pictured them to himself at all. (How about a
combination of thirty squares, twenty hexagons, and twelve decagons?)
Pappus provides the speciﬁcations for the thirteen solids. Those speciﬁca-
tions are correct, and those are all the nontrivial semiregular solids (other-
wise, any prism based on any regular polygon is a semiregular solid in a
somewhat trivial sense; it is not known how Archimedes ruled them out).
One concludes that Archimedes must have obtained a proof that these are
all the “real” semiregular solids there are. This proof Pappus does not
report, and the earliest to rediscover this (very diﬃcult) proof was Kepler,
in the seventeenth century (and even he would have found it much harder
to determine the proof, had he not had Pappus’s report with its correct set
of all such solids).So, once again: a complicated – indeed, amazing –
geometrical calculation.
The story of the rediscovery of the Archimedean solids is told by J. V. Field, “Rediscovering the
Archimedean Polyhedra: Piero della Francesca, Luca Pacioli, Leonardo da Vinci, Albrecht Du¨rer,
Daniele Barbaro, and Johannes Kepler,” Archive for History of Exact Sciences (): –.
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Figure 
Another lost work is reported by Pappus, and in this case, it can be
dated, in rough terms, to late in Archimedes’s career:
.
Alternative Spiral Lines
Pappus provides, in this case, the outline of the main proof (and we will
indeed consider this in detail later on). To recall, in the extant Method,
Archimedes revisited previous results and described how they could have
been obtained alternatively, through a less rigorous technique. This tech-
nique discussed in the Method applied for many of Archimedes’s past
results but not to Alternative Spiral Lines. Instead, Archimedes dedicated,
apparently, a separate (small?) treatise to showing just that: how a less
rigorous technique – diﬀerent from that of the Method – was used by him
to derive a result concerning spirals. Because this work evidently looks
back at a (late) piece of the correspondence with Dositheus, it must be
fairly late itself, as well. The opposite is true of the following:
.
On Balances
This produced results akin to those of On Balancing Planes but derived
in a more directly mechanical way (considering not the abstract propor-
tions of the law of the balance, but concrete balances). It appears that it
was this treatise that could have been a tool used in Quadrature of the
Parabola, the ﬁrst of the works sent to Dositheus; if so, it could be a
distinctly early work, which makes its more “mechanical” nature intriguing
(note, however, that our sense of the work is very ﬂimsy: all dependent on
an interpretation of a few passages in Quadrature of the Parabola).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three more works are also dependent on internal references, which,
however, provide few clues:
.
To Zeuxippus (a treatise on calculation, referred to in Sand-Reckoner)
Unfortunately, we have no idea when the Sand-Reckoner was written! It
does appear that Archimedes wrote a more formal statement of his original
numerical system, however.
.
On the Centers of Weights of Solids (a treatise where one found the
centers of the weight of solids, referred to in Meth.)
This tells us little chronologically because the Method is certainly very
late. It is interesting (but not surprising) that Archimedes extended the
study of the centers of weights of planes – the subject of On Balancing
Planes – to the study of the centers of weights of solids. (It seems likely that
this would be published later than On Balancing Planes, then.)
There is also the following:
.
An appendix to SC , solving a particular problem implied by the
treatise
This, ﬁnally, need not be considered entirely lost: Eutocius, in a late
commentary to Archimedes, claims that he has found this treatise, and he
quotes at least a portion of it verbatim, perhaps with his own additions.
I shall return to this episode on pages –. If this was at all published
by Archimedes, the publication must have postdated that of Sphere and
Cylinder .
The following are even harder to place:
.
Arbelos
Pappus also reports that Archimedes has introduced, and found surpris-
ing results concerning, a special object, derived from certain combinations
of circles (comparable, in a way, to Hippocrates’s lunules), called the
“Arbelos.” (Archimedes’s own naming? The word refers to a kind of knife.
In general, note the fancy titles found throughout Archimedes’s corpus –
we catch, already, a glimpse of a certain playful attitude.)
.
Heptagon
Arabic sources report that Archimedes produced a construction of the
regular heptagon. Although the attribution is late, Arab sources do seem to
know a good deal about Archimedes. The construction is complicated and
ingenious, and it is hard to see why, had it been by someone other than
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes himself, it was not properly claimed. (A few more works are
attested similarly via the Arabic tradition, of which the likeliest to have an
actual Archimedean source are On Tangent Circles, On Lemmas, and On
Assumptions. None is certain, but then again, had it not been for the
Palimpsest fragment, we would likely have dismissed the Arabic testimony
on the Stomachion, as well.)
Further, Greek authors sometimes refer to results by Archimedes that
are not to be found in the extant corpus. They could be mistaken in each
given instance, but the evidence does add up to suggest the loss of several
additional contributions to pure geometry, perhaps as follows:
.
On the Measure of a Circle (Or are those references to an original,
more expansive edition of what we now have as DC? But then again,
we do note Archimedes’s habit of returning to the same subject from
diﬀerent angles: Why not multiple works on the measurement of the
circle, then?)
.
On Plinths and Cylinders
.
On Irregular Surfaces and Solids (Or is it the same as the reference by
Pappus to semiregular solids?)
There are also references to work going beyond pure geometry, expand-
ing Archimedes’s scope even further: perhaps the following:
.
Mechanics (This would be one that engages not just with the theo-
retical concept of the center of the weight but also with its actual
mechanical signiﬁcance. Or is this the same as On Balances?)
.
Catoptrics (This, we are told, was an especially large work, and
apparently, it was foundational to Greek thinking about the theory
of reﬂection and refraction; I return to this on pages –).
.
Sphere-Making (This, most likely, described the making of a
mechanical planetarium, almost certainly comparable, in some sense,
to the Antikythera mechanism, to which we will return in Chapter .
It seems that Archimedes produced such a planetarium himself, and
indeed, the idea of such a device became associated with his name. It
is possible that ancient reports that Archimedes measured the length
of the year belong to a treatise such as this, but it is also possible that
he produced such measurements in yet other lost treatises: Aren.,
too, includes its own astronomical measurements.)
There is some fuzziness in the numbers, surely with some double-
counting already, so I will stop here. Even with such double-counting,
twenty-six is surely an undercount of the original number of works (it is
clear, from what we have seen, that the distribution of Archimedes’s corpus

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

carries a long tail of works attested only once or twice; there must have
been many more, now attested zero times). Most of Archimedes’s career,
I argue, has to be ﬁtted within twenty years or so. Throughout this period,
he would have sent out, perhaps, two treatises a year – perhaps more? –
sometimes very substantial, always breathtakingly brilliant. Let us go back
to pursue this correspondence, starting with Archimedes’s own, most
explicit account. We start with the introduction to Spiral Lines and
Archimedes’s report on the letter to Conon.
The Challenge of Archimedes
Here is Archimedes himself, in the letter to Dositheus introducing Spiral
Lines:
Archimedes to Dositheus, Greetings.
Of those theorems dispatched to Conon, about which you keep sending
me letters asking that I write down the proofs – many you have, written
down in the books conveyed by Heracleides, while some I send you, having
written them down as well in this book.
[By “Theorems dispatched to Conon,” Archimedes means a set of state-
ments that he has produced, as claims without proof, in a letter sent to
Conon quite a few years back. These included, for instance, the bold claim
that “the area of a spiral is one-third the circle” (more on this later on),
stating that Archimedes possesses a proof of that bold claim, withholding
the proof – and demanding others to show their mettle by trying to produce
their own proofs. When Archimedes says that Dositheus has many of those
already, this is because Spiral Lines is a late work: it was sent to Dositheus
after Quadrature of the Parabola; Sphere and Cylinder Books and were
sent already. Several of these works contribute to Archimedes’s proofs of the
theorems originally sent to Conon as challenges.]
Nor should you wonder why I took such a long time publishing their
proofs: this came about because I wanted to allow those who busy them-
selves with mathematics to take up studying those theorems ﬁrst. For how
many of the theorems in geometry appear not to go along the right lines at
ﬁrst, to the one who eventually perfects them? Conon passed away without
taking suﬃcient time for their study; otherwise he would have made them
all clear, discovering them as well as many others, while advancing geometry
a great deal: for we know that his mathematical understanding was extraor-
dinary, his diligence unsurpassed.
In the following sections, Archimedes’s Spiral Lines serves as entry point to Archimedes’s scientiﬁc
personality. The work is translated in R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and
Commentary, vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ). The passage cited here is on
pages –.
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

With many years now having passed since Conon’s death, we are not aware
of even a single problem being set in motion, not by a single person.
[The respect given to Conon seems real enough. It is also evident that the
entire series of letters to Dositheus – starting from Quadrature of the
Parabola – must have begun well after Conon’s death, hence not earlier
than about . What is most important is the overall competitive
thrust. Archimedes names, and respects, the dead Conon, but toward his
living contemporaries, his attitude is of ﬁerce competition – and hardly a
respectful one. Which is, indeed, how the letter to Conon came about: as a
competitive challenge. That apparently no one took up! It was, after all, the
in-between generation . . .]
I also wish to set out each of them, one by one. For it happens that [there
are] a certain two of the [theorems] in it [= the letter to Conon], not
distinguished apart but added at the end, so that those who claim to ﬁnd all
of them, but publish none of their [= the theorems’] proofs, would be
refuted by promising to ﬁnd solutions to impossible theorems. So I now
ﬁnd it appropriate to make clear which are those problems, and which of
them are those whose proofs you have (which were sent to you already), and
which I convey in this book.
[This is perhaps the strangest twist. The competitive nature of the letter to
Conon was real and not very amicably intentioned, either. Archimedes, of
course, made a bold claim: “I have provided proof to all those results.” But
at the same time, he asked much more of his potential respondents: to play
the game, they had to provide the actual proofs explicitly. But of course,
nothing prevented them from simply asserting – repeating Archimedes’s
own bold assertion – that they, too, have found those results, perhaps even
independently. To prevent this – Archimedes now reveals in retrospect – he
planted two poisoned results. Two of the claims were wrong, so anyone
claiming to have proved them all would be revealed as a fraud. Furthermore,
as a kind of insurance against anyone revealing the falsity of the poisoned
claims and implying that Archimedes made an error, Archimedes started
out by positioning the false claims in the wrong order (to provide some
credibility to his counterclaim, in such case, that he knew all along that the
claims were false and planted them deliberately).]
I go through this letter in detail because it is our most signiﬁcant
evidence for the sociology of Archimedes’s mathematics: a competitive
network. But of course, this means nothing until we get from the sociology
to the mathematics. Just what are the claims made in this letter? And how
are the two, sociology and mathematics, connected? How does the nature
of Archimedes’s communication help to explain what Archimedes found
worthy of communication?
There is a clear line passing through the entirety of the correspondence
with Dositheus – beginning already with Quadrature of the Parabola.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Not on the list of promised results: the very ﬁrst item in this correspon-
dence, sent out while Archimedes was still waiting for responses to his
challenge, was an “extra,” so to speak, whetting the readers’ appetite in
preparation for the big reveals.)
In Quadrature of the Parabola, Archimedes’s main result is that a
segment of a parabola (the area contained between a parabolic line and a
line cutting through it) is /the triangle it contains (whose base is the line
cutting the parabola and whose vertex is the vertex of the diameter
bisecting that base line). This result is obtained twice: once in a surprising
approach that involves weighing slices of the parabolic segments on
conceptual balances and then in another that is purely geometrical.
(I will brieﬂy return to this work – with its physical overtones – on pages
–.)
In the next item in the correspondence, Sphere and Cylinder, Book –
which creates the tools for dealing with a part of the challenge sent to
Conon but does not yet solve any of its problems – Archimedes’s key
results are the measurements of the surface and volume of a sphere. Its
surface is four times the great circle in the sphere; its volume is four times
the cone whose base is the great circle; and its height, the radius of the
sphere. This is then expanded to results concerning the areas and volumes
of a segment of a sphere.
In Sphere and Cylinder Book , Archimedes ﬁnally provided solutions
to some problems set out in the challenge. Some are straightforward once
SC I is available (for instance, to ﬁnd a sphere equal to a given cone), but
some are still very hard: for instance, to divide a sphere into two segments
so that their ratio is a given one. (Recall that Euclid, in his Divisions, was
solving this type of problem for a much simpler case: plane, rectilinear
ﬁgures.) Especially diﬃcult arguments are those refuting (implicitly) the
wrong claims of the letter to Conon. For instance, one of the false claims
was (in modern paraphrase) that if a sphere is divided into two segments,
with volumes V, Vand surfaces S, S, then V:V::S
:S
. Archimedes
shows that, in fact,
S1
1:5 : S2
1:5 < V 1 : V 2 < S1
2 : S2
2:
(Yes, Archimedes has a concept equivalent to “the exponent ..”)
Spiral Lines – from whose introduction we started – came next. It
contains two key results. First, the area contained between a single rotation
of a spiral line, as well as the line at the origin of the spiral, is one-third the
circle circumscribing that spiral. (To recall: later yet in his career,
Archimedes would reveal an alternative, heuristic way in which he had
obtained this very result. All of this we will review in detail later on.)
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1
3
THE
CIRCLE
Figure 
Second, in a conﬁguration such as that in Figure , if QZ is a tangent
to the spiral at the point Q and AZ is perpendicular to the line AQ at the
origin of the spiral, then AZ is a line equal to the circumference of the
circle that circumscribes the spiral line.
Z
Q
A
Figure 
Both results are expanded to several more complex (but essentially
equivalent) cases where instead of considering a single rotation of the
spiral, we consider several rotations of the spiral or even positions obtained
in between full rotations.
Finally – Conoids and Spheroids. The title refers to various solids
obtained from the rotations of conic sections. Take a parabola – or a
hyperbola – and cut it with a line passing orthogonally to the axis. Now
rotate it around that axis, and you get a solid. In the case of a parabola, this
will be of a more pointed shape; in the case of the hyperbola, this may be
more bowl-like. Either way, you get a curved shape with a ﬂat base – so, a
little like a cone. Hence the name, conoid. Or you can take an ellipse and
rotate it around one of its axes; the result, a symmetrical egg shape, will be

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

curved all around and so a little like a sphere, hence the name spheroid.
Archimedes is typically interested in segments of spheroids, which are
therefore not all that diﬀerent, visually, from conoids. Archimedes shows
that a conoid is .times (in volume) the cone it contains (namely, the one
having the same base and the same vertex), and he shows that a segment of
a spheroid is twice (in volume) the cone it contains (namely, having the
same base and the same vertex). All the results are shown ﬁrst for the case
discussed earlier – cuts perpendicular to the axes – and are then expanded
to the case of an oblique cut.
In each treatise (but also through the correspondence as a whole), there is
an emphasis on doing more than one thing. A proof for the area of the
parabola – and yet another. The surface of the sphere – but also its volume –
but also both, for sectors. The area of the spiral (but not only that – let’s also
throw in the line equal to the circumference of the circle), but also the
same for cases with more, or less, than a single rotation. Conoids, but also
spheroids – but also the same, for oblique segments. “You won’t believe what
I can do.” Followed by several iterations of, “And yet, I can do even more.”
The series ranges widely but is also narrowly deﬁned: measure curvilin-
ear objects in terms of simpler objects. The objects may be more or less far-
fetched, but they all seem, at ﬁrst glance, to defy measurement.
Speciﬁcally, they all seem rather like the circle. And yet, Archimedes
accomplishes their measurement – and then some.
And so, even at this overview, at some distance from the mathematical
detail, a clear pattern emerges: engaging with maximally puzzling, appar-
ently intractable tasks – with the supremely surprising, and therefore
supremely satisfying, result that the tasks can be fulﬁlled. This is, indeed,
competitive mathematics, seeking surprise above all. The mathematics – in
line with the sociology.
Closer to the Spiral
When I say that results are remarkable or surprising, this means nothing
without a sense of the actual mathematics. It would be impossible to
survey all of Archimedes’s achievements, but we must have at least one
closer look. I choose a relatively simple but spectacular achievement: the
measurement of the area of the spiral (the simpler of the two key achieve-
ments of the treatise Spiral Lines).
Imagine an analog watch with a minute hand. Let it start at the top (the
hour ) and rotate for a full circle – for an entire minute. Meanwhile,
imagine that there’s a dot – you can imagine it as a minute ant – that starts
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

out at the center of the watch, right at the bottom of the minute hand.
Imagine that it crawls, at uniform speed, along the minute hand, from the
bottom to the top, just as the hand keeps rotating. At the beginning of the
minute, the ant is precisely at the center of the circle; at the end, the ant is
precisely at its top. And through the minute, the ant had drawn a spiral line.
We can further imagine the area contained between: this spiral and the
beginning (or end) position of the minute hand. This area, Archimedes
proves, is exactly one-third of the circle.
Archimedes follows the basic proof – for the case of a simple rotation –
with proofs for the more confusing situations arising with several rotations
or the position of a spiral in mid-rotation. Although more confusing, the
proofs of those cases are direct extensions of the same case, and so, to
simplify my account, I will concentrate on just the basic proof for a single
rotation. To clarify, then: what follows is a brief account of the simpler
case, of the simpler proof, of Archimedes’s Spiral Lines.
The result in question is obtained in proposition of Spiral Lines: the
curved area marked by the spiral and the beginning line is one-third of the
circle. How is this achieved?
From the perspective of a reader trying to follow Archimedes’s proof, it
matters that there are two strands of proof – not only the one concerning
the area but also the one (as noted on p. ) concerning the ﬁnding of a
line equal to the circumference of a circle. The two strands of proof are, in
fact, independent – neither argument depends on claims required by
the other (other, that is, than the basic deﬁnition of the spiral). That the
treatise will touch on both results is made clear in the introduction.
The information, however, that they are logically independent is crucially
withheld from the reader; nor is it ever made clear, while reading the text,
which train of thought is pursued at any given moment.
The reader is ﬁrst provided with two propositions (and ) in the
geometry of points in motion on a line. (These have only a very general
bearing on the results at hand, which is typical: an Archimedean treatise often
begins with near-trivial, nearly irrelevant results, so to speak, lulling the
reader.) This is followed by two propositions (and ) concerning the
ﬁnding of lines greater or smaller than given lines or circumferences, and
then by very speciﬁc propositions (–) concerning the ﬁnding of lines,
positioned between circles and other lines, so that they fulﬁll certain pro-
portions. These are meaningful propositions already, but their function is not
yet clear. Even less clear is the function of the following propositions and
, which are unlike anything else in Greek mathematics. To give a sense of
the complexity, I will need to cite the general statement of proposition :

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

If however many lines are set in order, exceeding each other by an equal
[diﬀerence], and the excess is equal to the smallest [line], and other lines are
set equal to them [= the lines exceeding each other] in number while, in
magnitude, each is equal to the greatest [line] [= among the lines exceeding
each other], the squares on the [lines] equal to the greatest [line] [= among
the lines exceeding each other], adding on both: the square on the greatest
[line], and the [rectangle] contained by both: the smallest [line] [= among
the lines exceeding each other], and the [line] equal to all the [lines]
exceeding each other by an equal [diﬀerence] – shall be three times all the
squares that are on the [lines] exceeding each other by an equal [diﬀerence].
This is nearly impenetrable, and the proof for this claim is as opaque, if not
more so. One has to read this proposition with inﬁnite patience merely to
understand what it means, let alone to follow its logic. Tucked at the end is
a corollary; I shall return to explain its meaning immediately.
Following on this strange interlude of propositions and , the text
of Spiral Lines proceeds to the business of proving the result concerning
the line drawn to the tangent. This is a diﬃcult, subtle sequence of proofs,
culminating in the series of propositions (for the case of the single
rotation), , and (for more complicated cases).
Following that, in propositions –, a new idea altogether is devel-
oped. This is best explained in the case of the single, complete rotation
(proposition ). I will follow this argument in paraphrase, avoiding
Archimedes’s rigorous (and less accessible) approach and supplying,
instead, a more intuitive account.
Suppose you have the spiral in its rotation, inscribed within a circle. You
can draw lines from the center of the circle, with ﬁxed angles between
them, which then divide the circle into equal sectors (“pizza slices”). Each
also takes a slice out of the spiral area.
Figure 
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Now add the following: every time a line cuts through the spiral, draw
there a two-arc circumference, such as OLM, around the point L; PNR,
around the point N; and so forth. The outcome is that alongside the big
sectors of the circle, we also have a sequence of smaller sectors surrounding
the spiral line.
O
Q
A
K
L
M
N
R
P
Figure 
We may consider in particular two combinations of such sectors. We
may consider the combination that exactly circumscribes the spiral area:
adding up the sectors QAK and QLM and QNR, and so forth. And we
may consider the combination that is exactly inscribed inside the spiral
area: adding up the sectors QOL, QPN, and so forth.
What is the diﬀerence between the two combinations of sectors, the
circumscribing and the inscribed? Well, we can follow this sector by sector.
The diﬀerence will be the ring sector KAOL, and then the ring sector
MLPN, and so forth. And the thought suggests itself: I can rotate the ring
sector MLPN so that it snugly ﬁts just underneath the ring sector KAOL.
And I can do so repeatedly for all the ring sectors. Then they will all ﬁt
inside the single sector QAK. And this means that the sum of all such ring
sectors – the sum of the diﬀerence between the circumscribing and
circumscribed combinations of sectors – is equal to QAK or, simply, to
a single sector of the circle.
Because one can take any division of the circle into however many
equal sectors (one may cut the pizza into as many slices as one wishes),
each individual sector can become as thin as we wish. And because

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the diﬀerence between the circumscribing set and the inscribed set is equal
to a single sector, this also means that we can make the diﬀerence between
the circumscribing set and the inscribed set as small as we wish. Thus, we
have been given, right now, an algorithm that allows us to ﬁnd sector
combinations, circumscribing and inscribed within the spiral area, such
that their diﬀerences are smaller than any given magnitude. (All of this, of
course, rings somewhat familiar to anyone who has worked with limits and
the calculus, which is, ultimately, because limits and the calculus are ways
of making sense of Archimedes; more on this in Chapter .)
This, then, is achieved in proposition (with more complicated
variations for situations other than a complete, single rotation in proposi-
tions and ).
With this, Archimedes can ﬁnally spring into action, and proposition
proves the main result. Here is how this goes (once again, somewhat
paraphrasing to make the argument more accessible). Our goal, to recall, is
to prove that the spiral area is exactly one-third of the circumscribing
circle. Now, says Archimedes, let us assume this is not the case. Well, then,
the spiral area will either be greater or smaller.
Let us assume that it is smaller. (I provide an overview of only this
horn of the dilemma; Archimedes deals with both exhaustively, but the
one line of argument is, in fact, not hard to transfer into the other.) Well,
because the spiral area is smaller than one-third of the circle, it is smaller
than that by a certain given magnitude. We have an algorithm for that! As
you recall, proposition shows how to create circumscribing and
inscribed areas around the spiral line so that their diﬀerence is smaller
than any given magnitude. So, this is what we shall now do: draw the
circumscribing and the inscribed ﬁgures so that their diﬀerence is
smaller than the amount by which the spiral area is smaller than one-
third of the circle:
circumscribing figure
ð
Þ  inscribed figure
ð
Þ < 1=3 the circle
ð
Þ  spiral area
ð
Þ:
(This kind of typographic setting out of the argument is necessary for
modern readers; Greek readers, trained on the formulaic language of Greek
mathematics, picked up the argument without such symbols.)
If the diﬀerence between the circumscribing and the inscribed ﬁgures is
smaller than the given magnitude, then, of course, the same is true for the
even smaller diﬀerence between the circumscribing and the spiral area
itself:
circumscribing figure
ð
Þ  spiral area
ð
Þ < 1=3 the circle
ð
Þ  spiral area
ð
Þ:
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The obvious conclusion is that the circumscribing ﬁgure, composed of
sectors, is smaller than one-third of the circle. This much is settled:
circumscribing figure
ð
Þ < 1=3 the circle
ð
Þ:
At this point, Archimedes quickly recalls the language of proposition 
(still opaque to the reader!) and concludes that this is impossible. This is
both amazing and frustrating, and so we will now make a long detour to
understand what, on earth, Archimedes is even doing. I emphasize: the
following explanation is all missing from Archimedes himself and has to be
supplied by the reader!
And so, let us think a little more, to begin with, about the circumscrib-
ing ﬁgure. It is composed of sectors, all with equal angles but with diﬀerent
lengths. The lengths, in fact, form an arithmetical progression – they
became longer by a ﬁxed amount in each step. We may recall one of the
very ﬁrst observations we made, with Hippocrates of Chios’s lunules: plane
ﬁgures scale in a ﬁxed manner, according to the square of their sides. If
I double the side of the square, the square itself will be four times greater;
by a related logic, if I double the side of the sector but keep its angle ﬁxed,
its area will be four times greater and, in general, a series of areas of sectors
cut from the same circle, all with the same angle, will behave as the series of
squares on the sides of those sectors. This means that the area of the series
of the sectors, circumscribing the spiral area, behaves like the sum of
squares on an arithmetical progression. If the area of the smallest sector
in this series is , the area of the one following will be , then , then ,
and so forth..
But wait! Recall the impenetrable proposition . It starts out with, “If
however many lines are set in order, exceeding each other by an equal
[diﬀerence], and the excess is equal to the smallest [line]” – stop right
there! That’s an arithmetical progression; this is the same as lines with
length , , , , and so forth. Proposition then ends with a certain
complicated combination: “three times all the squares that are on the
[lines] exceeding each other by an equal [diﬀerence]” – that is, three times
the series of squares on lines , , , , and so forth or three times the series
, , , , and so forth.
In fact, the corollary tucked into proposition provides the result we
require. This is that the sum of the squares on all the lines equal to the
greatest line is less than one-third of the sum of the squares on the lines
exceeding each other.
Let us unpack this in our own algebraic way. Let us say there are n lines.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

They form an arithmetical progression from to n. The greatest, then,
is n. And there are n of them. The square on this greatest line is obviously
n, and so adding together the n of those, we get n.
The sum of the squares on the lines are like the following:
1 þ 4 þ 9 þ 16 þ . . . þ n2


:
The claim of proposition , transformed into our own algebraical sym-
bolism, is
n3 < 3  1 þ 4 þ 9 þ 16 þ . . . þ n2


:
Now, let us recall once again the precise arrangement with the circle and its
sectors. In proposition , the circle is divided into many equal sectors; let
us say n sectors. There is also a sequence of sectors, gradually growing,
circumscribing the spiral.
The sectors out of which the circle is made are all equal to each other
and also equal to the greatest of the sectors circumscribing the spiral. (They
are all equal to QAK.) There are n of those.
The areas of the sectors circumscribing the spiral are, as pointed out
earlier, like the squares on an arithmetical progression: they are like , ,
, , . . . n, and their sum is obviously like þ þ þ . . . n. This
is the area of the circumscribing ﬁgure.
Meanwhile, QAK is the biggest of those sectors, and it behaves, in this
context, like n. (Always taking the area of the smallest sector as our unit.)
The circle is made of n of those, and so the area of the circle behaves, in
this case, surprisingly, according to a cube value n  nor n.
To repeat: if the sum of the areas of the sectors circumscribing the spiral
area is þ þ þ þ . . . þ n, then the area of the circle is n.
What remains is obvious, although still remarkable. It has been proved
in proposition in general terms – in opaque, impenetrable, and unmo-
tivated terms – that
n3 < 3  12 þ 22 þ 32 þ 42 þ . . . þ n2


,
and from this, it follows that three times the circumscribed ﬁgure is greater
than the circle. This, indeed, directly contradicts the hypothesis, and so
Archimedes is justiﬁed in concluding that the spiral area is not smaller than
one-third of the circle.
To repeat: most of this detour is an explanation added by me and is
missing from Archimedes’s text. This is not because Archimedes is less
than rigorous: he clearly wants us to be ﬂustered. Indeed, he very
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

rigorously goes on to produce the analogous (but nonidentical) argument
for the assumption that the spiral area is greater than one-third of the circle
(one now will need to look at the sectors inscribed in the spiral area and
apply proposition somewhat diﬀerently). And once both sides of the
argument are completed – once both options, “smaller” and “greater,” are
eliminated – only one option remains: the spiral area must be precisely
one-third of the circle.
This is the argument of Spiral Lines, proposition . It is clearly harder
than most of the mathematics we have seen so far; for instance, all of the
foregoing relies on proposition , which I have black-boxed. The actual
proof of proposition is devilishly hard, and I did not clarify at all how
Archimedes came to suspect that it might be true (more on this to come).
So far, even complex arguments, such as Archytas’s duplication of the
cube, could be made accessible at one go, so to speak. This is no longer the
case – providing the sense that this is the mathematicians’ mathematics,
the kind of mathematics that demands professional commitment.
But not only that: the argument is not merely hard; it is also subtle
and surprising.
It is subtle in that it makes the most, in an inventive way, of small details.
There is an economy to the argument: everything ﬂows out of the key clever
thought – considering the circle as a series of sectors with equal angles. This
gives rise to the series of sectors circumscribing and inscribed around the
spiral line, which, marvelously, contributes twice to the main argument.
First, the sectors are arranged in consecutive, equal increments, and those
increments of increase can be added up and be made equal to a single full
circle sector. Hence, the two series – the circumscribed and the inscribed –
diﬀer from each other exactly by a single full sector, from which it follows,
ﬁnally, that the diﬀerence between the circumscribed and the inscribed can
be made as small as we wish. This is the argument of proposition , and it
provides the possibility of a proof by contradiction, by “squeezing” an area in
between the two areas that are assumed (impossibly) to be unequal to each
other. But more than this: because the sectors are arranged in consecutive,
equal increments, we can use an entirely distinct line of attack and apply
proposition , considering the properties of (in modern terms) the squares
on an arithmetical progression. The circle, reimagined as a conﬁguration of
sectors, is a brilliant conceptualization – with a double payoﬀ.
But more than this: the conceptualization is not incidental to our object
of study; in fact, it gets right to its essence. The entire point about spiral
lines, we get to realize, is a certain geometrical proportion: equal angles
correspond with equal linear increments.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Said like this, a modern reader may begin to have a glimmer of an
understanding of the logical order in which Spiral Lines is produced. But
such a statement is, in fact, anachronistic in a sense. Of course, Archimedes
does get to the essence of spirals, and he teases out their properties in a
brilliant, subtle way. But he does not aim to help the reader understand
how all that is done. Instead, Archimedes aims at surprise. The key point is
that as proposition is introduced, Archimedes makes all eﬀorts to
disguise its potential application. It is sandwiched between unrelated
results, and it is presented in opaque language, its key takeaway relegated
to a corollary. The key observation – that the sectors in a circle behave as
the series of squares on an arithmetical progression – is not asserted in
advance. Instead, the application of proposition is postponed and
revealed only at the very last minute when, introduced in the middle of
proposition , it ﬁnally makes sense of the argument. (To recall, in my
own presentation, I made your life too easy: Archimedes never explains
how proposition applies.) Everything is designed for the sake of this
denouement where, ﬁnally, the narrative of the treatise would make sense
in a surprising turn. Ugly, misshapen proposition is really about sectors
in spirals: the duckling was a swan all along!
The idea that this treatise has a narrative is not a metaphor. One comes
out of treatises such as Spiral Lines with the sense that these are carefully
crafted works. Which indeed ﬁts together with Archimedes – the author of
the letter to Conon – devising a plan and then gradually, patiently
executing it in the series of treatises sent to Dositheus. Across his career
as a whole, and then in the detail of each individual argument, we see the
same, again and again: an extraordinarily precise author, aiming through-
out at subtlety and surprise.
Eudoxus, Inspiration to Archimedes
We are historians, and we look for explanations. And so, the context
matters. Recall our vignette of cultural life in the third century , away
from Athens, centered around new cities such as Alexandria. It was a time,
and place, of ironic reﬂection. The literature of the Hellenistic era was
“postmodernist,” I said. Subtlety and surprise: those would come naturally.
Callimachus sent out pointed epigrams, teasing rival poets; he was famous
for his clever and subtle juxtaposition of historical lore in his poem, the
Aetia, a mosaic of various pieces of erudition, wandering across the Greek
Mediterranean, seemingly haphazardly, the one constant being the ironic
point of view of the scholar-poet. The last of these vignettes told the
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sublimely ironic tale of Conon ﬁnding a lock of hair in the sky.Why
would Archimedes not be inspired by such poetry – which clearly inspired
his entire generation?
This is certainly a part of the answer. But we need to do better than this.
We need to ﬁnd Archimedes’s mathematical inspiration. In this regard,
perhaps we should trust Archimedes himself. It is not surprising, I would
say, that this inspiration does not point at the more immediate past – that
of what I call the in-between generation. Archimedes was gracious to
Conon’s memory, but he does not refer to his mathematics at all.
Aristarchus gets a mention from Archimedes for a particular suggestion
(see Chapter ); Euclid, apparently, is never mentioned. The in-between
did not matter, to Archimedes, all that much. On the other hand, twice in
the extant introductions, Archimedes conveys his sense of accomplishment
by comparing his own results to those of Eudoxus. Indeed, both times, he
refers precisely to the same result. The introduction to SC I was probably
written early in Archimedes’s published career:
I would not hesitate to compare them [= the results concerning sphere and
cylinder] to the properties investigated by any other geometer, indeed to
those which are considered to be by far the best among Eudoxus’ investi-
gations, concerning solids: that every pyramid is a third part of a prism
having the same base as the pyramid and an equal height, and that every
cone is a third part of the cylinder having the base the same as the cylinder
and an equal height.
The introduction to the Method was written perhaps twenty years later:
For it is more feasible, having already in one’s possession, through the method,
of a knowledge of some sort of the matters under investigation, to provide the
proof – rather than investigating it, knowing nothing. For this reason, the
discoveries of those theorems, of which Eudoxus was the ﬁrst to publish
the proofs – the proof of both the cone and the pyramid, that it is a third
part: the cone of the cylinder, the pyramid of the prism (having the same base
and an equal height) – one should assign not a small share to Democritus,
being the ﬁrst to state the claim – without a proof – about the said ﬁgure.
The context is diﬀerent for the two quotations. The ﬁrst is straightforward:
Archimedes emphasizes the value of Eudoxus’s proof. The second is much
more complicated: Archimedes wishes to explain why it is useful to make even
For this fascinating literary vignette, see K. Gutzwiller, “Callimachus’ Lock of Berenice: Fantasy,
Romance, and Propaganda,” American Journal of Philology , no. (): –.
R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and Commentary, Vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ), p. .
This is my translation of the text found in R. Netz, W. Noel, N. Tchernetska, and N. Wilson, The
Archimedes Palimpsest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), p. , ARCHv col. ll. –.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

nonrigorous claims (as he does in the Method, to which we will turn in the
following discussion), by bringing in Democritus as the ﬁrst to oﬀer the claim
to which Eudoxus provided the proof. (As noted in Chapter , I believe
Democritus merely asserted that cones are essentially ledged pyramids whose
ledges are so small as to become invisible.) The very fact that the two quotations
are so diﬀerently motivated is reassuring, as is the fact that the two introduc-
tions have diﬀerent addresses. All of this suggests that we have found something
real about Archimedes’s thought process. Eudoxus’s result concerning the cone
and the cylinder was, for him, a paradigmatic piece of mathematics.
And we are fortunate enough to possess it! Well, in the mediated form of
Euclid’s rendering into the Elements. Book of the Elements is entirely
dedicated to just this combination: ﬁnding the measurement of a pyramid,
in terms of a prism, which is then extended to the measurement of a cone,
in terms of a cylinder. Undoubtedly, this conserves, in some way,
Eudoxus’s achievement. On, then, to this argument: the key, perhaps, to
Archimedes’s career?
The part of the argument involving the pyramid and the prism is
surprisingly simple. You recall that Euclid’s way of arguing for
Pythagoras’s theorem crucially relied on the bisection of the parallelogram
by the diagonal: pass a line between two opposite angles of the parallelo-
gram, and you have two congruent triangles. This is especially obvious in
the cases of the rectangle and the square, where this bisection property
must have been part of elementary education from Babylonian times on.
Remarkably, we may get a similar result – although one that is far less
obvious – with solids, as well. Take, for simplicity’s sake, a cube. A little
eﬀort of imagination shows that it can be dissected into three components,
each a slanted pyramid with the same square base (a face of the cube) and
the same height (a side of the cube). Perhaps the Greeks knew this already
in Democritus’s time (conceivably, Democritus could have been the one to
notice this), or perhaps Eudoxus was the ﬁrst to notice this (and
Democritus merely asserted, as a philosophical, atomistic observation, that
the cone and the pyramid are indistinguishable). Either way, this is a
challenging observation but one that calls for no mathematical background
at all. One then needs to extend it in all sorts of ways – to show that all
pyramids with the same base and height are equal to each other, regardless
of their shape (hence, it doesn’t matter that the pyramid is slanted); to
show that, once this result is true of the cube, it can be extended to all
other prisms; and ﬁnally, to show that, if true for pyramids whose base is a
square, this will be true for all pyramids, regardless of which polygon they
have for a base. All of this is child’s play for the mathematicians of the
generation of Archytas and, in fact, conceivably could have been proved
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

rigorously even before. This is all simple and is not what inspired
Archimedes. The crux was the result concerning the cone and the cylinder.
Here is how this goes, in Euclid’s telling of the Elements, Book .
First, I note that the argument relies on an elaborate proof that circles are
to each other as the squares on their diameters (.). It is likely enough that
this kind of result was always taken for granted (it is implicit in Hippocrates
of Chios’s treatment of lunules), and so the essence of Eudoxus’s interven-
tion, here, was to patch a logical gap – a matter of foundations. One is
reminded, then, of Eudoxus’s intervention in proportion theory. The proof
of such a foundational result is diﬃcult, and Eudoxus’s breakthrough was to
show how this can be achieved by a double proof of contradiction.
Assume the circles in question are in greater, or lesser, ratio; one can
then derive a contradiction by considering polygons inscribed within the
circles, whose ratio to the square on the diameter is independently estab-
lished. Now, to prove a proportion by considering the cases of a greater, or
smaller, ratio is directly reminiscent of Eudoxus’s deﬁnition of proportion,
and it is conceivable that geometrical cases of this kind informed
Eudoxus’s general proportion theory.
All of this is very abstract (indeed, there is a similar sense of abstraction
in Euclid’s text already: this is a study in logical foundations, after all!). It
all becomes clearer and more concrete as we reach the core result of
Elements : proposition . We need to show that a cone is one-third
of the cylinder with the same base and an equal height.
B
F
C
G
D
H
A
E
Figure 
We look at a circle ABCD, which serves as the base of a (merely
implied, in Euclid’s diagram) cone and cylinder with the same height.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And once again: we assume that the cylinder is not triple the cone. In this
case, it is either greater or smaller. Let us take the case that the cylinder is
greater than triple the cone. Euclid proceeds to develop a long argument
showing that it is possible to inscribe a polygon in the circle ABCD, for
instance, AEBFCGDH, so that the prism set up on that polygon is smaller
than the cylinder on the circle ABCD – smaller by an amount less than
that by which the cylinder is greater than triple the cone. This might be
confusing for a modern reader without symbolism, so just to clarify the
point, let us restate this in an anachronistic format. We assume that
cylinder > 3  cone:
Or,
cylinder  X ¼ 3  cone
where X is some magnitude
ð
Þ:
We establish that it is possible to ﬁnd a prism AEBFCGDH such that
cylinder  prism AEBFCGDH < X , or
cylinder  X < prism AEBFCGDH:
Hence,
prism AEBFCGDH > 3  cone:
At this point, however, we bring in the observation that
prism AEBFCGDH ¼ 3  pyramid AEBFCGDH (that is, the pyramid
on the same base and of the same height as the prism). Hence,
3  pyramid on polygonal base AEBFCGDH > 3  cone on circular base
ABCD; that is, pyramid on polygonal base > cone on circular base:
And this is obviously false because the cone contains the pyramid and
therefore cannot be smaller. Hence, we can rule out the possibility that
the cylinder is greater than triple the cone.
A similar argument is then extended for the opposite case, and as the
two alternatives are exhausted, the remaining option – the cylinder, equal
to triple the cone – must be correct.
This, then, is precisely the proof mechanism adopted by Archimedes in
his measurement of the spiral area. If indeed we may glimpse, via Euclid’s
formulation, something of Eudoxus’s original approach, then we note that
it might have been somewhat diﬀerently motivated from Archimedes’s.
The emphasis, in Eudoxus, seems to be foundational. This is all about
plugging a gap in the way in which proportions are treated in the case of
curvilinear objects. The point of the exercise is rigor. There is little eﬀort to
surprise: the result is ﬁrst obtained for the pyramid, and then the telling of
the main result, for the cylinder, is straightforward. The bulk of the proof
itself is on the interim step (that one can inscribe the prism fulﬁlling the
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

required conditions), which is integrated into the main proposition
(Archimedes, in Spiral Lines, separates this lemma so that the key result
proceeds much more smoothly). Finally, Eudoxus falls back on a very simple
analogy, which is directly highlighted – the cone, as related to a prism (but
with a circle, rather than a polygon, for a base). Archimedes falls back on an
extremely opaque analogy, made further opaque by the positioning of the
results throughout his Spiral Lines (the series of sectors around a spiral area,
as the squares on an arithmetical progression). For this reason, Archimedes’s
result is surprising, whereas that of Eudoxus is merely impressive.
What the two share is the result: :. This is, remarkably, not a
coincidence – and may serve as yet another conﬁrmation of Eudoxus as
Archimedes’s inspiration. And so, starting from Eudoxus, we may now
understand, ﬁnally, how Archimedes could have discovered his result.
As noted previously (item in the list on p. ), later in his career,
Archimedes produced a treatise with an alternative proof of the key result
concerning the spiral area. This alternative-proof treatise does not survive,
but it is reported in some detail by Pappus.
Here, then, is the nonrigorous proof with which Archimedes became
convinced that the spiral area is one-third of the circle. All we need to do is
consider the following diagram:
Figure 
An English translation is given in R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and Commentary,
vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

On the left, we have sectors inscribed inside a spiral line, as we are
familiar with already from Spiral Lines, all within a circle.
On the right, we have a cone, inscribing a set of thin cylinders, all
within one big cylinder.
The observation is that the two arrangements are entirely isomorphic.
(The same observation can then be extended to sectors and cylinder,
circumscribing the spiral/cone.)
Arrange the sector pairs (circumscribing and inscribed) from biggest
to smallest.
Similarly, arrange the thin cylinder pairs (circumscribing and inscribed)
from biggest to smallest.
It becomes clear, for instance, that each circumscribing thin cylinder is
to its paired inscribed thin cylinder, as is the associated circumscribing
sector to its paired inscribed sector. (In both cases, they stand in the ratio
of the square on line segments that are in the same ratio.)
Similarly, the ratios between consecutive thin cylinders (whether circum-
scribing or inscribed) – arranged in sequence from biggest to smallest – are
the same as those between consecutive sectors (whether circumscribing or
inscribed), arranged in the same sequence. All of this is mind-boggling but
ultimately exceedingly simple: you wouldn’t think that, but just look! The
set of magnitudes composed of cylinders and the set of magnitudes com-
posed of sectors carry exactly the same internal proportions.
And once this isomorphism is seen, it becomes clear that as the series of
thin cylinders (whether circumscribing or inscribed) is to the big cylinder
encompassing them all, so is the series of sectors (whether circumscribing
or inscribed) to the circle as a whole. And because we know already, thanks
to Eudoxus, that as the thin cylinders multiply and become closer in shape
to the cone, they come closer to one-third of the cylinder, it is clear that
the same must be true for the spiral area. So the spiral area must,
ultimately, be simply one-third of the circle.
This “must, ultimately” argument is already nonrigorous, and for this
reason, Archimedes held oﬀand never published this argument – until,
that is, he already had published the rigorous proof of Spiral Lines. And we
have to rely on Pappus’s report of a claim by Archimedes, a sly and
misleading author. But the claim makes sense, and I think we should trust
it. For now, indeed, we may ﬁnally understand how Archimedes had
obtained his rigorous proof.
Consider the sequence of thin cylinders: if they are indeed arranged as a
series of concentric circles, it is clear that they stand, consecutively, in
ratios deﬁned by the square on an arithmetical progression. The smallest
II. Enter Archimedes

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cylinder will have a base radius of , the next will have a base radius of ,
and so forth, and they are all under the same height so that their ratios are
as the squares on their radii.
Adding up all those cylinders, then, is rather like adding up
12 þ 22 þ 32 þ 42 þ . . . þ n2:
Further, the greatest of them all is like n, and n of these constitute the big
cylinder, which is therefore like n.
And because we’ve learned from Eudoxus that the cylinder is triple the
cone, we have also found that, “ultimately,”
3 12 þ 22 þ 32 þ . . . þ n2


~n3:
Three times the series of squares on an arithmetical progression to n is
somehow the same as n times the square on the greatest term of that
progression. This result is instantiated in the case of the cone – and
therefore it must be true for any isomorphic series and therefore for the
series as such. Thus, even though Archimedes has nothing like our algebra,
he knows that the general result must be true and therefore can set out to
prove it, hard as it is without algebra – and this becomes proposition of
Spiral Lines. At this point, all Archimedes had to do was present this result,
tantalizingly and inexplicably, on its own – and use it to derive the
maximal surprise and subtlety of proposition of Spiral Lines.
All the while, inspired by Eudoxus. We may perhaps follow the line of
inspiration. Eudoxus’s motivation might have been very diﬀerent from that
of Archimedes. Surprise, I suggest, may not have been the goal for him. The
goal was rigor. However, rigor in the measurement of curvilinear shapes
necessarily involves subtlety. Ultimately, this is because the curvilinear
measured involves the summation of inﬁnitely many rectilinear terms, and
the rigorous study of the inﬁnite most naturally proceeds indirectly. Hence,
to prove rigorously results for curvilinear ﬁgures, one moves, ﬁrst, so to
speak, sideways – to the consideration of associated rectilinear or simpler
ﬁgures, and then one moves, so to speak, upward – to the meta-claim of the
proof by contradiction, showing the result by ruling out the sequence of
alternatives. Sideways and upward and only then back to our original goal:
the subtle, indirect approach required for measuring curvilinear objects.
Looking back at the mathematical past, this particular achievement
caught Archimedes’s eye: the combination of a powerful result proved
subtly. It is possible that all Eudoxus cared about was foundations – he
simply wanted to plug a hole in the application of proportions to geom-
etry. I suggest that Eudoxus stumbled upon subtlety. Archimedes glimpsed

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that subtlety and – motivated by a culture that prized subtlety above all
else – made it the cornerstone of his own science. All it took was a certain
narrative rearrangement, hiding the grounds of one’s argument, springing
them upon the reader. But more than this – a lot more could be achieved,
Archimedes realized: the same proof technique could yield the measure-
ment of many other curvilinear ﬁgures, all obtained through subtle,
surprising routes. With this realized, Archimedes turned to craft his letter
to Conon.
III.
Response to Archimedes: Apollonius
Archimedes, Inspiration to Apollonius
“With many years now having passed since Conon’s death, we are
not aware of even a single problem being set in motion, not by a
single person.”
These are Archimedes’s words in the introduction to Spiral Lines. The line
is reasonable enough, perhaps. According to my account, Archimedes
started out at a low point for Greek mathematics. There were perhaps
only a few mathematicians, most of whom thought of themselves primarily
as astronomers. Perhaps there is little wonder that only a few even cared
about Archimedes’s esoteric challenge. The one most likely to propose his
own solutions would have been, perhaps, Conon himself. But he soon
died, and those who remained were perhaps not up to the challenge.
And then we need to imagine a mathematical milieu – a mere few years
later – where several brilliant works by Archimedes circulate. Archimedes,
in this telling, found a way of repurposing the achievement of the ﬁrst
generation. The subtlety required for Eudoxus’s study in foundations
could be remade into works of maximal narrative surprise – striking a
chord with contemporary Alexandrian culture. And so, perhaps, the chal-
lenge of Archimedes revived the ﬁeld, and soon there was not a handful
but dozens of authors directly engaging with the kind of mathematics
championed by Archimedes.
This, then, is my narrative. It is constrained by our sources and might
be distorted by them. And yet, the implication of the evidence is that a
group of mathematicians did indeed work primarily in response to
Archimedes. This was his generation. For most of those authors, only a
few results are now known – and those in mediated form. From only one
author – Apollonius – there is a substantial survival. However, there was
much more that Apollonius wrote and is now lost, and the likelihood,
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

indeed, is that he was as creative as Archimedes himself. The little we do
know suggests that Apollonius set himself precisely this task: to rival
Archimedes.
Consider, for instance, Apollonius’s Okutokion, or “Fast-Delivery” (the
metaphor refers to childbirth). The very tantalizing title is reminiscent of
some works by Archimedes, and the key result is clearly meant to over-
Archimedize. In his Measurement of the Circle, Archimedes found close
bounds on the value of p; Apollonius, in his Fast-Delivery, has found much
closer bounds. What were those bounds? We do not know – and have
merely
the statement, from
a
late commentary
to
Archimedes’s
Measurement of the Circle, that Apollonius’s bounds were closer.
Apollonius’s memory – surviving, barely, in the shadow of Archimedes.
Or consider Archimedes’s Sand-Reckoner. This playful exercise starts out
from the poetic trope that some things are as “innumerable as the sand.” In
a mock-serious way, Archimedes tries to make precise mathematical sense
of this phrase. He deﬁnes this to mean “the number of the grains of sand is
such that no number can be named to exceed it.” He then develops a
calculatory method of number-naming, allowing him to name very big
numbers, and pursues an astronomical calculation whereby the universe is
assumed to be very big, showing he can name, then, a number bigger than
the number of the grains of sand that ﬁll the entire universe (I brieﬂy
return to this in Chapter ). Such is the mathematics of this Alexandrian
generation: playful, engaging with poetry, trying out calculation for its
own sake. (Also, as we recall, courtly: this work by Archimedes is addressed
to the king of Syracuse!)
This, once again, served as a foil to Apollonius. Pappus – the source for
so much of our knowledge of Archimedes’s lost works – wrote a commen-
tary on an otherwise-lost work by Apollonius, of which the last few
propositions survive (as a fragment of the extant Pappus’s Collection,
Book ). There, Apollonius develops his own calculatory method, very
clearly rivaling that of Archimedes (both involve, eﬀectively, calculations
with exponents), and then Apollonius shows how this method can be used
to calculate . . . a line of poetry! Speciﬁcally, what Apollonius does is to
take a hexameter poem as a series of numbers (as will be explained in the
As noted in the Suggestions for Further Reading, the best study of Apollonius is M. N. Fried and
S. Unguru, Apollonius of Perga’s Conica: Text, Context, Subtext (Leiden: Brill, ). This, however, is
really focused on Apollonius’s major work, the Conics, and we simply do not have a study surveying
the totality of Apollonius’s corpus. For this, the best resources remain Heath .–.,
supplemented by the article in the Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography by G. J. Toomer.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

following chapter, the Greeks often operated with a number symbolism
whereby letters represented numbers). To calculate a line of poetry, then,
was, for Apollonius, to multiply its letters-taken-as-numbers by each other.
Because a line of poetry has several dozen such numbers, their multiplica-
tion easily gives rise to spectacularly big numbers. Once again, our sources
are what they are, and we cannot prove the relation, yet it seems clear
enough that Apollonius, here, directly tried to rival Archimedes’s Sand-
Reckoner.
But what, then, of Apollonius’s study of the Cochlias – entirely lost
save for a brief notice by Proclus? It appears that Apollonius studied (and
also invented and named?) this curved line, a three-dimensional spiral
drawn on the surface of a cylinder: such a treatise, I suggest, would
inevitably be read by Apollonius’s contemporaries – familiar with
Archimedes’s own Spiral Lines – as an attempt to rival the master. Our
evidence is always inferential, but it adds up, and so we may bring in yet
another connection, more obscure but also, ultimately, more important.
As we shall return to consider in Chapter , Archimedes produced a
planetarium that, quite likely, involved not merely a method of calculating
the positions of the planets but also a geometrical model. Whatever
Archimedes may have oﬀered in terms of such a mechanism, Apollonius
made a contribution of lasting implications. As we will note in Chapter ,
Apollonius suggested, or commented upon, two possible elaborations of
circular motions (the combination of the motions of two circles, super-
imposed on each other, or a single circle, rotating around a point other
than its proper center) – and then demonstrated the equivalence of the
two. This pair of techniques will remain to deﬁne astronomy for almost
two millennia more – although nothing remains of Apollonius’s work, save
for a few words in Ptolemy’s Almagest. But this is already suggestive:
indeed, it is likely enough that Apollonius was reﬂecting, directly, on the
operation of mechanisms. An astronomical mechanism, proposed by
Archimedes – answered by a key theoretical observation concerning such
mechanisms, oﬀered by Apollonius? A speculation, made likely by the
context. We shall return to all of this in Chapter .
Apollonius, doing so much – with so little now extant. We know of
many other works by Apollonius. He was far from a mere echo of
Archimedes. Indeed, speciﬁcally, it seems that many of his works were
directed not only at Archimedes but also at Euclid. (In this, indeed,
Apollonius diﬀers from Archimedes: perhaps the passage of time made
Euclid – now entrenched as a central resource – loom larger. We shall
return to the place of Euclid in mathematical education in the following
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

chapter.) Many of the works now attributed to Apollonius have an air
similar to that of the Euclidean work Divisions, mentioned on page .
These are systematic surveys based on the minute variation of a single
problem. In his Collection, Pappus summarizes the contents of no less than
six such works by Apollonius: Cutting Oﬀof a Ratio, Cutting Oﬀof an
Area, Determinate Section, Inclinations, Tangencies, Plane Loci. The ﬁrst of
these works is even extant, in Arabic translation. It is not necessarily an
inspiring work (Archimedes would never write such a laborious text). But
it is also, at places, quite hard-going and subtle. The sense of mathematical
craftsmanship is evident, even throughout the ponderous elaboration of
case after case. We must have lost rather more mathematics – possibly,
more entertaining mathematics – in other responses to Euclid, which are
now merely reported. A commentary by Pappus to Euclid’s Elements Book
is extant in Arabic translation, and a brief comment there reveals that
Apollonius did engage with this Euclidean material (almost the only one to
do so, in antiquity), obviously in a competitive way: Apollonius’s own
work was titled On Unordered Irrationals. Elements concludes with the
observation that its classiﬁcation is not exhaustive; it seems that Apollonius
could have taken this as his starting point, providing a subtler and
nevertheless not-yet-exhaustive, alternative classiﬁcation (we note a ten-
dency in Apollonius: subtlety above all, produced by sheer precision and
elaboration). Another work took as its starting point Elements Book ,
the study of the ﬁve regular solids. We know about this because Hypsicles
– a later mathematician (Hellenistic? of the Roman era?) responded to
Apollonius himself in a work that is still extant. (It survives in the
manuscript tradition, appended to Euclid’s Elements and titled, simply
and misleadingly, “Book .”) Hypsicles tells us that Apollonius, in his
original study, had a dodecahedron and an icosahedron inscribed in the
same sphere (this is the arrangement assumed by Elements , which is all
about the inscription of solids in the sphere). From this, Apollonius
derived the surprising result that the ratio of the surfaces of these two
solids is the same as the ratios of the solids themselves (what we would call
their volume). This interest in the ratio between surfaces and volumes in
solids is already directly reminiscent of Archimedes’s letter to Conon. But
we also recall Archimedes expanding on Book , in his own way –
through his study of semiregular solids; was Apollonius responding to both
Euclid and Archimedes, here? Perhaps. This sense of a double response, to
Euclid and to Archimedes, is clearest in Apollonius’s greatest work – and
the one best attested today: the Conics. Indeed, we have mentioned the

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

conic sections frequently in previous pages. It is time for them to retake
center stage.
Enter the Conics
We last left the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals – or of
“duplicating the cube” – at the hands of Menaechmus (p. ). To recall,
Menaechmus looked for line segments B, G that, with A and E given, satisfy
A : B :: B : G :: G : E:
Q
K
D
Z
H
A
B
G E
Figure 
His breakthrough was to consider the other conditions satisﬁed by such
line segments and realize that these would give rise to two types of curves
(which, therefore, can be invoked to solve the problem at hand). One
curve is such where the square on a determined line (such as QZ in
Figure ) is always equal to the rectangle contained by another associated
line (such as DZ) as well as by some ﬁxed line (such as A). Another is a
curve that ensures that all rectangles drawn against it in a particular way
(such as KQZD in Figure ) always have the same ﬁxed area.
It is possible that at ﬁrst, Menaechmus simply left it at that and was
satisﬁed to show that curves such as these would solve the problem,
whether or not they in fact “existed” (whatever existence means, in this
context). But the thing is, the curves are very real.
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Having found the description of the beast, let us now go, so to speak,
and hunt for it in the wild.
Let us concentrate on the example of the curve, where a certain square is
equal to a certain rectangle. This looks promising because this kind of
arrangement arises very naturally and is, in fact, a recurrent theme in our
considerations of the problem of ﬁnding proportionals. Consider, once
again, the diameter of the circle and the property of similar triangles arising
when two chords in a circle cut each other. Speciﬁcally, one of the chords
we take to be the diameter, and the other we take to be perpendicular to it:
A
C
E
D
B
Figure 
Because the triangles ABE, DCE are similar (the angles at A, D are
equal, as are those at B, C, in both cases because they lie on the same arc),
we have BE:AE::EC:ED, or
rectangle BE, ED
ð
Þ ¼ rectangle AE, EC
ð
Þ:
To recall, in Figure , we have BD perpendicular to the diameter AC, and
so BE ¼ ED, so that we also have the following:
square BE
ð
Þ ¼ rectangle AE, EC
ð
Þ:
And here we have precisely a determined square, equal to a determined
rectangle (see also pp. –). Unfortunately, this is not yet the beast we
are looking for. As we move the position of the line BE to the left or to the
right (that is, draw the perpendicular from diﬀerent points along the line
AC), we change both lines: AE, as well as EC. In the curve we look for, only
one of the sides of the rectangle should change, and the other should remain
ﬁxed. Our goal should be to preserve this type of equality – but so that one
of the sides of the rectangle is projected into some ﬁxed value.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Projecting a ratio so that one of its sides becomes ﬁxed . . . Obviously,
we think of triangles on which we can construct similarity. The simplest
thing would be to raise an isosceles right-angled triangle on top of our
circle. Let us do this, as the right-angled triangle AFC; to ﬁx EC (for
instance) in a single value, we would look for some line emerging when we
draw a parallel such as GE (parallel to FC). To complete our construction,
let us also draw GH, parallel to AC.
A
C
E
D
B
H
G
F
Figure 
Now we have a few more proportions and equalities to work with.
GHCE ended up a parallelogram; this, together with ACF, GHF being
isosceles, establishes several relations:
EC ¼ GH;
AG ¼ GE; but also,
triangle AGE~triangle GHF; and so
AE : GE :: EC : GF:
We recall that we are interested in ﬁxing one of the sides of the rectangle
AE, EC. Well, it turns out that if we transform
rectangle AE, EC
ð
Þinto the
rectangle GE, GF
ð
Þ,
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

we do the same transformation twice: from AE to GE and from EC to GF,
both in the same ratio. Which is, in fact, the very simple ratio of the
diagonal to the side in the square (what we would think of as /√).
Applying the same ratio twice is simply halving.
It turns out that the rectangle contained by AE, EC is twice the
rectangle contained by GE, GF. The line GF is ﬁxed, and so if I simply
double it (extending the line AF to Q where QF ¼ GF), I get
A
C
E
D
B
H
Q
G
F
Figure 
rectangle AE, EC
ð
Þ ¼ rectangle GE, GQ
ð
Þ:
We have now found a very useful rectangle, which is always equal to the
square on BE. It is true that it is no longer clear what is meant, at this point,
by “moving the line BE while preserving the relation,” but a moment’s
reﬂection shows how this can be done. We may imagine the right-angled
triangle extended into space, above the original circle (this is very
Archytean), and then choose diﬀerent circles, picking up diﬀerent planes
intersecting with that triangle (always parallel to the same base). At each
plane, they intersect with the same plane deﬁned by the points G, B,
D. And as they intersect in this manner, the same relation arises: the square
on the line such as BE (for instance, B0E0) is equal to the rectangle

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

contained by a line such as GE (for instance, GE0) and the ﬁxed line GQ.
The proportion deﬁning the arrangement is as follows:
square BE
ð
Þ ¼ rectangle GE, GQ
ð
Þ BE, GE covariable, GQ fixed
ð
Þ:
A
C
E
D
E'
B'
B
H
Q
G
F
Figure 
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

From a modern perspective, we have the arrangement where a square
on one variable is equal to the line on another, multiplied by a ﬁxed
parameter:
y2 ¼ px,
which is what we call a parabola. From Menaechmus’s perspective, this is
the cut passing through an isosceles, right-angled cone, perpendicular to
one of the sides. The beast – found. The curve required to solve the
problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals actually exists. Finding it,
Menaechmus gave it a name: the “cut of a right-angled cone.” The line
GEE0 is the axis and original diameter of the parabola; lines such as BE,
B0E0 are said to be drawn as “ordinates”; the property of the parabola is that
squares on the ordinates are to each other as the segments of the diameters
that the ordinates cut.
It gets better. Once we note that the cut of the right-angled cone
satisﬁes the equality between a square and a rectangle, one of whose sides
is ﬁxed, it becomes natural to look, in a similar manner, for geometrical
arrangements that would satisfy the equality between two rectangles. It is
only slightly more complicated to show that this is fulﬁlled by a similar cut,
this time to an obtuse-angled cone: take an obtuse-angled, isosceles cone,
and cut it perpendicularly to one of the sides. The result is a curve, which
we call a hyperbola and which Menaechmus called the “cut of an obtuse-
angled cone.” Rectangles constructed between it, and certain lines (which
we think of as the asymptotes), are always of the same magnitude.
The problem of ﬁnding two lines in mean proportion between two
given lines can be solved, it turns out, by the intersection of two curves: the
cut of a right-angled cone and the cut of an obtuse-angled cone. It
becomes natural to consider, at this point, the properties of a similar cut
of an acute-angled cone, as well (this is what we call an ellipse). Once
again: we have emerged, so to speak, into a new territory of mathematics –
an entire subcontinent – and the pickings are amazingly rich. There are so
many proportions and equalities to be found – all, ultimately, related to
the fact that with these curves being cuts in cones, they are always some
projection of a circle, and in this way, they reproduce many variations on
the properties of the circle and, in particular, the similarities and
proportions of the circle. Perhaps already, Menaechmus and those around
him had found many of those results; at any rate, Euclid – likely, active a
generation later – would dedicate a specialized collection of Elements just
to this ﬁeld alone. This is no longer extant – for reasons that will
become apparent.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes was heir to this tradition. An important fraction of his work
is based on the properties of conic sections. He refers to them invariably by
their early name. I have referred earlier to such works as Quadrature of the
Parabola, but Archimedes himself named this treatise Quadrature of the
Section of the Right-Angled Cone. Conoids and spheroids, for Archimedes,
are produced from the rotations of the sections of right-angled, obtuse-
angled, and acute-angled cones. This is all a matter of names and, as such,
is perhaps innocuous: after all, I often modernize some of the symbolism
so as to make it more accessible. So, for instance, I try to provide my
diagrams labeled with Latin, not Greek, letters, and I hope you understand
that this is my tacit transformation.
But in the case of the nomenclature of the conic sections, this is not so
innocuous, and I must ask you now to reimagine everything written about
Archimedes, so far, substituting back in the ancient terminology for conic
sections. Because the terminological transformation, in this case, is not
merely a patina of modernization. It is, instead, an active mathematical
contribution, introduced in antiquity itself. Here is the rare case of a
mathematician asserting himself by intervening within the established math-
ematical language (otherwise, as we noted, usually very conservative – it was
a genre, after all). And so, we circle back to Apollonius’s own contribution:
his Conics.
We have noted Apollonius responding to both Archimedes and Euclid.
Something similar may be suggested for Apollonius’s Conics: it aimed to
replace – no less – Euclid’s conics in the Elements; at the same time as
Apollonius was writing his Conics, the name of Archimedes was established
as the most signiﬁcant author of spectacular results concerning conic
sections. To provide one’s own spectacular results concerning conic sec-
tions would be the most natural way to assert oneself, then, vis-à-vis
the master.
We can judge some of this because the Conics is mostly extant. It is a
massive work, consisting of eight (mostly, big) books. As Apollonius
clariﬁes in his introductions, this work is bipartite. The ﬁrst four books
seek to replace Euclid’s conics in the Elements. Even there, however, it is
clear that Apollonius sought not merely to provide foundations but also to
achieve new, remarkable results. In fact, Apollonius is very critical of
Euclid as a mathematician. (Centuries later, Pappus will take oﬀense:
one should not behave like this toward the teacher of one’s teachers!
This, indeed, will mark a very diﬀerent Alexandria, more teacherly and
more reverential toward its past; see the section “Teachers, Commentaries,
Books” in Chapter .) The following four books are original studies. In my
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

terms, the ﬁrst four books are Apollonius’s response to Euclid; the follow-
ing four, his response to Archimedes. The ﬁrst four books were re-edited,
with a commentary by Eutocius, in the sixth century (on which, more
in Chapter ), and so they survived in the original. A translation into
Arabic of the entire Conics (save the ﬁnal book, lost probably already in
Late Antiquity) is still extant and was published in Latin for the ﬁrst time
in . We thus have direct knowledge of Apollonius’s most spectacular
work – Books –(among which, especially important is Book ).
The seventeenth-century makers of the scientiﬁc revolution knew of
Apollonius only through the ﬁrst four books. But this was enough, in
their minds, to establish him as the equal of Archimedes.
Recall that Apollonius renamed and redeﬁned the conic sections. But
even this redeﬁnition was much more than a mere terminological inter-
vention. Menaechmus and Euclid, as you recall, deﬁned the three conic
sections with reference to a single type of cone and a single procedure of
cutting it – an isosceles cone, cut perpendicularly to one of the sides. There
is only one variation allowed – the angle at the top of the cone – and the
three sections arise from that variation. Apollonius, however, takes up any
cone, cutting it in any way. He is serious about taking the cone in the most
general, diﬃcult sense, and for him, a cone is not simply a right-angled
triangle rotated around one of its sides. Instead – and producing a much
greater variety of shapes – it is the surface composed of all the lines passing
through (i) a given point (the vertex) and (ii) an arbitrarily chosen circle in
space (that does not pass through the vertex). He then shows that all the
resulting cuts must produce one of the three conic sections known before.
This takes, in and of itself, considerable ingenuity in three-dimensional
geometry (one recalls, in this regard, Apollonius’s study in the spiral,
drawn on the surface of the cylinder). What determines a conic section
now is not the cone from which it was produced but purely the relations of
magnitude it gives rise to. In the curve previously known as the “section of
the right-angled cone,” the equality is that of a certain square with a certain
rectangle. The square applies precisely along the rectangle, so this forms a
perfect “application” or, in Greek, parabolē. In what was called the “section
of the obtuse-angled cone,” the application exceeds by a certain amount
(excess is hyperbolē); in what was called the “section of the acute-angled
one,” it is deﬁcient by a certain amount (deﬁciency is elleipsis). Hence, the
modern terms (only lightly Latinized) parabola, hyperbola, and ellipse.
Toomer translated Books –from Arabic into English, and so these are now the most accessible
to an English reader: G. J. Toomer, Apollonius: Conics Books to (New York: Springer-Verlag,
).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

It will also be noticed that, as conceived in Apollonius’s way, a conical
surface has two components on each side of the vertex. It is now seen that a
hyperbola cuts the conic surface on both sides of the vertex, producing a
strange beast, the “opposite sections,” a single, discontinuous geometrical entity.
Figure 
All of this is explored in detail – and all of this occupies no more than
the ﬁrst few propositions of the ﬁrst book. By proposition , the three-
dimensional geometry is fully surveyed, and the four sections (parabola,
hyperbola, ellipse, and opposite sections) are already in place. From that
point on, the discussion is purely planar. By proposition , Apollonius
proves the key proportions deﬁned by the sections.
He is not modest in his introduction: he makes clear that the deﬁnitions
of Book are original; he also proudly asserts that many of the detailed
results, already in Books and , are new. Conic sections are such that,
even at the so-called elementary level, the results are already striking.
These, especially the results in Book , are “elementary” only in the
sense that, besides their intrinsic beauty, they are also widely applicable:
because, just as Menaechmus originally noted – solving the problem of
two mean proportionals with the aid of conic sections – it is always useful
to have meaningful equalities and proportions associated with determined
curves. The more equalities and proportions, the better. And so many can
be derived! I will give just one example from Book . The choice is
arbitrary, and this in itself is typical of the reading of this book: an arcade
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of continuous surprises – ﬁreworks, exploding almost in no particular
order. To ., then:
N
E
D
K
H
P
G
A
X
C
F
L
M
O
B
Figure 
On a parabola, draw three arbitrary tangents so that each intersects with
the other two, for example, AE, EC, DF. The points of contact and
intersection determine, on each line, two line segments: AD, DE on the
line AE; EF, FC on the line EC; DB, BF on the line DF.
Apollonius applies the truly elementary results of the Conics – those whose
main purpose is to derive the more surprising results, such as those of ..
First, use Apollonius’s Conics .: if we bisect AC at point G, the
resulting line GE is the diameter of the parabola. In terms of the construc-
tion of the parabola from page , it is like the line GE in Figure .
This requires a detour – and is the moment to mention a crucial surprise
concerning parabolas. We constructed the parabola, in Figure , with a
particular axis GE, one that runs through the middle of the cone. It is a
“diameter” in the sense that there is an inﬁnite array of parallel lines such as
BD in Figure , all of them bisected by the diameter. In a parabola, we
consider any such line to be drawn “ordinate” to the diameter. In the
aforementioned case, BE is an ordinate on the line GE, and in this case, it
The books of the Conics surviving in Greek can be read in English translation in M. N. Fried and
R. C. Taliaferro, Apollonius of Perga/Conics –(Santa Fe, : Green Lion Press, ). This
brings Fried’s recent and scholarly translation of Book together with the much older translation
of Books –by Taliaferro, which was originally produced to answer the pedagogic needs of
St. John’s College. The version of Books –reprinted in has been revised from Taliaferro’s
original, but it remains not very good, although not quite as bad as to justify the enormous labor a
new translation would entail.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

happens to be perpendicular to it; the important feature of the parabola, of
course, is that the squares on the ordinates scale as the segments by which
they cut oﬀthe diameter. Now, here is the surprising thing: it turns out
that we can take any line parallel to the original diameter, and this, too,
will be a diﬀerent diameter; its end point, a new vertex. The only
diﬀerence is that the ordinate lines to such derived diameters are no longer
perpendicular to the diameters and are instead deﬁned by the property that
they are parallel to the line tangent to the parabola at the vertex of this
particular diameter. (The original diameter, it turns out, has the special
property that it is perpendicular to the tangent at its vertex.) It thus follows
that if we take any arbitrary line in a parabola, bisect it, and draw a line
through the bisection, parallel to the original diameter, we ﬁnd a new
diameter. This closes our detour, and now back to .: G bisects AC
and GE is drawn (as is shown separately) parallel to the diameter; hence,
GE is a diameter.
Next, ﬁnd the vertex H where the diameter cuts the parabola and then
draw KL, tangent at H. We then have (.) KH ¼ HL and also (.) AK
¼ KE and LC ¼ LE. But wait – there’s more! Let us draw the parallel to
EG via point B, MBP (CP drawn parallel to FB). Not only is this a
diameter, but we can also establish (.) MB ¼ BP. Now we have a great
many equalities and parallelism to work with, and we can immediately set
forth our starting point:
MC : CF :: EC : CL:
(In each ratio, in fact, the ﬁrst term is double the second.)
An incredibly elaborate and opaque set of transformations yields from that:
CF : FE :: XC : AX:
Apollonius follows similar, although distinct, lines of transformations and
substitutions on two more ratios of line segments, until each is shown to
be in proportion with the same XC:AC; hence, all are proportionate to
each other:
DE : DA :: CF : FE :: BF : BD:
The three tangents all cut each other, producing the same ratio!
A surprising result, yet again, and also a useful tool. If you wish to ﬁnd the
tangents to a parabola, you know they need to satisfy this property.
Conversely, and perhaps more signiﬁcant, if you know that a particular
problem requires the division of three lines in the same ratio (and remember
all the many treatises dedicated to the ramiﬁcations of dividing a given object
by given ratios!), you know that you can take the tangents to a parabola as
your starting point. These are elements – you do things with them – but so
much more than just elements, the typical Apollonian combination.
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Apollonius is as brilliant, as surprising as Archimedes. In the
remarkable parts of the elementary books – in many of the results of
Books and – the sense of surprise comes from the repeated applica-
tion of the mechanism of proportion so that at the end of the long
sequence of iterations, one hardly even sees the reason why the end result
is indeed true. This is the typical way in which Apollonius asserted himself
as a master: the bombardment of subtlety.
And yet Apollonius does produce a great deal more, often involving a
mathematics of a diﬀerent, more qualitative character. For instance,
Apollonius has an entire series of results on the conditions under which
straight lines cut, or fail to cut, the conic sections (.–.). A similar
example: much of Book concerns the conditions of intersection between
conic sections. After all, these curves are more complex than just the
straight line and the circle, and so there is a variety of them, so there is a
considerable combinatorial variety to the number of times that a given conic
section may touch or intersect with another. Much of Book is about the
similarity between conic sections. In all of this, we ﬁnd attention to more
or less “topological,” nonquantitative properties of the conic sections. One
pays attention to shape or to the presence or absence of points of intersection.
This brings us to the most impressive of Apollonius’s extant works. This
is Book , that is, a non-“elementary” part of the treatise. Its subject matter
is greatest and smallest lines. What does that even mean? Well, as usual, we
need to start from the circle. A very simple set of results (proved by Euclid
as Elements .and .) shows the following:
a.
From a given point – not the center – inside a circle, the greatest line
to the circumference is the one passing through the center, the
smallest is the complement to the same segment (in Figure , AF is
greatest, and FD is smallest).
F
D
A
Figure 

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

b.
From a given point outside the circle, the smallest line to the
circumference is the one passing through the center; the tangent is
the greatest.
Figure 
In the case of the circle, all of this is simple and intuitive, and as usual, as
we ask the simple question – and what if one has a conic section, instead of
a circle? – intuition nearly breaks down. Apollonius studies this question
thoroughly and precisely through an especially massive treatment – seventy-
seven propositions, often of considerable diﬃculty.
The very concept of “smallest line” or “minimum,” extended to conic
sections, is diﬃcult and subtle. To begin with, the idea is simple
enough: if we take a point on the axis of a parabola, very close to the
vertex, it is fairly evident that the smallest of the lines drawn from that
point to the curve is the line segment of the axis, the one drawn directly
to the vertex (this is analogous to Euclid’s Elements .). Conversely, if
we take a point on the axis very far from the vertex, it becomes clear that
the smallest of the lines drawn from that point to the curve no longer is the
line segment of the axis; one can ﬁnd shorter lines to the curve. In .,
Apollonius ﬁnds the position at which the point, so to speak, “escapes the
gravity of the vertex”: where the parabola stops being like a circle. The
position is at the distance of one-half of the parameter of the parabola from
the vertex. This value – one-half of the parameter – will return several
times again in this chapter. (To clarify: by “parameter,” we mean the line
segment D, which satisﬁes, for any point B chosen on the diameter of the
parabola, D  BC ¼ AB.)
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A
C
B
D
Figure 
So far, so clear – although already diﬃcult. It becomes even more
diﬃcult to consider the following problem: For a given point P on the
curve, are there points on the axis, such as some X, so that the line XP is
the smallest of the lines drawn from X to P?
P
x?
x?
x?
Figure 
The meaning of “smallest line” suddenly becomes counterintuitive. We
take point P on the curve as a given and scan the axis. For each potential
point X on the axis, we ask the same question: Is the line PX, drawn from
X to P, the smallest among all other lines that could have been drawn from
X to the curve? Note carefully: a “smallest line,” deﬁned relative to point
P on the curve, means not the smallest of the lines from P to the axis (this,
quite obviously and uninterestingly, is the perpendicular from P to the axis).
It is a line, such as XP, so that, relative to all other lines drawn from that
X under consideration, it is the smallest. Because there are many Xs to
consider, it becomes obvious that, in this sense, there could be more than
a single “smallest line” at a given point P on the curve – but also that there
could be none. Now our study has developed a clear “qualitative” sense and
has also become much subtler. To take just one example (and always staying
with just the simplest case, that of the parabola): we have noted that the
“escape from the vertex” happens at the distance of one-half of the parameter.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This value, indeed, has a more general import. It turns out that in general, a
line is a minimum from a point P on the curve to the axis if and only if the
segment of the axis cut oﬀbetween that line and the perpendicular dropped
from the same point P is equal to the same one-half of the parameter.
P
ONE-HALF
THE PARAMETER
Figure 
This is a precise value, and we can use it to determine the points
through which the smallest lines can be drawn. For instance, you might
wish to ask: Given a point E not on the curve of the parabola, but
somewhere else on the plane on the parabola, can we ﬁnd the smallest
lines that pass through that point? (To be fair, you probably would not
wish to ask that. But once Apollonius asks this, the question becomes
interesting! I shall return to this issue of motivation in later discussion.)
M
B
A
T
Z
E
G
K
I
L
R
H
Figure 
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is achieved in the extremely elaborate proposition .. Take
point E and draw the perpendicular from it down to the axis to fall on
point Z. Obviously, we are only interested in positions where GZ – the
distance of Z from the vertex – is more than one-half of the parameter
(otherwise, the smallest line is a segment of the axis and certainly does not
pass through E). With this established, we assume, through the course of
the proposition, diﬀerent possible magnitudes for the line EZ. (In an
interesting economy of the argument, Apollonius produces diﬀerent proofs
for the diﬀerent claims, always employing the same diagram – even while
the assumed magnitude of the line EZ keeps varying.) A complicated
calculation gives rise to a certain other magnitude, determined by one-
half of the parameter, which is here designated by the line K (the calcu-
lation of the magnitude of this length K is too complicated to be summed
up here). The key result is this: if EZ is greater than K, no lines can pass
from E to make a smallest line (no line such as LB can be a smallest line). If
EZ is exactly equal to K, then there is exactly one smallest line
passing through point E (indeed, the line LB). And if EZ is smaller than
K, then there are two smallest lines, namely, MI, AR; their positions are
found by drawing a hyperbola whose asymptotes are GH, HT (the ﬁnding
of the line HT is a separate problem, which I set aside here). The
hyperbola intersects the parabola at the points M, A that generate the
smallest lines. And once again, I remind you: when we say that MI is a
smallest line, this means that from point I, the smallest line to the parabola
is MI; when we say that AR is a smallest line, this means that from point R,
the smallest line to the parabola is AR. And from any other point on the
axis – other than I or R – the smallest line to the curve does not pass
through point E.
I relay all of this with a certain amount of guilt. I demand you to have
faith in me that everything about this argument is rigorously proved, and
then I ask you to be impressed by the proof and its rigor. I ask you to trust
me that, if you could only see the proof, you would be struck by its beauty.
And yet, I do not show it to you because it is so diﬃcult. A ﬁne
matchmaker! In truth, Apollonius’s proof takes time – impressive subtlety
and precision, rather than brilliant ﬂashes. Apollonius was not Archimedes.
He was his own mathematician with his own style.
This much, though, is clear. If mathematics was, perhaps, dormant in
the years leading up to Archimedes – it certainly came back to life in the
years following. One could write a mathematics as hard as that of
Apollonius – and yet count on an audience!

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes: Conversing with Apollonius?
Two diﬀerent ancient sources say that Apollonius was active under
Ptolemaic kings: the one says that he was active under Ptolemy Euergetes
(–), the other that he was active under Ptolemy Philopator
(–). This “active under” locution was probably often taken in
antiquity to mean “forty years old,” so what we learn is that some ancient
sources thought Apollonius was born somewhere between and .
There are many more complications to this problem of dating, and the
scholarly position on this question has moved back and forth (see the
Suggestions for Further Reading). But we can sum up the situation as
follows. Apollonius was almost certainly younger than Archimedes, but
perhaps not by all that much. The impression holds: surely Apollonius, at
least among other things, did respond to Archimedes.
When Apollonius started making a name for himself, was Archimedes
still alive? The evidence is less decisive, and yet, if Apollonius was born at
around, say, –, he would be in his forties, more or less, by the time
Archimedes died – perhaps already an established scholar but at any rate,
almost certainly one who has already published his ﬁrst works and made
some of his contacts. I envisage Archimedes conversing with Conon at
around , when he was perhaps thirty years old or a little more.
Archimedes might have noticed Apollonius, then, the way Conon
noticed Archimedes.
We usually think of On Floating Bodies as among Archimedes’s most
mature works. It relies on the lost Centers of the Weight of Solids, which was
probably later than On Balancing Planes, which probably relies on
Quadrature of the Parabola. It is certainly a major achievement: the second
book, in particular, is arguably the most remarkable piece of all extant
Greek mathematics. The object under study is, once again, the conoid: we
take – to use the modern term – a parabola and rotate it around its axis to
produce a more-or-less bullet-shaped object. Then – which brings this into
the realm of “ﬂoating bodies” – we assume that it is made of some
homogeneous matter lighter than a liquid and proceed to conceive of it
immersed in the liquid. We know that it will ﬂoat (it was assumed to be
lighter than the liquid). But will it balance? This is a diﬃcult question, as
we will return to discuss in greater detail later on. One needs to identify
two segments of the paraboloid – one immersed in the liquid, the other
ﬂoating above it – and ﬁnd the centers of the weight of the two segments;
stability depends on the qualitative relation between these two points.
III. Response to Archimedes: Apollonius

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

All of this varies, depending on the precise shape and relative weight of the
paraboloid.
A
complicated
study,
giving
rise
to
many
potential
combinations.
Almost all of the discussion in this treatise is done via a plane section
taken of the conﬁguration of solids (this is typical of many other studies in
Greek mathematics, where one starts with a three-dimensional space but
then simpliﬁes by considering just a single “representative” plane; recall the
treatment of the cone and the cylinder in Elements , for instance, where
we only looked at the base). The study is therefore, in practice, of a
parabola or, literally, in the terms employed by Archimedes, it is a study
of a section of a right-angled cone. More than this: Archimedes treats
many iterations of geometrical combinations and so draws the diagram
again and again and assigns the labeling again and again. Generally in
Greek mathematics, such labeling is done “randomly,” the deck of cards
reshuﬄed between one proposition and the following so that what was a
B in one proposition can become an A in the following, usually depending
on the order in which elements are introduced in the construction. Finally,
parabolic segments are usually labeled, naturally enough, with three letters.
It is therefore intriguing that Archimedes’s labeling in this treatise is
anomalous. A certain element of the labeling is never varied – never follows
an alphabetical logic, always has an extra, unmotivated letter. This occurs as
the main parabolic segment is introduced, in the following nomenclature:
Section of the right-angled cone, APOL.
The section of the right-angled cone is always labeled APOL. All things
considered, I think it is likely (although, of course, unprovable) that
Archimedes, in this late work – his last? – referred, obliquely, to
Apollonius’s renaming of the conic sections. Now, to refer to that which
Apollonius recently called a “parabola” as a “section of the right-angled
cone, APOL” is, I propose, funny. A career, begun with cunning, false
propositions, sent in a challenge, concluding with a cunning pun, dismiss-
ing an upstart’s terminological innovation.
Archimedes, responding to Apollonius? The story is almost too good
(which is why it should be treated with some skepticism).But this thing
stands out – whether or not a response to Apollonius: the work that we
usually take to be Archimedes’s most impressive, in some sense the
culmination of his life project, was not, in the end, a study in the
I discuss all of this in R. Netz, “Nothing to Do with Apollonius? Concerning the Style and
Chronology of Late-Archimedean Mathematics,” in Philologus (): –.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

measurement of volumes. The series of works sent to Dositheus does not
really sum up Archimedes’s achievement. That culminated, instead, with a
study in the mathematization of the physical world.
We recall the generation of Archytas – where much of the inspiration
for mathematics itself came from the recent idea of mathematizing music.
This is key to the way in which Plato, and philosophers like him, engaged
with mathematics – and the way in which mathematicians of that gener-
ation engaged back. And so far, we have considered the conversation of the
generation of Archimedes as much more internal to mathematics. How
does the mathematization of the physical world ﬁt into this conversation?
IV.
Archimedes’s Physics
Archimedes: Conversing with the Physical World?
Our interpretation of the generation of Archytas and its engagement with
philosophy has relied on mere fragments (and on the more substantial
evidence from the philosophical side). With Archimedes, we have the
mathematics itself. Four “physical” works by Archimedes are extant, and
although they are not strung together in a single correspondence (as are
those sent to Dositheus), they follow a clearly deﬁned conceptual path.
Those are the four works engaged with the center of the weight: On
Balancing Planes, Quadrature of the Parabola, Method, and On Floating
Bodies.(Chronologically, I suspect that On Balancing Planes followed
Quadrature of the Parabola; however, Archimedes relied, in the latter work,
on a diﬀerent version of the claims of On Balancing Planes, and, concep-
tually, therefore, we should consider On Balancing Planes ﬁrst.) This
sequence is crucial to the rise of modern science, and we should survey it
in somewhat greater detail.
On Balancing Planes
On Balancing Planes, or PE –(a single work, divided into two
books), begins with a proof of the famous result tied to the phrase “give
me a place to stand and I shall move the earth”: the law of the balance. To
paraphrase:
Volume of my translation of Archimedes includes these four treatises, and I hope that by the
time you read this book, it is already published by Cambridge University Press. Until then, the only
English version of these works is found in (really, a paraphrase) T. L. Heath, The Works of
Archimedes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, /).
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Magnitudes balance around a fulcrum when their distances from the
fulcrum are reciprocally proportional to their weights.
What does all of that even mean? Archimedes is not very explicit. In the
extant form of the treatise, it carries no introduction other than the
statement of a handful of postulates. We eﬀectively have to reconstruct
Archimedes’s concepts from the way in which they are applied. (The
contrast to Eudoxus’s interest in conceptualization as such, Theaetetus’s
interest in classiﬁcation as such, is striking.)
“Weight,” in practice, has, in the works of Archimedes, no meaning
independent from geometry and is not really a physical term. Usually, we
assume that all objects are made of the same homogeneous matter, so that
weight simply means “magnitude.” The weight of a polygon is its magni-
tude or (we would say) its area; the weight of a solid is what we would call
its volume; even lines possess weight, which is what we call their length.
Now, what about “distance”? The implicit deﬁnition is that it is the
distance or the length of a certain line segment. This is the line segment
drawn from the center of the weight of the given magnitude to the
fulcrum. However, the term center of the weight is never clariﬁed. The
implicit deﬁnition is that if two magnitudes balance around a point, then
that point is the center of the weight of the magnitude composed of the two.
So much for conceptual clarity! “Center of the weight” depends on the
operation of balance, which conceptually depends on “distance,” which in
turn requires, for its deﬁnition, the notion of “center of the weight.” This, in
practice, is not so much a matter of circular reasoning but instead a matter of
conceptual bootstrapping. To get started, we need some presuppositions
concerning particular centers of weight – and once we get them, we can
generate all the rest. But what centers of the weight are always remains
opaque. This opacity is signiﬁcant: Archimedes is able to maintain a certain
ambiguity. In some sense, the “center of the weight” is a purely geometrical
point, serving as a ratio-summing mechanism that transforms many ratios
between many geometrical objects into a single ratio (this will become
clearer as we see examples in practice). In another sense, the “center of the
weight” is a physical term whose existence is assured by the physical
intuition that objects do, in fact, balance around some point, and it can
then be used to derive further consequences as we assume that the motion of
rigid objects is determined by that of their center of the weight.
In fact, we can prove quite a lot about centers of the weight without
knowing at all what they are. Here is how this works, then, in
Archimedes’s proof of the law of the balance, On Balancing Planes

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proposition (the number of the proposition is erroneously given as “” in
modern editions).
First of all, we set out the assumptions. Produce two simple objects – say,
squares – and have them arranged around the fulcrum X. Make A the center
of the weight of the left square and B the center of the right one, so now we
can measure the distances AX, BX. (Note, once again, that for this exercise, we
do not need to know the meaning of the phrase “center of the weight.”)
B
A
X
Figure 
A brief set of postulates right at the beginning of the treatise establishes,
directly or indirectly, that if magnitudes balance at equal distances, the
magnitudes themselves must be equal, and vice versa. If the two squares
are equal and they balance around the fulcrum, we must have AX ¼ BX.
X is therefore the center of the weight of the composite magnitude AB. (It is
crucial for this operation that we recognize the existence of noncontiguous
magnitudes, composites of distinct continuous segments.) It is further
postulated that “if magnitudes balance at certain distances, the [magnitudes]
equal to them will also balance at the same distance.” What this means,
apparently, is that if we substitute the squares for some other equal magni-
tudes – but preserving the same centers of the weight A and B – the center of
the weight of the system as a whole would remain the same. So, for instance,
cut both squares in half horizontally along the middle, push the lower
resulting rectangles down by a notch, and push the upper resulting rectan-
gles up by the same amount. We have not yet proved this, but assume that,
in fact, following such a manipulation, the center of the weight of each of
A and B should, in fact, remain the same as it was before. The consequence
would be that the distances AB, BX would not budge either; hence, the
system should remain in balance around the same point X.
B
A
X
Figure 
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is enough for the main derivation. Assume that the two magni-
tudes in consideration have the same shape, a rectangle. (From the postu-
late, it follows that shapes do not matter as long as the center of the weight
is preserved, so the choice of the rectangle is merely an illustration chosen
by me and is not, in fact, speciﬁed by Archimedes.) Once again, let their
center of the weight be at A and B, and let the center of the weight of the
system as a whole be at X. Let us drop, however, the assumption that they
are equal: for instance, let A have the plane area of units; B, the plane
area of units. Now, if we assume that the rectangles A, B are so
positioned that they are balanced, we also know that they will remain
balanced if we substitute them for other ﬁgures, as long as we preserve the
magnitudes and centers of the weight. Let us divide the rectangles into
thinner rectangles so that all are equal, on the A as well as on the B side.
A will thus be divided into two parts; B, into seven parts. Let us position
those resulting nine parts as nine smaller rectangles, each balanced around
the original positions: so we have A in the middle between two small
rectangles, and B is right at the position of the central small rectangle,
surrounded by three on either side.
B
B
A
A
Figure 
Because all small rectangles are equal to each other, it is evident (and
indeed follows from the postulates) that their center of the weight, taken as
a whole, would be the center of the arrangement of all nine, which is the
middle of the central rectangle.
This is one unit of distance away from B and .units of distance away
from A. And the same must have held even before the big rectangles got
dissected because, by deﬁnition, the system was balanced before we did the
dissection, and the dissection preserved the centers of the weight! The ratio
of distances :.is the reciprocal to the ratio of the weights :. This is

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

my example of the argument that Archimedes produces, of course, in
geometrical generality (and also extending this, in a Eudoxean ﬂourish of
rigor, to the case where the two magnitudes are incommensurable). But
even without reproducing Archimedes’s general proof, it is clear that the
same will hold no matter which numbers are taken. We thus learn that
magnitudes balance, around a fulcrum, when their distances from the
fulcrum are reciprocally proportional to their weights. This is it. Almost
no mathematical tools at all – indeed, not even a clear articulation of what
is meant by “distance from the fulcrum” (certainly no physical experiment),
and a fundamental physical claim is established.
Impressive, right? But clearly not impressive enough for Archimedes,
and it is evident that, as far as Archimedes was concerned, this result,
early in the treatise, served merely as a tool. The treatise proceeds to ﬁnd
centers of the weight of individual ﬁgures. Here is where the bootstrap-
ping really happens.
Speciﬁcally, Archimedes postulates that wherever the center of the
weight of a polygon is, the center of the weight of a similar polygon
must be similarly situated. This is all rigorously deﬁned, but for our
purposes, we may take a very simple consequence: if two triangles are
congruent, their centers of the weight must fall on the same position
relative to the vertices of the triangles. Once again: we do not know what
centers of the weight are and where to ﬁnd them – but we can postulate
such obvious assumptions and, with this, bootstrap the results we
actually need.
And so, proposition (misleadingly labeled “” in modern editions).
A parallelogram is dissected by its diagonal into two congruent triangles.
(This, indeed, is how Euclid got his own proportion-less derivation of
Pythagoras’s theorem: an elementary result if ever there was one.)
Figure 
And here’s the simple and yet surprising observation: if we take any two
points in the parallelogram so that each is identically situated within its
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

own triangle, then the bisection of the line joining those two points must
fall on the diagonal of the parallelogram. Now, one of those pairs of points
(we don’t know which!) must be that of the two centers of the weight of
the two triangles. Because the two triangles are equal (they are congruent,
after all), their combined center of weight must be at the bisection of the
line joining their individual centers of their weight. Thus, the center of
the weight of the composite of the two triangles – that is, the center of the
weight of the parallelogram – must be on the diagonal. It is immediately
apparent that because a parallelogram has two diagonals cutting each other,
their point of intersection is, in fact, the center of the weight of the
parallelogram as a whole. This is takeoﬀ. We’ve got an entity in the world
for which we’ve been able to ﬁnd the center of the weight – the
parallelogram – which we did based on the triangle but without knowing
the position of the center of the weight of the triangle (which we have no
way of ﬁnding, as yet) and, strangest of all, without having any clear sense
at all of what a center of weight is!
Once again, impressive – but trivial for Archimedes, who proceeds
immediately to ﬁnd the center of the weight of a triangle: the circle of
bootstrapping is completed and indeed reversed as the triangle, now, is
decomposed, in turn, into parallelogrammical components. I skip this
argument, but the result, it turns out, is analogous to that of the
parallelogram. Just as the center of the weight of the parallelogram is
located on the parallelogram’s diagonal, so the center of the weight of
the triangle is located on the median. And once again, this establishes
the position of the center of the weight: all the medians of the triangle
meet at a single point. Speciﬁcally, this is the one dividing each median
line in the ratio :. This, then, must be the center of the weight of the
triangle. Even more diﬃcult is the ﬁnding of the center of the weight of
the trapezium – a point deﬁned, in a rather complex manner, along the
line joining the two points bisecting the two parallel sides of the
trapezium. (A trapezium is a triangle from which a triangle was
removed; little surprise that its center of the weight falls on the median
shared by those two triangles.) Thus ends Book – breathtaking,
seemingly impossible, and all of it, in fact, a mere prelude to the main
action, that of Book .
Book begins with a statement illustrating how the principle of proof
used for showing the law of the balance can be extended for such cases
where we do not know how to dissect the original shape into a number of
equal, smaller shapes: speciﬁcally, how to do so with a parabolic segment.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes then develops a remarkable argument for ﬁnding the center of
the weight of the parabolic segment. It turns out that this is on the
diameter, divided in the ratio .:. That is: in a parabolic segment
ABGD, the center of the weight Q satisﬁes BQ:QD::.:. The median
of the triangle is divided in the ratio :; the diameter of the parabolic
segment is divided in the ratio .:.
A
D
B
Q
G
Figure 
But even this is not enough for Archimedes! The treatise ends, instead,
with a very complex and subtle argument (this argument works as we come
to expect by now: Archimedes ﬁrst develops a seemingly unrelated lemma
and then, in a surprising move, ﬁnds how to apply it), ﬁnding the center of
the weight of a parabolic “slice,” that is, the subsegment of a parabolic
segment enclosed between two parallel lines. This center of the weight is
found on the line joining the bisections of the two parallel lines, at a point
deﬁned in a complex way that is not identical but very similar to that for
ﬁnding the center of the weight of the trapezium. The parabolic segment is
not a triangle, but it is akin to the triangle; the parabolic slice, it turns out,
is akin to the trapezium.
As we begin to read On Balancing Planes, with our modern training, we
are convinced that this is, eﬀectively, intended as a contribution to what
we now think of as physics. And indeed, if we stop reading almost at the
beginning – once we have achieved the proof of the law of the balance – we
may conclude that this is its intended goal. (In fact, the few modern
readers who pick up this treatise rarely go beyond that point.) But the
treatise does proceed much further, and its great bulk is dedicated to
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

questions whose entire motivation is geometrical, indeed, most closely
related to Archimedes’s, otherwise attested, interest in pure geometry: a
display of how a geometrical technique – which is intuitively applicable to
simple, rectilinear ﬁgures – may be extended to much more complex,
curvilinear ones. In the pure geometrical treatises – especially the series
addressed to Dositheus – this is done with measurement; in On Balancing
Planes, this is done with the ﬁnding of a center of the weight. The
operation, in this case, is assigned (implicitly) with an extra layer of
physical meaning – that of the balance. But it is, in practice, a purely
geometrical operation.
Quadrature of the Parabola
The geometric impetus is indeed obvious with the Quadrature of the
Parabola: this, after all, is explicitly about measurement (in fact, this is
the work opening the series sent to Dositheus). In this treatise, Archimedes
provides two routes for the measurement of the parabolic segment. The
second and perhaps more authoritative route applies the standard geomet-
ric toolbox, dividing the segment into components and ﬁnding their
measurements (and then, of course, relying on the Eudoxean technique
of following the consequences – in either direction – of the segment not
being four-thirds of the triangle).
The ﬁrst route is “physical.” The parabolic segment is imagined as hung
down and put on a balance. But then again, the operation – once this
“balance” manipulation is assumed – is strictly geometrical. The segment
as a whole is enclosed within a triangle and is also dissected into strips, each
enclosed in small trapezia. Everything then follows from the fact that we
know the position of the center of the weight of the triangle, enclosing the
segment, as a whole. We can therefore surmise where it would balance
with other, speciﬁed weights. Results concerning the parabola can then be
used to extend this to the system of trapezia enclosing the parabolic
segments. This ﬁnally translates – once again using standard Eudoxean
techniques – to measurement of the area of the parabolic segment as a
whole. “Weight” really means, in all of this, geometrical area; “balance”
really means, in all of this, a proportion involving areas and line segments;
the whole exercise is, explicitly, about geometrical measurement. Center of
the weight, to be sure: but is it physics?

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Method
Perhaps all of this becomes clearer as we consider the direct version of the
same argument provided in Archimedes’s Method. Indeed, we can say a
little more about Archimedes’s motivations in this case, based on the
introduction to this work. We should linger longer on the Method.
The conceptual richness of this treatise is perhaps related to the
identity of the addressee: the Method is addressed to Eratosthenes, the
leading poet-scholar of Alexandria of his day. Note the contrast:
Dositheus, the recipient of the main series of geometrical works, seems
to have been a minor author; King Gelon, recipient of the Sand-
Reckoner, had no scholarly aspirations. But Eratosthenes was a serious
author – who made, as we will note later on, his own serious mathe-
matical contributions. It is appropriate that this would be an especially
diﬃcult and enigmatic work.
Archimedes broaches, as noted earlier, a claim about mathematical
practice: that it is useful to know in advance that a statement is true –
regardless of how one comes up with this knowledge – so as to be able to
ﬁnd a rigorous proof. Archimedes heaps praise on Eratosthenes and then
suggests that he, Eratosthenes, is especially capable of judging (and apply-
ing?) a certain technique, “proceeding along which it shall be possible to
possess starting-points to enable one to see, through those of mechanics,
some of the theorems in mathematics.” This, then, is presented as a less-
than-rigorous technique – speciﬁcally, less than rigorous in that it applies
mechanics to geometry.
I mentioned that Archimedes heaps praise on Eratosthenes; the reason
I did so is because such praise strongly suggests, in my view, the possibility
of irony. We should be on guard. With this in mind, let us proceed with
the key examples.
The very ﬁrst proposition, as mentioned earlier, is the measurement of
the parabolic segment. Draw a parabolic segment and, inside it, the
triangle having the same base and the same vertex, both ABGD (BD
diameter). Draw AZ, parallel to BD, and GZ, tangent to the parabola at
G. Extend the line GB so that it cuts AZ at K, and then extend it further so
that QK ¼ KG. Now draw an arbitrary parallel to AZ, such as XONM. (It
quickly follows that GK is a median in the triangle AZG and that the
triangle ABG is one-fourth the magnitude of the triangle AZG.)
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A
X
D
B
C
N
O
K
H
T
Q
Z
M
G
Figure 
Archimedes now takes for granted a rather complex, although elementary,
result in conic theory (which he has proved in QP): in this kind of arrange-
ment with a parallel to the diameter, intercepted by the tangent, we have
MX : OX :: AG : AX:
The entire line (arbitrarily chosen, parallel to the diameter) intercepted
between the base and the tangent is to its section, intercepted between the
base and the parabola itself, as the entire base is to the segment of the base
intercepted by the arbitrarily chosen line.
With this, it only takes a couple of transformations to derive
MX : OX :: GK : KN or by construction
ð
Þ
MX : OX :: QK : KN:
We may now take OX and produce a copy of it (a line with the same
length) and position it so that its middle will lie on point Q (this is line
TH in the diagram). We now have
MX : TH :: QK : KN:
And so, we ﬁnd that K is the point around which, as a fulcrum, the two
lines MX and TH balance.
The argument proceeds directly, if very adventurously, from here. The
result we have just found could be repeated for any arbitrarily chosen line.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hence, it will be true for all of them. (The power of this “hence” is left
ambiguous.) Take all the lines in the triangle, such as MX, in the position in
which they are now. Then take all the lines in the parabolic segment, such
as OX, transported so that their center of the weight is on point Q. The
triangle would balance the parabola around the fulcrum, K. Now, we
know that the center of the weight of the triangle is at point C (where CK
is one-third of GK), and we have constructed, in this thought experiment,
point Q as the center of the weight of the transported parabolic segment –
with QK ¼ GK. The center of the weight of the triangle AZG is distant
from the fulcrum by the distance CK, but the center of the weight of the
parabola segment is distant from the fulcrum by the distance GK. Hence,
the parabolic segment is, in area, one-third the triangle AZG, or equiva-
lently, the parabolic segment is /the enclosed triangle ABGD.
Eratosthenes must have been impressed, if puzzled: Just what makes the
argument – however brilliant – so problematic? The words of the introduc-
tion clearly imply that the issue has to do with the application of mechanics,
but here, as noted previously, irony should be suspected – not to mention
the possibility of downright deception (Archimedes, back to his old tricks!).
After all, the very same argument – involving, however, not lines but,
instead, thin trapezia – was employed in the already-published Quadrature
of the Parabola. That was indeed a suspect, nonrigorous argument, but note
that Archimedes suggests that the technique is revealed, here, for the very
ﬁrst time: mechanics cannot be, then, the essence of the technique. Indeed,
we can do better than just comparing with Quadrature of the Parabola –
where the attribution of a “physical” ground for suspicion appears valid. We
can compare within the Method itself – to see another theorem that does not
apply a “physical” consideration and yet is equally suspect.
We need to get a fuller sense of the structure of the Method. It begins with
general “methodological” statements – and proceeds to provide various exam-
ples for the application of a certain technique. The measurement of the
parabola (area) is followed by the measurement of the sphere, the spheroid,
and the conoid (volumes), followed by the ﬁnding of various centers of the
weight. All of those were proved already, more rigorously, elsewhere.
There is more. The method starts out by promising not only the
revelation of a new proof technique but also of two new measurements,
this time of absolutely surprising objects. One is the shape produced by
cutting a cylinder obliquely through a diameter of a base circle; the result is
a lipstick-tip-shaped curvilinear object. The other is the result of having
two equal cylinders intersect perpendicularly: this is an even stranger
object,
a
box
bounded
by
eight
symmetrically
curved
surfaces.
Archimedes says in the introduction that he will ﬁrst display the new
technique through several of its applications, and then he will measure the
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

two new objects, ﬁrst by providing nonrigorous proofs based on the new
technique and then through a valid proof. Following the various results
concerning already-established measurements and already-known centers
of the weight, then, Archimedes proceeds to the new objects.
Archimedes’s treatment of the box is now lost, but we have not two but
three separate proofs for the “tip-of-the-lipstick” cylindrical cut. The ﬁrst
of these is similar in character to the proof we have seen in the Method’s
treatment of the parabolic segment, involving the centers of the weight of
individual slices. The third is indeed a valid geometrical argument, based
on circumscribing the shape between thin prisms and applying the type of
Eudoxean technique we saw with Spiral Lines.
The second is neither: clearly intended as less than a rigorous proof and
yet involving no mechanics. Appropriately, this is the last of the examples
of the new technique, produced through the Method: the hint, as it were,
tucked in, once again, right at the end.
G
H
Z
M
L
S
N
E
D
W
Y
Figure 

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The object that interests us is a cylindrical cut; let us think of the cut as
enclosed within a triangular prism. The base of the cylindrical cut is a
semicircle; the base of the triangular prism is a rectangle. Let us label the
rectangle EDGH and the semicircle EZH. Archimedes throws in an extra
construction, and of course, this is a parabola! We draw a parabola through
the three points – the number required to determine a parabola H, Z, E
(the parabola is represented in Figure by a triangle). We now draw an
arbitrary plane parallel to the line GH and perpendicular to the rectangle
EDGH, such as NMY. At the base, this is a line NM, cutting the circle at
point S and cutting the parabola at point L.
At this point, we have two triangles, one associated with the triangular
prism, namely, NMY, and one associated with the cylindrical cut, namely,
NSW. We also have three interesting lines at the base: one associated with
the rectangle, namely, NM; one associated with the circle, namely, NS;
and one associated with the parabolic segment, namely, NL.
The crux of the proof is a very surprising result in (elementary) conic
theory. It turns out that in the arrangement of the base with the parabola
passing through those three points of the circle, we always have the
following proportion:
NM : NS :: NS : NL
The line associated with the circle is the mean proportional between the
two other lines. Remarkable enough (the circle – in some sense, the mean
between a parabola and a line!) – but note the consequences. We imme-
diately see, through the operations on proportions that Hippocrates of
Chios already knew well, that we have also established that
NM : NS
ð
Þ2 :: NM : NL
ð
Þ:
That is: the ratio of the line associated with the rectangle to the line
associated with the circle, applied twice or squared – is the same as the
ratio of the line associated with the rectangle to the line associated with
the parabola.
Now, a ratio of lines, squared, is also simply the ratio of associated
similar plane ﬁgures. The triangle on top of the line of the rectangle
(NMY) to the triangle on top of the line of the circle (NSW) is like the
lines to each other, squared:
NMY : NSW :: NM : NL:
We have now reached a ratio involving, on the one side, triangles, on the
other side, lines.
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes, at this point, does something rather incredible. It is so
surprising that no one, in fact, suspected it before it was ﬁnally read,
twenty years ago, by the application of digital technology to the
Archimedes Palimpsest. I will return to the Archimedes Palimpsest (all
too brieﬂy) in the ﬁnal chapter, and so, for the time being, no more on
how we read this and instead just a quick note on the mathematics we ﬁnd.
What Archimedes does, now, is to gesture, brieﬂy, at a calculation with
inﬁnity. He points out that if we consider all the planes drawn parallel to
GH, then we may note that “the lines in the [rectangle] . . . are equal
in multitude to the triangles in the prism; and those triangles, in the
[cylindrical cut], are equal in multitude to the triangles in the prism; and
the lines [in the parabola] . . . are equal in multitude to the lines [in
the rectangle].” This is asserted, not proved, but clearly, Archimedes’s
thought – eerily reminiscent of modern set theory – must involve the
one-to-one relationship between planes and planes, planes and lines, and
lines with lines: asserting, in this way, an equality between inﬁnite multi-
tudes. What is even the point of all that? This observation on the equalities
between multitudes is only part of a wider set, all of which, taken together,
allow Archimedes – but only to the extent that he trusts a certain
operation, as it is extended to deal with inﬁnities – to sum up a set of
proportions. In this case, Archimedes sets up the inﬁnitely many diﬀerent
proportions, one for each of the arbitrary chosen planes and associated lines,
and derives from them one single proportion, involving the sums of all the
planes and lines taken together. Thus, Archimedes concludes this operation
by asserting that the triangular prism as a whole (consisting of all the triangles
in the prism) to the cylindrical cut as a whole (consisting of all the triangles in
the cylindrical cut) is as the rectangle (consisting of all the rectangle lines) to
the parabolic segments (consisting of all the parabola lines).
Let us pause to make a quick comparison. Archimedes, starting with
proposition , always did sum up, in this treatise, inﬁnitely many pro-
portions. He did this by transforming each proportion into a system of
magnitudes balancing around a ﬁxed point. Then, instead of invoking some
kind of rule with which the summation of proportions may be achieved, he
simply assumed that if one adds up many objects, even inﬁnitely many, so
that each balances at a ﬁxed point, so will all of them, taken together. In this
For the full technical detail on this episode, see R. Netz, K. Saito, and T. Tchernetska, “A New
Reading of Method Proposition : Preliminary Evidence from the Archimedes Palimpsest (Part
),” SCIAMVS (): –; R. Netz, K. Saito, and T. Tchernetska, “A New Reading of Method
Proposition : Preliminary Evidence from the Archimedes Palimpsest (Part ),” SCIAMVS 
(): –.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ﬁnal proposition, this is no longer relevant (the obtained proportion is not
transformed into a statement of physical balance). Hence, one operates,
instead, via a general argument concerning proportions.
The result itself is clear: prism to cylindrical cut, as rectangle to para-
bolic segment – but we know the ratio of the rectangle to the parabolic
segment! Archimedes has found this much earlier, in the Quadrature of the
Parabola – and again, just now, in the ﬁrst proposition of the Method itself.
So many circles are now closing. The rectangle to the parabolic segment is
:(after all, the parabolic segment is :the enclosed triangle), or if we
wish, the entire prism, surrounding the entire cylinder – four times this
triangular prism – is :or six times the cylindrical cut. The lipstick has
been measured. So much is clear, and so much else remains diﬃcult – and
tantalizing. Just what was Eratosthenes supposed to make out of this?
But then again: we should bear in mind, above all, the possibility of
irony. Likely enough, being tantalizing and diﬃcult was not some failure
on Archimedes’s part – as if Archimedes tried hard to convey to
Eratosthenes just what was valid, and what wasn’t, and to demarcate the
borders as clearly as possible, and then failed in doing so. No: everything
suggests that Archimedes wanted the question of what makes his technique
problematic to be, itself, problematic. For the same reason that he engaged
with problematic techniques in the ﬁrst place – for the same reason that he
made it maximally diﬃcult to realize why the result of Spiral Lines was
true, by making the route there as surprising and opaque as possible – for
the same reason that he sent out a challenge with two false claims thrown
in. Archimedes sought valid proofs, of course. But his goal was not to
achieve incontrovertibility. His goal was the precise edge of contestability:
the point at which one’s result would be shielded by the power of
mathematical proof – and yet would invite disbelief and even controversy.
And we can see the various layers of history – sociology – leading up to this
moment. The role of debate and controversy in deﬁning the very nature of
intellectual engagement, from the very beginning of Greek science and
philosophy, and then, the value put on irony, subtlety, and surprise in the
Hellenistic culture centered on Alexandria.
On Floating Bodies
The value put on irony . . . which is why I believe that “section of the
right-angled cone, APOL” really ought to be an intentional swipe at
Apollonius. Perhaps – this we cannot tell. (Even if it was intentional, it
was also intended to be hidden, after all!) The treatise itself is there: On
Floating Bodies, the culmination of Archimedes’s project of mathematizing
the physical world.
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The ﬁrst thing to note is that this treatise forms a close parallel to On
Balancing Planes. There, as you recall, Archimedes ﬁrst proves, in a ﬁrst
book, a key general result in “physics” (law of the balance), then applies it
to relatively simple results (center of the weight in triangle and trapezium);
the second book restates, somewhat diﬀerently, the general result and then
applies it in a much more complex way, by bringing in the parabola (the
center of the weight of the parabolic segment – and the parabolic slice).
Similarly, in On Floating Bodies, the ﬁrst book derives a key general
result in “physics” (law of buoyancy), then applies it to a relatively simple
result (conditions of stability of a spherical segment). The second book
restates the key result in a diﬀerent way and then applies it in a much more
complex way by bringing in the parabola (the conditions of stability of a
segment of a paraboloid). The parallels run deeper – both treatises, in their
current form, do not have an introduction other than a very brief state-
ment of postulates. (On Floating Bodies, incredibly, manages with only a
single postulate at the start – and then another, snuck in following the
proof of the law of buoyancy.) Quite obviously, both are divided, some-
what arbitrarily, into two books. And of course, both deal, in a purely
mathematical way, with a question about the physical world. I ﬁnd it
incredible that such a parallelism was not intentional.
And so, everything in On Floating Bodies is like that previous achieve-
ment – but more. As noted: a single postulate will do. “Let the liquid be
assumed having such a nature so that the less pressed of its parts – being set
equally [with each other] and being contiguous [with each other] – is
pushed out by the more pressed, and that, further, each of its parts is
pressed by the liquid above it which is along a perpendicular.” Just as with
On Balancing Planes, this cryptic statement gains its meaning only through
its applications. Figure is from Book , proposition .
G
B
1
3
4
2
U
R
S
T
H
Q
E
Z
Figure 

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We consider a planar section to a liquid sphere – a circle, then. (Note,
at this point, that Archimedes takes for granted – as did all educated
Greeks – that the earth is spherical. The spherical liquid is an approxima-
tion, then, of the sea.) We conceptually ﬁnd a sector within this circle,
divide it in turn into two equal sectors, and draw a smaller arc inside, so
that now we have four regions, which I will label, in this ﬁgure, , , , .
The key observation (in terms somewhat modernized from Archimedes’s)
is that region presses down on region while region presses down on
region . The forces pressing down are simply the weights of the bodies of
liquid in regions , . (You notice that it is taken for granted that liquids
press down toward the center of the earth. Further, liquids – and later on,
solids immersed in them – are tacitly taken to be homogenous; this is, of
course, the same as the assumptions used in PE.)
The postulate works in practice through the claim that if a liquid is
stable, the forces acting down on adjacent and equal sectors are equal to
each other. (This is a little bit like the balance of equal magnitudes
equidistant from the fulcrum, postulated for PE.) That is, if we assume
stability, it must be the case that the forces pressing down on regions and
by regions and are equal. (From this, indeed, we can quickly deduce
– as Archimedes does at the start of the treatise – that the liquids form a
sphere.) Now, what if – as in the ﬁgure of proposition – a solid, lighter
than the liquid, is immersed in region , such as EZGQHB? A moment’s
reﬂection shows that if indeed region is to remain with the same weight
as region , it must be the case that the solid will ﬂoat at the top of the
liquid, partly immersed, in such a way so that its overall weight
(EZGQHB) is equal to the weight of the liquid it has displaced. The
liquid it has displaced is, of course, its immersed portion (BGQH; equal to
RSTU in region ).
We have found that vessels ﬂoating on the sea do so in such a way that
they displace a liquid whose weight is equal to the vessel’s own weight.
I state this as a physical result to emphasize the sheer unlikelihood of our
achievement. Pure geometrical thought – and no more than a single
postulate – and so much can be proved about the world! A magic trick,
already. In some ways, this is much more impressive than the achievement
of the law of the balance. The generalization of the experience of the
balance (equal weights, balancing at equal distances) to the general case
was certainly known, empirically, prior to Archimedes. His achievement
was “merely” the ﬁnding of a pure mathematical proof. But nothing
suggests that anyone prior to Archimedes was aware of the law of buoy-
ancy. This, after all, was the original “Eureka” moment!
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And yet – and just as with On Balancing Planes – this is barely the
beginning. Proposition itself is further transformed – but relying on the
same type of reasoning throughout – to a form that allows us to calculate
the force with which an object, immersed in the liquid, is pushed up or,
equivalently, the weight it loses by being immersed. Following that, Book 
concludes with a relatively simple case of the determination of the stability
of a particular solid immersed in a liquid, namely, the segment of the
sphere. (This is the analogue of the way in which, in PE I, Archimedes
ﬁnds the centers of the weight of the triangle and the trapezium.) I will go
through this (proposition ) because it is much easier to explain than the
main development of Book and because it is clear that this was
Archimedes’s intention, as well: I.is a useful preparation for what follows,
not in mathematical terms (Archimedes does not refer back to it) but in
cognitive terms. Without it, Book would have been totally illegible.
In the arrangement of the diagram (which I slightly simplify and
modernize), ABGD is the spherical liquid, with L its center, EZHQ – a
light solid spherical segment (greater than a hemisphere) partially
immersed in the liquid (BNGZ being the immersed portion). ZQ is the
axis of the segment, and K is the center of the original sphere (of which
EZHQ is a segment).
H
E
Q
B
R
N
X
K
S
A
L
D
Z
G
Figure 

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An added postulate – snuck in right before this proposition – is that a
light solid, immersed in a liquid, is moved up along a perpendicular (this
phrase is left undeﬁned) passing through its center of the weight. It is also
taken for granted (perhaps understood to be in no need of a postulate
because it is already assumed in mechanical discussions) that a solid,
outside of a liquid, is moved down along a perpendicular passing through
its center of the weight. We thus have two portions: BNGZ and
EBNGHQ. The ﬁrst is immersed and moved upward; the second is
nonimmersed and moved downward.
Archimedes states his intention to prove that the segment comes to a
stand upright so that its axis is along a perpendicular (the phrase here
means – as we see from its application – verging toward the center of the
earth). To do so, he asks us to assume that the segment is not upright, that
is, that its axis does not verge toward the center of the earth. This is
explicitly – and meaningfully – presented as a proof by contradiction.
Thus, the line joining the center of the earth and the center of the spherical
segment is assumed not to pass through the axis of the spherical segment.
A moment’s reﬂection shows that if two spheres intersect, their conjoint
volume (a kind of lens shape) is symmetrical around the line joining the
centers of the two spheres. Thus, the center of the weight of this region
must be on that line, joining LK; we assume it to be R.
The center of the weight of the spherical segment as a whole must lie on
the axis QZ, on the side of K that is closer to Z (originally, the sphere had
its center at K; we obtained a spherical segment by removing part of the
sphere, farther away from Z, so after the removal, the center must have
moved toward Z). Let it be X. The center of the weight of the nonimmersed
portion of the segment of the sphere (EBNGHQ) must lie at a point such as
S, which is on the continuation of the line RX on the other side of the axis
from R. (This is because R and S balance out as point X; it is the fulcrum
of the two segments. Notice that Archimedes applies On Balancing Planes
here.)
This is all we need. The immersed portion is moved up along the line
LR. The nonimmersed portion is moved down along the line SL. Because
the lines do not coincide, the solid is not stable, and in fact, it will rotate.
Hence, the solid will be stable, Archimedes concludes, when it stands
upright. This ﬁnal transition is rather fast, and Archimedes elides the need
to show the existence of a path leading from instability to stability. (He
does so, perhaps, because he thinks of this problem strictly within the
terms of a proof by contradiction where once the alternative has been ruled
out, the aﬃrmative result is thereby immediately obtained; this is, after all,
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the basic technique Archimedes had learned from Eudoxus and applied so
often since!)
What this proposition does is clarify our approach to problems of
stability. A light solid is stable in a liquid when the centers of the weight
of its portions (immersed and nonimmersed) are aligned. The meaning of
“aligned,” in this case, is that the line joining those two points passes
through the center of the liquid sphere; this will be slightly (and implicitly)
revised in Book .
The case of the segment of the sphere already involves some interesting
geometry and is perhaps surprising. That is: it is not obvious that however
slanted the segment is at the start, it will always end up standing upright.
(Note, incidentally, one constraint: we are not allowed to slant the segment
such that its base is immersed in the liquid; Archimedes’s tools, in fact, would
fail then because the immersed portion, in such a case, is no longer a
symmetrical lens, and so its center of the weight cannot be determined.) But
we can already expect that this would be trivial compared to what comes next.
Book is an extended study in the conditions of stability – derived
from the positions of the centers of the weight – in the segments of
paraboloids of revolution. Let us take a look at FB .(the ﬁrst – and
least diﬃcult – of the cases).
We consider, once again, a plane section. APOL is a parabolic segment
(“section of a right-angled cone,” of course!). IS is the surface of the liquid,
so IPOS is immersed and AISL is nonimmersed. Note that Archimedes
moves to treating the surface of the liquid as ﬂat and to treating “perpen-
dicular” not as “verging to the center of the earth” but as “perpendicular to
the surface of the liquid.” (Almost incredibly: this happens without a word
of explanation!)
P
I
A
N
L
O
S
R
F
B
G
Figure 

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We need the centers of the weight of paraboloids of revolution, which
Archimedes had found in a previous (lost) work. Unsurprisingly, they lie
on the diameter of the segment, and remarkably, they are found at a simple
cut: one-third the diameter. NO is the diameter of the original parabolic
segment, and it is easy to show that if we bisect IS at F and draw FP parallel
to NO, FP is then the diameter of the parabolic segment IPOS. We thus
divide NO at R, so that OR:RN:::, and FP at B, so that PB:BF:::. R is
the center of the weight of the entire paraboloid; B, of its immersed
portion; point G can be found as the center of the nonimmersed portion.
Clearly, the segment will be stable when the line BG is perpendicular to
the surface of the liquid. In practice, we may as well consider just the line
segment BR. Is it, or is it not, perpendicular to the line IS?
This, it turns out, depends on two questions.
.
What is the shape of the original parabolic segment APOL: Is it
elongated, like a bullet? Or ﬂat, like a bowl? This is a degree of
freedom, as we are allowed to cut the parabola however far from or
close to the vertex as we please, and such a cutting produces a variety
of shapes. “However far or close” has to be measured by some unit
inherent to the parabola, and Archimedes measures this, naturally, in
terms of the ratio of the main diameter NO to the ﬁxed parameter of
the parabola. (This is already reminiscent of Apollonius’s Book ,
where the position of the smallest lines was dependent on the distance
from the vertex, expressed in terms of multiples of the parameter;
more on this to come.)
.
What is the immersed fraction of APOL? This is a degree of freedom
that, remarkably, can be given a precise geometrical as well as physical
meaning. In the ﬁrst proposition of Book , Archimedes restates the
law of buoyancy to show that the immersed fraction is determined by
the ratio, in weight (in the sense of what we now call speciﬁc gravity),
between the liquid and the solid. If the solid is one-ﬁfth the speciﬁc
gravity of the liquid, one-ﬁfth of it will be immersed; if it is percent
of the speciﬁc gravity of the liquid, percent of it will be immersed.
This is a ratio that we can simply assume as we wish. To make this
even more interesting, Archimedes had proved that the volumes of
segments of paraboloids of revolution are to each other as the square
of the diameter. The ratio of speciﬁc gravities between the solid and
the liquid is therefore the same as the ratio, in square, between the line
segments FP, NO.
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We thus have an arrangement such as in Figure , where we may vary
two values:
.
NO, in terms of the parameter (producing diﬀerent shapes for the
ﬁgure APOL)
.
FP:NO(producing diﬀerent fractions of the immersed portion)
The question then becomes, What happens to the relative positions of
the points R, B, as those two values are gradually varied? This is the single
question studied throughout FB .
P
I
A
N
L
O
S
w
K
R
F
B
G
Figure 
The way Archimedes deals with this question here, in FB ., is by
drawing a tangent at point P, such as KW. Because it is a tangent at the
vertex of the diameter PF, it will be parallel (by elementary conic theory) to
the line IS. This provides us with an opening. Draw the perpendicular
from P to the tangent/surface of the liquid, and if this perpendicular passes
through both points B, R, the ﬁgure is obviously stable. If it passes
between the points B and R, with B on its left and R on its right (as in
Figure ), we ﬁnd that the perpendiculars drawn from B and R, respec-
tively, do not coincide. The nonimmersed portion will move down more
on the side of L; the immersed portion will move up more on the side of A;
and overall, the segment will rotate in a clockwise direction and thus right
itself. If the position of B and R is replaced, the direction of the rotation
will be counterclockwise, and the ﬁgure will not right itself but instead
capsize (I return, later on, to this point to explain the sense of
“capsizing” here).
We are now looking at the relative positions of points B, P, R. In the
simplest case, studied in FB ., the axis of the main segment NO is taken

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to be small compared to the parameter, by a precise value: the diameter
NO is smaller than .times the parameter. With such a bowl-shaped
parabolic segment, it can be shown that regardless of the ratio NO:FP,
the segment behaves rather like the spherical segment, and indeed, when
the segment is tilted, the perpendicular drawn up from P must always fall
between B and R so that the segment then rotates and, presumably,
stabilizes when the points R, B, and P all fall on the same axis common
to both segments, APOL and IPOS.
Why is that? Because NO is less than .times the parameter, its
portion RO is obviously smaller than the parameter. It can be shown,
however, that for any arbitrary line drawn parallel to the diameter, such as
FP, if we draw two lines from P, one perpendicular to the diameter NO
and one perpendicular to the tangent KPW, they will intercept a segment,
on the diameter NO, exactly equal to the parameter. (This is precisely
analogous to the reasoning used by Apollonius in Book of his Conics.)
Thus, the line drawn from P, perpendicular to KPW, must cut the
diameter NO above the point R (or otherwise, the intercept will be smaller
than OR and so smaller than the parameter).
All of this is trivial compared to what comes next. Indeed, I am not
quite sure how to continue our guided tour because, from this point
onward, I cannot think of a way of making the arguments at all accessible.
I focus, then, on the results alone.
Archimedes goes, in the remainder of the treatise, through the combina-
torics of length and weight, adding in the extra consideration that the
segment may start out with its base entirely outside the liquid (the starting
point we have considered so far) or entirely inside the liquid (which brings
its own, slightly diﬀerent complications). This is elaborated across nine
propositions, the last of which breaks down into many subcases. It turns
out that the moment we allow the axis to be long, the ratio NO:FPdoes
matter. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁnal proposition shows that with a very long,
bullet-shaped parabolic segment, a certain paradoxical result ensues. If the
segment is almost as heavy as the liquid, almost all of APOL will be covered
by IPOS, and so the segment will still be stable. That is, if you tilt it (while
keeping the base entirely outside or entirely inside), it will right itself.
Make it somewhat lighter, and more and more of it will extrude outside
of the liquid, and so it will be less robustly based in the liquid. At a given
weight, the segment will obtain its stability – excitingly! – no longer
upright, but when it is tilted at a certain angle. This already is very
counterintuitive because, at ﬁrst glance, it would appear that a symmetrical
object such as the paraboloid must be stable upright – or not at all!
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Indeed, this stability is rare and obtained only at a precise weight. Make
the solid even lighter, and it will capsize.
But, and here is the greater paradox, if you make it even lighter – a
feather now, only slightly touching on the liquid – it will, counterintui-
tively, regain its tendency to stabilize. Make it light enough, and once
again, it will stabilize at an angle. Make it super-light, and it will stabilize
perfectly along the axis.
The tale of the Roman soldier who approached Archimedes while he
was hard at work and was asked to “leave my diagrams alone,” then killed
Archimedes in rage, is there to broadcast a particular image. However
involved with the practical world, Archimedes was also at a certain remove
from it. I ﬁnd it hard to read On Floating Bodies any diﬀerently. It is, in a
sense, a supreme application of mathematics so as to derive results that –
through that magic of mathematics that philosophers, rather than histo-
rians, need to explain – are, in fact, true of the physical world. But it is
clearly motivated, ultimately, by something much less practical, not just in
the sense that it is not about physical reality but that even within the terms
of mathematics, the point is not to furnish widely applicable results but
rather to furnish subtlety and paradox, as such. No ancient ships were
designed, in antiquity, based on Archimedean mechanics, and as a matter
of fact, it is clear that the ultimate motivation, for Archimedes, lay within
conic theory itself.
I have mentioned Apollonius’s Conics Book , and it is indeed, in some
ways, comparable to Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies. It is about ﬁnding
meaningful points on conic curves, often based on considerations having
to do with the point at which a line equal to the parameter is cut oﬀfrom
the axis. (In the most diﬃcult proposition , Archimedes, too, operates
by producing an extra, auxiliary conic section, in this case, a parabola.)
But here lies also a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. The question posed by
Apollonius is right at the edge of geometrical signiﬁcance. We are looking
at, ﬁrst, the smallest line from a given point on the axis to the curve (so far,
so clear). But then we move to another object altogether, the property that
a given point on the curve has, serving as the end point for the smallest
among the lines drawn from some point on the axis. And then even at a
further remove – the property of a given point on the plane, of having
some smallest line to a given curve (in the sense deﬁned previously) passing
through it. This is already hardly motivated and can only work because we
are fascinated, indeed, by the very subtlety of the exercise.
Archimedes, in this treatise, is even further removed from geometrical
signiﬁcance. This is all about the relative positions of almost-arbitrarily

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

chosen points on a parabolic segment and its subsegment; one point is A,
and another is L; yet another point is R, located at two-thirds of the
diameter NO; B is the ﬁnal point, located at two-thirds of the diameter of
the subsegment. We are provided with this general arrangement and asked
to ﬁnd, for various values of segment and subsegment, the relative posi-
tions of the points from left to right. This, in a nutshell, is the problem. It
is a genuine problem in pure conic theory, a very hard one – and a
surprising one, too. But who would even care?
This is what the physical interpretation does for Archimedes: it provides
the problem with meaning. Of course, I do not intend to say that
Archimedes got obsessed with the relative positions of A, B, R, L and then
looked for a possible meaning for this geometrical question. Rather, he
noticed in general that this thing, the “center of the weight,” applied to the
problem of stability in a liquid, can endow geometrical conﬁgurations with
meaning and thus expand the ﬁeld of what is geometrically meaningful.
Indeed, my suggestion is that this is why Archimedes got interested in the
center of the weight, itself, to begin with: because it made certain relations
rich with signiﬁcance. It was always Archimedes – turning back toward his
diagrams. Because, you see, it was the makers of diagrams – other math-
ematicians – with whom Archimedes was in conversation: Conon,
Dositheus, even Eratosthenes; Apollonius, perhaps, his ﬁnal, most
important interlocutor.
A Syracusan Coda: And More, on the Physical Sciences
In the end, the Roman soldier came. Archimedes got entangled in
Mediterranean history, indeed, in its most spectacular showdown. In
, Hannibal crossed the Alps; in , at Cannae, he completely
destroyed the Roman army. Rome had almost nothing, other than its
walls, with which to defend itself. Its allies in Italy were defecting; soon
enough, it was clear: Hannibal’s Carthage might rule over the western
Mediterranean. Averting immediate catastrophe, the Romans began to
raise a new army, and Hannibal was preparing for the ﬁnal push. What
he needed, above all, was fresh troops from Carthage, and he needed them
fast: they had to cross via Sicily. To prevent this, the Romans wanted
Syracuse on their side. Roman resources were thin, but this hole in the
defenses, above all, had to be plugged at all cost. When Syracuse
demurred, Marcellus laid siege to the city. We need to imagine the
Roman ﬂotilla approaching the city – a few last ships leaving the harbor
of Syracuse, bound for the eastern Mediterranean. I imagine one of those
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

holding in its bow a tiny piece of cargo – two rolls, addressed to
Alexandrian readers, containing Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies. How
eagerly this cargo was awaited by those in the know!
And meanwhile, Archimedes stayed back. Syracuse was holding.
Everyone in the Mediterranean, now, had catapults (as we shall return to
note in the following chapter). But those of Syracuse were especially well
sited by Archimedes, their ranges calculated precisely in advance so that
the besiegers would ﬁnd no safe place. (This is asserted in clear terms by
the historian best positioned to know, Polybius, on whom more in the
following chapter; I see no reason to doubt any detail in this account.) And
then, a rapid series of events. (Apollonius in Alexandria, meanwhile – allow
me to dream – was plotting his comeback, his own subtle response to
Archimedes’s APOL!) A traitor was found – they always did ﬁnd one in
those long sieges. The gates were opened in the dead of night; Syracuse fell;
Hannibal’s army was never replenished. The future would be Roman.
Archimedes died. He was old, to be sure, with perhaps many dozens of
books to his name. Later still, the future would be Archimedean. The last
two rolls coming out of Alexandria were more enduring than Roman
power. (More on this in the epilogue to this book.)
But enough with this romantic note and now to a sober observation:
one thing that did not happen in Syracuse was any mirror burning any
ship. To be clear, such a story would circulate, starting in Late Antiquity.
It is patently impractical with anything like ancient technology. But as
with “Give me a place to stand and I shall move the earth,” as with the
story of Archimedes jumping out of the bath, this story, too, was probably
invented out of a reality, rooted in Archimedes’s own writing.
To be clear, I do not think that Archimedes studied the geometry of
burning mirrors, for reasons that I will explain later on. But I do think he
was a pioneer in optics and was remembered for that – and that, years
later, the study of burning mirrors would come to be a dominant part of
the study of optics. And so, years later – in Late Antiquity – it became
natural to encapsulate, in narrative form, the idea that an author was a
master of optics by inventing a tale where he puts mirrors to good
burning use.
What can we say of Archimedes’s optics? Of ancient mathematical
optics in general? It now has its moment in my book – a history of
Greek mathematics, where I try to do justice to the variety of the exact
sciences as a whole. And yet I shall add no more than a few brief notes (this
one; another one, later in this chapter, on burning mirrors; and yet another
one, very brieﬂy, in Chapter , as I introduce Ptolemy’s character as a

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

scientist). Ancient optics, quite simply, is unlucky in its survival. It is likely
that its three main protagonists, in antiquity, were Archytas, Archimedes,
and Ptolemy. Of the ﬁrst, we have but the vaguest indications, which
suggest, however, that he might have invented the discipline. Of
Archimedes’s optics, what survives is no more than a couple of highly
mediated and late testimonies. Ptolemy survives – as Books –and
some of Book of an originally ﬁve-book treatise, all of this extant only in
a Latin translation from an Arabic translation of the Greek original (!).
A couple of works – on optics and on the ﬁeld of catoptrics, which is the
general theory of (nonburning) mirrors – are extant under the name of
Euclid. Whether or not they are indeed by him (or even should be dated to
his general era), they likely represent the elementary, and yet sophisticated,
results already obtained by Archytas or by other authors of his generation.
One quickly ﬁnds there the basic properties of perspective, and the key
property for catoptrics is that the line of vision is reﬂected by a mirror at
equal angles. This may, or may not, have been extended, even early on, to
the study of non-ﬂat mirrors; we do not know.
To repeat, Archimedes did not study burning mirrors (which are one of
the more natural applications of the study of non-ﬂat mirrors). And it does
seem likely that his main contribution lay elsewhere. The two positive, tiny
bits of information we have on Archimedes’s optics both involve
Archimedes engaging with the phenomenon of refraction. Both come from
late ancient commentaries: Theon of Alexandria – seemingly a well-
informed author – cites Archimedes on the manner in which the size of
the stars could be aﬀected by the refraction, through the passage of light
through (what we call) the atmosphere. Olympiodorus, a commentator to
Aristotle – perhaps less reliable but also hardly one to be able to invent this
kind of information – cites Archimedes for the observation that a ring
tossed into an empty vessel appears, once water has been poured, to
become displaced. There is a complication with that (the very same claim
is asserted – without any further elaboration – in the extant text of the
Euclidean catoptrics). The simplest account, in my view, is not that
Olympiodorus was confused between Euclid and Archimedes but that
someone took a well-known Archimedean observation and inserted it as
an addition to the Euclidean catoptrics (because, in fact, this observation is
not otherwise motivated by the text of Euclid). The study of refraction
came to be seen, in antiquity, as part of the general study of mirrors, and
A. M. Smith, Ptolemy’s Theory of Visual Perception: An English Translation of the Optics
(Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, ).
IV. Archimedes’s Physics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the reason is clear enough. When one studies mirrors, one usually studies
them for their optical illusions: the distortions produced by concave and
convex mirrors. And the tiny bit preserved by Olympiodorus, not coinci-
dentally, involves just that – an illusion, an optical trick.
To be clear, I doubt that the tossed ring was the point of Archimedes’s
lost treatise on optics. Later readers tend to remember the most elementary
bits of an Archimedean treatise. (I would seriously hazard the guess that, if
anything, Archimedes went on to study refractions produced by oddly
shaped bodies of water, or the image, through refraction, of oddly shaped
bodies: How about a paraboloid?) But it is nice to part with Archimedes on
this note of parlor magic. This is what this is all about: mystery, surprise.
And yet, there is one more Archimedean magic trick we have forgotten
to perform! Once again, I will be brief and merely hint at this one right
now. But let us remember Archimedes’s contribution to astronomy, which
consisted, above all, in the making of a wondrous device. We will, of
course, look further at the Antikythera mechanism – when we return to
discuss this as evidence for Greek astronomy. This much can be gleaned,
however, from Cicero’s report (ultimately based on Archimedes’s writing?)
of the machine. It put in place a subtle, carefully calculated combination of
hidden gears – so that, by pulling on a single handle, the mechanism
derived the entire motion of the sky and all the planets. It is hard to
reconstruct much more than this concerning the place of Archimedes’s
device in the history of ideas – or of technology. But what we know is
enough to put it, tentatively, alongside our sense, so far, of what
Archimedes was like, as an author. We imagine him displaying the
machine to his friends, perhaps to his patrons, but also conveying it, more
indirectly, as a written work. Conveying, throughout, the surprise of a
magic trick.
Throughout of all of this, we see, for sure, a communication pattern
diﬀerent from that of Archytas conversing with Plato. The intended
audience is not philosophical. This is not conceptual analysis, abstraction
for the sake of the quest for hidden ontological truths, logical classiﬁcation.
I imagine Archimedes seeking a group of like-minded readers, immersed in
the same culture of subtlety and surprise. I provided a number of exam-
ples, but before we move on to consider, ﬁnally, the totality of this
audience – Archimedes’s generation – a quick word on one ﬁnal, negative
A somewhat more expanded survey of ancient optics is oﬀered in R. Netz and M. Squire, “The
Limits of Ancient Optics,” in M. Squire (ed.), Sight and the Ancient Senses (London: Routledge,
), pp. –.

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

bit of evidence. We have seen engagement with the physical world – or
perhaps some kind of “mechanics” – and for sure (although now less well
attested), we have seen astronomy and optics. What we do not ﬁnd in
Archimedes – and almost without exception, in his entire generation – is any
hint of music. This – the hallmark of the application of mathematics –
seems almost to have vanished in the Hellenistic era, alone of all the
mathematical ﬁelds. Is it possible that the association between mathematical
music and a particular philosophical attitude became so pronounced that
mathematicians, from now on, who wished to avoid the implication of
philosophical allegiance, would prefer to avoid that discipline?
V.
Response to Archimedes: The Generation
The Generation of Archimedes
This has mostly been – appropriately – a chapter about Archimedes. I have
shown enough, I hope, to provide a sense of the scale of his achievement.
And in considering the ﬁgure of Apollonius (whom I have not adequately
represented), we have seen something of the generational response. For
indeed, if Archimedes was so important, this is because so many signiﬁcant
scientists read and responded to him over the centuries. This began
right then.
The following is a list of the authors whom it is reasonable to place in
the generation of Archimedes (that is, let us say, born later than
Archimedes but before about , and so active until the middle of
the second century). Our sources diﬀer from those for the generation of
Archytas: we do not have anything like Proclus’s historical summary,
apparently organized chronologically. Therefore, I will not try to arrange
these authors by date. But our sources are better: for many of these
authors, we have actual reports, sometimes fragments, of their works.
A few are even extant.
For each author, then, I note the state of our knowledge concerning the
mathematics: a mere attestation of mathematical activity (attested); frag-
mentary survival of some works, at least in a report that provides a sense of
the contents of the mathematical achievement (fragmentary); or extant
work(s). I also note the likelihood that the authors in question are, in fact,
from this generation: whether we have direct ways of dating them (dated)
or we merely assume, based on the character of writing, that it best ﬁts this
period (extrapolation). The list is arranged alphabetically.
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Apollonius
Extant
Dated
Apollonius (son)
Attested
Dated
Attalus
Attested
Dated
Basilides
Attested
Extrapolation
Charmandrus
Attested
Extrapolation
Crates
Attested
Extrapolation
Demetrius
Fragmentary
Extrapolation
Diocles
Extant
Extrapolation
Dionysodorus
Fragmentary
Extrapolation
Dositheus
Attested
Dated
Eratosthenes
Extant
Dated
Erycinus
Attested
Extrapolation
Eudemus
Attested
Dated
Heraclides
Attested
Dated
Heraclitus
Attested
Extrapolation
Hippias
Attested
Extrapolation
Hypsicles (father)
Attested
Extrapolation
Hypsicles
Extant
Extrapolation
Naucrates
Attested
Dated
Nicomedes
Fragmentary
Dated
Nicoteles
Attested
Dated
Perseus
Attested
Extrapolation
Philo of Byzantium
Extant
Dated
Philo of Tyana
Attested
Extrapolation
Philonides
Attested
Dated
Protarchus
Attested
Extrapolation
Puthion
Attested
Extrapolation
Scopinas
Attested
Extrapolation
Theodosius
Extant
Extrapolation
Thrasidaeus
Attested
Dated
Xenagoras
Attested
Dated
Zenodorus
Extant
Extrapolation
Zeuxippus
Attested
Dated
There are (adding in Archimedes himself ) thirty-four names, of which
almost exactly half (sixteen) are securely dated. Surely, at least some of
those whom I extrapolate to have been working in this era were, in fact,
active at some other time (if so, most likely in the imperial era; I shall
return to discuss this brieﬂy in Chapter as I comment, in the context of
the history of astronomy, on the character of mathematics under the
Roman Empire). But the number is signiﬁcant: compare it with what we
found for the preceding century (nine or ten?) and the generation of
Archytas (twenty-three). Once again, we have no advantage in terms of

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

historiography. There is no extant work setting out to record the mathe-
maticians of this era. The only thing that makes the memory of this era
survive is the sheer survival of its own works – which is very remarkable.
Aside from the two main authors, Archimedes and Apollonius, works may
now be extant in full, from this generation, by up to six other authors: eight
extant authors is already something like a third of the entire set of mathe-
matical authors surviving from antiquity. (A very large group in itself: of the
roughly three hundred extant ancient Greek authors, almost percent are
mathematical! I shall return to discuss this in the last chapter.)
So, to begin with, it is likely that there were indeed many mathemati-
cians. The ratio of attestation – how many of the extant authors are
actually now known – cannot be better than that for the generation of
Archytas, and it is therefore likely that there were at least a hundred
mathematicians in this period. Two – Archimedes and Apollonius – must
have been the most proliﬁc, with perhaps ﬁfty to a hundred works just
between the two of them; most must have written just a handful of works
or perhaps only a single one, but the conclusion is that there were
hundreds of mathematical treatises produced in this generation. About
twenty are now extant, even though almost all of the extant works from
this generation are diﬃcult pieces of mathematics, deﬁnitely not part of the
educational curriculum. They are extant not because they were in educa-
tional use but because they were valued. Already, the ancients knew:
something important was taking place then.
And indeed, the sense of a qualitative identity is what provides us with
the sense of a generation and justiﬁes our ascription of otherwise hard-to-
date authors to this era. The core is, indeed, the response to Archimedes.
In some cases, it can be very direct. In Sphere and Cylinder ., for
instance, Archimedes sets out a problem akin to that of the duplication
of the cube, although considerably harder than it. To recall: Sphere and
Cylinder came about halfway through the series of treatises sent to
Dositheus, discharging the original challenge to Conon. My own inter-
pretation of the evidence is that within this work, Archimedes set out an
extra challenge: see if you can solve that cubic problem! There was no one
to answer the original problem set out in the letter to Conon, but now
mathematics was revived, and there were, indeed, at least two solutions
oﬀered, one by Dionysodorus and the other by Diocles. We also have
extant Archimedes’s own solution. (All three are collected and cited by
Eutocius in the sixth century ; I return to this episode in Chapter .)
The problem is subtle and calls, speciﬁcally, for ingenuity with conic
sections. This is all typical to the challenge posed by Archimedes – and
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to the responses to it. Everyone, now, was brushing up on their parabolas.
There is a wider interest in other inventive curves.Nicomedes describes a
curve deﬁned by a complex geometrical condition that is best constructed
by a geometrical machine. (Is the machine purely hypothetical, or was it
built?) This is the conchoid, now known through a detailed account
preserved, once again, by Eutocius. Diocles proposed a diﬀerent curve,
which was perhaps called the cissoid. A conchoid (“shell-like”), a cissoid
(“ivy-like”): the rather ﬂamboyant nomenclature is in itself Archimedean.
But the key, of course, is the Archimedean tenor of the mathematics itself.
A certain Perseus studied the curve produced by the intersection of a plane
and a torus (a rotated circle) – this is already reminiscent of Apollonius,
studying the cylindrical spiral. Dionysodorus measured the volume of this
torus by ﬁnding that the ratio of this volume to a certain cylinder is as that
of a circle to a parallelogram. (This is directly related to the approach we
noted in the Method: Were Archimedes’s inﬁnitary methods applied by
other mathematicians?) A certain Hippias invented a curve now known as
the quadratrix, distinguished by a certain proportion deﬁning its construc-
tion as a point is moved along a line. (In this case, then, a very obvious
variation on the idea of the spiral. Just like the spiral, the quadratrix – as its
name suggests – can be used for the squaring of the circle.) Zenodorus is
now extant, in very mediated form, in a study of isoperimetric ﬁgures
(ﬁgures that have diﬀerent shapes but the same perimeter or surface). The
precise approach taken is a direct continuation of Archimedes’s studies on
the surface of the sphere and is related, in fact, to the original challenge
sent to Conon. It all goes back to there!
Perseus celebrated his curves with an epigram:
Finding three lines on ﬁve sections
Perseus, honoring these [the gods?], propitiated the demons
He must have set up an inscription with an image of the curves, a
demon-pleasing diagram! Eratosthenes did something similar with his
Mesolabion. This small piece is extant (again, cited by Eutocius).
Eratosthenes describes a machine that solves, directly – no need for extra
curves – the problem of ﬁnding mean proportionals. He criticizes past
solutions
(Nicomedes,
in
turn,
would
criticize
this
solution
by
I refer, in the Suggestions for Further Reading, to W. R. Knorr, The Ancient Tradition of Geometric
Problems (Boston: Dover, ). The kind of authors brieﬂy surveyed here are discussed there, in
greater detail, in Chapter .
G. R. Morrow, Proclus/A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements (Princeton, :
Princeton University Press, /), p. (p. in Proclus’s critical edition).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Eratosthenes) and concludes with a celebratory epigram that was inscribed
on stone, accompanying a model of the machine. This is indeed all
reminiscent of Archimedes’s own mathematics-in-a-poem, the Cattle
Problem, a puzzle – yet another challenge! – asking its readers to solve a
problem of calculation that is presented twice, in a simpler and in a more
diﬃcult version; the simpler version is hard, and the diﬃcult version, as far
as we can tell, would have been impossible for an ancient reader. (It was
ﬁrst computed only with the aid of modern computers. Yet another
poisoned bait?) We already mentioned the poetic premise of the Sand-
Reckoner, to which, as noted earlier, Apollonius himself responded with a
calculatory treatise that culminated with the calculation of the numerical
value of a hexameter line! This pattern of an interface between mathemat-
ics and poetry is perhaps natural in a culture revolving around the literary
center of Alexandria, with its distinctive poetic tradition. The goal is to
obtain surprise, through subtlety, in the manner of the poets. We could go
on, but such few strokes already establish the sense of the generation.
There were many mathematicians, all of a sudden – always under the spell
of the culture on which they grew, that of Hellenistic Alexandria, with its
emphasis on irony and subtlety. This is what I have characterized, in the
title of a previous book, as the mathematics of “ludic proof.”
This is all a very rapid overview and therefore does not do justice to this
very active generation. As usual, I try to amplify such rapid overviews with
at least one example – and surely, we must have the burning mirrors!
And so, to Diocles. As is typical of the work of the minor ﬁgures of
Archimedes’s generation, it survives in a mediated form. Not only is it in
Arabic translation only, but the treatise, as it is stands, is a medley of three
distinct problems, each treated fairly brieﬂy and all, taken together,
amounting roughly to the scale of a single Archimedean treatise. Likely,
the compilation is late (although, conceivably, it could have been produced
by Diocles himself; our evidence is too meager to rule out the possibility
that authors in this generation did produce such hybrid works).
I will now concentrate just on the problem of burning mirrors and on
one of its proofs alone – the one that shows the burning-mirror property of
the paraboloid. This gives us, ﬁrst of all, a clue for Archimedes’s optics: this
treatise strongly implies that Archimedes did not study burning mirrors.
Diocles strikes us as a very able geometer, and so I think we should trust
his statement that he is the inventor of the construction he proposes.
Furthermore, the paraboloid of revolution was so central to Archimedes’s
geometry that I ﬁnd it incredible that Archimedes would have studied
burning
mirrors
without
producing,
speciﬁcally,
the
construction
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proposed by Diocles. (Indeed, it is precisely for this reason that Diocles’s
treatment reads like the fulﬁlling of a task, worthy of Archimedes himself:
the clear sense of the generational response.) But if so, we ﬁnd that
Archimedes’s optics did not study burning mirrors, and so – as suggested
by our scattered reports – it probably focused on the geometry of
refraction. Diocles, then, must have been a deeply original mathematician –
but also, as we will see, one deeply indebted to Archimedes.
The study of burning mirrors involves not refraction but simple reﬂec-
tion. We take it for granted, to recall, that rays of light and lines of vision
are reﬂected by mirrors so that the angles of incidence are equal.
Figure 
It is an ingenious but straightforward thought to consider the reﬂection
of light and of lines of vision on curved mirror surfaces. The angle here will
be measured with the tangent at the point of incidence.
Figure 
With this ready, let us now dive into Diocles’s argument.We
consider a paraboloid mirror surface, and as usual, we argue based on just
Diocles can be read in English translation in G. J. Toomer, Diocles on Burning Mirrors (New York:
Springer, ).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a single plane section so that the diagram shows a parabola. The mirror is
turned so that its concave side faces the sun, speciﬁcally in such a way that
the rays of the sun are all taken to be parallel (a simpliﬁcation that is, of
course, justiﬁed and is analogous to the simpliﬁcation in FB , where the
surface of the liquid is taken to be a ﬂat plane).
In Figure , KBM is the parabola, and BZ is the axis of the paraboloid,
hence, the axis and diameter of the parabola. We take an arbitrary point on
the curve, namely, Q.
At this point, we add in an extra construction. First, draw the tangent at
Q, as the line XA, meeting the axis and main diameter of the parabola at
point A. Second, draw QZ perpendicular to the tangent, meeting the axis at
Z. Finally, draw QG from Q, perpendicular to the diameter. The next bit is
a little more unexpected, but this, too – and this is crucial – is by now
traditional. We further add point E so that BE is equal to the parameter (we
recall the signiﬁcance of this position from both Apollonius’s Conics as
well as Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies ). The argument is now ready
to proceed (the diagram drawn here is schematic only).
G
E
Z
S
X
K
Q
M
D
B
A
Figure 
The key observation of the argument is the one we are familiar with:
with the construction at hand – QZ perpendicular to the tangent, QG
perpendicular to the diameter – the intercept on the diameter between the
two perpendiculars, namely, GZ, is equal to the parameter. In this case,
this means that GZ is equal to BE.
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

From more elementary considerations of conic theory, we can also get
the equality AB ¼ BG. But from GZ ¼ BE. we can also directly conclude
that EZ ¼ BG, and so EZ ¼ AB. At this point, we bisect the line BE at D,
and it is obvious that AD ¼ DZ. D, we ﬁnd, bisects the line AZ. It is
deﬁned as the bisection of the line BE, which is itself a given (because it is
deﬁned by the parameter, itself given with the parabola).
We thus ﬁnd that wherever we choose to draw the tangent to the
parabola at a point such as Q, we always ﬁnd a diﬀerent intercept of the
diameter between the tangent and the line perpendicular to the tangent –
such as the line AZ. This line keeps changing, depending on the position
of Q. However, even as Q and AZ keep changing, the bisection of all the
lines, such as AZ, will always be at the ﬁxed point D.
Now let us go back to the diagram. We know that AD ¼ DZ, and by
construction, the angle ZQA is a right angle. Diocles asserts that in such a
construction, QD ¼ AD ¼ DZ. This is merely asserted, and we are asked to
provide the proof on our own. (Archimedes would often leave such key steps
unproved: instead of dotting the “i”s, one leaves out such details as subtle,
surprising challenges.) This, in fact, goes back to the fundamental geometry
of the semicircle and the right angle that we have seen ever since Hippocrates
of Chios himself. The angle on the diameter of a circle is a right angle,
and conversely, a right-angled triangle can always be inscribed inside a circle,
its hypotenuse being the diameter of that circle. Obviously, then, the
bisection of the hypotenuse is the center of that circle, and for that reason,
QD ¼ AD ¼ AZ. (All three are radii, so to speak, of an implied circle.)
We can now move quickly through several conclusions. Because those
are angles at the base of an isosceles triangle, the angle DQZ is equal to the
angle DZQ.
But wait, because we’re playing with angles, let us draw a parallel! QS is
drawn from Q, parallel to the main diameter and axis BZ. Because QS
and AZ are parallel, we also have angle ZQS equal to angle DZQ. (Note
that the key protagonist of this proposition, the parallel QS, has been
sneakily – Archimedes-like – introduced.) Hence, obviously, angle ZQS is
equal to angle DQZ, as well. However, the angles XQZ, ZQA as a whole
are both right angles (by construction), and so if we remove from each the
equal angles ZQS, DQZ, the remaining angles XQS, DQA must also be
equal to each other.
Point D, to recall, is ﬁxed, regardless of the choice of point Q. This
means that we have just found that for any point chosen on the curve, the
line passing through that arbitrary point, parallel to the main diameter, will
create a pair of angles equal to each other. One of those equal angles will be
between the parallel line and the tangent. The other equal angle will be

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

between the same tangent and the line drawn from that arbitrary point to
the ﬁxed point D.
But obviously, each arbitrary parallel line SQ, hitting the curve at an
arbitrary point such as Q, can be taken to represent a ray of the sun: we
started out by positioning our mirror so that it faces the sun in that
direction! Meanwhile, the equality of the angles determines the reﬂection
of such rays from the surface of the mirror. Hence, a paraboloid mirror
turned toward the sun will direct all the rays to a single point D, at which,
it is now stated, the mirror will act as a burning mirror.
I went through this in some detail, among other reasons, because it
provides us a rare opportunity to follow the precise mathematical detail of
the achievement of the generation. A typical Archimedean result (let alone
a proof by Apollonius) is simply harder to follow. This is more straight-
forward. Although relatively simple, this is also palpably Archimedean.
The same emphasis on subtle surprise – down to the intentional delay in
the construction of the parallel line, so that, throughout the argument, we
do not yet see the relevance of any of it for the optics of rays of the sun.
And not only do we see here the mere concern with the mathematization
of physics: indeed, the mathematization follows precisely the same route as
in On Floating Bodies, using precisely the same properties associated with
the parabola: the intercept between tangent and ordinate. In fact, the two
diagrams – of FB .and of Diocles – are essentially identical. The same
geometrical conﬁguration – with a radically diﬀerent meaning. In
Archimedes, the secondary parallel diameter is used to ﬁnd the position
of the center of the weight of the portion of the paraboloid immersed in
the liquid. In Diocles, the secondary parallel diameter is the ray of the sun.
In Archimedes, the tangent to the parabola deﬁnes a line parallel to the
surface of the liquid. In Diocles, the tangent determines the optical
property of reﬂection. In both Archimedes and Diocles, one starts from
the magnitude of the intercept to derive results concerning that tangent,
relying on the property that the lines deﬁning the intercept have been
drawn as perpendiculars. In Archimedes, this perpendicularity combines
with speciﬁc metrical assumptions concerning the parabolic segment so as
to determine the position at which the angle of that perpendicular will
contain, or fail to contain, the center of the weight. In Diocles, this
perpendicularity combines with a particular result concerning the equality
AB ¼ BG to ﬁnd a ﬁxed equality of angles (this is the chief original
contribution by Diocles, which, we now notice, is really a – brilliant –
variation on an Archimedean theme).
And so, in the treatments we just saw from Archimedes and from
Diocles, the geometrical ﬁgure and its key relations are the same, whereas
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the physical meaning is diﬀerent. But this, in fact, is the key similarity
between the two proofs. Both gain their meaning through the assignment
of a particular physical meaning. (And in this, they both diﬀer from
Apollonius’s Book , otherwise a rather similar work.) And that physical
meaning is essentially irrelevant to the argument of the proof, other than in
providing it with a meaning – so that essentially the same mathematics can
be repurposed, with ease, for distinct physical “applications.”
To be clear, I do not suggest that Archimedes and Diocles had ready a
set of pure geometrical investigations and were shopping for potential
physical interpretations. (“Eureka!” Archimedes exclaimed. “Two-thirds
the diameter in a parabolic segment can stand for the center of the weight
of the paraboloid of revolution and so deﬁnes its behavior in a liquid! I can
ﬁnally publish my pure geometrical result on the relative positions of
points two-thirds the way of the diameters of various parabolas!”) This,
obviously, is absurd. Archimedes was thinking in parallel about the prop-
erties of solids immersed in a liquid and the properties of paraboloids of
revolution, and then he must have realized that the fact that (assuming a
ﬂat surface for the liquid) the immersed portion of a paraboloid of
revolution is itself a paraboloid of revolution opened interesting avenues
for bringing the two together and developing a relevant geometry of the
parabola. With this example in place, it was easy for Diocles to notice
another opening, in considering the same tangent, now not as parallel to
the surface of the liquid but as the line with which to measure angles of
incidence and reﬂection.
And so, perhaps, one of the ways in which Archimedes inspired a
generation. Not merely in that there was an example of a great mathema-
tician, so one wanted to emulate him. More than that: the example of
Archimedes suggested speciﬁc ways in which one could create surprising
and subtle mathematics. The signiﬁcance of Archimedes, then, is that he
found ways in which subtlety and surprise could play out mathematically.
These can be classiﬁed mostly under two headings: the indirect approach
for the study of especially diﬃcult (so, in practice, curvilinear) measure-
ments and the application of mathematics to the study of the
physical world.
The Signiﬁcance of Ludic Proof
Let us ﬁrst of all note the historical signiﬁcance of the two main avenues
opened up by Archimedes. Perhaps the case of the mathematization of
physics is obvious: clearly, this will lead (through authors such as Galileo,

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Kepler, and Newton) to no less than the making of modern science. But
exactly the same authors, we should now note, relied also, crucially, on the
measurement of curvilinear ﬁgures. This, too, is a key theme of the history
of science, for a good reason. The thing that makes the measurement of
curvilinear ﬁgures diﬃcult is that they involve, eﬀectively, the summing up
of inﬁnitely many components. This type of summing up is, then, equiv-
alent to modern calculus. The technique pioneered by Eudoxus – but then
perfected by Archimedes – is roughly equivalent (because it is its direct
ancestor) to the delta/epsilon in modern calculus. Besides providing this
essential idea, Archimedes and his generation provided many examples of
the application of this technique, such that the makers of the modern
calculus would eventually generalize and deduce from more basic princi-
ples. I will return to note this in the ﬁnal chapter, but for the time being,
we may conclude with this: Archimedes opened the door to calculus and to
mathematical physics, hence to modern science. It was just a crack; much
more had to be done. But the door, ﬁrmly shut before, was now open.
But our goal as historians is not to be impressed by Archimedes. Our
goal is to understand him. And here is why it is important for us to situate
Archimedes within his generation, within the historical moment of
Hellenistic civilization. A literary culture of irony and surprise; science
and philosophy, drifting away from each other. This is important to note
because otherwise, we could easily misunderstand the route that led
Archimedes to his mathematics.
It is often suggested – as a rather uncontroversial statement, even – that
“science” came to be in the eighteenth century or even the nineteenth
century. Indeed, there isn’t a Greek word neatly translating the modern
concept “science,” and more to the point, something does change through-
out the eighteenth century itself. Before that, throughout the seventeenth
century and well into the work of Newton himself, many authors of
science think of themselves as philosophers, and they engage with wide
metaphysical concerns. It is only in the eighteenth century that something
like the modern institutions of modern science begin to form and, indeed,
only early in the nineteenth century that the career pattern of the “scien-
tist” becomes established.In early modern Europe, all the way down to
Newton – or even beyond – what we now call “science” was pursued in the
context of a wider pursuit, best understood – as indeed it was understood
For a standard statement on this sociological development, see E. Mendelsohn, “The Emergence of
Science as a Profession in Nineteenth-Century Europe,” in K. B. Hill (ed.), The Management of
Scientists (Boston: Beacon, ), pp. –.
V. Response to Archimedes: The Generation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

by its very practitioners – as “natural philosophy.” This is all clear and
correct. The mistake is that, from our own modern vantage, we tend to
take this relatively recent transition and extrapolate it all the way back into
the past. It was always natural philosophy. This is a common fallacy: that
the part of history we know less about is more or less linear, more or less
the same as the part we know better. And so we assume that because it
used to be that what we now call science was once mixed up with
philosophy, it must have been even more so, further back in the past:
surely, they were all philosophers, back then!
Clearly, they were not. Linear extrapolations are often wrong. From
Newton onward, science becomes ever more autonomous from philoso-
phy. But prior to Newton, the path was more complicated and zigzagging.
In Archimedes’s time, in particular, science was quite autonomous, and in
his way, I would say that Archimedes was a scientist.
But “his way” is not ours. Archimedes was a scientist – as opposed to a
natural philosopher – not because he pursued the distinctive career path of
a scientist, deﬁned by the institutions of science. In this institutional sense,
indeed, science did not exist. There were no royal societies, no journals
of scholars, no university departments of science, no science chairs to ﬁll.
The identity of Archimedes was provided, ﬁrst, by his choice of a literary
genre – the one pioneered by Hippocrates of Chios and then by Archytas,
of proofs provided with the aid of diagrams and a technical language.
Further, at this particular juncture of time, this literary genre was written
with a particular audience in mind – that of fellow mathematicians and, to
a much lesser extent, the elite audience as a whole (the philosophers in
Athens, least of all: they did not read the literature written away from
Athens), written, always, against the background of wider literary currents,
emphasizing subtlety and surprise.
And it is those motivations, this sociology – and not the ideas of an
Aristotle of a Plato – that account for the speciﬁc scientiﬁc route taken by
Archimedes. He picked up a particular technique, ﬁrst oﬀered by Eudoxus,
because its subtlety (required, ultimately, by its subject matter) made a
certain kind of surprise especially satisfying. Hence the inﬁnitary methods.
And he saw the possibilities of applying geometry to a seemingly unrelated
ﬁeld – the study of centers of the weight in solids, balancing outside and
inside liquids – because there was a particular payoﬀof subtlety and
surprise to be obtained by the bringing together of apparently irreconcil-
able, maximally distinct ﬁelds of study. This was rather like Callimachus’s
poetry! Hence the mathematization of physics.
This is best seen by considering the autonomy of the mathematical
research, as shown by the topics selected for study. The objects discussed

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

by Archimedes – and by the following generation as a whole – are hardly
motivated by concrete applications. There seems to be a special value
placed, if anything, precisely on somewhat outré objects: a conchoid, a
spiral; above all, again and again, the conic sections. Other cultures simply
did not consider such objects as part of their mathematics: Why should
they? One studies, normally, things such as rectangles and triangles,
squares and circles, perhaps cubes and spheres. This is natural when
mathematicians are at the service of a society. You refer to those objects
that are already known as part of more or less established practical usage.
The study of, let us say, the paraboloid of revolution can arise only when
mathematicians can make up their own objects to study and essentially no
longer even worry about an outside audience. Of course, one does not just
invent objects for study on a whim. The typical route we see – and one
that is found time and again in the later history of mathematics – is that
the thing that was ﬁrst studied as a tool for other purposes gradually
becomes the subject of research for its own sake. Study the ﬁnding of
proportions, and therefore invent the tool of conic sections – until, at some
point, you are no longer studying proportions as such, but rather, you
simply study the conic sections themselves. Why is this possible? Because
your audience shares, with you, the interest in the tools: because it is an
audience of fellow mathematicians.
And so, this is what the generation of Archimedes did – to the point
that, even when studying physics, the preferred object of study was,
precisely, conic sections: the center of the weight of a parabolic slice; the
stability of a segment of a paraboloid; a paraboloid mirror.
Something crucial took place in the making of science in the generation
of Archimedes: the making of a well-deﬁned ﬁeld, pursued apart from
philosophy, based on its own concerns and techniques. The manner in
which this happened favored, precisely, an engagement with a ludic realm,
of toy objects of no obvious practical signiﬁcance, pursued purely for the
aesthetic value of their study. And it is, ﬁnally, this very purity of aesthetic
concern that gave rise to a particular brand of abstraction, typical to what
would ultimately become the mathematization of the world as studied by
science. This mathematization was based not on Plato’s conceptual pref-
erence for the abstract over the material. It was based, instead, on the
autonomy of mathematical research.
Suggestions for Further Reading
In this chapter, I had to be selective: I concentrated on the major author –
Archimedes – and even with him, I did not survey the contents of his
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

works in full. This is the point where readers should turn to T. L. Heath,
A History of Greek Mathematics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ). The ﬁnal
part of volume surveys Euclid exhaustively; Archimedes, Apollonius, and
the minor ﬁgures of this generation occupy the bulk of volume .
We are indeed lucky to have several outstanding surveys now available.
A very rich interpretation of the architecture of Euclid’s Elements is
provided by I. Mueller, Philosophy of Mathematics and Deductive
Structure in Euclid’s Elements (Cambridge, : MIT Press, ). The
best account of the mathematical achievement of the era is W. R. Knorr,
The Ancient Tradition of Geometric Problems (Boston: Dover, ). For
Archimedes, the simply titled E. J. Dijksterhuis, Archimedes (Princeton,
: Princeton University Press, /) is incomparable. For
Apollonius, the best starting point is M. N. Fried, and S. Unguru,
Apollonius of Perga’s Conica: Text, Context, Subtext (Leiden: Brill, ).
My own interpretation of Hellenistic mathematics is oﬀered in R. Netz,
Ludic Proof: Greek Mathematics and the Alexandrian Aesthetics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ). The historical context for the auton-
omy of science from philosophy is a main theme of the second part of
R. Netz. Scale, Space and Canon in Ancient Literary Culture (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ).

The Generation of Archimedes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

