 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 1 - 12 
 
 
 
 
 
Manual for the policy 
 
Art. 1 
Definition of terms 
Art. 2 
Basis for the insurance 
Art. 3 
Commencement, term and termination of the insurance 
Art. 4 
Adjustment of the premium and/or conditions 
Art. 5 
Premium 
Art. 6 
General exclusions and restrictions 
Art. 7 
Damage 
Art. 8 
Address and notifications 
Art. 9 
Registration personal details  
Art. 10 
Applicable law and complaints 
Art. 11 
Further descriptions 
 
Clauses sheet terrorism cover 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS   
           KOV ALG 
 
In case of doubt or discussion, the stipulations in the Dutch version shall apply. 
 
The following terms and conditions shall apply separately for each insured component and shall form, with the special 
terms and conditions for the insured component, the applicable policy conditions.  
If any stipulations in the applicable special terms and conditions deviate from the stipulations in these general terms 
and conditions, the stipulations in the special terms and conditions shall prevail. 
 
If there are specific company terms and conditions referring to general terms and conditions, the company terms and 
conditions shall be fully excluded and replaced by these general terms and conditions. 
 
 
Art. 1 
Definition of terms 
 
1.1 
Bank or giro account number 
The bank or giro account number belonging to the policyholder that he has submitted. This account number 
can be used by the company for direct debit of the premium(s), for which the policyholder has granted 
permission by taking out this insurance. The insurance company will inform the policyholder in advance of 
the amount and date if a premium is collected by direct debit. 
 
1.2 
Company 
 
The authorized agent of an insurance company / insurance companies recorded as such in the  
 
accompanying policy schedule. These companies are registered as offerers of (nonlife) insurances with the  
 
Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets (AFM) and have a permit from De Nederlandse Bank NV  
 
(DNB) to conduct nonlife insurance business. 
 
1.3 
E-mail address 
 
The valid e-mail address submitted by the policyholder. The company is not liable for the non-arrival of  
 
relevant messages, if this is caused by an e-mail address that has not been entered corrected or if a  
 
change in e-mail address has not been registered. 
 
1.4 
Event 
 
An event occurring within the term of the insurance – such as, for example, an accident, damage, a  
 
dispute, a claim, or claims resulting from acts or omissions – that can lead to the insured party appealing to  
 
the insurance; in this context a series of directly related events shall be considered one event, and  
 
occurring at the time of the first event of the series. 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 2 - 12 
 
1.5 
Insurance contract 
 
This contract shall comply – unless explicitly agreed otherwise between the parties – with the contingency  
 
requirement referred to in article 7:925 of the Civil Code of The Netherlands, if and to the extent that the  
 
damage for which the company is liable is the result of an event of which it was uncertain for the parties, at  
 
the time that the insurance was taken out, that it would result in damage for the insured and/or a third party,  
 
respectively would result in this in future under normal circumstances. 
 
1.6 
Insured party/parties 
 
The policyholder and/or that party / those parties described as such in the special insurance terms and  
 
conditions that apply to the insured interest. 
 
1.7 
Personal Digital Record 
 
The personal part of the back office of the company, that can be accessed online, in which the policyholder  
 
manages his personal and insurance details. Access is by a unique code, consisting of a user name and  
 
password, chosen by the policyholder himself. 
 
If there are no more current insurances in the Personal Digital Record and the time limit for the terminated 
 
insurances has expired, the Personal Digital Record shall be closed. The record can then no longer be  
 
accessed. 
 
1.8 
Personal injury 
 
Damage by injury or damage to the health of persons, fatal or otherwise, including the resulting damage. 
 
1.9 
Policyholder 
 
The natural person (in private capacity) with whom the insurance was entered into, and who is recorded in  
 
the policy schedule as such. 
 
Art. 2 
Basis for the insurance 
 
2.1 
Basis 
 
The details, information and statements submitted by the policyholder shall be the basis of the insurance  
 
contract and are incorporated in this contract. The details in the insurance schedule shall be considered to  
 
originate with the policyholder. 
 
2.2 
Disclosure obligation of the policyholder on commencement of the insurance 
 
The policyholder is obliged, before entering into the contract, to inform the company of all facts that he  
 
knows or should know and of which he is or should be aware that these facts are or could be of interest for  
 
the acceptance decision of the company. This concerns both the policyholder himself as well as other  
 
interested parties in the requested insurance(s). 
 
If this disclosure obligation is not (fully) complied with, this can result in the right to payment or to providing  
 
legal aid being restricted or even cancelled. 
 
If the company was intentionally misled or if the company would never have concluded the insurance  
 
contract if it had been aware of the true facts, the company is also entitled to terminate the insurance  
 
forthwith within a term of two months of the discovery thereof. 
 
2.3 
Disclosure obligation of the policyholder during the term of the insurance 
 
The policyholder undertakes to include all relevant changes that occur during the term of the insurance in  
 
his Personal Digital Record immediately. Relevant changes include his personal details as well as specific  
 
data on the insured risks. If the coverage is extended due to a later change, the disclosure obligation is  
 
extended as if the contract was concluded on the date of change. 
 
2.4 
Notifications by the company 
 
Notifications and commitments by the company shall only be binding when effected by e-mail or in writing.  
 
 
Art. 3 
Commencement, term and termination of the insurance 
 
3.1 
Commencement and term 
 
a. All offers and calculations on the internet are without obligation, until the policyholder makes a final  
 
 
request for acceptance of an insurance; 
 
b. The provisional coverage shall only be valid after the policyholder has entered all data and has agreed  
 
 
to take out the insurance. The provisional coverage shall commence immediately or a commencement  
 
 
date chosen later at 0.00 PM; 
 
c. If it becomes apparent, based on the entered data, that acceptance is not or not immediately possible,  
 
 
no provisional coverage shall be effected; 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 3 - 12 
 
 
d. The company shall only definitely accept each new policyholder and convert the granted provisional  
 
 
coverage into final coverage, after an technical insurance assessment has been conducted and the first  
 
 
premium has been collected; 
 
e. The company reserves the right, based on a technical insurance assessment, not to accept the  
 
 
policyholder or to refuse a certain insurance, after which the (possibly) granted provisional coverage is  
 
 
terminated immediately and therefore no claim whatsoever can be made on this insurance for the  
 
 
period thereafter; 
 
f. The company shall inform the policyholder, except in unforeseen circumstances (including force  
 
 
majeure), of its acceptance decision within 1 workday; 
 
g. The policyholder shall take out, manage and change all his insurances himself, by accessing his  
 
 
Personal Digital Record; 
 
h. The company shall immediately provide provisional coverage for each change indicated by the  
 
 
policyholder in his Personal Digital Record. If the newly occurring insurance situation falls outside the 
 
 
perimeters of  the acceptance policy, the company shall inform the policyholder, except in unforeseen  
 
 
circumstances, of this within 1 workday, after which the provisional coverage of the newly to be insured  
 
 
risk is terminated. The company reserves the right, in that situation, to terminate the existing insurance  
 
 
contract; 
 
i. In general, no policy document or policy endorsement on paper shall be provided. A policy document  
 
 
(endorsement) on paper shall be provided only be explicit request of the policyholder. The connected  
 
 
costs shall be to the account of the policyholder; 
 
j. Any suspension, settlement or discount of the premium, expenses and insurance tax owed shall not be  
 
 
possible; 
 
k. Any requests or changes sent in another manner than in the Personal Digital Record (e.g. by e-mail)  
 
 
can only be considered as received if the company has confirmed the receipt thereof.  
 
3.2 
Termination of the insurance 
 
a. The insurance shall be terminated by the policyholder giving notice immediately or at any later date  
 
 
chosen by the policyholder through his Personal File; 
 b.  The insurance shall be terminated by the company giving notice: 
  
1. on the policy renewal date stated in the policy schedule subject to a term of notice of two months; 
  
2. after an event has been reported to the company, which resulted or shall result in payment(s), or 
after the event has been rejected by the company, with a term of notice of two months; 
  
3.  if the policyholder has acted intentionally to mislead the company or if the company would never 
have concluded the insurance had it known of the true state of affairs, within two months after this 
discovery with immediate effect; 
  
4.  following a court order for debt rescheduling of the policyholder or as soon as the policyholder has 
been declared bankrupt, effective immediately; 
  
5. in case of fraud, swindle or deceit by the policyholder, with the intent to misled the company, 
effective immediately; 
 
 
6.   if periodic checking of national or international sanction lists show that the policyholder, the insured 
interests, the insured person(s) or any other interested party are listed on these lists, effective 
immediately; 
  
7.  if the policyholder fails or refuses to pay the premium or pays it too late. 
  
 
Termination shall take place pursuant to article 5. 
 
c. The insurance shall also be terminated without notice in writing being required: 
 
 
1. As soon as the previously agreed termination date, stated in the policy schedule, has occurred; 
 
 
2. As soon as the policyholder is no longer domiciled or established in The Netherlands; 
 
 
3. As soon as the policyholder or his heirs no longer have an interest in the insured interest.  
 
Art. 4 
Adjustment of the premium and/or conditions 
 
 The company reserves the right to implement changes in the premiums and/or conditions of certain groups  
 of insured parties, groups of insurance and/or classes of insurance. The changes concerned will take  
 immediately effect after notification, or, if explicitly stated, at a later time. 
 It is assumed that the policyholder agrees to these changes, unless he states otherwise in writing within a  
 month of being notified of the change.  
 In this case, the insurance ends on the date stated in the notification. 
 
Art. 5 
Premium 
 
5.1 
Premium by direct debit / electronic invoicing 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 4 - 12 
 
 
The premium, including – if applicable – the costs and the insurance tax for the concluded insurance 
 
contract, shall be paid by direct debit in instalments chosen by the policyholder, or by the policyholder 
 
himself by means of electronic invoicing. The premium shall be owed on the premium due date by advance 
 
 
 
payment. In case of direct debit, in accordance with the direct debit schedule, the policyholder shall reserve 
 
the right to immediately reverse the payment, if he is of the opinion that the company collected the 
 
premium(s) wrongfully.  
5.2 
Consequence of default of payment 
 
In the unlikely event that the premium(s) cannot be collected by the company, irrespective of the reason,  
 
then a demand for payment will be sent to the policyholder after the due date stating the consequences of  
 
continuing to withhold payment.  
 
The cover relating to the insurance concerned lapses by operation of the law if the policyholder does not  
 
fully satisfy his/her payment obligations within a term of 14 days, starting from the day after the demand for  
 
payment. 
 If the premium(s) owed cannot be collected a third time, and no payment was received after the demand for  
 payment, the insurance shall be cancelled due to default of payment. 
 Even if the insurance is cancelled due to default of payment, the policyholder shall be obliged to pay the  
 premium(s). The coverage shall not be restored after payment. 
 
5.3 
Reimbursement of premium  
 
Except when the insurance was terminated for intent to mislead the company, if the insurance is terminated  
 
in the interim, the premium shall be reimbursed in fairness for the insurance term not yet expired, possibly  
 
with deduction of expenses. 
 
Art. 6 
General exclusions and restrictions  
 
6.1 
General exclusions 
 
Damages due to: 
 
a. Nuclear reactions; 
 
b. Willful damage; 
 
c. Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions; 
 
d. Flooding; 
 
e. Collapses; 
 
 
as stated in the further descriptions, shall be excluded from this insurance. 
 
Damage due to terrorism are subject to the conditions in the Clauses Sheet Terrorism Coverage. 
 
6.2 
Trade and/or economic sanctions 
Concluding an insurance contract with you may be forbidden. This is determined by national and 
international (sanction) rules. A contract is not concluded if you or another interested party appears in a 
national or international sanction list. We check this afterwards, which is why the ‘suspensive condition’ 
stated below applies. 
 
We perform the first check, in any case, within 10 working days after we have sent you the policy. If you or 
other interested persons are not listed on a sanction list, then the contract will take effect from the date 
stated on the policy. If a person is listed on a sanction list, then we will inform the applicant about this in 
writing. 
 
The suspensive condition reads: 
The contract may only be concluded if this check shows that offering financial services is not forbidden by 
virtue of the Sanctions Act or legislation, for or for the benefit of: 
- 
the policyholder; 
- 
the insured persons, co-insured and other (legal) persons who could benefit from the 
 
existence of the contract; 
- 
the representatives and agents of the company of the policyholder; 
- 
the definitive financial interested parties concerned at the company of the policyholder. 
 
When it appears, after the issue of the policy, that the policyholder, the insured property, the insured 
person(s) or other interested parties is/are (as yet) listed on a national or international sanction list and this 
is not determined by a periodic check, then the following applies: 
- 
the company will not pay any payment for damage and/or loss of property in which one may not  
 
trade according to national or international legislation; 
- 
the (financial) interests of persons, companies, government bodies and other entities, for  

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 5 - 12 
 
whom/which it is not permitted that insurers insure these interests by virtue of the national or 
international legislation, are excluded from the insurance. 
 
Art. 7 
Claims 
 
7.1 
In case of damage, the insured party or the party entitled to payment is obliged to: 
 
a. To limit the damage to the fullest extent possible and follow any instructions from the company; 
 
b. As soon as the insured party knows or should know of an event that could lead to the company paying  
 
 
out, inform the company of this event as soon as reasonably possible; 
 
c. Reporting this online, or, if this is not possible, submit a full and signed report of the damage; 
 
d. If damage is caused by an offense, such as burglary/theft, or an attempted burglary/theft, robbery,  
 
 
extortion, fraud, vandalism, as well as by loss or missing items, report this to the police;  
 
e. Provide the company within a reasonable period with all the information and documents that are  
 
 
important for the company to assess the payment obligation; 
 
f. Give full cooperation to the damage settlement and refrain from any actions that could damage the  
 
 
interests of the company. This also applies to dealing with compensation claimed by a third party  
 
 
(liability claim), respectively recovery of damage by the company. 
 
7.2 
Loss of right to compensation 
 
The right to (full) compensation or payment is cancelled if: 
 
a. The damage is caused intentionally, by willful or other recklessness, or intentional or other reckless  
 
 
culpability, or with the approval of the insured party or the party entitled to payment; irrespective of  
 
 
whether this damage was caused to his own interest(s) or (also) to those of another insured party /  
 
 
other insured parties. In this case insured party includes the spouse, registered partner, children and  
 
 
household members, whose interest is co-insured, whether or not they are stated in the policy as  
 
 
insured party; 
 
b. In case of damage it is shown that the insured party or the party entitled to payment failed to comply  
 
 
with his obligations from this policy, and thereby harmed the interests of the company; 
 
c. In case of damage it is shown that the insured party or the party entitled to payment failed to comply  
 
 
with his obligations from this policy, with the intent to mislead the company, unless such deception does  
 
 
not justify the cancellation of the right to compensation; 
 
d. After three years, if the company has taken a final position on a claim on the policy from the party  
 
 
entitled to payment: 
 
 
- 
Either by rejecting the claim; 
 
 
- 
Either by (an offer of) payment by means of a final settlement, to be calculated from the day on  
 
 
 
which the party entitled to payment or his authorized representative was made aware of this  
 
 
 
position. Unless the party entitled to payment or his authorized representative contested the  
 
 
 
company’s position within this period; 
 
e. By expiry: if the notification did not take place within three years after the time in which the insured party  
 
 
or the party entitled to payment knew or could have known of the event that could lead to the company  
 
 
being obliged to payment.  
 
7.3 
Claim settlement for material insured items 
 The damage is determined by the company, respectively by an expert appointed by the company. The  
 insured party is entitled to appoint an expert himself. If there are two experts, both from the side of the  
 insured party and from the side of the company, before a valuation is conducted, a third expert shall be 
 appointed, who shall rule, if there is a difference of opinion, within the limits of the two valuations.  
 This ruling shall be binding for both parties, as well as the valuation by both aforementioned experts, when  
 an agreement has been reached on the amount of the damage. The appointment of the experts referred to  
 in this article and the acceptance by the experts of their appointment shall be shown by a deed, signed by  
 the company, the policyholder and the experts. 
 
7.4 
Claim settlement on liability damage 
 The company is entitled to compensate injured parties directly and enter into settlements with those parties.  
 The company is not bound by any promise from an insured party on acknowledgment of liability or  
 obligation for compensation. Claims by injured parties for compensation of personal injury shall be dealt  
 with pursuant to the stipulations in article 7:954 of the Civil Code of The Netherlands. If the compensation  
 to be paid  is to be in regular installments and if the total amount of these payments (including possible 
 other compensations) is higher than the insured amount, the term or the amount of these payments shall  
 be adjusted accordingly.  
 
7.5 
Transfer of ownership after theft 
 
The insured party is obliged, at the request of the company, to transfer the ownership of the items lost by  

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 6 - 12 
 
 
theft for which the company has paid or shall pay compensation. If these items come into the possession of  
 
the company afterwards, the company shall transfer these back to the insured party at his request, against  
 
reimbursement of the amount paid for these items, deducting the costs of repairs of any damage incurred  
 
after the theft. However, the costs of repair shall not be more than the value of these items. If the stolen  
 
items revert back to the ownership of the insured party, without intervention by the company, he is obliged  
 
to inform the company accordingly. 
 
 
7.6 
Damage settlement 
 The payment of compensation shall take place as soon as all documents pertaining to the damage event  
 have been received, the company has acknowledged its obligation to pay compensation and the parties  
 have reached an agreement. 
 
7.7 
Other insurances  
 If the same damage is also covered by one or more other insurances, and the amount of all insurances  
 exceeds the value of the insured interest, the compensation shall be reduced accordingly. No premium  
 shall be reimbursed. Any self-insurance for another insurance shall not be compensated. 
 
7.8 
Aon Helpline  
 
a. The Aon Helpline shall provide its services in proper consultation with the insured parties, their family  
 
 
members or authorized agents, within a reasonable term and if this is not made impossible due to  
 
 
government regulations or other external circumstances. The Helpline is free to choose any parties it  
 
 
wishes to engage for its services. 
 
b. The Aon Helpline shall enter into agreements on behalf of the insured parties or their authorized  
 
 
agents. 
 
c. The Aon Helpline is entitled to demand the required financial guarantees to the extent that the  
 
 
provision of its services is not covered by the insurance. If this is not complied with, the obligation of the  
 
 
Aon Helpline to provide the requested services, as well as any thereto connected other insurance  
 
 
coverage shall be terminated. 
 
d. The Aon Helpline shall not be liable, except for its own shortcomings and errors, for damage  
 
 
resulting from shortcomings or errors of third parties, without prejudice to the own liability of these third  
 
 
parties. 
 
Art. 8 
Address and notifications to the policyholder 
 Any notifications to the policyholder shall be sent legally to the address on the policy schedule, or, if there  
 has been a change of address, to the address last known to the company.  
 
Art. 9 
Registration Personal Details 
 
9.1 
Privacy legislation 
The personal data you provide to us will be used by us to process your request for information, quotes and 
financial products. We also use this personal data to possibly contact you on the basis of the quotation, for 
the establishment of the insurance and for the services provided by us. We handle your information with 
great care. We also request this from other parties with whom we share your information. More information 
about how we handle your personal data can be found in our Privacy Statement at aon.nl/privacyverklaring. 
 
9.2 
CIS 
 
The data provided in case of damage can be processed in the database of the Central Information System  
 
Association (CIS) of insurance companies operating in The Netherlands. The privacy regulations of the CIS  
 
shall apply to this registration; you can find the text on www.stichtingcis.nl. 
 
Art. 10 
Applicable Law and Complaints 
 
10.1 
Applicable law 
 
The laws of The Netherlands shall apply to this insurance contract. 
 
10.2 
Complaints 
If you are not satisfied with the services provided by Aon or the insurance company, you can submit your 
complaints and / or suggestions to the management of Aon, Admiraliteitskade 62, 3063 ED Rotterdam, 
Postbus 518, 3000 AM Rotterdam. You can also report the complaint via our website: www.aon.nl. 
 
After receiving your complaint we will contact you as soon as possible but in any case within two weeks. 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 7 - 12 
 
With complaints about the service provided by the insurance company, you can of course approach the 
management of the insurance company directly. If desired, you can request contact details from Aon. 
 
Experience shows that most complaints are handled satisfactorily. If, however, we are unable to find a 
solution, you can turn to the Klachteninstituut Financiële Dienstverlening with your complaints. 
 
PO Box 93257, 2509 AG The Hague 
 
telephone 077 333 8 999, Website www.kifid.nl. 
This complaints procedure at Kifid is only open to consumers, and therefore not to companies or individuals 
who exercise a profession. 
 Aon follows the statements of the Kifid. You can also contact the civil court.  
 
 
Art. 11 
Further Descriptions 
 
The following provides an explanation of terms used in the special conditions. 
 
11.1 
Earthquake and volcanic eruptions 
 
‘Earthquake and volcanic eruptions’ means damage occurring, either during the time in which, or during 24  
 
hours after which, in or near the place where the insured property is located, the consequences of an  
 
earthquake or volcanic eruption were manifest, unless the insured party can prove that the damage was not  
 
due to one of the aforementioned phenomena. 
 
11.2 
Nuclear reactions 
 
‘Nuclear reactions’ means each nuclear reaction that emits energy, such as nuclear fusion, nuclear fission,  
 
artificial and natural radioactivity. The exclusion for nuclear reactions does not apply to radioactive nuclides  
 
that are outside a nuclear reactor and are used or intended for industrial, commercial, agricultural, medical  
 
or scientific purposes, provided that the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment has  
 
granted a permit for the manufacture, use, storage and disposal of radioactive substances. To the extent  
 
that a third party is liable for damage suffered under the law, the exclusion shall apply.  
 
In this contact, the ‘law’ means the Nuclear Accidents Third Parties Liability Act (Bulletin of Acts and  
 
Decrees 1979-255), i.e. the special legal regulation for liability in nuclear energy. ‘Nuclear installation’  
 
means a nuclear installation as referred to in the law, and a nuclear installation aboard a ship.  
 
11.3 
Costs of safeguarding  
 
‘Costs of safeguarding’ means the costs of measures taken during the term of the insurance by or on behalf  
 
of the insured party/parties, that are reasonably necessary to avert the immediate threat of damage which  
 
is covered by the insurance, or to limit such damage, also if these measures were ineffective. ‘Costs of  
 
measures’ includes damage to items used for these measures. 
 
11.4 
Fire 
 
‘Fire’ means a fire caused by incarnation and accompanied by flames, outside a fireplace, that is capable of  
 
spreading under its own force. The following shall, among others, not be considered a fire: 
 
a. Singing, scorching, melting, carbonizing, smoldering; 
 
b. Burning through of electrical appliances and engines; 
 
c. Overheating, burning out, breaking apart of ovens and boilers. 
 
11.5 
Surveyor’s fees 
 ‘Surveyor’s fees’ means fees and expenses of surveyors and experts to assess the damage. For the expert  
 appointed by the insured party, this is limited to the amount of the wages and expenses of the expert  
 appointed by the company. 
 
11.6 
Collapse 
 Collapse is understood to mean damage caused by: 
 - 
caving-in and subsidence resulting from the nature of the building(s), as well as the foundations, and 
also if this is the result of the nature of or a defect in the building(s) and foundations; 
 - 
ground subsidence and landslip..  
 
11.7 
Aircraft 
 ‘Damage cause by aircraft’ means damage to the insured parties as a result of being struck by a departing,  
 flying, landing or falling airplane or spacecraft, respectively a projectile, explosive substance or other object,  
 connected to, detached from., thrown from or falling from such an airplane or spacecraft, as well as any  
 other item struck by any of the aforementioned items. 
 
11.8 
Willful damage 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 8 - 12 
 
 ‘Willful damage’ means damage caused by or resulting from armed conflict, civil war, rebellion, civil  
 commotion, riots and mutiny. 
 The company shall be obliged to prove that the damage was caused directly, or resulted from, one of the  
 aforementioned causes. The six aforementioned forms of willful damage, as well as the definitions of these  
 forms of willful damage are included in a text that the Association of Insurers filed with the Registry of the  
 District Court of The Hague on 2 November 1981. 
 
11.9 
The Netherlands 
 
‘The Netherlands’ means the territory of the Kingdom of The Netherlands in Western Europe. 
 
11.10 
Explosion 
 
‘Explosion’ means a full or partial destruction, caused immediately by a sudden violent manifestation of  
 
energy from gases or vapors, taking into account the following. If the explosion occurred within a barrel –  
 
closed or otherwise – the requirement of a sudden violent manifestation of energy is complied with if the  
 
wall of the barrel under pressure of gases or vapors within (irrespective of how these gases and vapors  
 
were created and irrespective of whether these were already present before the explosion, respectively  
 
developed during the explosion) has been divided to such an extent that by the leakage of gas, vapor of  
 
fluid through the opening formed by the division, the pressures inside and outside the barrel are suddenly  
 
equal. 
 
If this is not the case, or if the explosion occurred outside a barrel, the sudden violent manifestation of  
 
energy will have to be the immediate result of gases and vapors that were developed or exploded due to a  
 
chemical reaction of solid, fluid, gaseous and vaporized substances or a mixture thereof. 
 
If insured items are fully or partially destroyed by an explosion, the damage to insured items is also covered  
 
for what can be considered consequential damage. If insured items are fully or partially destroyed by an  
 
explosion, the damage to insured items is also covered which can be considered in the vicinity of such a  
 
destruction. 
 The text of this clause and the accompanying explanation thereof has been filed with the Registry of the  
 District Court of Utrecht on 5 April 1982 under number 275/82.  
 
11.11 
Clearance costs 
 ‘Clearance costs’ only means those costs not already included in the damage valuation of clearing and/or  
 demolishing and/or destroying insured items aboveground at the insured risk address and at the immediate  
 vicinities of the aforementioned address, to the extent that this clearing and/or demolition and/or destruction  
 is the necessary consequence of the damage covered by the policy.  
 This does not include the costs for investigating, cleaning, clearing, storing, transporting, destroying and/or  
 replacing soil, (ground) water and surface water to eliminate pollution of the soil, (ground) water and  
 surface water and the costs of isolating the pollution. 
 
11.12 
 Flooding 
 
‘Flooding’ means the collapse or overflowing of dikes, quays, sluices or other dams, irrespective of whether  
 
the flooding was the cause or the consequence of an event covered by this insurance. The following shall  
 
not be considered flooding: overflowing of the aforementioned dams, if this overflow is caused by an  
 
extreme flood of heavy local rains of at least 40 mm in 24 hours, 50 mm in 48 hours or 65 mm in 72 hours  
 
in the vicinity of the location where the damage occurred. 
 
11.13 
Riots, disturbances and disorders 
 
‘Riots, disturbances and disorders’ mean incidental manifestations of violence. 
 
11.14 
Salvage 
 
‘Salvage costs’ are costs incurred by or on behalf of the Salvage Foundation during or immediately after a  
 
fire to offer assistance and taking the initial and most necessary measures to limit the damage. 
 
11.15 
Decontamination costs 
 
‘Decontamination costs’ are: 
 
a. Costs for investigating, cleaning, clearing, storing, transporting, destroying and/or replacing soil, ground  
 
 
and/or surface water to eliminate pollution therein; and 
 
b. Costs for isolating such pollution, including the costs of safeguarding this and emergency facilities. 
 
 
All of this only by instruction of a competent government authority and to the extent that: 
 
c. The soil, ground and/or surface water are at the location of the insured property or immediately in the  
 
 
vicinity of this location; 
 
d. All of the above is the necessary consequence of a covered event taking place within the terms of the  
 
 
applicable insurance. 
 
 
These costs do not include the restructuring of the premises. 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 9 - 12 
 
 
11.16 
Storm 
 
‘Storm’ means a wind speed of at least 14 m per second. 
 
11.17 
Terrorism 
 
‘Terrorism’ means: 
 
- 
Violent acts and/or behavior, in the form of an attack or a series of attacks that are linked in time and  
 
 
objective, as well as 
 
- 
Spreading or having spread pathogens and/or substances causing injury and/or damage to the health,  
 
 
fatal or otherwise, of humans and animals and/or damage to items, respectively damage to economic  
 
 
interests, of which it can be assumed that such an attack or series of attacks, respectively the spreading  
 
 
of pathogens and/or substances – whether or not as an organization – was planned and/or executed  
 
 
with the intent of realizing certain political and/or religious and/or ideological goals. 
 
According to the attached clause of the Dutch Terrorism Risk Reinsurance Company NV (NHT). 
 
11.18 
Terrorism prevention measures 
 
Measures taken by the government and/or insured parties and/or third parties to avert the immediate  
 
danger of terrorism or – if this has already occurred – to limit the consequences thereof. 
 
11.19 
External contingencies 
 
‘External contingencies’ means an immediate, unexpected and suddenly occurring external violence, other  
 
than an event against which the insured risk should normally, considering its nature and/or use, be able to  
 
withstand.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 10 - 12 
 
Clauses sheet terrorism cover 
From the Dutch Terrorism Risk Reinsurance Company NV (NHT). 
 
Art. 1 
Definition of terms 
 
In this clauses sheet and the stipulations based on this sheet, the following terms shall mean the following – unless 
shown otherwise: 
 
1.1 
Terrorism: 
 
Violent acts and/or behavior – committed outside the scope of one of six the forms of assault defined in  
 
article 3:38 of the Financial Supervision Act - in the form of an attack or a series of attacks that are linked in  
 
time and objective, resulting in injury and/or damage to health, fatal or otherwise, and/or damage to  
 
property, respectively if economic interests are damaged otherwise, of which it can be assumed that such  
 
an attack or series of attacks – whether or not as an organization – was planned and/or executed with the  
 
intent of realizing certain political and/or religious and/or ideological goals. 
 
1.2 
Malicious contamination: 
 
Spreading or having spread – outside the scope of one of six the forms of assault defined in article 3:38 of  
 
the Financial Supervision Act – pathogens and/or substances that, as a result of their (in)direct physical,  
 
biological, radioactive or chemical effect, can cause and/or damage to health, fatal or otherwise, in humans  
 
and animals, and/or damage to property, respectively economic interests are damaged otherwise, of which  
 
it can be assumed that such spreading or having spread – whether or not as an organization – was  
 
planned and/or executed with the intent of realizing certain political and/or religious and/or ideological  
 
goals. 
 
1.3 
Preventive measures: 
 
Measures taken by the government and/or insured parties and/or third parties to avert the immediate  
 
danger of terrorism and/or malicious contamination or – if this has already occurred – to limit the  
 
consequences thereof. 
 
1.4 
Dutch Terrorism Risk Reinsurance Company NV (NHT): 
 
A reinsurance company established by the Association of Insurers, where payment obligations from  
 
insurance contracts, that can result, directly or indirectly, for insurers approved in The Netherlands, from  
 
the realization of the risks referred to in articles 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3, can be reinsured. 
 
1.5 
Insurance contracts: 
 
a. Contracts for non-life insurance to the extent that these contracts, according to the conditions in article  
 
 
1.1 under ‘state where the risk is located’ of the Financial Supervision Act, apply to risks located in The  
 
 
Netherlands. 
 
b. Life insurance contracts if concluded with a policyholder with his regular place of domicile in The  
 
 
Netherlands, or, if the policyholder is a legal entity, with the business concerning the insurance of the  
 
 
policyholder located in The Netherlands. 
 
c. Contracts of funeral insurance with in-kind benefits if concluded with a policyholder with his regular  
 
 
place of domicile in The Netherlands, or, if the policyholder is a legal entity, with the business of the  
 
 
policyholder located in The Netherlands, concerning the insurance. 
 
1.6 
Insurers approved in The Netherlands 
 Life, funeral with in-kind benefits, and non-life insurers that are authorized, based on the Financial  
 Supervision Act, to conduct insurance business in The Netherlands. 
 
Art. 2 
Restrictions on the coverage for the risk of terrorism 
 
2.1 
 If and to the extent that, taking into account the descriptions in articles 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3, and within the  
 
 restrictions of the applicable policy terms and conditions, there is coverage for the consequences of an  
 
 event (directly or indirectly) related to: 
 
 - 
terrorism, malicious contamination or preventive measures, 
 
 - 
acts or behaviour to prepare terrorist acts, malicious contamination or preventive measures, 
 
 Hereinafter jointly to be called “the risk of terrorism”, the payment obligation of the insurer for each 
 
 claim submitted for compensation and/or payment shall be restricted to the amount of the payment that the  
 
 insurer receives for that claim from the reinsurance for terrorism risk at the NHT, if this is an insurance with  
 
 capital accumulation to be increased with the amount of the already accumulated capital from the insurance  
 
 concerned.  

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 11 - 12 
 
 
 For life insurance, the amount of the accumulated capital shall be established according to the premium  
 
 reserve for the insurance concerned pursuant to the Financial Supervision Act.  

 
 
KOV ALG / 01-2015 / 12 - 12 
 
2.2 
 The NHT offers reinsurance coverage for the aforementioned claims to a maximum of 1 billion euro for  
 
 each calendar year. This amount can be adjusted annually and applies to all insurers affiliated with the  
 
 NHT jointly. Any adjustment shall be published in three national newspapers. 
 
2.3 
 In deviation of the stipulations of the above paragraphs of this article, the following applies to insurances  
 
 concerning: 
 
 - 
damage to real estate and/or the contents thereof; 
 
 - 
consequential damage to real estate and/or the contents thereof; 
 
 That for each policyholder for each insured location annually no more than 75 million euro shall be paid out  
 
 under this agreement, for all affiliated insurers as referred to in article 1, jointly, irrespective of the number  
 
 of policies issued. 
 
 In the context of the application of this paragraph ‘insured location’ means: all objects present at the risk  
 
 address insured by the policyholder, as well as all objects outside the risk address insured by the  
 
 policyholder, of which the use and/or intention is related to the business activities at the risk address. In any  
 
 case all objects insured by the policyholder that are less than 50 meters apart and where at least one of the  
 
 objects is at the risk address, shall be considered as such. 
 
 If this paragraph applies to legal entities and business connected in a group, as referred to in article 2:24b  
 
 of the Civil Code of The Netherlands, all group companies shall be jointly considered a policyholder,  
 
 irrespective of which group company/companies belonging to the group took out the policy/policies. 
 
Art. 3  Payment protocol NHT 
 
3.1 
 The Protocol for the Settlement of Claims (hereinafter to be called: the Protocol) shall apply to the  
 
 reinsurance of the insurer. Based on the stipulations in this Protocol, the NHT is entitled, among others, to  
 
 postpone payment of the compensation or the insured amount until such time as it can determine whether  
 
 and if it has sufficient financial resources to fully pay out all claims that it covers as reinsurer. To the extent  
 
 that the NHT has insufficient financial resources, it is entitled to make a partial payment to the insurer,  
 
 pursuant to the aforementioned stipulations. 
 
3.2 
 Taking into account the stipulations in Stipulation 7 of the Protocol, the NHT is entitled to decide whether  
 
 an event for which payment is claimed can be considered as realization of the terrorism risk. A decision by  
 
 the NHT to that effect, pursuant to the aforementioned stipulation, shall be binding for the insurer,  
 
 policyholder, insured parties and parties entitled to payment. 
 
3.3 
 The insured party or the party entitled to payment can claim payment as referred to in article 3.1 from the  
 
 insurer, only after the NHT has informed the insurer which amount, as an advance or otherwise, shall be  
 
 paid out to the insurer. 
 
3.4 
 The reinsurance coverage at the NHT shall only apply, pursuant to stipulation 16 of the Protocol, to  
 
 compensation and/or payments that are reported within two years after the NHT has determined that an  
 
 event or circumstance can be considered realization of the terrorism risk in the meaning of this Clauses  
 
 Sheet. 
 
 
 This Clauses Sheet has been filed with the Chamber of Commerce of Amsterdam on 23 November 2007  
 
 under number 27178761. 
 
 
 
 
 

