FILM THEORY AT 
THE FRINGES OF 
CONTEMPORARY 
ART CINEMA
GENRE 
TROUBLE 
AND 
 EXTREME 
CINEMA
Troy Bordun

Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema

Troy Bordun
Genre Trouble 
and Extreme Cinema
Film Theory at the Fringes of Contemporary 
Art Cinema

Troy Bordun
Trent University
Peterborough, ON, Canada
ISBN 978-3-319-65893-3 	
ISBN 978-3-319-65894-0  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017950397
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights 
of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction 
on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and 
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and 
information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. 
Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have 
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover credit: Post Tenebras Lux (Carlos Reygadas 2013)
Printed on acid-free paper
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature 
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

v
Acknowledgements
This volume is a revised version of my Ph.D. dissertation. From my thesis 
committee, I thank Davide Panagia, Veronica Hollinger, Ian McLachlan, 
Brian Price, and Elaine Stavro. Their comments, patience, and adminis-
trative support made the dissertation work flow smoothly and steadily. 
Erin Stewart Eves at Trent University’s Academic Skills Center was inval-
uable at the beginning of my dissertation. Several sections of this book 
were previously published in slightly altered forms, and I would like to 
thank the journal editors for permission to reprint them here. Chapter 4  
is derived, in part, from “‘Sex is Metaphysical’: Catherine Breillat’s 
Pornographic Films,” published in Cine-Excess 2 (2016); part of Chap. 5  
was published as “Seeing Horror, Imagining the Horrible” in Off-screen 
19.9 (2015); Chap. 6 was derived, in part, from “Onscreen and Off-
screen Flesh and Blood: Performance, Affect, and Ethics in Catherine 
Breillat’s Films,” published in Studies in European Cinema 12.2 (2015), 
available online at www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1741154
8.2015.1037572; and part of Chap. 8 was published in CineAction! 96 
(2015) as “Abuse of Weakness.” My thanks to the film studies editor at 
Palgrave Macmillan, Lina Aboujieb, for making this project possible in 
such a short timeframe. Lina was very encouraging and eased the process 
of publishing my first book. The comments from the anonymous reviewer 
were also very helpful. I thank Carlos Reygadas for permission to use stills 
from his films.
My peers and colleagues in Trent’s Cultural Studies programs 
and Theory, Culture, and Politics program made my four years at the 

vi   Acknowledgements
University enjoyable. For sharing conversation on my work, and on life, 
I extend my gratitude to all of you. It is also important to recognize the 
support of those closest to me. My supervisor consistently reminded me 
that graduate studies (and now, I may add, contract instructorships) takes 
its toll on the best of us, so I thank my friends and partners for their 
inspiration and for having confidence in me throughout the years. My 
parents also deserve my appreciation—they were infinitely supportive.

vii
Contents
1	 Introduction: Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema	
	
1
Body Genres and Extreme Cinema	
	
7
Film Theory After Maurice Merleau-Ponty	
	
12
Beyond the Shock of On-Screen Sex and Violence	
	
23
References	
	
26
2	 Carlos Reygadas, the Avant-Garde, and the Senses	
	
29
The Difficult Film	
	
33
“[A]ll the Levels of Perception”	
	
37
Narrative Shock	
	
37
Cinematography and Levels	
	
47
A Slow Dream, “As If” It Was Real	
	
57
References	
	
62
3	 !Que Viva México!: Reygadas as Documentarian	
	
67
Performative Documentary	
	
68
Human Animals, Non-Human Animals	
	
80
Fictional Death: “Come Play with Us Cos Dad  
Has Died Already”	
	
86
References	
	
96

viii   Contents
4	 I Don’t Know It When I See It: Catherine Breillat’s 
Pornography	
	
99
Erotic and/or Pornographic	
	 103
Looking-At Breillat’s Films	
	 111
References	
	 120
5	 Horrible Pornography: Fat Girl (À Ma Soeur!, 2001)	
	 123
Sexual Numbers	
	 124
Fat Girl: Synopsis and Sexual Numbers	
	 126
Pornography “Too Late!”	
	 129
Pornography Under-Age	
	 136
Problems with the Pornographic	
	 139
Horror “on Time!”	
	 142
Breillat’s Horrible Fat Girl	
	 152
References	
	 160
6	 On-Screen and Off-Screen Flesh and Blood:  
Performance, Pornography, Spectatorship	
	 165
Blow Job (2005)	
	 171
Mesquida’s Tears	
	 180
The Extradiegetic and Profilmic Event in Breillat’s  
Brief Crossing	
	 188
The Ethics of Breillat’s Method	
	 190
Affective and Possessive Spectatorship	
	 193
References	
	 195
7	 Reframing Spectatorship Theory with Extreme Cinema	
	 199
Pornography and Psychoanalytic Film Theory	
	 199
The Confrontation with the Real of the Film	
	 204
The Remembered Film	
	 208
Postscript	
	 213
References	
	 214

Contents   ix
8	 Conclusion: Know Genre, No Trouble	
	 217
A Courageous Supplement	
	 223
References	
	 228
Filmography	
	 231
Bibliography	
	 233
Index	
	 237

xi
List of Figures
Fig. 2.1	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
40
Fig. 2.2	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
41
Fig. 2.3	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
51
Fig. 2.4	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
52
Fig. 3.1	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
70
Fig. 3.2	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
71
Fig. 3.3	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
72
Fig. 3.4	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
73
Fig. 3.5	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
85
Fig. 3.6	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
86
Fig. 3.7	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
90
Fig. 3.8	
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)	
	
91
Fig. 6.1	
Battle in Heaven (Reygadas 2009)	
	
174

1
A critic-defined tendency in recent art cinema, initially coined New 
French Extremism by James Quandt ([2004] 2011) and now known 
generally as “extreme cinema” by scholars working in the Anglo-Saxon 
context, offers a set of films to be investigated in light of their formal 
affects as well as their effects on spectators.1 Indeed, much of the schol-
arly and critical attention to this production trend has centered upon 
particular films’ or directors’ capacity to shock or affect spectators. Less 
attention has been given to the number of genres invoked by so-called 
extreme filmmakers. While the trend is not limited to close readings 
from the theories and histories of the following genres, with varying 
degrees of emphasis I will argue that the avant-garde, documentary, 
melodrama, pornography, and horror genres play significant roles in 
the oeuvres of two filmmakers associated with the extreme cinema trend, 
Carlos Reygadas and Catherine Breillat. My turn to these genres hinges 
upon the theory that genre is not inherent to a given film but that cer-
tain elements are extracted from the work and recollected by a viewer. 
This reading of genre is inspired by Rick Altman’s critique of genre 
CHAPTER 1
Introduction: Genre Trouble and Extreme 
Cinema
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_1
1 Most scholars agree with these terms: it is not a genre, a style, or a movement but a 
recent production trend for extreme representations of sex and violence as well as trans-
gressions of the formal codes of art cinema. Cf. Quandt (2011); Grønstad (2006: 163); 
Beugnet (2007: 25); Vincendeau (2007: 205); Horeck and Kendall (2011: 3, 5); Frey 
(2014: 158–160); Frey (2016: 6–8). William Brown (2013: 26–28), incorrectly in my 
view, contends that extreme cinema “perhaps constitutes” a genre.

2   T. Bordun
theorists who attempt to “level all spectators” and only study genres that 
do not mix, crossbreed, or function as anomalies (Altman 1999: 151, 
17). For Altman a film may attempt to turn its audiences into “a sin-
gle homogenous block,” but given the diversity of individual experience 
and individual knowledge of genre(s), “the ability to choose one’s genre 
pleasures lies at the very heart of generic operations” (1999: 151). My 
undertaking in this book, in the personal choices of genres to study and 
films to engage with, represents a critical effort to both understand and 
practice a theory of genre that puts the spectator into an active engage-
ment with images, sounds, and his or her past associations with those 
images and sounds—call it a work that combines philosophical reflec-
tion and cinephilia. For Stanley Cavell, film is less a completed work than 
an assemblage of frames that matter for an individual ([1978] 2005: 9). 
Extreme cinema, as a trend that attempts to confound simple readings or 
interpretations, functions as the best example to demonstrate my thesis. 
My aim is therefore not to produce a genealogy or cultural history of the 
aforementioned genres nor an attempt to contemporize and contextu-
alize those genres with the recent production trend known as extreme 
cinema—such a project is for the film historian. The chapters demon-
strate that the films under investigation re-order the generic categories 
of sense-perception and verification and work against the logic of trans-
forming a body of spectators into a single homogenous block.
A theory of spectatorship that argues for a process-oriented model—
that is, spectatorship as recollection and assemblage—does not simultane-
ously suggest that a film lacks a style and mode of address. The modes 
of address in the five genres above can be generally proposed as follows: 
Stan Brakhage argued for “pure perception” in the cinema, thus explain-
ing experimental filmmakers’ longstanding fascination with both pleasur-
able and unpleasurable visuals, consistently devoid of narrative pleasure; 
documentary, contentiously, can provide a shock in the form of truth—
the shock of a scene or story is in the veracity of its representation(s) or 
truth claims; melodrama, as theory describes, often brings a familial narra-
tive to a bittersweet resolution filled with spectators’ tears; pornography’s 
address is often to arouse viewers sexually, sometimes apart from either 
a narrative or intellectual pleasure; and horror films aim to elicit fear in  

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   3
their audiences, causing jumps in seats, screams, and nausea.2 Extreme 
cinema deploys these generic tropes or addresses to an ideal spectator.3 
A filmmaker may aim to elicit disgust, unease, tension, anxiety, and shock 
while also aiming at perceptual pleasure by certain so-called experimental 
tactics; certain films also solicit sexual pleasure via pornographic tropes. 
Martine Beugnet therefore claims (2007: 9) that this “hybrid cinema” is 
“the most exciting forms of filmmaking […] currently offered,” although 
the notion of hybrid refers to hybrid genres.4
The aim of my research is to navigate the so-called “hybrid” terrain  
in a manner that does not claim extreme cinema to be at the avant-
garde of narrative filmmaking or a mix of genres.5 Beugnet’s claim about 
2 Viewing documentary in this way is only one of many definitions and practices. Indeed, 
the ties between experimental film and documentary film have frequently been noted 
by theorists from the 1930s up to the present. Cf. Dulac ([1932] 2011: 656); Grierson 
([1935] 2011: 662); Minh-ha ([1990] 2011); Marks (2000: 10, 177). I will tease out the 
connections between these two genres in Chaps. 3 and 6.
3 Cf. Elsaesser and Hagener (2010: 4–5): “Each type of cinema (as well as every film 
theory) imagines an ideal spectator, which means it postulates a certain relation between 
the (body of the) spectator and the (properties of the) image on the screen, however much 
at first sight the highlighted terms are ‘understanding’ and ‘making sense’, ‘interpretation’ 
and ‘comprehension’ […] Films furthermore presuppose a cinematic space that is both 
physical and discursive, one where film and spectator, cinema and body encounter one 
another […] Likewise, bodies, settings, and objects within the film communicate with each 
other (and with the spectator) through size, texture, shape, density and surface appeal, as 
much as they play on scale, distance, proximity, color or other primary optical markers. But 
there are additional ways the body engages with the film event, besides the senses of vision, 
tactility and sound: philosophical issues of perception and temporality, of agency and con-
sciousness are also central to the cinema, as they are to the spectator.”
Thomas Elsaesser and Malte Hagener’s claim (2010: 5) that the film is much more than 
diegesis and form, such as “extra-diegetic material” and the fact that spectators inhabit two 
(or more) worlds simultaneously—the diegesis and their own physical space—is additionally 
relevant to the study I undertake in Chaps. 6 and 7.
4 The hybrid mode makes distribution difficult. “[A]ccording to [Raymond] Murray 
[CEO of Artsploitation Films], the apparently inclusive advantage of hybrid modes such as 
extreme cinema—artistically sophisticated yet with a titillating allure—can develop into a 
commercial disadvantage as well” (Frey 2016: 76–77).
5 Mattias Frey’s book-length critique of extreme cinema scholars who champion the 
trend as transgressive and ground-breaking without considering the industry or reception 
side is an invaluable reorientation of the field (Frey 2016; Bordun 2017). Unfortunately, 
nearly all of the research of my present volume was completed before its publication. In my 
attempt to read extreme cinema alongside genre and spectatorship, as well as film theory, 
I equally contest the scholars who emphasize the transgressive in extreme cinema without 
addressing reception, at least in hypothetical terms.

4   T. Bordun
extreme cinema maintains some affinities with postmodern notions—
for example, “pastiche” and “schizophrenia,” hyperrealism, attacks 
on modernity (Storey 2006: 129ff; Altman 1999: 156–157)—despite 
attempts to suggest otherwise (2007: 126–127). (Moreover, she very 
much reads extreme cinema as “against the grain” of mainstream cin-
ema: hence the subtitle of her volume, French Film and the Art of 
Transgression.) Indeed, if extreme cinema offers nothing but a postmod-
ern genre mixing, there is no argument to be made about the novelty of 
this production trend since Hollywood has always mixed together gen-
res in both advertising and in their semantic and syntactic components 
so as to appeal to as many spectators as possible (Neale [1990] 1995; 
Altman 1999: 128–143; Staiger 1997). I therefore maintain my distance 
from categorically labeling extreme cinema as a genre or as composed 
of evident, unchanging, and verifiable ones. Instead, without dismissing 
the genre critic who notes common formal traits and themes alongside 
spectators’ recognition of those traits and themes to thereby compose 
an understanding or theory or history of (a) genre, I treat genre the-
ory as a theoretical tool to undermine its own methodologies, for-
mulations, and conclusions. In other words, the films discussed in the 
chapters of this book are not borrowing formal and narrative elements 
of identifiable genres; they are reorienting and restructuring the notions 
of genre(s) and spectatorship and, as I will introduce below, spectators’ 
sensuous experiences of films. Transforming sense-experience, follow-
ing the general theory and methodology of many phenomenologists and 
affect theorists, thereby transforms social, cultural, ethical, and political 
engagements (Leys 2011).
Genre and genre theory have been a contentious object of study, and 
there has been no critical consensus on how to study them (Ryall 1998: 
327–330; Blandford et al. 2001: 113). Rather than identifying one dom-
inant genre in a given film according to a pre-established generic cate-
gory—for example, as William Brown does in labeling extreme cinema 
an offshoot of horror (2013: 26–28)—I will argue that the extreme films 
I have chosen to discuss demonstrate an epistemological instability in five 
film genres. Thus I do not address the question of what the tendency 
for new fictional films of dramatized sex and violence categorically or 
generically is as such, in terms of a definitive genre, style, and its his-
tory or antecedents. Through theoretical analyses of two directors and a 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   5
number of their films, and through a careful consideration of these direc-
tors’ straying from and proximity to one or more of the aforementioned 
genres, as established by the genre scholarship, I locate each filmmaker’s 
attempt to elicit sensuous responses in his or her spectators.
Extreme cinema is a challenge on all fronts: the difficult-to-stom-
ach content, the play with formal and aesthetic codes, and the refusal 
of many filmmakers to craft films within a pre-established generic cate-
gory or categories. What this challenge reveals, furthermore, is that the 
scenes and sequences of films are collected or assembled by spectators 
in ways that make/have sense to/for them. Altman names this experi-
ence the “generic crossroads” of a film, a fork directing spectators to 
either submit to the generic pleasures or return to cultural norms (e.g., 
in a gangster film a spectator must take pleasure in illegal and possi-
bly murderous fictional events or oppose generic pleasure to return to 
a culture in which the rules are mostly followed). Indeed, the common 
link amongst genre films is precisely “the warring traditions in society 
and the social importance of understand convention” (Braudy [1976] 
2009: 538). Moreover, for most Hollywood genre theorists, film gen-
res share structurally similar narrative arcs: a disruption of social order 
followed by a return to that order (e.g., Sobchack [1975] 1995; Schatz 
[1981] 2011). While Altman’s crossroads address the tension between 
narrative pleasure and cultural norms, the films investigated here offer 
a crossroads between possible competing generic experiences of percep-
tual, narrative, and formal natures. My collection and recollection of the 
films begin from my bodily and theoretical responses to these works and 
to my associations and readings of genre. This approach requires that the 
scholar or critic trust his or her experiences of the film, which means that 
the film itself should teach the author how to read it. This will become 
clearer as I assemble together two vastly different directors who aestheti-
cally, geographically, and politically have nothing to say to each other. I 
bring them together under the banner of extreme cinema for the sake of 
my arguments about their oeuvres to be sure, but also to argue my larger 
claims about the porous nature of genre.
My interest in extreme cinema begins with a line of inquiry opened by 
Linda Williams and, as I introduce below, in extreme cinema’s confound-
ing of Williams’s theory of genres and sensation. Before my own work 
on an individual director begins, I should suggest why her short essay 

6   T. Bordun
on genre and spectatorship and her more recent work on sex and sensa-
tion in the cinema cannot be adequately applied to this recent cinematic 
trend. I will introduce contemporary extreme cinema in more detail as 
well. In the section that follows my preliminary remarks on Williams, I 
turn to recent developments in phenomenological film theory, the lens 
I adopt for this study. Of the possible theoretical frameworks through 
which to approach extreme cinema and genre, the recent turn to phe-
nomenology is the best suited to my project. Alongside my argument 
of the fluidity of genre, my contention is that this production trend can 
reorder the categories of sense-experience (when spectators are con-
fronted with a supposedly generic film) and, according to the aims of the 
director and the spectators’ willingness to approach or adopt the film-
maker’s visual critiques of society, culture, and/or politics, make a minor 
change in the real world. Thus diverse theories in phenomenology, with 
their respective focuses upon the body, will be useful in the following 
chapters. Indeed, much work has been done in this area of sensation and 
extreme cinema, and I will briefly explore how my research adds to prior 
scholarship on the subject.
Theorists such as Vivian Sobchack, Laura U. Marks, and Jennifer  
M. Barker are each informed by the writings of Maurice Merleau-Ponty. 
His position that embodiment is the seat of experience is adopted by 
these three theorists to consider both aesthetics and spectatorship. Yet 
this turn to embodiment in film studies exists not solely within the 
scholarship. I hope to show that the phenomenological turn in film 
theory occurs at a time when filmmaking itself has also turned to vis-
ual and aural techniques that explicitly aim at evoking spectators’ senses 
(Beugnet 2007: 14) and directly engage “sensory mode[s] of address” 
(de Luca 2014: 1). In keeping with the phenomenological framework 
and “sensory mode of address” in contemporary cinemas, I deploy phe-
nomenological descriptions when speaking to and about the films them-
selves. As the formal qualities of films can reach out to touch viewers 
viscerally, as much of the scholarship describes, my style of writing aspires 
to achieve the same. I accomplish this form of argumentation with a 
writing that gives close attention to detail and original interpretations of 
narratives, and which works with the films to deliver descriptions in tune 
with a film’s slowness, urgency, or spontaneity. Catherine Wheatley sug-
gests (2011: 178) there is not yet a “coherent approach” to research-
ing and writing on extreme cinema; I bring one torch to brighten this 
darkness.

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   7
Body Genres and Extreme Cinema
In the 1991 essay “Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess,” Williams 
identifies the content of and bodily response to three of the so-called low 
genres of cinema: melodrama, horror, and pornography. Each in its own 
way produces bodily sensations of varying degrees and intensities in the 
spectator (Williams [1991] 2009: 613). With melodrama, characters are 
always “too late!” and miss an opportunity for love or happiness, thereby 
effecting sadness or tears in predominantly (passive) female viewers. The 
colloquial terms for these films have included “weepies” and “soft-core 
emotional porn for women” (Williams 2009: 603, quoting Douglas).6 In 
the experience of horror film, often viewed by teenage boys and young 
men, characters appear “too early!” in a narrative or scene—that is, they 
are situated in the wrong place at the wrong time to thereby encounter 
and face off with a murderer/serial killer. The ensuing shock, surprise, 
and violence of the horror film causes shuddering, disgust, fear, anxi-
ety, and other negative visceral effects in spectators (Kerner and Knapp 
2016: 46). Finally, in pornography, the time of fantasy is always perfect; 
characters operate in a ‘pornotopia’ where every time is bedtime. At this 
period in 1991 Williams posits an active male spectator who is aroused 
by and capable of producing his own pleasures and orgasms during the 
screening of a (heterosexual feature-length) pornographic film.7 To bring 
us to the third term in her essay’s title, what is excessive is an addition 
to the film itself—a corresponding and sometimes implacable sensation. 
According to Williams, sensation and the low genres go hand-in-hand.
For Beugnet, body genre films and the corresponding sensuous 
experience they offer usually exist only in mainstream cinemas (and, we 
should add here, mainstream pornography websites). Due to the com-
mercialized nature of the genres, “experimentation with cinematic effects 
is, on the whole, limited or standardized. Controlled and rendered 
functional, the initial element of excess loses its power of disruption” 
6 The history of the melodrama and woman’s film is much more complicated than 
Williams’s hypothesis suggests. For an overview of this history and critics’ invention of the 
woman’s film, see Elsaesser ([1972] 2011) and Altman (1999: 70–77).
7 Kerner and Knapp (2016: 3) unconvincingly add comedy to Williams body genres, for 
“humor, and particularly its grotesque forms, can be deeply affecting, causing the spectator 
to ‘roll’ with laughter, cry, or bend over in involuntary spasm.” Extreme cinema, on the 
whole, does not make room for humor.

8   T. Bordun
(Beugnet 2007: 24–25). The sensations that result from an extreme 
film may resemble those identified by Williams in “Film Bodies,” but 
claims to epistemology and sensation are much more complicated than 
Williams’s and others’ genre and spectatorship studies of popular or 
art-house films.8 The distinction between the pornography of Gerard 
Damiano and the transgressive art of Bernardo Bertolucci, for example, 
is maintained in the reviews of the films cited by Williams in Screening 
Sex (2008). Critics appeared equally enthusiastic and equally sure of the 
perverse arousal of Deep Throat (1972) and the formal beauty of Last 
Tango in Paris (1971) (Williams 2008: 119–124). Critics’ sensual expe-
riences of Deep Throat and Last Tango are equally intense—one gim-
micky yet providing maximum visibility and the other comparing the 
little death to the finale of real death (Williams 1999: 48–49)—yet they 
occur in different levels of the body. A critic of pornography could rate 
the former feature based on a “Peter-Meter,” the extent to which images 
and sound produce an erection; a critic of art cinema could make claims 
to a dark and poetic eroticism (Williams 2008: 123, 346n28). Or, in 
more theoretical terms, Barker’s (2009) phenomenological account 
of spectatorship may locate the sensation of Last Tango in the viscera, 
the dark eroticism of the film reaching down and gripping a spectator’s 
core, and Deep Throat might produce tingles of varying degrees on one’s 
skin, therefore resonating with Williams’s suggestion that the two films 
“exist on a continuum of representations, any of which can be sexually 
stimulating” (2008: 142).9 The arousing features operate in their sepa-
rate spheres and theatrical spaces and evoke sensations of quite different 
types, but never do the films, at least for Williams, at their opposite poles 
on the continuum, convey any epistemological or affective doubt upon 
8 In Screening Sex, Williams begins to think through extreme cinema and sensation—she 
refers to it as “hard-core art,” a nod to her field of interest, porn studies. Her chapter is “an 
initial typography of hard-core art film chosen from a range of possibility” (2008: 261).
9 Following Leo Bersani, Williams (2008: 132–133) provides a distinction between the 
satisfying scratch of Deep Throat—“which emphasizes the telos of end pleasure”—and the 
itch in Last Tango, “which intensifies and increases sexual tension up to the limit case of 
[…] self-shattering and death.” The binary restates the obvious and general: porn is for 
masturbation and art cinema for the philosopher or cinephile. I find such a conclusion 
inapplicable to extreme cinema, the latter cinema having a much richer and complex rela-
tionship with representation, sensation, and claims to knowledge/genre categorization.

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   9
their verification as a graphically explicit product of a particular type 
(porn or art cinema).
The directors associated with extreme cinema, by contrast, inten-
tionally and unintentionally challenge the relative stability of (critics’ 
assessment of) film genres (Beugnet 2007: 15–16). This output of fes-
tival-circuit fictional films, roughly from 1997 to the present, had been 
dubbed New Extremism due to its sexual and violent content. The “New” 
is the more graphic depictions compared to its transgressive cinema pre-
decessors such as Bertolucci, Nagisa Oshima, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Rainer 
Werner Fassbinder, and many others. It is also likely that New Extremism 
emerged from the ashes of 1980s Hollywood’s phase of extreme violence 
against women. At present, similar to the life cycles of various New Waves 
of cinema, extremism is now a staple at festivals and theaters alike, so the 
“New” has been shed. The films under consideration here do not con-
sciously label themselves as extreme, or as part of a specific genre; how-
ever, filmmakers identified as extreme deny neither generic influences 
nor the accompanying sensations produced by those genres. This leads, 
of course, to numerous troubles when playing the game of film critic or 
theorist. Although I do not consider Judith Butler’s gender theory in this 
research, perhaps her notion of gender performativity is analogous to the 
practices of extreme filmmakers. Butler contends ([1989] 1999: 43–44) 
that gender is the “repeated stylizations of the body, a set of repeated 
acts within a highly rigid regulatory frame that congeal over time to pro-
duce the appearance of substance, of a natural sort of being.” Similarly, if 
gender is seen as “natural” when it is rather “naturalized” and “created 
through sustained social performances” (Butler 1999: 143, 180), some 
genre critics have also deployed arguments as to genre’s ahistoricity with-
out having considered its creation through repeated forms and narratives 
unique to the medium (Altman 1999: 49ff, 77–78). In Butler’s study of 
gender, drag performance demonstrates the constructed quality of gender. 
Drag performers imitate gender and “implicitly reveal […] the imitative 
structure of gender itself—as well as its contingency”, and thereby debunk 
myths of originary genders (Butler 1999: 175–176). According to my 
reading, extreme filmmakers demonstrate the same for genre.
Similar to Beugnet’s approach to French cinemas of sensation 
(2007: 16), I will attempt to look beyond the ‘sensationalist’ aspects 
of the studied films, although, by virtue of the films’ respective narra-
tives and content, there will be sustained investigations of both horrific 

10   T. Bordun
and pornographic elements. With this book I have chosen two direc-
tors whose style and output offer a cross-section of extreme cinema. 
The directors are from different nations and come from different film-
making backgrounds. Carlos Reygadas, from Mexico, operates accord-
ing to an aesthetics of realism, the avant-garde, and documentary. 
Catherine Breillat, from France, crafts melodramatic features that con-
tain scenes bordering on pornography and horror; her cinema is largely 
indebted to the erotic literary tradition in her country. While each 
director can be situated within the mode or institution of art cinema 
(Bordwell [1975/2007] 2011), screening their films at the same festi-
vals and receiving some of the same awards, the filmmakers vary in their 
generic means to elicit spectatorial interest and sensorial engagement. 
Reygadas and Breillat are not part of the “antigenre film” identified by 
Thomas Sobchack (Sobchack [1975] 1995: 111–112)—the directors 
do not merely adopt conventional genre plots, characters, and iconog-
raphy to then pull a fast one over us at the end (e.g., the “crook” gets 
away with it). The “queer connection” between the critic-defined label 
“extreme cinema” and my two filmmakers (for it is not enough to point 
at an object and repeat its name to give it a “real name” [Wittgenstein 
(1953) 1958: 19–20]) is in their repeated invocations of the commonly 
held definitions of experimental film, pornography, horror, melodrama, 
and documentary, and the appropriation of these genres in an attempt 
to aim for the bodies of their spectators. As I progress through the chap-
ters, I will show how this differs from a postmodern conception of pas-
tiche or genre mixing. Given my claim that the directors have an aim, so 
as to not fall victim to an intentional fallacy, I must state that whether 
Reygadas and Breillat intentionally want to move spectators bodily is of 
less concern than what I believe their work accomplishes, although, my 
occasional use of interviews with the filmmakers furthers the arguments I 
make about their films.
My study will assess each director’s use, abuse, subversion, and appro-
priation of established codes of film genres to frustrate expectation, as 
Richard Falcon suggests (1999: 11): “Although disparate in their aes-
thetics and influences, [extreme films] share an aggressive desire to con-
front their audiences, to render the spectator’s experience problematic.” 
Falcon is echoed by Mattias Frey when he writes (2014: 148),
Specifically, extreme cinema depends on two hermeneutic transformations: 
(1) the creator’s intention and/or pretension to be producing something 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   11
more sophisticated than simple horror [and other sensational genres]; and 
(2) the consumer’s belief and/or desire to have the capability of rarefied 
taste to appreciate larger, deeper meanings beyond the obvious horror 
[and other sensational genres].
In a broader sense, I would suggest that the films discussed in the follow-
ing chapters find a home in the pornographic. The term ‘pornographic’ 
is employed here in a way similar to Siegfried Kracauer’s definition 
([1960] 2009: 270): that is, as an indicator not just of on-screen nudity 
and sexuality but as referring to any cinematic subject which “over-
whelms consciousness,” be it “Elemental catastrophes, the atrocities 
of war, acts of violence and terror, sexual debauchery, and death.”10 
Reygadas’s and Breillat’s films overwhelm consciousness and engage the 
body of the spectator through treatments of, and experiments with, film 
genres. Narrative and form function to overwhelm the viewer. Further, 
we will see that, regardless of the genre invoked by the directors, these 
filmmakers forgo typical distinctions between fiction and reality.
I have suggested that the extreme film spectator does not quite know 
what he or she sees. The epistemological confusion of genres and of fic-
tion and reality counters the habitual sensuous responses of Williams’s 
low genres—in most instances the effect desired by the filmmaker (if he 
or she has one), in terms of cause within the diegesis or particular images 
and sounds and the effect produced in the spectator’s body, is not so 
simply definable and locatable. To address the aesthetics of extreme cin-
ema and to be precise and clear about directors’ desired affects is a dif-
ficult project to undertake and, according to some readings, would be 
either an intentional or an “affective” fallacy (Brinkema 2014: 26–46), 
although I am perhaps less concerned about this fallacy than I am with 
fully accounting for the film experience.11 To claim that the directors 
11 Daniel Yacavone (2015: 14–15) contends that knowledge of the filmmaker, both as 
the person responsible for a given film as well as the artistic intention behind the film, is 
part of the experience of attending to it. Further considerations suggest, for Yacavone, that 
author intention is but one of many experiential and interpretative engagements a spec-
tator has with a work. He writes: “In the appropriate application of […] relevant (prior) 
knowledge, as opposed to its mental bracketing or willed ignorance [such as a suspension 
10 Helen Hester (2014) has published a book-length study about the contemporary shift 
from pornography as a genre to the use of the term pornographic in discourse. Among 
other topics, she studies “warporn,” “misery porn,” and the use of pornographic as a syno-
nym for disgusting. Unlike Hester, I find critical value in thinking of pornography as a 
genre.

12   T. Bordun
do nothing would result in a formal exercise within the larger body of 
work known as film criticism. According to critical and scholarly writings, 
Reygadas and Breillat craft cinemas of displeasure in an effort to offer 
some kind of critique of social or cultural relations: of class, race, and 
gender in Mexico, and the lingering resonance of patriarchy in France, 
but perhaps the West in general. However, these social and political 
aims are often misfires as spectators perhaps do not make the connection 
between the film’s reconsiderations of genre and their own desire to have 
that expectation fulfilled—that is, what Altman calls the generic cross-
roads. Indeed, a criticism that could be leveled against the production 
trend is the extent to which these misfires promote violence or refuse to 
return to cultural norms whereby immoral or illegal behavior is punished 
(Altman 1999: 145ff).
Extreme cinema is therefore dangerous across a number of different 
registers. I contend that this cinema is the most deeply problematic one 
of the twenty-first century. The range of interpretations and sensations is 
expansive; thus, when I place the spectator as the subject of my theory or 
argument, as in any film theory, I am always speaking of the relationship 
between the spectator and the film(s). As I quickly introduced above, I 
heed Cavell’s “theoretical” and “practical advice” (1981: 10): “I should 
like to stress that the way to overcome theory correctly, philosophically, 
is to let the object of the work of your interest teach you how to con-
sider it.”
Film Theory After Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Now that we have understood how sensation and genre has been stud-
ied by Williams, we can turn to the theory that undergirds the analyses 
of the following chapters. It will helpful to have a basic understanding 
of Merleau-Ponty’s existential phenomenology before turning to the 
contemporary incarnation of phenomenological film theory proper. The 
 
of disbelief], viewers may literally experience more of the singular, irreducible, presented 
[film] world […] and not (necessarily) less. Such relatively more knowledge informed per-
ception often leads to quite literally seeing and hearing something more, or different, on 
the screen than one otherwise might, not to mention to often feel more deeply in relation 
to it.” I adopt a similar approach to Yacavone’s broad account of spectatorship, particularly 
in Chaps. 6 and 8.

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   13
central tenet of Merleau-Ponty’s writings was to describe the fundamen-
tal way humans encounter the world—that is, through bodily percep-
tion (but not limited to sight). His Phenomenology of Perception (1945) 
argues that perceptual experience is pre-personal and anonymous, taking 
place in me (bodily), rather than in a personal I (ego or consciousness as 
the receptor of sense-data) that perceives the world. The following brief 
account of embodiment will then lead us to its applicability to theorizing 
cinema and its effects on perception.
The lived body is the way in which we inhabit the world—it is the 
structure of sensuous existence. Gary Brent Madison observes that the 
body is present in the world and we are aware of it, a consciousness of 
one’s self, as a body, taking up the demands of the world (1981: 23). 
This awareness of having sensations makes it possible to discuss the 
body’s pre-cognitive capacities. For Merleau-Ponty, we experience the 
world through our bodily sensations, and those sensations constitute the 
world as a thing which exists ([1945] 2004: 93). We know this world 
through habitual nature, a continuity of experience through a storing 
or stocktaking of prior encounters with things and persons. According 
to Merleau-Ponty, I do not wake up each morning and need to readjust 
my motility to my surroundings, for my body is ready to respond to the 
imperatives of physical comportment that the world demands. On the 
other hand, to usher in the new, heretofore unique motor and perceptual 
imperatives are assimilated into the habit body.
A famous example would be the experiment by clinical psycholo-
gist G.M. Stratton. Stratton rigged eyeglasses to reverse the up-down 
axes of natural perception; everything that was down was up, and vice 
versa. This upside-down perception was a hindrance at first, but after a 
week of experimentation Stratton was able to interact normally with the 
world (Lingis 1996: 31–32). This example suggests that the habitual-
ized body “guarantees” or assures the body can act spontaneously; the 
habit body allows for a consistency and continuity of the world through 
time, whether perception is normalized or disrupted then normalized, as 
in Stratton’s experiment (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 93–94). There are thus 
two layers of the lived body: a habit body and a body in the moment. 
In the following chapters, I will demonstrate how both Reygadas and 
Breillat re-order habituated patterns of genre spectatorship. Steve Neale 
and Thomas Sobchack argue that spectators’ memories and awareness of 
prior genre films are instrumental in their generic expectations and evalu-
ations of a given film (experienced in the film’s generic qualities as well 

14   T. Bordun
as seen and heard in advertisements, trailers, and so on) (Neale 1995: 
170; Sobchack 1995: 103). Likewise, the body in the seat in the cinema 
(or, more likely, on a couch at home), becomes habituated to the generic 
sensations offered by the abovementioned body genres. Reygadas and 
Breillat, I contend, aim to reorganize this sense experience through both 
their filmic forms and their narratives.
What makes my claim about these two directors’ films possible is the 
relationship our bodies have with the world. For Merleau-Ponty, acts do 
not start with the cogito as intentionality, as Edmund Husserl suggests, 
but are rooted in bodily experience. In shifting focus from cogito to lived 
body, consciousness turns from “I think” to “I can,”—that is, the body 
is a subject-object, “a being of possibility, a being open to the emergence 
of determinateness from an horizon of indeterminacy” (Russon 2003: 
31). I can deliberately encounter and engage with things and persons or 
I can react to their coming to greet me. Consciousness retains its sta-
tus as a mediator between self and world but does not function as the 
initiator. Rather, the body is a directedness toward something: limbs are 
put into motion for intentional acts, toward some purpose or goal, or, 
as Alphonso Lingis deems it, to address the bodily imperatives placed on 
us by the world (1996). John Russon similarly observes (2003: 16): “I 
experience interpretively changed environments, things, and places that 
carry within them a directive force [… W]hat I experience are environ-
ments that already have meanings embedded in them, and the kinds of 
meanings they have are essentially directional, that is, they direct my 
actions toward some end.” We therefore do not just inhabit space and 
time, but operate in expressive space, in an open realm for possibilities of 
action as well as responses to the demands of the world. Put in the terms 
of film spectatorship, the images and sounds on a screen can direct our 
bodies to certain forms of sensuous expression—anything from goose 
bumps to motion sickness.
An individual history comes along with the habitualized body. The 
moment of sensation is a reconstitution of a personal history, part of 
what has been left behind by prior constitutions. This reconstitution or 
recreation happens at every moment. Perception, in its constantly renew-
ing and reconstituting character, offers itself as pre-personal to us in the 
dual sense of pre-cognitive and coming before an existing personality 
(ego or consciousness) (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 128). The anonymity of 
perception and its pre-personal quality become clear in Merleau-Ponty’s 
example of the perception of a lamp (2004: 81). Part of habitual life is 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   15
in grasping the identities of objects in terms of their respective aspects. 
“[T]o look at an object is to inhabit it,” and inhabiting an object, in 
perceiving it, one is also opened up to the various angles in which to 
see that object through the perspective of other objects. The wall, the 
chimney, the tables and chairs “see” the faces of the lamp that a person 
cannot. “Thus every object is the mirror of all others,” the phenome-
nologist writes. An individual’s gaze, however, is always directed toward 
one face of the object, and at that same time this gaze opens perception 
for all other possible vantage points. In my gaze I presume a synthesis 
of the object when, in fact, it is incomplete (in the sense that I see only 
one side). I perceive anonymously in this respect, for my perception is 
“incapable of bringing any precise testimony,” and the parallel with films 
is quite clear in that the objects, persons, and entire film world are per-
ceptually incomplete. For Merleau-Ponty, an object in its incompleteness 
“slips away,” then is rekindled, in part, by the “infinite number of dif-
ferent perspectives compressed into a strict co-existence” (2004: 82).12 
Such a process is beyond our immanent experience—Merleau-Ponty 
names this an ek-stase of experience (2004: 83). Ek-stase is described as 
“Active transcendence of the subject in relation to the world” (Merleau-
Ponty 2004: 84n1). The body is the medium for these experiences of 
objects in the world; sensation and perception synthesize the horizon of 
objects.
The lived body primordially senses against a background or setting. 
This background is not made of perceived unrelated parts; rather, move-
ment and perception are in relatedness to the whole setting, a Gestalt 
(Merleau-Ponty 2004: 122). Even the outlying and strange bodily expe-
riences, such as “dreams, hallucinations, erotic and psychedelic phan-
tasms,” operate in the same “practicable field of perception” (Lingis 
1996: 112). In Chap. 2 of this book, these strange bodily experiences 
factor into the phenomenological account of Reygadas’s Post Tenebras 
Lux (2013). In answering the call of things and persons in the world, 
we are therefore not collecting sense-data, sets of empirical facts, for 
some of our perceptions may be entirely hallucinatory (Merleau-Ponty 
[1945] 1964: 48–49; Lingis 1996: 114; and elsewhere). Perception tran-
spires against a background of bodily and perceptual givens, even the 
12 Lingis (1996: 60): “To see a real thing is to sense how to position our forces before it; 
to see something is to know how to approach it and explore it.”

16   T. Bordun
strange ones, thus indicating not a personal identity but an opening for 
general and anonymous sensation (Madison 1981: 26). As we will see 
in the chapters of this book, the first experience we have with the films 
of Reygadas and Breillat offers us a plethora of perceptual experiences 
unlike our preconceived generic expectations.
Perception is a response to a situation, sensitivity to the moment. 
Jennifer M. Barker, who owes a debt to Merleau-Ponty for her phenom-
enological film theory, defines the pre-personal nature of perception as 
follows (2009: 18): it “takes place in the world of phenomena; we are 
immersed in it as we are immersed in materiality. It does not require a 
will and desire on our part as subjects to put it into play”. We can con-
trast this primordial or immediate experience with what we might call 
a personal act. An individual does not plunge into the vast blue sky in 
the same way one understands a book or devotes oneself to mathematics. 
These “personal acts” create a situation from a decision, but perception, 
fundamentally, is the pre-personal expression of the body in a given situ-
ation (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 129–130). Pre-personal bodily expression is 
a perceptual a priori.
In Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology, and in the films I discuss, the 
reorganization of perceptual experience has the potential to foster mean-
ingful encounters, first, between the film and the viewer, and second, 
between the viewer and the world outside the film. For the phenome-
nologist, the body is “a hollow, a fold, which has been made and which 
can be unmade” (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 129–130), thus opening a “‘dia-
logue’ between consciousness and thing, subject and object” (Madison 
1981: 28). Perception, then, creates a situation within which sense-
experience is anonymous and general—a perceptual field is opened for 
our gaze, a field in which we are always already enmeshed, where mean-
ing and significance can be fostered through the mediation of conscious 
thought. My close readings of the films followed by my arguments as to 
the significance of these films adheres to the phenomenological process: 
I explicate the forms and narratives of the films interspersed with remarks 
from critics, theorists, and even the directors themselves in an attempt 
to replicate this first-time experience. Once sensed, perceived by all of 
the senses, I bring these “discoveries,” as Laura Marks calls them (2000: 
178), to consciousness. I then develop arguments about the genre inter-
ventions of the two studied filmmakers by turning attention to oft-cited 
film genre scholarship. The writings of genre theorists assist me in articu-
lating Reygadas’s and Breillat’s efforts at not necessarily overturning the 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   17
qualities of specific genre but expanding the notion of genre and recon-
sidering the concept as a whole. Finally, this complex method is neces-
sary for the larger claims I make about the directors’ works—namely, 
about their visual critiques of contemporary Mexico and contemporary 
France, respectively. Their films function as attempts to visually critique 
social, political, and cultural facets in their home nations.
The above brief account of Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology plays 
more of a pivotal role in this volume than his attempts at film philoso-
phy. For a philosopher with such an investment in perception and the 
arts, especially painting, Merleau-Ponty wrote comparatively little about 
film. In his only extended account of film, “The Film and the New 
Psychology” (1945), film is contrasted with a “normal vision,” a vision 
in which the figures stand out from the ground so that we may direct 
ourselves toward them (Merleau-Ponty 1964: 49). A figure or “sector” 
discloses itself in a landscape, momentarily concealing all others from our 
gaze (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 80). Perception operates along this horizon. 
Film, on the other hand, “has no horizons:” “When […] the camera is 
trained on an object and moves nearer to it to give a close-up view, we 
can remember that we are being shown the ash tray or an actor’s hand, 
we do not actually identify it” (Merleau-Ponty 2004: 80). Thus we see 
that a film, given Merleau-Ponty’s argument for embodiment above, is 
not a collection of sense-data and its sum total, “but a temporal gestalt” 
(1964: 54). Without the clear figure–ground separation, memory is 
called upon to revive the prior shots in order to perceptually comprehend 
the new. His account of film spectatorship, then, parallels what he wrote 
about the lived body in the moment and the habit body. In Chap. 7  
of this book we will see how Breillat demands that her spectators use 
their memories to discover the meaning and message of Sex is Comedy 
(2002).
It was in this 1945 essay that Merleau-Ponty also seemed to champion 
a realist aesthetics which touch upon humanist issues. Despite this affin-
ity for the realism of his time, the play of movement on-screen for per-
ceptual pleasure seemed to resonate deeply with Merleau-Ponty (1964: 
57–58). Prior to his attempt to posit some kind of cinematic specific-
ity with realist aesthetics, the aspect of film that was of most interest 
was its potential for perceptual experimentation. Cinema as a percep-
tual experience allows filmmakers, theorists, and spectators to play with 
the varying expressions—visual, aural, and tactile—of moving images. 
Merleau-Ponty’s discussion of a moving train (which has an affinity with 

18   T. Bordun
the early Lumière pictures—whether trains arriving or landscapes shot 
from trains) and the perceiver’s relation to that movement should serve 
as an example of what I have called cinema’s potential for perceptual 
play. Additionally, Merleau-Ponty’s following statement was clearly influ-
ential on the ideas of contemporary film theorists. The frame of a win-
dow and the two modes of viewing the contents of the frame—in motion 
or stationary—suggest the cinematic experience.
Even the perception of movement, which at first seems to depend directly 
on the point of reference chosen by the intellect is in turn only one ele-
ment in the global organization of the field. For, although it is true that, 
when either my train or the one next to it starts, first one, then the other 
may appear to be moving, one should note that the illusion is not arbitrary 
and that I cannot willfully induce it by the completely intellectual choice of 
a point of reference. If I am playing cards in my compartment, the other 
train will start moving; if, on the other hand, I am looking for someone 
in the adjacent train, then mine will begin to roll. In each instance the 
one which seems stationary is the one we have chosen as our abode and 
which, for the time being, is our environment. Movement and rest distrib-
ute themselves in our surroundings not according to the hypotheses which 
our intelligence is pleased to construct but according to the way we settle 
ourselves in the world and the position our bodies assume in it. (Merleau-
Ponty 1964: 51–52)13
This is the power cinema can harness. The camera itself can track, 
zoom, pan, and the like, and in doing so will shortly thereafter project 
the movement of whatever was captured. It is not our cognitive abilities 
that grant these perceptual pleasures but our body, anchored as it is to 
the seat in a cinema. Merleau-Ponty would say we instantly recognize the 
13 Lingis (1996: 34) interprets Merleau-Ponty’s scenario as follows: “The particular 
movements we make toward things that move or stabilize are made possible by the move-
ment our sensory-motor powers make to maintain themselves on the levels that extend and 
maintain a field. If, seated in the compartment of a train and waiting for the departure, we 
get absorbed in what someone is doing over in the adjacent train, then when one of the 
trains starts to pull out, it will be ours we experience as pulling us away from the scene or 
person we are holding on to with multiple interests. But if, when we entered our compart-
ment, we settled into our seat, are now arranging our papers or starting a conversation with 
our fellow-passengers, then it is the adjacent train we see backing out across the side win-
dow. Later, engrossed in our reading or in conversation, it is the trees that lean over and file 
across the window of the train and not the car that pitches as the train mounts the hills.”

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   19
projection as part of our field and in turn express our perceptual capaci-
ties in the reception of the projection. On the one hand, the movements 
and colors may dazzle our eyes; on the other, more recent narrative 
films may nauseate audiences with a shaky camera, sometimes known as 
queasy-cam. While Merleau-Ponty sets the foundation for thinking about 
the embodied spectator at the cinema, his phenomenology is insufficient 
by itself to discuss the film experience fully. A dogmatically Merleau-
Pontian film theory could not venture much further than I have here.
How do contemporary film theorists work with the philosophy of 
Merleau-Ponty, and more importantly, fill in the gaps and extend his 
work? Perhaps the most significant concepts developed thus far are by 
Vivian Sobchack. In “The Active Eye: A Phenomenology of Cinematic 
Vision” (1990), Sobchack initially conceptualizes the spectator’s 
encounter with cinema as a “viewing view.” While at the cinema, what 
a spectator views is the camera in the act of its viewing, and we see the 
importance of Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy for him/her to describe and 
assess the film experience. The kind of reversible exchange between the 
spectator’s perception and his or her expression is likewise appropriate in 
accounting for the camera’s viewing. Sobchack summarizes this relation 
(1990: 25):
[Merleau-Ponty argues that w]e can see the visible and objective body 
of another who is looking at the world or ourselves, and understand that 
objective body is also a body-subject – whose sight is as intentional and 
meaningful as my own. What is so unique about the cinema’s ‘viewing 
view,’ however, is that it presents and represents the activity of vision not 
merely as it is objectively seen by us, but also as it is introceptively lived by 
another. Thus, the cinema’s ‘viewing view’ is a model of vision as it is lived 
as ‘my own’ by a body-subject, and its uniqueness is that this ‘viewing 
view’ is objectively visible for us in the same form as it is subjectively visual 
for itself.
The way to understand cinema, then, is similar to the manner in which 
human perception operates. When an object calls to us, demands our 
attention, we alter our heretofore indeterminate horizon and re-evaluate 
our figure–ground relationship to bring the object into contact with our 
perception. The zoom-in of the camera functions similarly, intensifying 
the object, “making it more vivid than it was before, centering it—first, 
immediately, in the film’s consciousness, and second, mediately, in ours 

20   T. Bordun
as spectators” (Sobchack 1990: 28). The zoom-out functions as the 
reverse, shrinking or drawing our perception away to realign ourselves 
with an expanded horizon. This theory helps me account for Reygadas’s 
contribution to cinema, particularly in tracking shots and mounted 
camera shots. Similarly, the performance of bodies in the cinemas of 
Reygadas and Breillat tests us with one effect of viewing—for example, 
the bodies may arouse, horrify, or cause disgust and shock—and then 
unhinge that initial sensation by aesthetically, narratively, or themati-
cally producing the opposite. This theory is demonstrated in several ways 
within the chapters of my book: the inclusion of surrealism, dreams, and 
hallucinations shot in the realist style; a young girl’s nudity in a sequence 
of coercion and rape; oral sex at the outset of a narrative film; and an 
intratextual reading demanded by form and narrative.
Vivian Sobchack renames the “viewing view” shortly after the publica-
tion of her foundational essay—her 1992 book includes a lengthy dis-
cussion of what is now called the “film’s body.” This concept receives 
full treatment in The Address of the Eye, in terms of the film operating as 
a mediator of filmmaker’s and spectator’s perception, and more directly, 
as the film itself expressing the world through its technological means 
(1992: 168). Similar to our own bodies, the film’s body is both an object 
and a subject of perception. But it is not reducible either to an anthro-
pomorphic account or to its functioning simply as an apparatus. Akin to 
our own being-in-the-world, which is irreducible to materiality alone, 
following my above account of Merleau-Ponty’s theory of embodiment, 
the film’s body “is discovered and located only reflexively as a quasi-sub-
jective and embodied ‘eye’ that has a discrete – if ordinarily prepersonal 
and anonymous – existence” (Sobchack 2004: 66n49).
Jennifer Barker’s more recent application of phenomenology in The 
Tactile Eye (2009) begins with the film’s body as the foundation of a sen-
suous film experience. Through various case studies which function as 
exemplary instances indicating the expressive potential of the film’s body, 
Barker traces three dynamic and sensuous locales of the spectator’s body 
that are affected: the skin, the musculature, and the viscera. From the 
touch that lingers too long on a character’s skin in a horror film, to the 
speedy editing and jittery camera which presents a non-human percept 
of a chase sequence, and in the palpitations of experimental film, she 
describes the film experience in terms of cinematography, editing, sound, 
lighting, and animation and assesses how these varying functions of the 
apparatus elicit a bodily reaction that is, in Merleau-Pontian terms, also 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   21
a bodily expression (Barker 2009: 7–10). In other words, the sense that 
we get from absorption at the cinema is a sense of our bodies as such. 
We see, then, as I said above about the possibilities in cinema for the 
perceptual play of movement, that this play of perception is dual in that 
both film’s body and spectator’s body are perceptive in the reception of 
something (the profilmic event on the one hand, the dancing light of 
the screen on the other) and expressive in that reception of something 
(via the zoom, edits, and so on, and the goose bumps, heart palpitations, 
and tingling of the skin). Both Sobchack’s and Barker’s film theories will 
become clearer as I move through the chapters.14
The theoretical approach outlined above provides the tools I need 
to accomplish close readings of Breillat’s and Reygadas’s films and 
their genre interventions. While my method resembles that of the phe-
nomenologist, there is some significant overlap between the Merleau-
Ponty-inspired theories of Sobchack and Barker and the more Gilles 
Deleuze-oriented theory of Laura Marks. Marks outlines what she calls, 
following Deleuze, “haptic visuality.” The term suggests a touching with 
one’s eyes: images of surfaces and bodies and even the grain of the image 
itself can be grazed by spectators’ eyes, which mimics tactile experiences 
directly felt on the skin (Beugnet 2007: 66). Further accounts and defi-
nitions of haptic visuality as well as how it functions in the films of the 
two directors will be discussed in greater detail in the following chapters. 
For now, it suffices to observe that for Sobchack, Barker, and Marks, the 
foundation for the cinematic experience is the embodied subject; thus, 
whether we describe it as the film’s body or outline processes of haptic 
visuality, the core of the matter remains the same.
My theoretical approach to extreme cinema is not unprecedented. 
In Cinema and Sensation (2007), Martine Beugnet provides close 
readings of a number of films and articulates the techniques by which 
recent French filmmakers encourage haptic visuality. Such tactics include 
“Changes in focus, unusual angles and framing, long shots alternating 
with close-ups and extreme close-ups, graphic editing and the combina-
tion of different media […] with their variations in ratios and graininess” 
14 The influence of Gestalt psychology on Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology allows 
for a productive comparison between his writings on film and those of Rudolf Arnheim. 
Arnheim was also influenced by Gestalt psychology. Indeed, his 1933 volume Film as Art 
understands the sensory perception of films in similar terms to Laura U. Marks and Jennifer 
Barker. Cf. Arnheim ([1933] 2011: 281–282, 287–289).

22   T. Bordun
(2007: 67). Although Beugnet and I share similar theoretical tools and 
even generate some similar results, her book works alongside Merleau-
Ponty, Georges Bataille, Jacques Lacan, and Deleuze (sometimes on the 
same page) to better understand the spectatorial experience of haptic 
visuality in the films of Philippe Grandrieux, Claire Denis, and Breillat, 
among others. Beugnet’s volume focuses on the formal techniques and 
sensations of such directors, while my study places form alongside narra-
tive, through which I generate claims as to the directors’ social, cultural, 
and ethical views. Moreover, my self-imposed limitation of two directors 
studied through Merleau-Ponty and contemporary film phenomenology 
is an attempt to discuss the films in a consistent way, to be sure, but also 
to construct a coherent approach to my study of extreme cinema, and 
cinema more generally. Thus when I employ formal analyses for specific 
films (Chaps. 2 and 4), bring psychoanalysis to bear on psychologically 
troubling scenes (Chap. 5), or use affect theory to discuss performance 
(Chap. 6), it is in the service of my underlying method (phenomenol-
ogy) and the overarching argument of the book—namely, that Reygadas 
and Breillat reorder sense-experience through the reorganization of 
generic tropes.
The phenomenological method is not solely about the subjective film 
experience; something I think Tiago de Luca overemphasizes (2014: 
8) about the kinds of film theory Barker, Marks, and Sobchack attempt 
(although, there is a considerable subjective element). Barker concisely 
attests to the mutual exchange between film and subject in her analysis 
when she writes (2009: 12–13):
Watching a film, we are certainly not in the film, but we are not entirely 
outside of it, either. We exist and move and feel in that space of contact 
where our surfaces mingle and our musculatures entangle […] This sense 
of fleshy, muscular, visceral contact seriously undermines the rigidity of the 
opposition between viewer and film, inviting us to think of them as inti-
mately related but not identical, caught up in a relationship of intersubjec-
tivity and co-constitution, rather than as subject and object positioned on 
opposite sides of the screen.
In different words, subjectivity is already there when discussing the sen-
suous elements in a given film. The cinemas that comprise the body of 
this volume pre-exist the hypothesized response of the ideal spectator, 
or, in de Luca’s words (2014: 9), the “films themselves aim to produce 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   23
and convey sensory experience.” Yet, if the films aim to produce and 
convey a sensory experience, the films and subsequent theorizing there-
fore demand an embodied spectator. De Luca’s study of contemporary 
directors (Reygadas, Tsai Ming-liang, and Gus Van Sant) updates clas-
sical realist theories and thereby modernizes realist aesthetics. While he 
and I certainly share similar views and theoretical foundations, I inter-
vene in recent debates about sensation and spectatorship in contempo-
rary cinema, and develop ideas about how contemporary cinemas work 
and work over genres. I also attempt to show that the turn to the body 
in film theory and the turn to the body in contemporary art cinema have 
collided in recent decades. Whether one follows from the other is impos-
sible to say with certainty; perhaps it is best to suggest that the theory 
and the practice are mutually reinforcing.
Beyond the Shock of On-Screen Sex and Violence
Having given a brief account of Williams on the body genres, Merleau-
Ponty’s phenomenology, and recent theorists’ appropriation of phenom-
enology, I can state my argument for the following chapters concisely: if 
the experience of film is constituted by an embodied spectator who sen-
suously interacts with the object in a pre-personal and anonymous way, 
and if the repeated interactions with genre films have produced habit-
uated bodily responses in the spectator, then the cinemas of Reygadas 
and Breillat re-order or re-organize sense-experience by troubling famil-
iar and generic styles and narratives (in the films previously encountered 
by the spectator). In this film experience, a genre is established after the 
fact of viewing. The viewer collects and assembles the images and sounds, 
at first, in a way familiar to the habituated patterns of film recollection 
according to genre. However, a new experience is configured in this 
attempt at recollection, for the cinemas of Reygadas and Breillat do not 
easily conform to pre-established tropes of given genres. Their oeuvres 
serve as exemplary instances of “filmic multivalency.” One such strategy 
to assure multivalency is a “fertile juxtaposition” of “multiple characters, 
plots, and themes,” a device that seems to be about the organization of 
form and narrative as well as a description of spectatorship:
Every screen moment is caught up in a multidimensional loom, in which 
several elements – foreground and background, shot scale and lighting, 
mise en scène and editing, dialogue and music – are woven together into 

24   T. Bordun
a multidimensionally reversible fabric. With each new juxtaposition new 
connections are made, and concepts are reinforced or relegated to stor-
age, potentially leading to that magic moment of conceptual refram-
ing when the spectator-weaver presses on the pedal, raising some threads 
while lowering others and thus initiating a new series of juxtapositions and 
reframings. (Altman 1999: 136)
In my phenomenological reading of the film experience, the specta-
tor creates a film that is unique and original in itself, an artwork that is 
understood by the habit body first, followed by an experience of genre 
trouble, and then posited as something that has meaning and signifi-
cance for the individual (even if that meaning is to label a film trash or 
incomprehensible). Indeed, this movement through a film is what I call a 
cinephilia of displeasure.
In the pages to follow, both the formal excesses and the bodily excesses 
of particular films are explored. Chapters 2 and 3 focus upon Reygadas’s 
experimentation with fictional narrative film in Post Tenebras Lux. Of the 
two directors studied, Reygadas perhaps explores more fully the cam-
era’s possibilities for altered forms of perception. I trace his aesthetics 
in this film through the aforementioned theorists Sobchack and Barker. 
Breillat’s pornographic films are investigated in Chaps. 4 and 5. I turn to 
Williams’s numerous studies of pornography to reveal the genre fluctu-
ations in Breillat’s film, and, through the directors’ aesthetic plays with 
pornography, present her critiques of contemporary heterosexual rela-
tionships. Chap. 5 attempts to reconcile Williams’s employment of psy-
choanalysis with my phenomenological approach (via Marks) to thereby 
discuss Breillat’s interventions in the horror genre. In Chap. 6, I consider 
the affective and intratextual dimension of Breillat’s Fat Girl (À ma soeur, 
2001) and Sex is Comedy (2002). The latter is an autofiction (a fictional 
making-of) of the former feature. I argue that the performance of lead 
actress Roxane Mesquida offers itself as a site for the shock of what was 
assumed to be a fictional performance in the former film. I combine the 
two roles as one consistent site for practical and theoretical interests. I 
contend that this combination results in an affective experience for specta-
tors (or effective, in the sense of using performance as one formal means 
of critiquing patriarchy) across not merely one isolated diegesis but two 
narrative worlds and the extradiegetic materials. On this latter node, I 
will also address issues surrounding possible exploitation of performers by 
directors, a point which emerges in each of the films studied due to the 
presence of reality forcing its way into a fictional narrative. Following de 

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   25
Luca, this is the “profilmic event” that perhaps constitutes the key differ-
ence between contemporary art cinemas and those of the past. I develop 
the fundamental concepts for my reading of Sex is Comedy by first examin-
ing the sexual scenes in Reygadas’s Battle in Heaven (Batalla en el cielo, 
2005). Thus the similarities between the two directors are not in their 
politics or style, but in my readings of their form, modes of address, and 
way of shooting sexual performances. Chapter 7 resituates and reformu-
lates spectatorship theory with the arguments made up to that point. I 
will again bring psychoanalytic film theory to bear on genre and conclude 
that it is unable to provide me sufficient tools to wrestle with extreme cin-
ema. I contest Slavoj Žižek’s psychoanalysis with Marks’s theory of haptic 
visuality. By bringing these two theorists together I am able to develop a 
new take on spectatorship and the pornography genre.
A discussion of pornographic and realist codes arises with each of the 
directors studied as well as a discussion of the possible effects these codes 
have on spectators. As Victoria Best and Martin Crowley note, the inter-
play between the “real presence of the performer” and “audience par-
ticipation” is crucial in the creation of meaning in a given text or film 
(2007: 16). Meaning is dependent on the viewer; it can be in the form 
of outrage or, for the cinephile, a pleasure in the discomfort of disturb-
ing images. Therefore, extreme cinema is not affective on its own or has 
affects without the mediation of spectator. Cinema requires an audi-
ence habituated in classical narratives and representations to appreciate 
or dismiss it. Spectators collide with a work and together consumer and 
product produce the meaning, although, as in the production of cycles 
and genres, the meaning(s) may shift over time. One of Cavell’s favorite 
passages from Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations (1953) 
makes this point as well (Cavell [1971] 1979: 158; 1981: 43; [1985] 
2005: 142): “What dawns here lasts only as long as I am occupied with 
the object in a particular way.” This consideration applies to my study 
as well. I am intrigued by the films discussed in the proceeding chapters 
and I approach them with a closeness, rigor, and hopefully, theoretical 
insight. For the moment, then, reading Reygadas and Breillat through 
genre, and assessing their generic instability through form and narrative, 
are my way of attending to the work of film theory.
I have repeated the idea that film and viewer co-constitute a finished 
product and its meaning; whether rigorous or opinionated, with praise or 
with outrage, meaning is generated by the situated and embodied specta-
tor with a history of cinematic (and moral) assumptions. Extreme cinema 
generates, even for scholars, extreme difficulties in stating, with certainty, 

26   T. Bordun
the exact representations seen on-screen and a film’s worth or worthless-
ness. I will attempt it nevertheless, and this attempt requires a new mode 
of viewing, a new mode nevertheless not inconsistent with previous ones.
References
Altman, Rick. 1999. Film/Genre. London: BFI.
Arnheim, Rudolf. [1933] 2011. Film and Reality, from Film as Art. In Critical 
Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy 
Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 279–289. Boston and New York: 
Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Barker, Jennifer M. 2009. The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press.
Best, Victoria, and Martin Crowley. 2007. The New Pornographies: Explicit Sex 
in Recent French Fiction and Film. Manchester and New York: Manchester 
University Press.
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Blandford, Steve, Barry Keith Grant, and Jim Hillier. 2001. The Film Studies 
Dictionary. London: Arnold.
Bordun, Troy. 2017. The End of Extreme Cinema Studies. Canadian Review of 
Comparative Literature 1 (44): 122–136.
Bordwell, David. [1975/2007] 2011. From Poetics of Cinema. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 558–573. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Braudy, Leo. [1976] 2009. From The World in a Frame. In Film Theory & 
Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed. 535–551. New York 
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2014. The Forms of the Affects. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.
Brown, William. 2013. Violence in Extreme Cinema and the Ethics of 
Spectatorship. Projections 7 (1): 25–42.
Butler, Judith. [1989] 1999. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of 
Identity, 10th Anniversary ed. New York: Routledge.
Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film, 
Enlarged ed. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 1981. Pursuits of Happiness: The Hollywood Comedy of 
Remarriage. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 2005. Cavell on Film, ed. William Rothman. Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press.
Dulac, Germaine. [1932] 2011. The Avant-Garde Cinema. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 651–657. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.

1  INTRODUCTION: GENRE TROUBLE AND EXTREME CINEMA   27
De Luca, Tiago. 2014. Realism of the Senses in World Cinema: The Experience of 
Physical Reality. London and New York: I.B. Tauris.
Elsaesser, Thomas. [1972] 2011. Tales of Sound and Fury: Observations 
on the Family Melodrama. In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and 
Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta 
Mazaj, 498–511. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Elsaesser, Thomas, and Malte Hagener. 2010. Film Theory: An Introduction 
through the Senses. New York and London: Routledge.
Falcon, Richard. 1999. Reality is Too Shocking. Sight & Sound 9 (1): 10–14.
Frey, Mattias. 2014. The Ethics of Extreme Cinema. In Cine-Ethics: Ethical 
Dimensions of Film Theory, Practice, and Spectatorship, ed. Jinhee Choi and 
Mattias Frey. New York: Routledge.
Frey, Mattias. 2016. Extreme Cinema: The Transgressive Rhetoric of Today’s Art 
Film Culture. New Brunswick, NJ and London: Rutgers.
Grierson, John. [1935] 2011. First Principles of Documentary. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 657–667. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Grønstad, Asbjørn. 2006. Abject desire: Anatomie de l’enfer and the unwatch-
able. Studies in French Cinema 6 (9): 161–169.
Hester, Helen. 2014. Beyond Explicit: Pornography and the Displacement of Sex. 
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Horeck, Tanya, and Tina Kendall (eds.). 2011. The New Extremism in Cinema: 
From France to Europe. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Kerner, Aaron Michael, and Jonathan L. Knapp. 2016. Extreme Cinema: Affective 
Strategies in Transnational Media. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Kracauer, Siegfried. [1960] 2009. From Theory of Film. In Film Theory & 
Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed. 262–272. New York 
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Leys, Ruth. 2011. The Turn to Affect: A Critique. Critical Inquiry 37: 434–472.
Lingis, Alphonso. 1996. The Imperative. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana 
University Press.
Madison, Gary Brent. 1981. The Phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty: A Search for 
the Limits of Consciousness. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.
Marks, Laura U. 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, 
and the Senses. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. [1945] 1964. Sense and Non-Sense, trans. Hubert 
Dreyfus and Paul Dreyfus. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. [1945] 2004. Selections from The Phenomenology of 
Perception. In Maurice Merleau-Ponty: Basic Writings, ed. Thomas Baldwin. 
London and New York: Routledge.
Minh-ha, Trinh T. [1990] 2011. Documentary Is/Not a Name. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 691–704. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.

28   T. Bordun
Neale, Steve. [1990] 1995. Questions of Genre. In Film Genre Reader II, ed. 
Barry Keith Grant, 159–183. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Quandt, James. [2004] 2011. Flesh and Blood: Sex and Violence in Recent 
French Cinema. In The New Extremism in Cinema, ed. Tanya Horeck and 
Tina Kendall, 18–25. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2013. Carlos Reygadas: The Devil. ICO. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tFqWAkaa8PQ. Accessed 24 Apr 2014.
Russon, John. 2003. Human Experience: Philosophy, Neurosis, and the Elements of 
Everyday Life. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ryall, Tom. 1998. Genre and Hollywood. In The Oxford Guide to Film Studies, ed. 
John Hill and Pamela Church Gibson, 327–338. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schatz, Thomas. [1981] 2011. Film Genre and the Genre Film, From Hollywood 
Genres. In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary 
Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 452–465. 
Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Sobchack, Thomas. [1975] 1995. Genre Film: A Classical Experience. In Film Genre 
Reader II, ed. Barry Keith Grant, 202–213. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sobchack, Vivian. 1990. The Active Eye: A Phenomenology of Cinematic 
Vision. Quarterly Review of Film and Video 12 (3): 21–36.
Sobchack, Vivian. 1992. The Address of the Eye: A Phenomenology of Film 
Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sobchack, Vivian. 2004. Carnal Thoughts: Embodiment and Moving Image 
Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Staiger, Janet. 1997. Hybrid or Inbred: The Purity Hypothesis and Hollywood 
Genre Theory. Film Criticism 22 (1): 5–20.
Storey, John. 2006. Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction, 4th 
ed. Essex: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Vincendeau, Ginette. 2007. The New French Extremism. In The Cinema Book, 
ed. Pam Cook, 3rd ed., 205. London: BFI.
Wheatley, Catherine. 2011. Naked Women, Slaughtered Animals: Ulrich Seidl 
and the Limits of the Real. In The New Extremism in Cinema, ed. Tanya 
Horeck and Tina Kendall, 93–101. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1989] 1999. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the “Frenzy of the 
Visible”. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Williams, Linda. [1991] 2009. Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, Excess. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 602–616. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. [1953] 1958. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M. 
Anscombe. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Yacavone, Daniel. 2015. Film Worlds: A Philosophical Aesthetics of Cinema. New 
York: Columbia University Press.

29
Carlos Reygadas was born in Mexico in 1971 and studied interna-
tional law before turning to the cinema. During his studies in Brussels, 
he frequented the Museum of Cinema, sometimes viewing as many as 
three films a day. The future director discovered the films of Robert 
Bresson, Carl Th. Dreyer, and Andrei Tarkovsky (Wood 2006: 116–
118), and the influence of each director is clear in his four films to date: 
Tarkovsky in Japón (2002) and Post Tenebras Lux (premiered in 2012, 
re-edited for theatrical and home release in 2013), Bresson in Battle in 
Heaven (Batalla en el cielo, 2005), and Dreyer in Silent Light (Stellet 
Licht, 2007). Tracing Reygadas’s influences is productive for certain 
historiographical analyses, but an obvious comparison between the 
masters of art cinema and Reygadas neglects the impact of experimen-
tal filmmaking on the director’s oeuvre. While the relationship between 
the avant-garde and Reygadas’s films is unarguably indirect as his stated 
influences were, in fact, the above named directors, and the “avant-
garde” consists of a “spectrum of alternative practices which develop 
and decay with historically specific needs and possibilities” (Smith 
1998: 398, citing David James), I nonetheless contend that Reygadas 
shares the aim of experimental filmmakers: that is, to grant viewers 
heightened perceptual and sensuous engagement with the medium.
Stan Brakhage, perhaps the most renowned experimental filmmaker, 
criticized the theatricality of “ninety-nine and forty-four one hundredths 
per cent” of the cinema. The theatricality of “Motion Pictures” is expe-
riential rather than aesthetic or stylistic, “an experience akin to watching 
CHAPTER 2
Carlos Reygadas, the Avant-Garde, and the 
Senses
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_2

30   T. Bordun
a stage-play thru a variety of opera-glasses controlled by the director-
editor of the movie being passively watched” ([1996] 2011: 670). One 
gets the sense that this type of movie is crafted by a lazy director–editor 
who merely stiches together pieces of a play. We can perhaps suggest that 
the theatricality of cinema follows closely the theatricality Michael Fried 
has identified in painting ([1967] 1998). While slightly tautological, it 
perhaps suffices to describe theatricality as “staginess” and “literalist” 
(Fried [1967] 1998). We can apply this to the cinema. Brakhage notes 
that the bond between theatre and film is in the French word for cine-
matographer, cinématographe, which can be literally translated as “writer 
of movement.” His preferred definition of “Film” is Bill Wees’s “Light 
Moving in Time,” a series of Platonic ideals implied by the capitalization 
(Brakhage 2011: 671, citing Wees). Reygadas too will condemn theat-
ricality, but not so far as to declare Light (the projector) as the specific 
aspect that defines Film1; however, what Brakhage and Reygadas share is 
the idea that the specific quality of cinema is first and foremost an appa-
ratus for perception rather than cognition (Brakhage 2011: 671).2 In 
light of this claim, this chapter sets out to assess Reygadas’s dreamy and 
hallucinatory Post Tenebras Lux.
This 2013 film is a slight departure from the realist style of Reygadas’s 
previous works, although there are numerous parallels to be made 
between it and the three others. I see Post Tenebras Lux as a counter-
argument to Alan Williams’s categories of “principal genres”: narrative 
film, experimental/avant-garde film, and documentary. For Williams, 
all film is simply these principal genres and, under them, what we typi-
cally call the other genres are what he labels “sub-genres” (cited in Neale 
1995: 176). Post Tenebras Lux foils distinctions amongst the principals. 
In this chapter, I will articulate how the film collapses narrative and 
1 Cf. Deren [1960] 2011. Maya Deren, an experimental filmmaker as well, condemns 
theatricality for similar reasons to Brakhage. She argues that film must distance itself from 
“the narrative disciplines” to develop its own language. For Deren, the medium offers 
an art that can re-order time and reality. This creative treatment of reality further links 
Reygadas to the avant-garde tradition.
2 Beugnet (2007: 22–23) productively links extreme cinema to Antonin Artaud’s praise 
of avant-garde film. “The power of the cinema […] rested with ‘purely visual sensations 
[…] the dramatic force of which springs from a sock on the eyes, drawn, one might say, 
from the very substance of the eye, and not from psychological circumlocutions of a discur-
sive nature which are nothing but visual interpretations of a text.’”

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   31
avant-garde, and in the next, how it collapses narrative and documentary. 
What Williams’s theory and my work here have in common, I should 
note, is that the former declares that genre is not solely a Hollywood 
phenomenon but a global one (cited in Neale 1995: 159).
This chapter will argue that Post Tenebras Lux is a work of “vision-
ary realism.” Following P. Adam Sitney, Tiago de Luca defines visionary 
realism as a filmmaking technique that adheres to certain staples of the 
realist style, such as location shooting, long takes, and non-professional 
actors, but which also “contradicts [this] focus on the objective real 
through experimental strategies that evoke mental processes of percep-
tion and cognition, that is to say, altered states of mind” (2014: 159–
160, 181). De Luca’s notion of visionary realism may seem at odds with 
the common interpretation of André Bazin’s praise of realist filmmaking, 
namely, the indexical relationship between what is photographed and the 
imprint it leaves on celluloid; however, Adam Lowenstein has recently 
reinvigorated a debate regarding Bazin’s championing of surrealism, so 
that a surrealist realism is not a contradiction of terms (2015: 13–17). 
What remains is for me to describe the experience of Post Tenebras 
Lux—and in this experience we find Reygadas’s ties to the experimental 
filmmaking tradition. My main claim is that the levels of reality in this 
film—the present-tense conscious reality of the main characters as well 
as the dreams and fantasies of those characters—are immanent expres-
sions of the film’s formal qualities. Further, amending de Luca’s defini-
tion slightly, the representation of these differing levels of reality offers 
a philosophical concept: dreams and fantasies are embodied experiences 
rather than purely mental ones.
Reygadas has been included in the scholarship on extreme cinema 
due to the performances of real sex in his first two features. His inclu-
sion within extreme cinema is perhaps questionable with the latter two 
films, Silent Light and Post Tenebras Lux, however, since these works 
downplay violence and sex rather than shocking viewers with graphic or 
explicit visuals (although Tanya Horeck and Tina Kendall include the lat-
ter in a footnote listing extreme films outside of Europe [2012: 5n1]). 
Yet his visionary realism, I claim, assures Reygadas a place amongst 
other contemporary art cinema directors whose films are experiments 
with narrativized sex and violence. Moreover, similar to other auteurs 
of extreme cinema (Beugnet 2007: 61), his challenging narrative struc-
tures, employment of various genres and visual and aural filmmaking, 

32   T. Bordun
and emphasis on the bodies of his characters, as well as appealing to the 
bodies in the film theatre, suggest his relevance to extreme cinema schol-
arship. In this chapter we will see how Reygadas moves his viewers bodily 
in the manner of the avant-garde, and how this avant-garde aesthetics 
generates critical thinking about what is precisely documented and its 
significance. In the next chapters we will see that Catherine Breillat aims 
to invoke spectators’ senses through the genres of pornography and hor-
ror. Thus the two directors can be subsumed under cinemas of sensation, 
and both, in their respective uses and abuses of genre, allow spectators to 
engage with the films in the manner that best suits them.
In the first section I turn to Post Tenebras Lux and discuss my first 
experience of coming into contact with the film myself. It affected me 
like one of Brakhage’s pieces. I felt a curious mix of perceptual pleasure 
and cognitive boredom. I will provide some context on the film’s release, 
my theoretical framework for analyzing the film, and a brief synopsis. In 
the proceeding sections I analyze the film through specific lenses and 
themes to uncover its means for evoking a sensuous film experience and 
work toward my larger claims about filmic representations of dreams and 
Reygadas’s investment in representing sexual difference. My discussion 
of the film will be grounded in Vivian Sobchack’s and others’ phenom-
enological film theory. This theoretical foundation helps to account for 
the mode of viewing that Reygadas’s film elicits.
I approach Post Tenebras Lux via contemporary phenomenology due 
to some provocative yet simple claims made by the director during inter-
views about the film and the numerous critical reviews emphasizing the 
sensations felt during its viewing, ranging from uncanny beauty to narra-
tive confusion. Little has been written about the director’s films, but he 
has graced us with many interviews. I draw on many of these in order to 
substantiate my claim that theory and practice work in tandem in much 
of contemporary art cinema. We may not agree with Reygadas on all 
accounts, nor do we need to accept the director’s post-film reflections 
(read: filmmaking intentions), but as I noted in the Introduction, the films 
should teach us how to read them. Put differently, the film theorist should 
not impose theory upon his or her objects of study, but the films should 
show one how to reflect and theorize. Reygadas and Breillat are articulate 
and educated individuals who seem to enjoy discussing their films, agreeing 
and disagreeing with interviewers, and through these conversations gener-
ate some theoretically complex statements on the nature of filmmaking. In 
this volume I therefore treat their words in conjunction with their practice.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   33
The Difficult Film
Post Tenebras Lux, Latin for “After Darkness, Light,” has a sense of 
incompleteness and fragmentariness. The episodes appear to be arranged 
at random by the director and his wife and editor, Natalia Lopez. 
Jonathan Romney contends that the film is exciting for its sketch-like 
quality of potentialities, possibilities, and the combinations of images 
(2013: 74), a comment that resonates with my claim that Reygadas and 
Breillat offer films that require an effort on the part of the viewer to col-
lect and curate the shots, sounds, and formal elements of a given work in 
order to generate a full experience of it, including its technical prowess 
and critiques. Reygadas’s (2013) film works with characters’ dreams, fan-
tasies, and desires in an achronological fashion. With this film the direc-
tor is unquestionably an experimental filmmaker, but not to the extent 
that narrative has altogether disappeared. “My cinema is tremendously 
narrative,” he states; “There’s always a clear line that connects” (Koehler 
2013: 13). Yet Reygadas wants viewers to come away with a feeling or 
sense of the work, rather than following or identifying with a story, plot, 
or character(s). He is frequently dismissive of the deeper meanings direc-
tors instill in films and, for that matter, of viewers who attempt to read 
too much into a work. For the film’s capacity to generate multiple kinds 
of viewing, while simultaneously eschewing meaning in favor of produc-
ing perceptual and bodily sensations in spectators, Post Tenebras Lux is 
often described as challenging and difficult.
According to Vivian Sobchack’s typology of the “difficult film,” a 
typology which includes films that are described or experienced as dis-
gusting, boring, bad, complicated, or any combination of these, the most 
difficult works transgress these conventional impediments as well as nar-
rative logic and cinematic specificity, and “make sense” to us “sensu-
ously, experientially, in the phenomenological ‘now’ of seeing, hearing, 
and touching (if always also at a distance)” (2014: 51).3 She provides 
3 The full typology is as follows (Sobchack 2014: 50): “There are those that are diffi-
cult to watch because of their explicit violence or graphic sex (Gaspar Noé’s Irreversible 
[Irréversible, 2002]), or their extremely disturbing visceral effects (Kirby Dick’s documen-
tary Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist [1997]). There are also those 
that are pleasurable in their difficulty: cerebral “puzzle” films with intricate plots and/or 
structures that require some effort to figure out (Christopher Nolan’s Memento [2000], 
or Carruth’s debut feature Primer [2004]). Then there are films that are difficult because 
they push the limits of representation as far as it will go (Charlie Kaufman’s Synecdoche, 

34   T. Bordun
Terrence Malick’s To the Wonder (2012) and Shane Carruth’s Upstream 
Color (2013) as examples. The former asks its viewers to experience its 
fragmented visual poetry rather than a plot; the latter depicts a sci-fi 
story more concerned with presenting the bodily experiences of char-
acters infected by a mysterious bug than with exploring its causes or 
social, ethical, and political effects. Carruth’s characters, in line with  
Sobchack’s argument, have heightened sensorial experiences, and the 
film attempts to capture such moments. Post Tenebras Lux, alongside its 
aesthetics of visionary realism, is part of this category of difficult film. 
The stories in Reygadas’s features, however, are always very simple, so as 
to grant the spectator a sensuous experience over and beyond (or under 
and below) narrative pleasures.
As I mentioned earlier, Reygadas brings the narrative tradition into 
contact with traditions and ideas in experimental filmmaking. For Murray 
Smith (1998: 396), “the avant-garde […] aims to challenge and subvert[, 
…] asks us to rethink our fundamental preconceptions about cinema.” I 
am interested in the contestation the film’s narrative poses, as a strenuous 
and intellectual effort to comprehend, but it is more worthwhile to inves-
tigate the test Reygadas proposes: he demands that spectators rid them-
selves of their desire to put the pieces of the film together and replace 
their traditional modes of viewing with a highly sensuous experience. This 
sort of spectatorship, however, still requires an engagement with the story, 
as it serves to link the sounds and images with cognitive continuity. With 
a story and the style used to show and tell it, generic conventions appear 
and disappear. A study of Post Tenebras Lux therefore poses questions 
about the nature of genre, spectatorship, and fictional film, and to study a 
fictional film requires a careful explanation of the story to bring the expe-
rience of the work to language. Thus my explication of the narrative and 
form of the film presupposes that the reader has not seen it, and my analy-
sis of the film’s “sensory mode of address” (de Luca 2014), as elsewhere 
in this book, posits the first-time viewer as its intended spectator.
 
New York [2008] and its mise en abyme of infinite representational regress). There are 
others that go even further and push the very limits of cinema itself (Derek Jarman’s 
monochromatic Blue [1993], or Michael Snow’s La Région central [1971]). Most com-
monplace, however, are those films that are difficult to watch because they push nothing: 
they’re unchallenging spectacles devoid of thought, affect, and any reason, other than mer-
cenary, for being at all (certain kinds of mainstream trash like […] Hansel and Gretel: Witch 
Hunters [2013]).”

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   35
Juan (Adolfo Jiménez Castro) and Natalia (Natalia Acevedo) are a 
married couple living about 45 miles (70 km) outside of Mexico City in 
the unstated city of Tepoztlán (the city is Reygadas’s current town of res-
idence, and the film was shot on his estate). Juan, Natalia, and their very 
young children Rut (short for Rutilia, performed by Rut Reygadas) and 
Eleazar (Eleazar Reygadas) live in a newly built, quite luxurious home in 
the mountains.4 Despite his economic and familial success, Juan has an 
internet pornography addiction. This addiction is briefly mentioned by 
Juan and resurfaces, perhaps, in his aggression toward his dog Martita 
and his sexual frustration regarding his wife. Natalia appears to have 
her mental health, but Juan’s sexual problems likely generate emotional 
and sexual issues for her. This family is also light-skinned, “Western 
Mexicans,” Reygadas says.5 The lighter-skinned family is contrasted with 
a worker for the household, Seven (Willebaldo Torres), who is darker 
and poorer. In describing the class situation in contemporary Mexico, de 
Luca notes that “class and ethnicity go hand in hand […], meaning that 
the darker one is, the poorer one is likely to be” (2014: 85). We can see 
this in each of Reygadas’s features: the Westernized middle-aged painter 
(Alejandro Ferretis) who visits a rural village in Japón; Marcos (Marcos 
Hernández), as the obese and dark-skinned chauffeur of the young and 
beautiful Ana in Battle in Heaven; and Silent Light’s narrative focus on 
the white Mennonites living in Mexico. Although there is initially no 
observable tension between Juan and Seven in Post Tenebras Lux, and 
they appear to be friends, there nevertheless exist class and ethnic divides 
that Reygadas is keen to explore.
On a day of national celebration, the family is driving toward some 
unknown destination. Natalia realizes she has forgotten something back 
at their home. On the return journey, the family stops at a restaurant 
and sees Jarro, another worker who, at that time, was supposed to be 
guarding the family’s house while they were away. Natalia and the chil-
dren remain with Jarro, and Juan goes to retrieve the items. Upon his 
homecoming Juan surprises Seven and another man in the middle of 
4 The infants are Reygadas’s children. They have retained their names so that they may 
respond to them in the confabulated settings of the film. For the same reasons, the fictional 
wife is named Natalia, after the children’s mother.
5 Reygadas in Koehler (2013: 12): “Western Mexicans tend to have chronic dissatisfac-
tion and see life from a disconnected point of view. [Juan is] detached, and he’s that way 
since he’s wealthy.”

36   T. Bordun
attempted robbery. At the goading of the other man, Seven shoots Juan 
and both men flee, leaving Juan for dead. As a result, Juan loses part of 
a lung. Seven later decides to visit his wounded friend and in a far from 
melodramatic  shocker, young Eleazar casually informs Seven that his 
father has died. The murderer then strolls into a field and, without warn-
ing, removes his head with his own hands.
This surreal scene completes the foundational narrative thread of 
the film. If we were to take these sequences alone, however, Reygadas 
would barely have a feature-length product. In fact, the key plot event 
of the film—Seven shooting Juan and Juan’s death—does not transpire 
until more than halfway through the story. The events in what I would 
call the present-tense narrative were quickly summarized above. Some of 
the episodes that I have not noted are dreams, fantasies, desires, flash-
forwards, even concepts, although, which character the dreams might be 
emanating from is neither established nor, I think, relevant.6 However, 
as Alphonso Lingis suggests and as I will argue, dreams and phantasms 
are integral components of the human perceptual field. These dream and 
fantasy sequences are neither supplements nor addendums, nor com-
monplace dream-sequences that push ahead the plot; nor do they serve 
to establish a character’s psychological state, or operate as a catalyst for 
action, or even as a reason for an action—each stands as a unique sensu-
ous moment in the whole. Contrasted to altered states of mind, I inter-
pret these sequences an experience of altered states of embodiment, and 
such sequences aim to represent dreams and fantasy “as if” real for the 
spectating subject. Reygadas fosters this kind of sensuous engagement 
through his aesthetics and storytelling; the hallucinations and dreams are 
as real as the diegetic present: that is, they exist on a plane with an equal 
degree of intensity to the real or present-tense diegetic events. Alongside 
Sheldon Penn’s Deleuzian discussion of Silent Light, it would therefore 
be appropriate to call the film a “cinema of immanence” or what Martine 
Beugnet calls “cinemas of sensation” (2007). According to Penn (2013), 
Reygadas’s immanent cinema offers movement for itself, without mean-
ing or message, cuts that are entirely irrational, and objects and spaces 
that are presented in excess of the narrative; and it sometimes appears 
6 To simplify the writing in this chapter, when I refer generally to the sequences that 
do not operate in the present, I will use the phrase “dream” or “fantasy sequence(s).” 
However, it should be stressed that not all the episodes are necessarily dreams or fantasies.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   37
as if the actors themselves are acting without direction. I tread this same 
thematic path but carry a different theoretical walking stick. My prefer-
ence for a cinema of immanence is also not dismissing Maurice Merleau-
Ponty’s evaluation of the ek-stase of experience, defined as an “Active 
transcendence of the subject in relation to the world” (2004: 84n1). To 
fill in the gaps of the frame, of temporarily, of spatiality, the spectator 
must also transcend the immanent experience of what is on-screen and in 
frame.
As Reygadas observes of his filmmaking method, and inadvertently in 
a nod to the objects of study for phenomenological inquiry, let us now 
turn to “the things themselves” (Lim 2013).
“[A]ll the Levels of Perception”
In terms of the film’s capacity to elicit spectators’ sensuous engagement 
with its images and sounds, it is possible to study six interrelated aspects 
of Reygadas’s method and style. In this chapter, I will consider narrative 
and chronology, cinematography, and dreams and fantasy. In Chap. 3 I 
will turn to the profilmic event and documentary traditions, dead and 
living animals, and the representation of death.
Narrative Shock
After his first two features, Reygadas became known for shocking view-
ers with his graphic displays of sexuality between likely and unlikely cou-
ples. The most shocking example is perhaps Battle in Heaven. This film 
features an obese dark-skinned Mexican man receiving fellatio from a 
rich, young white girl, followed summarily by their real on-screen sex, 
and lastly, that same man’s sex with an obese and dark-skinned woman. 
I discuss the fellatio sequences in Chap. 6 in an attempt to reorient 
theoretical conversations about performance in contemporary art films 
that depict performers engaging in sex. For now, when Post Tenebras 
Lux turns to sex, the film takes a different approach, depicting it in a 
rather subdued manner compared to the director’s prior features.7 The 
7 However, in a screening I held, a mother and her teenage daughter promptly left dur-
ing the sex sequence. “Trent Film Society Presents: Carlos Reygadas’s Post Tenebras Lux,” 
Artspace, Peterborough, ON, May 28, 2014.

38   T. Bordun
controversy and debate around this film was not about its display of sex-
uality; rather, “the film’s biggest provocations are its aesthetic and narra-
tive liberties,” film critic Dennis Lim wrote in 2013.
I did not explore the “narrative liberties” in my synopsis. Amongst the 
episodes described above are sequences that are dreams, flashbacks, and 
flash-forwards that function as evidence of a character’s desire or offer a 
concept about our ontology and the ontology of cinema that add to the 
sensuous quality of the feature as a whole. “Instead of progressing from 
one event to the next,” Lim writes, quoting his interview with Reygadas, 
“[the film] drifts among ‘all the levels of perception,’ […] which include 
‘dreams, things you long for, memories, an imagined future, the conscious 
present, a reality that is beyond us’” (Lim 2013).8 It is possible, given 
Reygadas’s comments and the complexity of the film, to focus on any 
number of episodes. My choices and emphases on particular sequences and 
shots to demonstrate my argument is due to the demands placed upon me 
to write with some linearity and clarity. While the film may not command 
a strong understanding, theoretical writing certainly does. The concept of 
cinematic excess serves as a starting point to address the narrative.
Reygadas’s oeuvre, unquestionably, is an experiment in cinematic 
excess. Kristin Thompson explained this concept in detail in her 1977 
essay on the topic. Her targets are those who find a cinematic device used 
without narrative motivation disturbing.9 According to Thompson, to 
argue for the legitimacy of cinematic excess is to champion the specific-
ity of cinema—that is, images and sounds—for perceptual play ([1977] 
1986: 133). There are no rules that govern when a device should be used 
to motivate the narrative, such as an exceedingly long take (Thompson 
1986: 135–136). This is clearly the case in Post Tenebras Lux, as we are 
required to restrain ourselves from linking the episodes to some kind 
of cause-and-effect logic. The arbitrariness of the sequences, the gaps 
in time, and the lack of context and situatedness of the characters in 
the sequences render them excessive. We will see that Reygadas’s film 
8 Reygadas in Koehler (2013: 11): “The film is about many things, including the percep-
tion of reality, of our dreams, fantasies, and in our direct experiences, and in the acknowl-
edgment of the reality beyond what we see and hear […] As for the feelings people have 
from their experiences, and what these may trigger in our dreams, or subconscious, these 
are felt more or less powerfully. And if we didn’t feel them we wouldn’t be alive.”
9 According to Anton Chekhov, these sorts of excessive films would bungle their plots; 
one does not bring a gun onstage, claims the playwright, unless it is to be fired.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   39
demands a new mode of viewing. He attempts to usher in a new kind 
of narrative cinema where the images function individually, are them-
selves expressive of the capacity for the film’s and spectator’s perceptual 
play, and can be curated or collected in a manner that suits the specta-
tor’s tastes or preferences (even if the spectator dislikes what is seen 
and heard). In my following analysis of the narrative, I attempt to heed 
Thompson’s advice (1986: 141) on encountering the excessive film:
Once the narrative [of an excessive film] is recognized as arbitrary rather 
than logical, the viewer is free to ask why individual events within its struc-
tures are as they are. The viewer is no longer constrained by conventions of 
reading to find a meaning or theme within the work as a solution to a sort 
of puzzle which has a right answer. Instead, the work becomes a perceptual 
field of structures which the viewer is free to study at length, going beyond 
the strictly functional aspects.
Her comment is evocative of Stanley Cavell’s statement (1981: 29), 
made just a few short years later, that a genre does not simply comprise 
of the common features in a body of films but is instead a mode of criti-
cal engagement whereby the individual spectator asks, for him- or her-
self, “what [the films] are in view of one another”. Taking Thompson and 
Cavell’s advice to heart, by absorbing myself in the episodes presented in 
Reygadas’s film, I can both engage with what is there as perceptual play 
while also studying the individual sequences and their relationship to the 
whole, and then, in relation to other films, genres, and production trends.
Post Tenebras Lux begins with Rut meandering in a damp soccer 
field as the sun sets. Above the tree-lined mountains we see the sky in 
a beautiful shade of light blue; purples and pinks dance on the few vis-
ible clouds. Rut chases the cows, pets the dogs, and watches the dogs 
chase the cows. Horses and donkeys trot at a distance from her. With 
her newly acquired language skills, Rut points to the animals and identi-
fies them with their colloquial names (Fig. 2.1). She laughs and giggles; 
the dogs pant and splash in the puddles. The day slowly fades into night; 
the brightness of the sunset quickly darkens to a near pitch black. Dark 
clouds now cover the sky. Rut whispers, “Mommy,” “Daddy,” “Home,” 
“Rut, Eleazar,” and her silhouette, in a medium shot, appears between 
lighting strikes on the horizon behind her. Rut disappears, and we cut to 
a shot of the stormy sky. Each word of the title individually appears, like 
Rut, between lightning flashes. The sequence lasts about seven minutes.

40   T. Bordun
A sequence featuring a glowing red devil with a toolbox appears next 
(Fig. 2.2). The devil enters, looks about, encounters a child, and then 
enters the bedroom of the child’s parents (we assume). The devil may 
be a representation of what children will become—not evil, as we com-
monly associate with devils, but a person capable of creative and destruc-
tive acts. Reygadas thus names this long scene a “concept” (2013), 
and he has also identified it as Eleazar’s dream (Solórzano 2013: 53), 
although the child in the devil sequence is not Eleazar himself and nei-
ther does the home belong to the protagonists.
Seven is then introduced to us, but we do not yet know his status or 
name. The temptation is to link him to the devil of the preceding episode; 
however, with the lack of definitive claims or arguments in the film as to 
the strength of such a link, there is no reason to build a bridge between 
the two sequences. We must not forget Rudolf Arnheim’s ontological 
claim about the cinema ([1933] 2011: 287): “because the fact that two 
sequences follow each other on the screen does not indicate in itself that 
Fig. 2.1  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   41
they should be understood as following each other in time.” Similar to the 
opening of a Western, Seven casually travels in the forest atop his donkey, 
two dogs scampering about. Here, in Seven’s axe-wielding and tree-chop-
ping sequence, Reygadas intentionally denies spectators the opportu-
nity to engage their cognitive faculties if they are not Mexican or familiar 
with Mexican rural life. Reygadas informs us that in Mexico logging has 
become a deeply ecological issue, as the men chop small chunks from the 
trees for the anafes (“rudimentary stoves”), and therefore most of us can 
only understand this sequence post-film experience with the aid of this 
interview (Solórzano 2013: 53). In a long panning shot of tree tops, we 
hear the sound of chopping wood. Seven’s relationship to the forest will 
appear twice more before the end credits roll.
We spend many minutes with Seven, his logging, and his travels, 
before turning to our main protagonists, Juan, Natalia, Rut, and Eleazar. 
Close-ups of Natalia and Juan sleeping, similar to countless shots we will 
see in the film, far exceeds the requirements of narrative functionality. 
Fig. 2.2  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

42   T. Bordun
Natalia is slowly roused by a crying Rut, and as the latter babbles about 
animals, the mother asks if she dreamt of giraffes and cows. In the open-
ing scenes with Rut, with its lack of an event, space for character iden-
tification (and camera identification, as I explore below), and setting 
for a story, the sequence attained the status of a lived perception. Only 
now are we informed that it was a dream. The sequence of Rut skipping 
across the field initially gripped us in its immanence, in its present-ness. 
Reygadas denies that the scenes function as a prologue and downplays a 
rational explanation of them as a “synthesis of the story.” He mentions, 
“I love that piece of land [the setting of the scene] and go there every 
evening. I love those animals. I wanted to make a film that started by 
showing those things only because I wanted to share them” (Solórzano 
2013: 53). This is the first of many instances where Reygadas places him-
self in the film, in this case as a person who loves a particular piece of 
land. Including oneself in the film without any narrative motivation is 
an avant-garde strategy. (Alfred Hitchcock’s cameos have nothing to do 
with a personal stamp on the film, although, they operate as a clever dis-
play of hide-and-seek and the addition of an extra.) But just as significant 
as the selfish indulgence of the director are his earlier claims to aestheti-
cize all the levels of perception. I will turn to the levels of dreams and 
fantasies after I discuss the cinematography and style of the film.
Now the family is awake. All four enjoy each other’s drowsy company 
on Juan and Natalia’s bed. A naked Eleazar wrestles his father. After a 
scene of Juan taking his aggression out on his favorite dog, Martita—she 
had done “it again”—we cut to an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meet-
ing, where Seven and others deliver speeches regarding their substance 
abuse. Non-professional actors grace us with their perhaps authentic 
tales. In a brief talk with Seven following the meeting, we learn of Juan’s 
porn addiction. Juan’s addiction is not addressed in depth; thus the film 
is a far departure from the psychological character study of porn addict 
Brandon (Michael Fassbender) in Steve McQueen’s Shame (2011). 
Instead, Juan’s addiction will be revealed through his anger toward his 
dogs and in petty squabbles with his wife. I would further suggest that 
the very different kinds of addiction plaguing Seven (alcoholism) and 
Juan are representative of their classes.
If viewers are still with the narrative at this point, some thirty min-
utes into the film, a conceptual, flashback, or symbolic scene punctures 
whatever narrative pleasure we had left. A group of English teenage boys 
prepare for a rugby match by stretching, shouting, and chanting. Tony 

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   43
Rayns writes: “The most disruptive element here is the rugby match […] 
The two rugby scenes are wild anomalies – visually, linguistically, you 
name it” (2013: 101). We can see the episode as yet another expression 
of Reygadas’s selfish indulgence: he loves the sport and as a young man 
attended and played rugby at that depicted school in Derbyshire, in the 
UK (Solórzano 2013: 53; O’Hehir 2013). It is also “technically” a scene 
from Juan’s youth, Reygadas agrees with Robert Koehler, and this flash-
back is to a time of lessened strife (2013: 14). Conceptually, the director 
claims these young men are about to enter into adulthood and thereby 
lose their purity and innocence (Solórzano 2013: 53). The boys are thus 
linked to the devil sequence. In the second rugby sequence, which also 
serves as the conclusion of the film, we hear the team’s “rallying cry” to 
shed their individualities, work together as a team, and overcome their 
opponents, who are stronger than them.
In my reading, the effect of this episode is to produce a gaping hole 
in our desire for narrative logic and to intensify Juan’s immediately prior 
confession regarding his addiction to porn. He had lost his purity and 
innocence perhaps at this very juncture of his life when sport, a homo-
social affair, to say the least, was introduced. We will see this enthusi-
asm for physicality reappear in another episode which is, as expected 
by now, another puncture in our habitually narrative-driven film expe-
rience. But what this rugby scene and the following temporally out-of-
joint ones suggest is the interiority of time. I began with an epigraph 
quoting Reygadas on interiority for this very reason. When the film pro-
ceeds backwards into Juan’s memories of life in the UK, or later when 
a sequence leaps years ahead, I contend that Juan and Natalia’s world, 
a world of sensations and experiences which generate meaning and sig-
nificance, are constituted by internal temporality. This must be the case if 
the sequences are altered states of embodiment. Jenny Chamarette, the-
orizing the cinematic subject in a phenomenological framework, writes 
(2012: 35): “One might venture to say that temporality is pure subjec-
tivity, given that it rests in no object, is contained by no subject, and is, 
rather, a condition of possibility for being sensible of, or sensitive to, the 
world.” Post Tenebras Lux presents time in this fashion, even when the 
time that is presented is the immanence of memory, dream, and fantasy.
Now we leap ahead. Rut and Eleazar are around ten years of age and 
the family is at a lavish and crowded Christmas dinner party. Family and 
friends are all there, and the two children are at that age between curi-
osity and sociality. They lack confidence in their social skills, so they  

44   T. Bordun
wander about the party while the adults engage in idle chatter. The 
adults should bore us, as they bore each other with their drunkenness 
and passing remarks about Russian literature. Juan recites one of Leo 
Tolstoy’s character’s epiphanies, the moment the character realizes life is 
not about money, class, status, etc., and this unannounced recital par-
allels Juan’s own epiphany just before his death later in the film.10 But 
the party itself, akin to Juan’s impressive recital, in its subdued frenzy 
of food, drink, and gift-giving gives us no point of reference narratively, 
spatially, or temporally. Similar to some real-life Christmas gatherings, 
we, like the guests, do not know all these people; nor, for that matter, 
do we know how our protagonists arrived there or what they have been 
doing for the approximately seven to eight years since we last saw them. 
If we take seriously Eleazar’s pronouncement at the end of the film—
that is, his father has died—this is the first of the film’s fantasy scenes. Its 
utter lack of an event, merely a banal Christmas gathering, suggests it is a 
future projection of one of the family members. Had Juan not been shot, 
and Natalia and the children remained healthy, these mundane and rou-
tine parties would exist. However, since we do not yet know that Juan 
will die while the children are still quite young, again the episode must 
be taken in its present-ness. Thus the narrative shock when Juan gives up 
the ghost later in the story.
In each of the temporally out-of-joint episodes Juan adopts a new hair-
cut and varies his facial hair. In the last he had medium-length hair and was 
clean-shaven. To end the Christmas party sequence, a rapid cut presents 
a naked woman’s torso and is followed by a selection of shots presenting 
other nude patrons, male and female, in a sauna. Alongside the bored and 
naked individuals are the sounds of sex: slaps, groans, and men barking 
sexual commands. No director has taken Michel Foucault’s claim that “sex 
is boring” so seriously (Gutting 2005: 101, quoting Foucault). It is likely, 
we may speculate, that when Juan and Natalia enter the frame, they desired 
this orgy precisely because of their stale physicality. The husband is now 
buzz-cut with facial stubble; therefore, it is ambiguous whether the scene 
transpires before or after the previous one or is yet another conceptual 
10 Juan recites a passage from War and Peace (Война и миръ,1869), but these epiphanies 
plague Tolstoy’s work. Cf. The Cossacks (Казаки, 1862), The Death of Ivan Ilych (Смерть 
Ивана Ильича, 1886), and Master and Man (Хозяин и работник, 1895). I agree with 
Juan’s interlocutor in this scene that it is not Tolstoy, or Fyodor Dostoevsky, who is the 
master, but Chekhov.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   45
scene. I speculate that this is not a real event that happens to the characters 
but is the immanent expression of Natalia’s desire. I address this sequence 
fully in two separate sections below. Its significance is immense for what I 
claim to be Reygadas’s critique of contemporary romance.
Another scene of Seven deals with woodcutting—a friend of his wants 
a tree chopped down to enrage his sister. The episode ends and transi-
tions to a cut of women eating. This is a festive scene at a time when 
the children are still infants. Rut and Eleazar, in contrast to the Rut and 
Eleazar of a few years older, identify colors and stamp their feet onto a 
projected light on the dance floor, looking much like cats who attack 
flashlight beams on a wall. A very drunk, dark-skinned man refers to 
Juan and Natalia as “whiteys,” and the couple must assure this man that 
they too are Mexican. The man then invites them to visit his poor home 
for a beer during the celebration of the Lady of Guadalupe on December 
12.
Cut to a beach. Rut and Eleazar, mentioned by name, are teenagers. 
Juan has long hair down his back. Close-ups of the children reveal that 
they are becoming beautiful and handsome, not unlike their attractive 
parents. Unlike the opening scene with Rut, a pretty sunset closes the 
episode, and this static shot lasts about a minute until Rut and Eleazar, 
now back in their infancy, appear in frame and cavort in the sand. We 
transition to the family’s home and watch a domestic scene unfold. The 
infants are put to bed and Juan whispers to Natalia that he will have sex 
with her “in the ass” that evening. Natalia seems receptive, but the scene 
eventually turns into a squabble regarding the color of curtains. In a 
medium shot of Natalia, the petty badgering leads to anger and frustra-
tion as Juan reveals his dissatisfaction with their sex lives. Finally, Natalia 
threatens to leave him. The husband exits the room and a short episode 
of the dogs feeding follows.
The film is an hour and fifteen minutes in, and here the narrative 
event that tied together my synopsis—that is, the shooting of Juan by 
Seven—at last unfolds. Once the shooting has taken place, Reygadas pro-
vides us another conceptual scene, perhaps, as a man (Natalia’s new hus-
band? He refers to Eleazar as “son”) appears to take Rut and Eleazar, 
now around age ten again, out to hunt birds—they paddle along a river 
and likely shoot a bird. Through the use of symbolic cutting, Rut’s gun-
shot brings us to an episode of some anonymous men discussing life, 
playing chess, and eventually Juan’s condition: we discover that Juan has 
lost part of a lung.

46   T. Bordun
Reygadas has an eye for aesthetically pleasing locations and shoot-
ing conditions. The following episode contains the two infants play-
ing atop some boulders while Natalia and a dog rest on the ground. We 
should note here that Natalia is without Juan. This scene was cut short 
by Reygadas after the film’s premiere at Cannes, and I think it needs to 
be seen in its original length.11 From one perspective, Juan is the main 
protagonist, and therefore Reygadas is correct when he states that the 
extended scene is without importance. Watching Natalia walk back to the 
house with the children alone asserts her self-importance, and her gaze at 
the house where Juan is recovering also suggests her loneliness without the 
father of her children. We must not forget, as Reygadas does in interviews, 
that Juan’s passing is significant for the story of Juan, to be sure, but is 
simultaneously a life-changing event for his wife and mother of his chil-
dren. Natalia’s care for the children without Juan might hint at the opti-
mism of the film’s title; perhaps, after Juan has died, there will be light.
In the next episode, during Juan’s convalescence, Natalia’s charming 
and off-key recital of a Neil Young tune on the piano, “It’s a Dream,” 
confirms not only the fantasy of the flash-forward episodes but also 
the melancholy optimism of a life without her husband.12 According 
to Reygadas, evidence of Juan’s imminent death concludes the recital. 
During Natalia’s rendition of Young’s song, a painting fills the screen. 
It is entitled The Iceberg and is by Frederic Edwin Church. This is Juan’s 
point of view, and the painting “suggests he’s going to die” (Reygadas in 
Koehler 2013: 15). Juan poetically reflects at length on his life, particu-
larly his childhood, and his seemingly solitary speech—the whole thing is 
shot in a close-up without a cut—ends with Natalia jumping into frame 
in tears followed by Juan in tears. His epiphany is a memory of child-
hood joys, and now, he says, it is Rut and Eleazar’s turn to live. In a new 
sequence, Eleazar then informs Seven of Juan’s passing, and Seven com-
mits suicide. Just prior to this death, it is worth mentioning, Seven has 
failed to reunite with his wife and children, suggesting that in addition to 
murdering  Juan he has nothing left to live for. A self-decapitation, and 
then we cut to the British boys’ rugby match.
Salon film critic Andrew O’Hehir, like many of his colleagues, grap-
pled with the film in a manner that echoes Thompson’s theorization of 
11 The deleted scenes are available on Strand Releasing’s Blu-ray of Post Tenebras Lux.
12 Reygadas in Koehler (2013: 13): “When [Natalia is] playing Neil Young’s ‘It’s a 
Dream,’ that’s like supercondensed narrative.”

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   47
cinematic excess. He placed himself in the moment of the feature and 
wrote of it in a past which, now gone, cannot be apprehended or experi-
enced in quite the same way. During the episode of Juan’s convalescence, 
while Natalia is singing, Juan looks over “in a mood of wistful nostal-
gia, at a photograph of the Spanish golfer Seve Ballesteros at the British 
Open.” For O’Hehir, unable to account for it in his writing, he never-
theless knew that Juan’s glance, and to some degree the film as a whole, 
“made perfect sense at the time. I felt, while I was watching the movie, 
that I understood it well enough […] I […] understood that while this 
movie is deliberately constructed so that almost nobody will ‘get it’ or 
like it – and I’m not sure how I feel about that perversity – it’s a master-
piece despite that, or because of that or just anyway” (2013). My close 
description of the narrative as well as some interpretative remarks began 
with an experience like O’Hehir’s. But given the complexities of time 
and space, I needed to return to the film again and again to write this 
section. Even with many viewings behind me, the film still leaves me per-
plexed, uncertain, unsure of whether my reading is appropriate, correct, 
apt, worthy of transmission.
The narrative is shocking and an immense challenge—if we try too 
hard to comprehend during our first experience of Post Tenebras Lux, we 
risk losing the aesthetic and political dimensions, an unarguably impor-
tant aspect of the film that I will discuss at length in below. Despite its 
seemingly arbitrary narrative, I will later argue that the political aspect 
is dependent upon the film’s aesthetics and experimentation. In regards 
to the narrative, as time subjectively operates for the individual specta-
tor, the jarring cuts and episodes play with our personal and bodily tem-
porality. The film affects us precisely because its narrative provides such 
limited opportunities for cognitive and intellectual engagement. It is 
not a puzzle to be solved, but a painting to be absorbed, or a tune to 
hum along to, without thought or reason. I will revisit this idea of nar-
rative shock in Chap. 5. For this chapter, the shorter sections that follow 
address more narrowly defined devices, themes, and scenes.
Cinematography and Levels
Alphonso Lingis, a translator of Merleau-Ponty and a continental phi-
losopher who pays direct homage to the tradition through highly sub-
jective worldly accounts, posits his own account of embodiment in The 

48   T. Bordun
Imperative. He names our practicable field levels. A practicable field may 
be defined as our outward bodily engagements and expressions with 
objects and persons in the world, although, for Lingis, the boundaries 
between practicable and unpracticable fields are blurry: the latter may 
be defined as bodily expressions directed inward, such as dreams and 
the like. Levels are the sense organs in their contact with the elements 
(Lingis 1996: 13–17). We experience the tactility of wood or fur with 
our hands; light and darkness play on our retinas; we hear a noisy music 
hall silence when a conductor raises his baton, or we focus on the per-
son’s voice across from us and turn a room’s chatter into background 
noise. The levels are neither empirically verifiable, a set of significations 
that make a thing comprehensible, nor a universal or necessary law for 
the appearance of things as such (Lingis 1996: 25–27).
A level is neither a purely intelligible order, nor a positive form given to a 
pure a priori intuition; it is a sensory phenomenon. A level is neither a con-
tent grasped in a perception nor a form imposed on an amorphous matter 
of sensation; it is that with which or according to which we perceive. It is 
not an object formed nor an organization elaborated among objects but an 
ordinance taken up and followed through.
The levels of our practicable field, but also those of the unpracticable 
domains, the landscapes, the visions, the spheres of musicality, the oneiric 
and the erotic fields, the vistas through which our nomadic vitality wan-
ders, are not suspended in void nor in the empty immanence in which our 
representational faculty a priori would extend the pure form of exterior-
ity. They take form in a vital medium, in light, in the air, in warmth, in 
the tangible density of exteriority, on the ground, in the night, and in the 
night beyond night. (Lingis 1996: 27)
Similar to Lingis’s phenomenology, Laura U. Marks suggests that 
with haptic visuality, a touching with one’s eyes, the levels of sense per-
ception can be extended. She contrasts haptic visuality to optic visual-
ity, “discrete, self-standing elements of figuration in illusionistic spaces” 
(Beugnet 2007: 66). A haptic visuality closes the distance between 
observer and image; spectators graze the surface of the image with their 
sight, to be sure, but other senses may be engaged, depending upon 
the formal properties of the film as well as the film stock, for instance 
(Beugnet 2007: 51–52). Additionally, the content of the images can 

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   49
sometimes affect the intensity of hapticity, yet for Marks, a cinemato-
graphic style is the more elaborate and sensually convincing means for 
a haptic cinema. Multisensory filmmakers refuse “to make their images 
accessible to vision, so that the viewer must resort to other senses, 
such as touch, in order to perceive the images” (Marks 2000: 159). 
For example, Roula Haj-Ismail’s I Wet My Hands Etched and Surveyed 
Vessels Approaching Marks Eyed Inside (1992) and Ming-Yuen S. Ma’s 
Sniff (1996) use such extreme close-ups of bodies that verification 
by sight gives way to verification by our sense of the tactility of skin or 
scalp (2000: 156–158, 172–173). Indeed, this applies to some shots in 
popular cinema as well. In her experience of Jane Campion’s The Piano 
(1993), Vivian Sobchack contends that the blurry images that begin the 
film were recognized—sensed—by her fingers prior to having sense of 
them visually. She writes: “we do not experience a movie only through 
our eyes. We see and comprehend and feel films with our entire bodily 
being, informed by the full history and carnal knowledge of our accultur-
ated sensorium” (2004: 63).
Post Tenebras Lux offers the spectator an engagement with levels; the 
film aims to make the spectator aware of his/her capacity to experience sen-
sory phenomena. While viewing Reygadas’s film, we do not make contact 
with the forest’s smells and tactility directly with our senses of smell and 
touch, nor do we feel or get a scent of the many dogs gallivanting or rest-
ing. Through its cinematography, Post Tenebras Lux intends to rouse not 
just one sense at a time through perception, but the basic motility and spa-
tial organization of the spectator’s body. The film’s capacity to elicit sen-
suous engagements is noted in many critical reviews. Dan Sullivan, among 
others, contends that “Reygadas aims to evoke pure sensation [, …] make 
the viewer truly feel the audible and visible” (2013: 67). This evocation 
of sensation further ties the director to the avant-garde as defined by its 
early practitioner Germaine Dulac. The avant-garde “envelop[s] the viewer 
in a network […] of sensations to experience and to feel” (Dulac [1932] 
2011: 656). Reygadas’s director of photography, Alexis Zabé, accidentally 
discovered the merits of a lens which, in part, made this sensuous engage-
ment possible. For most of the exterior shots, and a few interiors, Reygadas 
and his DP employed a beveled or refracted lens. This lens is polished flat 
so that (the camera’s and spectator’s) perception is drawn toward an inner 
circle, creating a “halo-like effect” and a “ghostly doubling” of whatever 

50   T. Bordun
appears in the fringes of the frame (Lim 2012).13 For the director, this 
produced “an amazing effect” (Reygadas in Koehler 2013: 15); for film 
critic Peter Bradshaw it was “annoying and absurd” (2013). Contrary to 
Bradshaw’s dismissive remark, this effect creates a number of stylistic and 
philosophical conclusions, particularly when it is deployed for Steadicam 
and handheld shots. At the stylistic level, it blurs the motion of the figure 
on-screen at their peripheries, thereby dissecting the perfect figure–ground 
dichotomy of HD-quality cameras and images. These sorts of high-defini-
tion “horrible images,” says Reygadas (Lim 2013), “go further than the 
actual eye can see” and are therefore far from real perception. The intention 
with Post Tenebras Lux was to revisit and reinterpret the aesthetics of reality 
(Reygadas in Lim 2012), and the lens is a technical means that helped the 
director accomplish his aims.
Philosophically, a more accurate cinematographic perception of real-
ity would also be more attuned to the levels of perception that exclude 
the human as visual object. In some films, the narrative motivation calls 
for such shots, but Reygadas would prefer to focus on landscapes, non-
human animals, or pieces of nature that serve no other purpose than to 
be eye-pleasing. This tendency is consistently employed in Reygadas’s 
other features as well. It is this lack of a human character in the frame 
that again commands a sensuous engagement with Post Tenebras Lux. 
Indeed, this is how de Luca describes Gus Van Sant’s visionary realism 
in Gerry (2002), citing the film’s “disdain for anthropomorphic dimen-
sions” (2014: 175). The prologue of Post Tenebras Lux serves as an 
example of such disdain.
In the opening scene the refracted lens of the Steadicam occasionally 
seems to take Rut’s point of view (Fig. 2.3). The shot is low, at the per-
ceptual level where the infant can encounter the playful dogs firsthand. 
The shakiness of the camera accentuates this point-of-view (POV) shot, 
particularly when there are reverse shots between Rut’s POV and that 
of a cow or dog, or when the dogs run around and avoid bumping into 
Rut/the camera operator. After some minutes of exchange between what 
we think to be POV shots and shots featuring Rut in frame as the central 
object (Fig. 2.4), a long shot of the animals has Rut enter the right of 
13 Reygadas in Koehler 2013: 15: “What happens is the outside of the lens is pol-
ished and shaved so it becomes flat, and then it creates a refraction. It was a 25 mm lens, 
and it reacts differently depending on the light and atmosphere, as well as the camera 
movement.”

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   51
the frame unannounced, disrupting our assumption that we were view-
ing Rut’s POV and our certainties about camera position(s). In Craig 
Epplin’s observations (2012: 299), in Reygadas’s films the camera often 
appears to line up with a character’s gaze only to then deny us their POV 
as it drifts back to reveal them or, as I observe here, have the character 
enter the frame to our surprise. Writing on Japón, but similarly applicable 
here, Epplin argues that Reygadas’s camera erases the human subject and 
questions the human subject’s centrality in narrative film. We see this in 
the opening of Post Tenebras Lux and in many other scenes as well: for 
example, our introduction to Seven, the many shots of dogs and trees, 
a (CGI) devil, the frequent use of post-action lag, and the long take of 
waves gliding up to the sand in the beach episode. Reygadas’s semi- or 
quasi-documentary aesthetic transcends the boundaries of the camera as 
factual observer of the (human) world, as well as transcending the per-
ceptual treatment of the POV shots, which are more often used to estab-
lish a direct relationship between character and spectator.
Fig. 2.3  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

52   T. Bordun
To reinforce this effect Reygadas consistently employs handheld cam-
eras or a Steadicam. Moreover, instances in which a shot would nor-
mally cut and bring us to a new camera set-up to coincide with narrative 
momentum, Reygadas’s shots frequently work against the logic of nar-
rative or character identification and challenge our spatial awareness of 
where the characters are going and what they are getting into. In Battle 
in Heaven, the camera follows Marcos’s trek as he pushes through per-
sons in a crowded subway station; the camera tracks right through a sub-
way turnstile and eventually loses track of him altogether. In the 2013 
feature, we travel alongside Juan and Natalia in the sauna as they search 
the hallways for the Duchamp room. As they enter the Hegel room, the 
camera pursuing them continues directly inside. The camera moves for-
ward at waist height, inches from one patron’s flaccid penis, then breaks 
the threshold of the room and to a medium shot of a young girl who 
gazes at what we can only guess to be the new guests, Juan and Natalia. 
Behind her is yet another bored older couple. But with this tracking 
Fig. 2.4  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   53
motion our attention is shifted as Juan and Natalia disappear from the 
frame, sidestepping to the left. The protagonists’ and spectators’ spatial 
awareness of the room is not established before we lose contact with 
them. Reygadas does not grant us this ordinariness in our cinematic 
experience.
This constantly shifting dynamic of spatial, temporal, and perspectival 
co-ordinates intertwines “the levels of actor, character, and audience,” 
writes William Rowlandson (2006: 1033) on Japón, and we should add 
to these three levels that of the relationship between spectator’s body 
and Sobchack’s non-anthropomorphic concept of the “film’s body.” The 
film’s body, as I wrote in the Introduction, is the spectator’s phenom-
enological experience of the cinematic apparatus. Unlike the apparatus of 
psychoanalytic film theory, the film’s body participates in a relationship 
with the human spectator; the film’s body expresses itself—with zooms, 
edits, etc.—and we perceive its expression. Meaning is drawn by the spec-
tator from this exchange. Consider a wandering camera theorized as an 
aspect of the film’s body and a humanly enabled camera that exists not as 
cinematic expression but for narrative economy. The latter should retain 
its interest in the film’s protagonists, aid spectators in their comprehen-
sion and engagement with a human-centered story, and represent some-
thing. Reygadas has called these aesthetics “filmed theatre” (Higgins 
2005). His images instead express themselves with obvious curiosity and 
with little regard for bridging the gap between spectators’ desire for nar-
rative momentum and character identification. Cinema returns to its fun-
damental capacity, as I understood Merleau-Ponty also to be arguing.
For Jennifer M. Barker, the spectator’s body and the film’s body both 
orient themselves in space with musculature, a given set of physical co-
ordinates that come near to and are spatially separate from other per-
sons and things. She writes: “[w]e comport ourselves by means of arms, 
legs, muscles, and tendons whereas the film does so with dollies, cam-
era tracks, zoom lenses, aspect ratios, and editing patterns […] We mark 
our position in relation to space by such things as shoulders and hips, 
whereas the film’s frame is marked off by the edges of the celluloid strip, 
viewfinder, screen, and theatre” (Barker 2009: 77). She invokes Merleau-
Ponty’s concept of ek-stase, defined again as a transcendence whereby 
one can consciously activate the body to function in the world and carry 
out projects (2009: 76). With Reygadas’s wandering camera we will see 
how activating the body for particular goals serves both film’s body and 
spectator’s body.

54   T. Bordun
Barker argues that long tracking shots allow spectators to empathize 
with the film’s body’s musculature. During the sauna sequence in Post 
Tenebras Lux, with the lens nearly brushing the flaccid penis and then 
crossing the threshold of the Hegel room, we watch and feel as the cam-
era comports itself in the world and finds what interests it: the young 
girl. As the Steadicam traipses through the soccer field with Rut, in the 
bobbing close-up of Seven atop his donkey near the beginning of the 
film, or when we move alongside Juan and Natalia in the sauna, “we feel 
those movements in our muscles because our bodies have made similar 
movements: we have whipped our heads from side to side, moved slowly 
and stealthily, and stretched out our bodies in ways that are distinctly 
human but inspired by attitudes like those that inspire the film’s move-
ments” (Barker 2009: 75). These are but a few examples of the ways in 
which Post Tenebras Lux is attuned to multiple levels of perception, in 
filmmaking and its processes of expression and projection, and in specta-
tors’ empathetic experience of the audio-visual displays. The cinematog-
raphy functions like the camera of an avant-garde filmmaker, rather than 
that of strictly narrative cinemas.
We can also consider the levels of perception with reference to aspect 
ratios. Silent Light was shot in the now standard widescreen aspect ratio. 
The open plains of the Chihuahua province in Mexico called for such a 
presentation. Reygadas’s camera would pan across these landscapes, taking 
its time to return us to a human character, and the narrative at hand. Post 
Tenebras Lux adopts the 4:3 ratio. The mountainous landscapes surround-
ing the city of Tepoztlán necessitated the return to the Academy ratio 
(1:37:1), as it was important to feel the heights of the mountains and be 
overwhelmed by the grandeur of the trees (Reygadas in Lim 2012). And 
when the Academy ratio is employed, we cannot help but think of Yasujirō 
Ozu’s films, which employ this aspect ratio alongside low camera place-
ments so as to come as close to possible to human perception.
The film’s body comports itself with aspect ratios, cranes, dollies, and 
tracks—what Barker calls the musculature. But while humans are rooted 
to the ground and limited in our movements to tilts of the head up and 
down, or a walk forward which requires a gaze straight ahead, the cam-
era has a freer range of mobility, reminding “us that we’re not as com-
petent, fast, graceful, and powerful as the film’s body” (Barker 2009: 
110). When Reygadas shoots the tallness of the trees with his refracted 
lens from what I suspect to be a dollied crane, while the dolly tracks for-
ward the camera’s gaze is to the right. Such a look in motion is a difficult 

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   55
bodily movement for humans; it would mean sidestepping left and look-
ing straight ahead (while not running into anything on our left), or 
walking straight ahead while looking right (while not running into any 
oncoming people or objects). Provided the aspect ratio and movement, 
I suggest we come to the fore ourselves and discover our bodies in this 
shot. Since the art’s inception, the wind in the trees has been a standard 
trope for acknowledging the power of the filmic medium to present real-
ity. Van Sant (de Luca 2014: 170) and Reygadas are no exceptions, but 
the latter does so in order to heighten spectators’ awareness of their own 
bodies. Lingis writes of his favorite trees (1996: 62):
When we look at the sequoias, our eyes follow the upward thrust of their 
towering trunks touching the sky and their sparse branches fingering the 
mist. We comprehend this uprightness of their life not with a concept-gen-
erating faculty of our mind but with the uprighting aspiration in our ver-
tebrate organism which they awaken. Our postural axis turned up before 
them emanates about itself a body image which is shaped not as the visual 
form our body would turn to a fellow-human standing at normal human 
viewing-distance but as our body looks to the sequoias.
Our gaze in the 4:3 format, combined with the humanly impossible view 
from the dollied crane, turns us back on ourselves. The trees stand erect 
and the film engages our perception and up-down axis. This coming to the 
fore of ourselves is how Marks describes her preferred mode of film experi-
ence. With the reversible exchange between film and viewer, the deploy-
ment of haptic visuality for haptic images, “I come to the surface of myself 
[…], losing myself in the intensified relation with an other that cannot be 
possessed” (Marks 2000: 184). Indeed, haptic images are akin to a new 
discovery, coming across a thing for the very first time (Marks 2000: 178).
I would describe Reygadas’s cinema as a discovery. We know not what 
awaits us as every shot and sequence generates a different experience of 
both the film’s body and, by extension, our own. This is unlike the recent 
cinema of Malick, a director whose work critics tend to liken to Post 
Tenebras Lux. In The New World (2005), a film set in the sevententh cen-
tury about the colonization of the territory now known as Virginia, Malick 
required the actors to generate a haptic experience for the audience. 
Reaching the shores of new land, characters were compelled to bring their 
eyes skyward or gaze about in wonder; some would run their hands across 
the trees and elements, and this effort was employed to set in motion, by 

56   T. Bordun
association, the senses of spectators. This façade of discovery was unneces-
sary, however, given Marks’s theory.14 Reygadas does not resort to pro-
jecting the tactile cinematic experience empathetically through character’s 
limbs; the film’s body that makes up this work called Post Tenebras Lux 
solicits haptic visuality through purely cinematic means, not theatrical 
ones.
One more cinematographic example will advance my argument about 
the film’s body and the spectator’s body. Consider another perceptually 
impossible view for human bodies—the camera mounted on the front of 
Juan and Natalia’s speeding vehicle. In our first viewing of this episode, 
the one I named in the synopsis “a day of national celebration,” we do 
not know from whose vehicle we are looking and who we are looking at. 
The prior sequence ends then rapidly cuts to a mounted camera which 
follows a motorcyclist for a minute, winding down a hilly road (we never 
learn who the motorcyclist is). Then Reygadas cuts to the inside of the 
vehicle and shoots briefly from behind the windshield, and eventually 
we cut to the protagonists. Similar to the dollied crane, with a mounted 
camera “The film throws us out and gives us nothing to hang onto.” 
Barker continues: “In these moments [of mounted camera shots], we go 
where even fearless drivers and pilots would not dare go; we are riding 
without seat belts, without windshields, without any protection at all” 
(2009: 113). There is a kind of action here, more akin to an amusement 
park ride than a contemplative art film. My point is that both crane and 
mounted camera shots operate according to a certain logic, namely, to 
present what is not available to ordinary perception but nevertheless 
solicits an engagement with spectators’ own bodies.15 Whether we see 
the trees in the flesh or mediated through Reygadas’s dreamy lens, or 
experience speed from the front of a moving-vehicle firsthand or on a 
screen, “[p]erception is ordered by the ordinances things realize, and we 
as perceivers realize what we are through the styles of postural integra-
tion they induce in us and in the images they project back on us of the 
14 Cf. Koehler (2013), an excellent article dealing with the numerous problems in 
Malick’s recent output.
15 Rudolf Arnheim shared this description of the cinematic experience ([1933] 2011: 
287): “Our eyes are not a mechanism functioning independently of the rest of our body. 
They work in constant cooperation with the other sense organs. Hence surprising phenom-
ena result if the eyes are asked to convey ideas unaided by other senses. Thus, for exam-
ple, it is well known that a feeling of giddiness is produced by watching a film that has 
been taken with the camera traveling very rapidly. This giddiness is caused by the eyes 

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   57
way we look, hear, and feel to them” (Lingis 1996: 63). We encounter 
the trees or a winding road, but according to Lingis, via Merleau-Ponty, 
we also encounter ourselves.
Cinematography, for Reygadas, plays the same role as editing and sto-
rytelling; the seemingly arbitrary selection of shots, persons, and objects 
works in tandem with the seemingly fragmentary and incomplete selec-
tion of episodes described in the prior section. This leads us back to the 
description of embodiment Merleau-Ponty developed: that is, its pre-
personal and anonymous existence. With a narrative unfolding in the 
manner befitting itself, its own designs as it were, and a cinematogra-
phy which attempts to replicate the conditions of human perception on 
the one hand and bring new perceptions to us on the other, we have 
evidence for Reygadas’s claim that his cinema aims for “all the levels of 
perception.” I now turn to the often unacknowledged levels, dream and 
fantasy.
A Slow Dream, “As If” It Was Real
What grants the dream and fantasy sequences similar immanent, cin-
ematographic properties to the present-tense images? How do we per-
ceptually and sensuously experience them “as if” they are real and as 
legitimate narrative devices for the characters in the film? Reygadas’s film 
has no time for indications of mise en abyme, as a dream within a dream 
or un-/subconscious processes. Rather, the film is better described via 
the concept of immanence, or “present-ness,” as Sobchack illustrated; 
the dream episodes are immanent expressions of characters’ bodies, not 
“out-of-body” or disembodied events. Sobchack’s concept of “sensual 
catachresis” will help to describe the spectator’s immanent experience of 
these altered states of embodiment.
In response to the question as to why the refracted lens was used, 
Reygadas answered—not getting “too analytical about it”—that it cin-
ematically projects how we might perceive a dream (Koehler 2013: 15). 
The seven-minute opening sequence of Rut playing in the field with dogs 
participating in a different world from that indicated by the kinesthetic reactions of the 
body, which is at rest. The eyes act as if the body as a whole were moving; whereas the 
other senses, including that of equilibrium, report that it is at rest.”
 

58   T. Bordun
and cows is a dream, but we do not know it is a dream until Natalia asks 
her child about it in the film’s first episode proper. What do we make of 
the rest of the scenes shot with the refracted lens? Clearly these are not all 
dreams. And what do we make of the scenes that are projections into the 
future? Reygadas offers viewers the chance to decide for themselves.
We go back and forth in our own heads, we imagine a future that never 
comes, and then you see the past, and we go back and forth [in the film 
Post Tenebras Lux] as we do in our own heads all the time.
I’m doing that in the film without a code or conventional limits in story-
telling […] The viewer nowadays is highly developed, and can go very far, 
and doesn’t need to be taken by the hand. (Reygadas in Koehler 2013: 13)
Before Juan is killed, the film presents what appear to be flash-forwards 
of the family: at a Christmas party and at the beach, for example. We know 
they are flash-forwards because the children are older and the adults’ hair-
styles have changed. By the end of the film, it seems probable that these 
are not exactly dreams but fantasies of Juan, Natalia, Eleazar, or Rut, or all 
four, or combinations thereof, or simply the projection of what a nuclear 
family might look like from no one person’s perspective in particular. Yet 
we only learn of their status as future projections at the end of the film, 
when Juan has died from his gun wound. Whether we engage with the 
episodes as dreams, fantasies, or projections of a future which could not 
possibly exist, what we see takes place at the levels of immediate perception 
and has a tangible and present-ness. Thus film critics have cited Kubrick’s 
The Shining (1980) as another influence on Post Tenebras Lux, despite 
their dissimilar genres. As the scholars in the feature-length video essay 
Room 237 (Rodney Ascher, 2012) elaborate, the characters Jack, Wendy, 
and Danny all live through horrors and hallucinations that are impossible 
to verify as really existing, and this verification applies to spectators as well. 
To discuss one spectatorial experience of Post Tenebras Lux, it is necessary 
first to establish a phenomenological account of sleep and dreams.
According to Lingis, sleep is different from a coma. In our sleep we 
maintain a contact with the perceptual levels, our tasks, and our projects 
which need to begin again when we awake. Our dreams, however, are 
not merely the daily residues hypothesized by Sigmund Freud: the dream 
images are strange and fascinating, projecting their own perceptual, tac-
tile, and sexual depths (Lingis 1996: 108–109). The dream is spatially 

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   59
and temporally unstable and episodic, a series of blurry images that con-
ceal and reveal the confounding experience of embodiment. A dream 
could be described as the obstinate state of our body, not a ready-to-
hand and practicable field as in ordinary everydayness but the uncanny 
experience of the body as present-to-hand. Such an analogy echoes 
Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenological account of the body in the moment 
and the habit body. When practicing new bodily movements, such as 
dancing, we become aware of the body as a thing that can disagrees with 
our mental preparations for it; on the other hand, dancing is a real pos-
sibility because we have habitualized the movements of walking (Russon 
2003: 29–31).
For example, we run and flail in our dreams, sometimes without much 
success; we are maimed and wounded, sexually excited and emotionally 
distressed, and each of the physical exchanges or emotional moods of our 
dream life can rouse us from our slumber. The dream ties itself to the 
waking state. Merleau-Ponty writes: “the world obsesses us even during 
sleep, and it is about the world that we dream” (Lingis 1996: 112, quot-
ing Merleau-Ponty). Every practicable field (bodily expression directed 
outward) and unpracticable field (bodily and conscious states directed 
inward) of perceptual expression and projection exists in the same world; 
thus for the dreamer, his or her nighttime reveries or daytime fantasies 
exist as one level among the many. For Lingis and Merleau-Ponty, this 
“one-world hypothesis” means that there is not “one universal set of 
geometrical dimensions upon which the spaces opened in dreams and 
erotic obsessions can be measured. These spaces are absorbed into the 
geography of the practicable world, ‘as the double images merge into 
one thing, when my finger stops pressing upon my eyeball’” (Lingis 
1996: 112, quoting Merleau-Ponty).
The dream sequences that populate the cinemas offer something dif-
ferent from Merleau-Ponty’s one-world hypothesis. Most films indicate 
a dream from its diegetic present. The standard trope is to fade into a 
dream as a character slowly shuts their eyelids, or to cut sharply from 
a dreamy event to a character’s startled awakening, punctuated by 
close-ups of the eyes opening or a gasp for breath. In films such as Luis 
Buñuel’s Los Olvidados (1950), the dream is signified by the shift to soft 
focus and slow motion. The clear separation between waking and dream-
ing is relinquished in Post Tenebras Lux. As part of its attempt to evoke 
sensuous experiences in its spectators, this film presents the immanence 
of the dream as both an embodied experience and an uninterrupted 

60   T. Bordun
practicable field of perceptual awareness. Indeed, if we accept the direc-
tor’s claim—the lens perceives “as if” in a dream—this dreaminess (or 
fantasy of a projected future) works alongside other aspects of the film’s 
body, including the cinematography, the slow pace of the episodes, the 
events therein, and the consistent use of the “hyperbolic long take” (de 
Luca 2014).
The sequences of Post Tenebras Lux seem to extend indefinitely and 
the shots therein withstand the command to cut, thereby providing the 
time required for spectators to explore objects, persons, and landscapes 
before altering the camera set-up. We see an attempt by the filmmaker to 
explore cinematic perception attuned to human perception (in our con-
tinuous and uninterrupted stream of sensuous perception of the world). 
Reygadas, alongside many other internationally renowned art cinema 
directors, such as Tsai Ming-liang, Abbas Kiarostami, Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul, Béla Tarr, and Hou Hsiao-hsien, is part of a recent 
production trend embarking upon aesthetics of slowness. The turn 
to digital filmmaking has contributed to this proliferation of slow cin-
ema. Matthew Flanagan (2008) hints at some of the activities involved 
in watching such a feature: contemplation, relaxation, “panoramic per-
ception.”16 Romney contends that slow cinema helps to establish mood 
rather than plot, and intensifies our reception of temporality (James 
2010, quoting Romney). Yvette Bíró argues (2006) for the fullness of 
this minimalist cinema, which has the appeal of a more “universal vision” 
on the level of sensation. To sum up critics’ and theorists’ praise, despite 
the uneventfulness of story and plot there is more taking place in these 
films than in other trends, Hollywood, independent, or otherwise.
Slow cinema aims at a sensuous experience for spectators, its long 
takes perceptively illustrating real time passing in both the diegesis and at 
the level of the viewer’s body. De Luca writes about Gerry (2014: 183) 
in a manner applicable also to Post Tenebras Lux: “Onscreen for minutes 
in overstretched shots, these images resist signification, being conveyed 
as heightened sensible presences. Here, the long take provides the view 
with plenty of time to study the phenomenal, textural, tactile, in short, 
the sensory-material qualities these landscapes radiate.” The long takes 
and slow episodes of Post Tenebras Lux may not have a strong narra-
tive motivation, but the extended experience of the film’s temporality, 
16 Cf. Keathley (2006: 41–49), on panoramic perception.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   61
equalized as it is across the film’s episodes, suggests that these sequences 
all exist on the same plane of reality. Further, by not clearly demarcat-
ing the dream or fantasy of the episode, the (non-)event depicted in a 
given episode presents the literalness of the viewed. The consistent style 
employed throughout suggests Merleau-Ponty’s one-world hypothesis. 
Although varying in intensities, the events and episodes form a descrip-
tion of the phenomenological subject whose bodily and mental organi-
zation does not differentiate, in a Cartesian mode, between mental and 
physical experiences—dream, fantasy, and desire are part of embodied 
existence. If we agree with Barker’s argument that we empathize with 
the film’s body, my provocative claim is that Reygadas allows us to feel 
dream and fantasy and desire, or at least to feel “as if” we perceive them.
The immanence of these dream or fantasy episodes resonates with 
Sobchack’s argument that critics and theorists resort to the phrase “the 
film [shot, scene, or sequence] felt ‘as if’ it were real” because lan-
guage lacks a better one. In her phenomenology of film experience, it 
is no longer necessary to posit a hierarchy of the senses. Thus being 
“touched” by the film—when not “actually” being touched—is not met-
aphorical. Sobchack demonstrates how all the senses are ignited in the 
film experience, or, in Barker’s terms, we feel the reversible exchange of 
empathy between film’s body and our body—the immanent although 
diegetically unreal episodes of Post Tenebras Lux work in the same way.
Sobchack develops the concept of sensual catachresis for examining 
our relationship to cinema. Catachresis is a “false or improper meta-
phor;” “‘it mediates and conflates the metaphoric and the literal’ and is 
used ‘when no proper, or literal, term is available’” (Sobchack 2004: 81, 
quoting Richard Shiff). Sobchack’s examples include the “head” of a pin 
or the “arm” of a chair. Thus when a film critic contends that a shot 
felt “as if” it was real, that critic is reflecting upon himself and his body 
to find the appropriate relationship between his sensuous experience and 
that which cannot be sufficiently literalized. With sensual catachresis, in 
“trying to describe this complex reciprocity of body and representation, 
our phrases turn back on themselves to convey the figural sense of that 
experience as literally physicalized” (Sobchack 2004: 82).
Post Tenebras Lux, through its formal and narrative qualities, legiti-
mizes the often unexplored realities of being-in-the-world, such 
as dreams and hallucinations, and we can understand the film bet-
ter, and three sequences in particular, via the concept of sensual cat-
achresis. Reygadas attempts to bring the figuratively real of a desire 

62   T. Bordun
into the literally, although imagined, real for Natalia. The sex sequence 
does not operate as metaphor or symbolism, but immanently exists for 
her “as if” real: that is, the embodied reality of fantasizing and desir-
ing. Her sexual problems with Juan, revealed in a later sequence, sug-
gest that the earlier orgy apart from her husband is an impossible yet 
desired event. The focus on the tactile elements in this sequence, such 
as the varying textures of flesh, further demonstrates the haptic visual-
ity the screen demands. The continuous stream of embodied experience 
is also addressed in the shift from Rut’s dream to conscious state. When 
she awakens in tears and tries to bring her dream to language, we see 
and hear her struggle with phrases to describe the lingering resonance 
of the immanent experience. Rut’s playful dream turned thunderstorm 
continues to live itself in her consciousness. And finally, the collective 
but imaginary flash-forward episodes of the family at a Christmas party 
and at the beach are not symbolic representations of what a nuclear 
family could be—these are fantasized futures of ordinary everydayness 
or, as Stanley Cavell calls it, the film medium’s power to show what is 
otherwise unseen to our everyday lives: the ordinary (Macarthur 2014: 
92–95). These banal futures are latent in Juan, Natalia, Eleazar, and Rut, 
and were awaiting realization. However, in a kind of reverse melodrama 
similar to Gaspar Noé’s Irreversible (Irréversible, 2002) or François 
Ozon’s 5x2 (2004), Juan is murdered, and therefore these episodes will 
only ever exist as latent potentialities of an ordinary everydayness. If we 
follow de Luca’s claim that the long take affects spectators sensually, that 
the cinema is a haptic and tactile experience, and that the analysis of the 
cinematic apparatus and embodied spectatorship is best described as a 
reversible exchange between film and viewer’s body, what we are sens-
ing in Post Tenebras Lux is the sensation of a dream “as if” it was real. 
Sobchack aptly concludes: “In the film experience the nonverbal medi-
ation of catachresis is achieved literally by the spectator’s lived body in 
sensual relation to the film’s sensible figuration” (Sobchack 2004: 83).
References
Arnheim, Rudolf. [1933] 2011. Film and Reality, from Film as Art. In Critical 
Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy 
Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 279–289. Boston & New York: 
Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Barker, Jennifer M. 2009. The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, & London: University of California Press.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   63
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Bíró, Yvette. 2006. The Fullness of Minimalism. Rouge 9. http://www.rouge.
com.au/9/minimalism.html. Accessed 3 Feb 2013.
Bradshaw, Peter. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux—Review. The Guardian, 21 March, 
n.p. 
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/21/post-tenebras-lux-
review. Accessed 22 Apr 2014.
Brakhage, Stan. [1996] 2011. In Consideration of Aesthetics. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 667–72. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Cavell, Stanley. 1981. Pursuits of Happiness: The Hollywood Comedy of 
Remarriage. Cambridge & London: Harvard University Press.
Chamarette, Jenny. 2012. Phenomenology and the Future of Film: Rethinking 
Subjectivity Beyond French Cinema. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Deren, Maya. [1960] 2011. Cinematography: The Creative Use of Reality. In 
Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. 
Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 144–156. Boston and 
New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
De Luca, Tiago. 2014. Realism of the Senses in World Cinema: The Experience of 
Physical Reality. London & New York: I.B. Tauris.
Dulac, Germaine. [1932] 2011. The Avant-Garde Cinema. In Critical Visions in 
Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, and Meta Mazaj, 651–657. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Epplin, Craig. 2012. Sacrifice and Recognition in Carlos Reygadas’s Japón. 
Mexican Studies 28 (2): 287–305.
Flanagan, Matthew. 2008. Towards an Aesthetic of Slow in Contemporary 
Cinema. 16:9. n.p. http://www.16-9.dk/2008-11/side11_inenglish.htm. 
Accessed 28 Jan 13.
Fried, Michael. 1998. Art and Objecthood: Essays and Reviews. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Gutting, Gary. 2005. Foucault: A Short Introduction. Oxford and New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Higgins, Charlotte. 2005. I am the Only Normal Director. The Guardian, 22 
August, n.p. http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2005/aug/22/edinburgh-
filmfestival2005.edinburghfilmfestival. Accessed 14 Jan 2013.
Horeck, Tanya, and Tina Kendall (eds.). 2012. The New Extremisms: Rethinking 
Extreme Cinema. Cinephile 8 (2):4–7.
James, Nick. 2010. Passive Aggressive. Sight & Sound 20 (4): 5.
Keathley, Christian. 2006. Cinephilia and History, or The Wind in the Trees. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Koehler, Robert. 2013. What the Hell Happened with Terrence Malick? Cineaste 
38 (4): 4–9.

64   T. Bordun
Lim, Dennis. 2013. All the Dreaminess of Reality. NY Times, 26 April, n.p. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/movies/post-tenebras-lux-by-car-
los-reygadas-at-film-forum.html?_r=0. Accessed 22 Apr 2014.
Lingis, Alphonso. 1996. The Imperative. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press.
Lowenstein, Adam. 2015. Dreaming of Cinema: Spectatorship, Surrealism, and 
the Age of Digital Media. New York: Columbia University Press.
Macarthur, David. 2014. What Goes without Seeing: Marriage, Sex and the 
Ordinary in The Awful Truth. Film-Philosophy 18: 92–109.
Marks, Laura U. 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, 
and the Senses. Durham & London: Duke University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. [1945] 2004. Selections from The Phenomenology of 
Perception. In Maurice Merleau-Ponty: Basic Writings, ed. Thomas Baldwin. 
London & New York: Routledge.
Neale, Steve. [1990] 1995. Questions of Genre. In Film Genre Reader II, ed. 
Barry Keith Grant, 159–183. Austin: University of Texas Press.
O’Hehir, Andrew. 2013. ‘Post Tenebras Lux’: A Perverse, Dreamlike 
Masterpiece. Salon, 1 May, n.p. http://www.salon.com/2013/05/01/post_
tenebras_lux_a_perverse_dreamlike_masterpiece/. Accessed 22 Apr 2014.
Penn, Sheldon. 2013. The Time-Image in Carlos Reygadas’ Stellet Licht: A 
Cinema of Immanence. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 90 (7): 1159–1181.
Rayns, Tony. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux. Sight & Sound 23 (4): 101.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2013. Carlos Reygadas: The Devil. ICO. http://www.you-
tube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tFqWAkaa8PQ. Accessed 24 
Apr 2014.
Reygadas, Carlos, and Dennis Lim. 2012. Cannes Film Festival: Loud Boos 
Don’t Faze Carlos Reygadas (interview). NY Times, 27 May, http://artsbeat.
blogs.nytimes.com/2012/05/27/cannes-film-festival-loud-boos-dont-faze-
carlos-reygadas/. Accessed 22 Apr 2014.
Reygadas, Carlos, and Robert Koehler. 2013. The Impossible Becomes Reality: 
An Interview with Carlos Reygadas. Cineaste 38 (3): 10–15.
Romney, Jonathan. 2013. For and Against: Carlos Reygadas. Sight & Sound 23 
(4): 74–75.
Rowlandson, William. 2006. The Journey into the Text: Reading Rulfo in 
Carlos Reygadas’s 2002 Feature Film Japón. Modern Language Review 101: 
1025–1034.
Russon, John. 2003. Human Experience: Philosophy, Neurosis, and the Elements of 
Everyday Life. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Smith, Murray. 1998. Modernism and the avant-gardes. In The Oxford Guide to 
Film Studies 392–412.
Sobchack, Vivian. 2004. Carnal Thoughts: Embodiment and Moving Image 
Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.

2  CARLOS REYGADAS, THE AVANT-GARDE, AND THE SENSES   65
Sobchack, Vivian. 2014. Stop Making Sense: Thoughts on Two Difficult Films 
from 2013. Film Comment 50 (1): 50–52.
Solórzano, Fernanda. 2013. The Devil in the Detail. Sight and Sound 23 (4): 
50–53.
Thompson, Kristin. [1977] 1986. The Concept of Cinematic Excess. In 
Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A Film Theory Reader, ed. Philip Rosen. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Wood, Jason. 2006. The Faber Book of Mexican Cinema. London: Faber & Faber.

67
With the analyses of cinematography and the levels of reality depicted 
in the film behind us, we can now turn to its socio-cultural critiques. 
Reygadas has much to express regarding class and race, sexual differ-
ence, human relationships with animals, and death. He visually and aurally 
expresses himself within the narrative filmmaking tradition, to be sure, but 
I need documentary film and documentary film theory to articulate the 
director’s critiques fully here. This chapter also extends recent scholarship 
on “the tangled relations between fiction and nonfiction” (Renov 2004: 
21). Indeed, as Sarah Cooper briefly summarizes (2006: 7–9), much con-
temporary work on documentary draws the conclusion that the boundary 
between fiction and non-fiction is “difficult to sustain.” The intersection 
of fiction and documentary demands our attention now more than ever.
My first claim about Post Tenebras Lux was that Reygadas demon-
strates that dreams and fantasies are embodied experiences. My second 
main claim regards the ethical and political significance of Reygadas’s 
film. Reygadas’s concerns about sexual difference manifest in a sex-
dream sequence. The director has offered comments about class and race 
depictions in all of his films, but he has said little about gender, gen-
der roles, sexuality, and sexual difference. Post Tenebras Lux presents the 
ever-increasing incongruity between contemporary life and traditional 
marriage. I claim that marriage is now an unviable and unhealthy option 
for many individuals, and the couple in the film struggle with “com-
pulsory monogamy” in a sexual epoch much more diverse than hetero-
sexual, monogamous sex permits. The second section of this chapter 
CHAPTER 3
!Que Viva México!: Reygadas 
as Documentarian
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_3

68   T. Bordun
articulates how Reygadas’s documentary style provides an alternative 
look at human–animal relations. The final section turns to the problem 
of shooting fictional death in narrative cinema.
Performative Documentary
Class and race figure in the narrative of Post Tenebras Lux. Besides the 
narrativized class and race conflicts in my brief synopsis, they are simul-
taneously articulated in the style of the film. In Reygadas’s oeuvre, as 
well as in Breillat’s films, I find the exploration of the profilmic event to 
be one of the most intriguing aspects. Annette Kuhn and Guy Westwell 
(2012: 333) define the profilmic event as that which is set before the 
camera, including not only sets, lighting, and the actors. This is con-
trasted with what appears in frame or what appears to the spectator for 
the purposes of narrative economy. The directors under investigation in 
this volume, similar to documentary filmmakers and theorists going back 
to John Grierson, try “to preserve the integrity of real-space and time of 
the profilmic event.” For some film critics this is a cause for concern.
Paul Julian Smith is suspicious of whether the octogenarian woman 
in Japón was informed enough about her sexual performance. He claims 
(2003, my emphasis) that “Reygadas is not documenting the real […] 
he is intruding on it,” a phrase that echoes Slavoj Žižek’s claim regard-
ing the experience of watching pornography, a discussion I take up in 
the final chapter. For this critic, the form and the performers breach the 
fantasy space of the viewer. Similarly, in Battle in Heaven, Smith doubts 
(2005) if the non-professional actors really knew what they were get-
ting into when they signed up to perform sexually. De Luca decon-
structs Smith’s concern, stating that “by insinuating that these are people 
unable to take responsibility for their decisions, the critic has taken up, 
through his words, the condemned superiority he attributed to the 
film director in the first place. The power relations that the critic aims 
to dismantle are, conversely, reinforced” (2014: 90). Additionally, the 
numerous interviews with Reygadas and his actors address the problems 
raised by critics such as Smith.1 Ethics should always be on a filmmaker’s 
1 Reygadas in Higgins 2005: “I don’t feel any responsibility towards [Marcos, Ana, and 
Bertha Ruiz], because I believe in individual responsibility […] Some people say that there 
is risk of exploitation. I don’t think this idea respects the fact that people are intelligent and 
grown up.” See also the interview with Reygadas and Mushkadiz on the Palisades Tartan DVD.

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   69
radar to some degree, but, as I explore in my chapter on Breillat’s 
relationship(s) with her actors and actresses, at the same time we cannot 
treat the performers as victims. Moreover, by framing his discussion of 
the film in ethical terms, Smith also highlights my thesis about the nature 
of genre and spectatorship, and mainly spectatorship as a collection of 
images that matter for the individual. More precisely, in his viewing of 
Battle in Heaven, Smith observes what I will address in the following 
section: Reygadas’s films’ “confusion of life and art” (Smith 2005). This 
intrusion of the real and the confusion of life and art operate on several 
different registers in Post Tenebras Lux. When the real intrudes, it does so 
through the bodies of human beings, often in ecstatic states.
Reygadas firmly believes in casting non-professional actors in his films. 
He was very outspoken about this in his interviews proceeding Battle of 
Heaven. Reygadas claimed that a “naturalistic” acting or faithful repre-
sentations of a character are incorrect criteria of judgment; he repeatedly 
invokes his desire for “the actual human presence,” portraying actor-
characters as they are in the world. It is like choosing someone for a 
photographic still or painted portrait, he says (Marlow 2006). He claims 
more recently, in regard to Post Tenebras Lux, that “For the children 
to be there really powerfully, it had to be my children. Otherwise they 
would be representations of children” (Lim 2013). By keeping a distance 
from representation, Reygadas rethinks the relationship between real and 
fiction as these persons on-screen, in the flesh—in their vulnerability, 
anxiety, and bursts of courage—perform a particular scene. In Chap. 6, 
on Battle in Heaven and Breillat’s Sex is Comedy (2002), I examine the 
distinction between acting and performing. For now, I am occupied with 
the distinctions amongst avant-garde cinemas, art cinemas, and docu-
mentary aesthetics.
In de Luca’s terms (2014: 75), “the phenomenological presence of 
the spontaneous real” emerges with Reygadas’s casting choices, particu-
larly with children. Post Tenebras Lux continues to work with the pro-
filmic event, a formal trait the director has been editing into his films 
since beginning his practice. Several examples stand out: Rut’s presence 
resembles that of the children of Silent Light who could not help but 
stare into the camera (Fig. 3.1); the drunk man who hassles Juan and 
Natalia similarly cannot restrain himself from acknowledging the tech-
nology (Fig. 3.2), his look through the fourth wall resembling the (fic-
tional?) workers on display in Japón who mention that the men from the 

70   T. Bordun
film do not give them anything to drink2; and the numerous shots of 
anonymous people and animals eating (Figs. 3.3, 3.4), a document of 
carnality if there ever was one.3 Indeed, in an effort to film people as 
such, Reygadas recognizes the stock we take in the preparation and con-
sumption of meals. John Russon maintains (2003: 99) that “Our sense 
of ourselves as human, our sense of cultural identity, and our sense of 
familial identity are all typically invested in these primitive bodily prac-
tices of ingestion.” By excessively documenting the food ritual for our 
visual interests, Reygadas solicits a “concern for the actual human pres-
ence” of the person on-screen (Marlow 2006); we see how they exist in 
Fig. 3.1  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)
2 Renov 2004: 30–31 argues that these fourth wall breaks in politically charged fiction 
films “circumvent the customary relay of character/identification/introjection […] and 
produce a discursive caesura intended to instruct by force of confrontation.”
3 Reygadas’s short film This is My Kingdom (Este es mi reino 2010) is an earlier attempt to 
work with food, festival, and documentary aesthetics.

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   71
their world, with their complex familial and cultural identities on display. 
De Luca names this the “ethnographic quality” of Reygadas’s work. It 
is here that we may locate the documentary aesthetic in the film. This 
aesthetic is unlike the documentary aesthetic of contemporary cinema’s 
“shaky cam.” The shaky cam cinematography implies a level of authen-
ticity to an otherwise fictional narrative, but Reygadas’s foray in the doc-
umentary genre has more to do with expression and presentation than it 
does with camerawork.
The concern with human presence in Post Tenebras Lux—whether Rut, 
the drunken man, or the persons eating—exemplifies Reygadas’s aesthetic. 
He has said, “It is absolutely essential that things need to be real and not 
simulated […] [I]f Marcos [in Battle in Heaven] has to get naked, I don’t 
want to simulate his penis. I mean, if he’s going to eat a sandwich, I don’t 
want him to pretend […] [I]f I could have simulated [nudity] with an 
extra, without harming the film, I probably would have simulated it” 
(Marlow 2006). But a simulation would have harmed the film, as would 
Fig. 3.2  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

72   T. Bordun
any limitation on the spontaneity of the children, or the drunken men. 
There is another drunk earlier in Post Tenebras Lux, at the Christmas party, 
but this one is a bourgeois. It appears that these men, both the self-pro-
claimed poor man and the bourgeois, are not actors and they are very 
drunk. Fernanda Solórzano challenges Reygadas for allowing non-pro-
fessional actors from lower classes to get drunk. The director asserts that 
those who feel he has exploited non-actors also “don’t know how to treat 
others like equals,” and then challenges Solórzano for not noticing that 
the bourgeois man was also drunk (2013: 52). I take his statement to be 
more than a defense of what and who he chooses to film—it is an indi-
cator of his investment in a style of documentary filmmaking. The poor 
man and the bourgeois are equally represented as drunks, as expressions of 
situated Mexicans. Thus for Reygadas there is an urgency to the profilmic 
event that extends beyond a pursuit of cinematic authenticity, verisimili-
tude, or a concern for the actual human presence. Presence is significant 
only if it is an expression of something, of a director’s idea.
Fig. 3.3  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   73
In this film Reygadas approaches the status of documentary precisely 
because this confusion of fiction and reality “asserts itself as a purely sen-
sible presence” (de Luca 2014: 60). Although Reygadas does point to the 
limits of my approach here (Koehler 2013: 13), noting that “everything 
is fictionalized, but they [the scenes and ideas] come from real sources,” 
I carry forward the clear divide between actual events filmed and those 
performed for Reygadas’s camera. What I am interested in is the sensi-
ble presence of people and things, for the director’s aesthetic choices are 
employed for social, cultural, or political investigation and critique.
Bill Nichols has written prolifically about documentary films. In 
the early 1990s he noticed a new kind of documentary mode emerg-
ing, which he names “performative.” This mode of documentary does 
not establish a referent; it is often the case for documentary films that 
some kind of historical event be indexed or a look at a particular reality is 
undertaken in an effort to glean the truth. The performative documen-
tary straddles the line between fiction and documentary and establishes 
Fig. 3.4  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

74   T. Bordun
the viewer as the “primary referent,” putting “the referential aspect of 
the message in brackets, under suspicion” (Nichols [1994] 2011: 675, 
677). Nichols continues: “These films address us, not with commands 
or imperatives necessarily, but with a sense of emphatic engagement that 
overshadows their reference to the historical world” (2011: 675). Even 
if the documentary is about a particular historical incident, it is not an 
attempt to present what “really happened” so much as an endeavor by 
the filmmaker to express poetically a collective memory of that incident, 
intersecting various aspects such as race, class, nation, and so on (Nichols 
2011: 678). Thus performative documentaries are less indexical than they 
are iconic—they are freed from the “discourses of sobriety,” able to bring 
all the powers of cinema to bear on their film (Nichols 2011: 679–680).4
Is this not Reygadas’s undertaking as well? Although he is clearly 
working in the realm of fiction, the blurred boundary of documentary 
cinema unveils itself throughout his oeuvre. In Post Tenebras Lux, the 
object of study is less an event, an individual, or a site of struggle than 
it is class in Mexico as a social reality. It is not the statistically significant 
income discrepancies or crime rates that are on display; the documentary 
aesthetic of the film shows class consciousness without external verifica-
tion (Nichols 2011: 678), what it feels like to be an upper- or lower-class 
citizen in twenty one-century Mexico. This is not to suggest naively, as 
Reygadas does above about “the actual human presence,” that the on-
screen individuals are appearing as such. Elizabeth Marquis reminds us 
that documentary performance is always mediated by the apparatus—
“technological presence impinges on screen performance” (2013: 50). 
Nevertheless, in the scene addressed above, when the poor drunk man 
4 Nichols defines discourses of sobriety as follows (1991: 3–4): “Documentary film has 
a kinship with those other nonfiction systems that together make up what we may call the 
discourses of sobriety. Science, economics, politics, foreign policy, education, religion, war-
fare – these systems assume they have instrumental power; they can and should alter the 
world itself, they can effect action and entail consequences. Their discourse has an air of 
sobriety since it is seldom receptive to ‘make-believe’ characters, events, or entire worlds 
(unless they serve as pragmatically useful simulations of the ‘real’ one). Discourses of 
sobriety are sobering because they regard their relation to the real as direct, immediate, 
transparent. Through them power exerts itself. Through them things are made to happen. 
They are vehicles of domination and conscience, power and knowledge, desire and will. 
Documentary, despite its kinship, has never been accepted as a full equal.” Examples can be 
heard in politicians’ speeches, the depersonalization of scientific publications, the formality 
of the university lecture, and the authorial voice-overs of documentary films.

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   75
confronts Juan and Natalia about their status as “real” Mexicans, his 
expressions and spontaneity shine. The fact that he is really inebriated 
appears to justify his being on camera, for here we see a document of 
Mexico performed by Reygadas as a documentarian. In the performa-
tive documentary, according to Nichols, “we observe social actors who 
do not coalesce into characters” (2011: 680). The political dimension 
of the film is therefore not located in a story so much as documenting 
the profilmic event. For the class and race divisions to be clearly present, 
Reygadas invests his work with traces of the real, whether breaking the 
fourth wall, using long takes, or employing “social actors.”
Seven appears as a “social actor” when we are first introduced to him 
as well, an individual who may be playing his societal role as a fictional 
role for the film. Indeed, for non-Mexicans his logging is perhaps part 
of life; but as Reygadas tells us in an interview, cited above, this sort of 
tree-cutting practice is frequent and quite damaging to the country’s eco-
logical system. This sequence is not putting forward an argument but a 
suggestion—the performative documentaries “do not explain or summa-
rize so much as imply or intimate,” and precisely what is implied or inti-
mated is mostly up to the viewers to decide (Nichols 2011: 680, 683). 
Regardless of what they decide, there is a clear ethnographic dimension in 
Nichols’s description of the performative mode and in Reygadas’s cinema.
The ethnographic quality in this mode of documentary filmmaking 
is expanded to include filmic expressions of the rhythm inherent in dif-
fering modes of life: “Performative documentary seeks to evoke not the 
quality of people’s worldview but the specific qualities that surround par-
ticular people, discrete events, social subjectivities, and historically situ-
ated encounters between filmmakers and their subjects” (Nichols 2011: 
680–681). Seven’s introductory sequence resembles Nichols’s descrip-
tion, and combined with the later scenes between this laborer and the 
bourgeois family, the film raises themes of classism, nationalism, and 
racism as questions regarding social subjectivities in Mexico. Again, this 
is not an effort to address concrete individuals as such, but the “exis-
tential situatedness […] of class consciousness” (Nichols 2011: 678).5 
5 In a deleted scene early in the film, Seven helps Juan push his vehicle out of the mud. 
Seven is splashed with mud while Juan drives away clear. The symbolism is not very subtle, 
although Reygadas does not dramatize the event by having Seven make a big fuss over his 
dirty clothes. It is these types of class depictions, Sight & Sound’s Quintin observes (2013: 
75), without direct reference to the scene just mentioned, that make Reygadas and Post 
Tenebras Lux appear “ridiculous and condescending.”.

76   T. Bordun
Further, drawing on Nichols’s previous quote once more, Reygadas visu-
ally asks himself what relationship he has with Mexico’s social problems 
by turning to the art of fictional narrative filmmaking in an experimental 
mode—the film was shot on his estate, and he originally thought him-
self and his wife suitable for the fictional bourgeois couple (Lim 2013). 
Thus the director is in dialogue with himself and with his geographical 
and social situation, and each of his films depicts one small portion of 
Mexican life. His depictions are made all the more personal by casting 
his own laborers, acquaintances, friends, and family (Reygadas in Koehler 
2013: 14).6 This rescues Reygadas’s comments on naively presentational 
modes of fictional filmmaking; the person is not on-screen as such, but 
a representation of Reygadas’s interaction with social actors, class con-
sciousness, and twenty one-century Mexico. However, as I have argued 
here, the director’s representation of lived experience is not “sealed off, 
made safe,” as Michael Renov suggests about most historical narrative 
films (2004: 41). Through his documentary mode and use of perform-
ers in sometimes vulnerable contexts, Reygadas presents us with his cri-
tique. I will continue this examination of performers’ presence in Chap. 
6. Asking actors to perform sexually further complicates my assessment 
of documentary aesthetics, social actors, and acting/performing modes.
Reygadas’s style and recourse to the profilmic event—in casting non-
professional actors, allowing his performers to become intoxicated, 
employing a documentary aesthetic—are infused with social and politi-
cal concerns. It is not enough to note the content of a sequence and 
argue for its social or political significance; we must turn to aesthetics 
additionally to do justice to the director’s attempt to navigate class con-
ditions in contemporary Mexico. When the fiction film imbues itself with 
a documentary real, the viewer too is charged to implicate themselves 
ethically in the real presented on-screen. Sobchack names this film expe-
rience “the charge of the real.” For Sobchack (2004: 275) films that blur 
the divide between fiction and documentary establish that both fictional 
and real films are “constituted from the same worldly ‘stuff.’” Thus a 
fictional film can, and often has, as much epistemological, social, cultural, 
and political truthfulness as a documentary work.
6 Using people close to him as actors is a common tactic for Reygadas. In Japón it was a 
friend of the family (Ferretis), and in Battle in Heaven his father’s chauffeur (Hernández). 
On self-referentiality and documentary filmmaking, see Renov 2004: 176–180.

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   77
But there is more to the film than its visual depictions of class and 
race. Critics and scholars of Post Tenebras Lux, and of Reygadas’s oeuvre 
generally, focus too much on class and race and neglect the issue of 
sexual difference present in the film. Rosi Braidotti, paraphrasing Luce 
Irigaray’s notion of sexual difference, defines the ethicality of the term 
as “[b]eing able to approach any other in full respect of his/her living 
singularity; respecting the presence and the boundaries, while moving 
and being moved by an other toward the recognition of our respective 
and irreducible differences” (1994: 133). The difficulty of practicing 
this ethics is presented in a number of scenes in Reygadas’s 2013 film. 
In narrower terms, perhaps the issues of compulsory monogamy, femi-
nine desire, and latent patriarchy in heterosexual married couples are 
at play. Juan suffers from porn addiction, on the one hand placing the 
blame squarely on the internet and on the other blaming Natalia for 
never being in the mood. When the problem is broached earlier in the 
story, it is made as a passing remark, and never discussed again. The lat-
ter episode—the one in which a disagreement about the color of curtains 
turns into a heated battle about the possibility of ending the marriage—
points to a latent sexism; Natalia must be for Juan when he is ready. The 
intrusion of the profilmic event appears again in the very long take of the 
husband berating his wife. She sits at a table in medium shot, the camera 
stationary at the height of her nearly straightforward gaze. But she looks 
slightly to the right of the camera: that is, at Juan standing by the kitchen 
counter, venting his sexual frustrations. This shot is the reverse of what 
we see in Ulrich Seidl’s documentary Jesus, You Know (Jesus, Du Weisst, 
2003). In this film individuals stare directly at the camera and recite their 
prayers to Jesus. With this shot of Natalia, Juan confesses his own prob-
lems behind the camera’s back, and she silently receives his accusations.
It is difficult to pinpoint what is wrong with their marriage. The ver-
bally aggressive confrontation between the couple registers not in an 
argumentative, demonstrative, or even rational mode; as Nichols writes 
of the performative documentary, what is more significant is its intima-
tions. This is a marriage of several years now sliding downward. Yet the 
dialogue is fluff; Juan’s typical accusations of frigidity are not excep-
tional. More interesting is Reygadas throwing a formal curve into this 
couple’s scene: the documentation of the evening has gaps in time. 
Earlier in the scene, while Natalia is washing the dishes, Juan play-
fully whispers to his wife that he will screw her tonight “in the ass.” 
The sequence seems to continue uninterrupted, with a few cuts and 

78   T. Bordun
new camera set-ups, but the ensuing argument has Juan shout down at 
Natalia that she never wants sex, and that evening he had to insist three 
times before she agreed to anal intercourse. The film documents only 
one of those instances, so the truth of this claim is either suspect or, 
according to my reading, irrelevant since Reygadas is expressing a tone. 
The tone is further emphasized by the use of pathetic fallacy. During the 
couple’s argument, the film cuts to a medium shot of Juan, and a win-
dow behind him shows the dark sky brightening with lightning flashes. 
Adding the pathetic fallacy has little to do with an authenticity or docu-
mentary real; Reygadas successfully employs this technique to express or 
intimate a latent gendered violence. There is a formal attempt, then, to 
draw spectators into an expressive version of truth and ethics, about sex-
ual difference and sexism.
In both Post Tenebras Lux, and in my following chapters on Breillat’s 
Fat Girl (À ma soeur, 2001) and Sex is Comedy, I spot a theoretically 
unexplored part of the film experience. As a selection of episodes which 
could be almost arranged at random, Post Tenebras Lux asks the spectator 
to visit and revisit sequences to engage all the others. In the above scene 
between Juan and Natalia, we may return to the bathhouse sequence 
with the numerous bored patrons and verify my suspicion that the scene 
of Natalia’s intense sexual pleasures is her desire immanently realized. 
When I hear Juan’s testimony that his and Natalia’s intimacy is a fail-
ure—that she consistently refuses his advances, that he has turned to 
online pornography—I cannot help but think that something more and 
possibly transgressive is needed in terms of fulfilling Natalia’s desire. As I 
mentioned in the synopsis in the prior chapter, Juan’s problems suggest 
that Natalia has problems as well. (Or, a husband’s sexual problems are 
ipso facto also the wife’s, insofar as sexual intimacy is a desired part of a 
healthy marriage.) In Natalia’s sex scene, the husband first accompanies 
the wife through the halls and rooms of the bathhouse. The film does 
not reveal which partner brought the other to this place, but the focus 
of the sequence implies it was Natalia since she must take control of the 
situation, and she gains the sexual pleasure. This control is demonstrated 
by her responses to the other patrons who speak French; Juan, unfor-
tunately, cannot speak the language himself. I claim that this language 
difference prohibits Juan from participating in the sexual transgressions 
and reinforces my hypothesis that this sequence, rather than existing as 
diegetically real, exists as a fantasy in the mind of Natalia and is an indi-
cator of Reygadas’s interest in issues of sexual difference.

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   79
As described previously, the cut to a fragmented body in a sauna is 
sudden. Bored men and women sit in this steamy room while the 
sounds of men having intercourse can be heard near by. An earlier rugby 
sequence appears in an altered form here. In the temporally out-of-joint 
rugby scene young men are shouting and chanting, preparing for their 
physical sport. In the sauna a tall man and a very short man confront the 
bored patrons, and the tall one asks, as if looking for some teammates to 
join his rugby match, “We need two guys … two men. We need two!”, 
and someone from the action pesters the non-joiners, “Come on, come 
on!” He paces to and fro, his eyes wandering from patron to patron. 
It is a request to participate in a game, rather than a sexual escapade. 
For Natalia, this is the world of men. When the couple enters the frame, 
clearly lacking the enthusiasm of these sporty males, Juan and Natalia 
resemble the other uninterested guests. Eventually the couple leave this 
room of men in search of the more elusive Duchamp parlor.
Upon reaching the room Juan removes Natalia’s towel, and as she is 
laid on the bench we lose sight of him altogether. Natalia’s intercourse 
is far removed from the boredom encountered in the other rooms. 
One man has intercourse with her surrounded by the others. An older 
woman, on whose lap Natalia’s head rests, tells her she is made for 
this pleasure. Two younger women admit their jealousy for the pleas-
ure Natalia is experiencing, and one woman desires Natalia for her-
self. Everyone else in the room is either impotent or non-participatory, 
much like Juan, who has neither the time nor the stamina for his wife. 
In the close-up of Natalia’s prolonged orgasm, Romney proposes (2013: 
75) there is a sense of rapture, and I am reminded of Lingis’s mystical 
description of the erotic encounter (2011: 103):
In orgasmic pleasure the body loses its posture; its limbs, dismembered, 
roll about, moved by another, moved by the pleasurable abandon of 
another; one’s fingers probe and penetrate blindingly not knowing what 
they are looking for. Dissolute, possessed, no longer in control of one’s 
thoughts and values, no longer master of one’s feelings, invaded by alien 
feelings, one loses one’s skilled and social identity, one’s responsibility, 
one’s self-respect […] Yet this abandon is making love, from which come 
all the care, respect, compassion, mercy, devotion, grace, admiration, ado-
ration, worship that rebound over beings in the world.
The long take of an orgasm in close-up and the quantity of bodies—
slim, rotund, young, old, hairy, and trimmed—are further displays of the 

80   T. Bordun
profilmic event. The camera fragments the bodies, does not turn aside 
when confronted with flaccid penises, tracks close-up to present “a sense 
of monstrosity” in any one of the fleshy forms (de Luca 2014: 64). The 
older woman’s breasts press against Natalia’s face, this woman’s body 
overflowing the borders of the film’s frame, a stylistic device frequently 
used in Reygadas’s oeuvre (de Luca 2014: 61–65). The beads of water 
dripping from the bodies of the patrons and our extended gaze at the 
varieties of nude forms again exceed any kind of narrative motivation.
Once the scene is accepted as one of Natalia’s desire, immanently 
realized via a plot point (Juan berating her) and the film’s form, we can 
begin to ask questions about what is precisely being performed, and why. 
Desire is so present in this scene, but its time and place are impossible 
to locate with certainty. My perhaps outlandish reading is that Natalia 
fantasizes about sexual pleasure unavailable with her husband; yet the 
husband walks with her to the Duchamp room, though there is no indi-
cation of either his enthusiasm or reluctance to give her to another man 
(or men and women). However, by including Juan in the scene merely 
as a presence, perhaps Natalia retains her sense of caring and compassion 
for her husband. Lingis named this an erotic uninhibitedness as quoted 
above. Moreover, Juan’s distance from Natalia’s orgy stresses the chang-
ing status of compulsory monogamy. Juan is powerless against this slow 
change in contemporary relationships. In Natalia’s fantasy, if he is unable 
to allow himself to join in, he will simply disappear from the scene.
I will also demonstrate in the following chapter, on Breillat, that por-
nographic representations in contemporary art cinema can, and do, make 
strong critiques of sexual and romantic norms. In both Reygadas and 
Breillat, then, style informs the ethical direction of a work.
Human Animals, Non-Human Animals
I have articulated the ways in which Reygadas is a director of the pro-
filmic event. In each of his films he attempts to maintain the integrity 
of locations, people, and objects without transforming them into narra-
tive devices. The director’s aesthetics are often about presenting people 
and things as they function in space and time. In contemporary fiction 
films, death cannot be part of the profilmic event: neither humans nor 
animals are killed in the service of drama, on the one hand, and on the 
other, even if this was permitted, it is difficult, if not impossible, to cap-
ture the precise moment of passing from existence to non-existence even 

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   81
in a non-fiction context. Unlike hardcore pornography, which attempts 
to “‘fix’ the exact moment of the sexual act’s involuntary convulsion of 
pleasure” by explicitly documenting the male orgasm (Williams [1989] 
1999: 113), death has no such visible instant. Given the limits and chal-
lenges of bringing realistic death to narrative cinema, Reygadas has dem-
onstrated a complex and varied relationship to cinematic dying, corpses, 
and the repercussions of death for the characters in his films. He has 
experimented with representations of the death of animals, shown the 
aftermath of a person’s death, tried to replicate murder  with a high 
degree of verisimilitude and, in his latest feature, briefly turned to com-
puter-generated imagery to illustrate a suicide symbolically. Each attempt 
to bring dying to the screen further exemplifies the director’s aim to 
elicit sensuous responses in spectators, quite apart from emotional empa-
thy (Laine [2011] 2013) or spontaneous eruptions of screams or tears 
(Williams [1991] 2009).
The death of an animal or animals in fiction cinema stands as a substi-
tute for the impossibility of representing human death. Sergei Eisenstein 
knew this better than any filmmaker of his time. In Strike (Cтaчкa, 1924) 
he cut the execution of workers with the execution of cattle. Of this 
scene he wrote:
I did this [finale of Strike], on the one hand, to avoid overacting among 
the extras from the labour exchange ‘in the business of dying’ but mainly 
to excise from such a serious scene the falseness that the screen will not 
tolerate but that is unavoidable in even the most brilliant death scene and, 
on the other hand, to extract to maximum effect of bloody horror. The 
shooting is shown only in ‘establishing’ long and medium shots of 1,800 
workers falling over a precipice, the crowd fleeing, gunfire, etc., and all the 
close-ups are provided by a demonstration of the real horrors of the slaugh-
terhouse where cattle are slaughtered and skinned. ([1924] 1988: 43)
On the one hand, we have “the business of dying,” a dramatization 
that is often too unreal to generate the kind of cognitive engagement 
Eisenstein aimed to elicit in his spectators. On the other, the slaughter 
of the cattle served as a bloody replacement for what could not then be 
shown with verisimilitude in the cinema. This substitution of real death 
for fictional death posits differing ethical spaces. While the narrative 
momentum of Strike calls for the execution of the laborers, the indexical 
inscription of the murdered cattle carries no such narrative motivation. 

82   T. Bordun
In an early essay, Sobchack discusses Jean Renoir’s Rules of the Game (La 
règle de jeu, 1939) and observes that killing an animal on-screen, and 
contrasting that real death with the fictional death of a character, “vio-
lently, abruptly, punctuates fictional space with documentary space” 
(2004: 246–247). She argues that this intrusion of the real results in a 
greater sense of shock at the death of a rabbit than the fictionalized death 
of the human character later in the film. Her consciousness, which had 
theretofore been situated or accustomed to the irreal and fictional events, 
was abruptly transformed “into a documentary consciousness charged 
with a sense of the world, existence, bodily mortification, and mortality, 
and all the rest of the real that is in excess of the fiction” (2004: 269).7
In a later essay, from which the second quotation was taken, Sobchack 
addresses the fiction/documentary blur in more detail. I began to 
explore similar terrain in the last section by turning to Nichols’s writings 
on the documentary. Here, with reference to animal death, Sobchack 
claims that an animal is not of the same fictional order as a human char-
acter. Upon the event of the rabbit’s death, its status as a “quasi charac-
ter” quickly transitions to that of a real “once-living creature;” the animal 
dies in the fictional world while also dying for the production of fiction, 
“in excess and outside of the irreal fictional world, in the space of the real, 
where death counts because it is irreversible” (Sobchack 2004: 269–270). 
Animal death thus serves as an interruption of the fiction by the profilmic 
real. Given the inability to “fix” the moment of human dying, Catherine 
Wheatley writes (2011: 97), “the blow that strikes down the living [non-
human] animal is the violent equivalent of the penetration shot, offering 
‘proof’ of an act which shocks by its very reality.” However, this func-
tions on different registers for the classical film from for the contempo-
rary. Wheatley finds many examples of animal death in contemporary art 
cinema (2011: 97), and Reygadas’s films fall in with this trend.
In Eisenstein’s and Renoir’s films, the purpose of this factual interrup-
tion is to grant the irreal an index which could then elicit similar bod-
ily and cognitive responses from the spectator when they later witness 
7 I follow Sobchack (2004: 258n1) in the use of irreal, as a contrary to the real and not 
its direct contradiction, as in the “not real” of an impossible or fantastic fiction. In an irreal 
fiction “the real is ‘bracketed’ and put off to the side as a noncriterion of the work’s mean-
ing, coherence, or plausibility.”

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   83
the fictional death of a human character. Reygadas’s most recent feature 
touches upon something different: a documentary quality whereby the 
animals appear to exist for themselves. To make this point, it is helpful to 
contrast Post Tenebras Lux’s animals with those of Reygadas’s debut fea-
ture. In Japón the unnamed protagonist, on his journey toward a remote 
village to contemplate and commit suicide, encounters a child with a 
wounded bird. The child states that he is not strong enough himself to 
pull the head from the bird’s body to end its suffering. The man takes 
the animal and without hesitation accomplishes the task himself. A close-
up of the head tossed to ground, the bird gasping for breath, concludes 
the scene. The significance of this act is clear.
Two more instances of animal death punctuate the film but function 
less powerfully as intrusions of the real. Prior to his final descent to the 
village, the man wakes one morning to the agonizing screeches of a pig, 
the animal on its way to becoming human food. He then enters a butch-
er’s shop and we see close-ups of various parts of animals. Again, both 
the slaughter of the pig and the remains symbolically illustrate the man’s 
desired death. Further, in the middle of the film, in perhaps the most 
emotionally driven sequence, on the threshold of committing suicide, the 
man encounters a dead horse. He raises his gun toward his own head but 
cannot pull the trigger. He collapses beside the horse while the viewer 
takes in a helicopter shot of the scene, and the sounds of Johann Sebastian 
Bach’s St Matthew Passion fill the non-diegetic air. It is important to note 
the use of rain in this scene, as pathetic fallacy, which sets the mood for  
the long shots and Baroque music.
We should be reminded of Eisenstein’s October (Oктябpь, 1928) and 
the dead horse displayed therein, again as a stand-in for the human body, 
as well as the beating of the horse in Raskolnikov’s dream in Crime and 
Punishment (Пpecтyплéниe и нaкaзáниe, 1866), symbolically illustrating 
his madness. For de Luca (2014: 40) the animal deaths in Japón “under-
score the film’s central themes: life, death and rebirth,” and poignantly 
exhibit the “fragility and finitude of physical life as captured by the film 
medium.” Thus we have two possible but not exclusive ways of receiving 
these scenes: we can interpret the animal deaths symbolically or, more 
productively, as an expression of film’s capacity not simply to represent 
but to present something real. As we have seen in the preceding sections, 
Reygadas runs conflicting modes of spectatorial consciousness up against 
one another, either in the mode of fiction or documentary, and thereby 
blurs such rigid divides. For Sobchack, and this is what I also claim to 

84   T. Bordun
be Reygadas’s aim, the shock of the conflict between one consciousness 
and the other registers at the level of the body. “My goal [in Japón] was 
to make people feel,” Reygadas provocatively stated in an interview from 
shortly after the film’s release (Gordon 2002). “Maybe not feel well, but 
not bad particularly either. I wanted to make them just feel something. 
Being numb is bad. Feeling something is good […] Animals die. We 
die. But we just don’t think about it. [The film] was for making peo-
ple think about it for a while.” When I hear the pig squeal or see the 
horse’s innards in Japón, I am still nauseated—I also feel my own inter-
nal organs and wonder about their size and shape, and as I struggle with 
relatively minor health issues, I am perturbed that I too will end up like 
Reygadas’s animals.
Although there are no animals killed or any animal carcasses in Post 
Tenebras Lux, horses, cattle, and Reygadas’s dogs gallop, meander, and 
dart on-screen in a number of sequences. Rut introduces us to all three 
species in the opening episode, and here we should note that Reygadas 
devotes as much attention to the non-human animals as he does to his 
daughter. Rut’s sense of wonder and spontaneity at these creatures trans-
lates into what the camera sees as well. Of all the animals, the dogs are 
given the most screen time, and we might want to say that Martita is even 
given a minor role. We saw previously how Martita was severely beaten 
by Juan for some undescribed transgression. Reygadas makes no attempt 
to shoot for verisimilitude here—a medium close-up of Juan frames only 
his punches and not the dog herself receiving the blows. We do hear the 
painful yelps and whimpers of a dog as Juan inflicts his punishment. Thus 
while certainly not granting us real death, the scene attempts to convey a 
sense of the real through Juan’s overwhelming brutality and the sounds 
of the dog being beaten. Sound artists therefore figure in this sense of 
the real. I link this extended scene of brutality and its audio track to those 
images and sounds of the slaughtered pig in Japón. In both scenes we are 
physically overwhelmed by the punishment or dying of animals.
Juan’s punishment of Martita is significant for two sequences later in 
the film. After Juan and Natalia have concluded their argument about 
their deteriorating marriage, Juan goes to feed the dogs. He rests on the 
ground with them as they eat, a gesture of intimacy, and a close-up of 
one of the dogs ripping apart its meal may be Juan’s POV (Fig. 3.5). 
Proceeding Juan’s deathbed speech, this gesture of intimacy repeats 
itself. The protagonist’s last words are a request to bring him the dogs. 
Reygadas then spends some long seconds with several of the animals, a 

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   85
clear expression of the profilmic event; the dogs look at something out 
of frame, probably Reygadas himself, instructing them to keep still. Each 
animal is given a ghostly doubling by the camera lens (Fig. 3.6).
In both Japón and Post Tenebras Lux, then, the animals do not merely 
serve as substitutes for an impossible-to-film (ethically and aesthetically) 
human death. Their status as quasi-characters begs the question of what 
constitutes the fiction/documentary divide, and in the case of the lat-
ter film, the intimacies possible between human and non-animal humans. 
As if Martita was a human member of the family, Juan stresses after her 
beating: “I always hurt […] the one I love most.” For André Bazin, 
writes Jennifer Fay (2008), there is a strong relationship between realist 
aesthetics and the depiction of animals. One of the things Bazin loved 
most about cinema was precisely its capacity to place human and non-
human animals together in unique, if not dangerous, framings. The tra-
dition of Bazinian realism echoes in yet another way in Reygadas’s work; 
both critic and director have warm places in their hearts for animals.
Fig. 3.5  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

86   T. Bordun
Fictional Death: “Come Play with Us Cos Dad  
Has Died Already”
In Reygadas’s four features, human death is represented in several forms. 
Ascen’s death at the end of Japón shows her nephew’s tractor over-
turned, scattering the pieces of her former house across a long stretch of 
road. The scene is six minutes in length, as the camera tracks forward on 
a railway line and rotates 360 degrees to the music of Avro Pärt, before 
eventually coming to rest on Ascen’s corpse. The impossibility of such an 
accident is exaggerated by the unconventional camerawork.
Silent Light shows us the moments prior to Esther’s death and her 
funeral. In the first of these two scenes, during a torrential downpour, 
Esther leaps from her husband’s slowly moving vehicle and rushes into 
the woods. She props herself against a tree and weeps uncontrollably as 
rain splashes against the camera lens—yet another indication of Reygadas’s 
investment in the profilmic event. Johan soon goes in search of his wife; 
Fig. 3.6  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   87
he carries her back to the side of the road, and two Mexicans arrive to 
help. Rather than the death itself being shown, a doctor later informs 
Johan that his wife has passed away. In a nod to Dreyer’s Ordet (1955), 
Esther is resurrected by a kiss from Marianne, her husband’s mistress.
Battle in Heaven depicts death with a heightened display of verisi-
militude. This likeness to reality was used because of the gravity of the 
depicted act. Marcos visits Ana as a last gesture before his consenting 
arrest. She passionately kisses his lips, but he does not respond similarly, 
and she tells him to leave. She then appears satisfied by his departure. The 
next scene has Marcos in the hall urinating in his pants. This is a revela-
tory moment, for he returns to the apartment, fetches a knife, and makes 
a preliminary jab at Ana, gashing her arm badly; shocked by the action, 
she struggles briefly as Marcos plunges the weapon into her. His left arm 
wraps around her and there is less a stabbing motion than a forced entry. 
She collapses and blood pools all around the floor. Marcos retrieves his 
hanging coat, left behind after his first exit, and steps out of the door.
The violence displayed in extreme cinema has an intensity that reg-
isters viscerally, totally unlike the spectacle of horror films. The gash 
on Ana’s arm at first left me motionless, and the attempted struggle to 
save her own life was an instant of anxiety for me. The tension of the 
scene, exhibited initially by Marcos’s indifference to her kiss and subse-
quent urination, erupted into an intensely affective moment as the knife 
entered Ana’s body. I received a similar sensation in Post Tenebras Lux 
is the sensation during the final shot of Breillat’s Perfect Love (Parfait 
Amour, 1996), in which the lead male, in close-up, excessively stabs his 
lover, who has repeatedly humiliated him. This excessiveness, and the 
murder we had anticipated since the beginning of Perfect Love (it begins 
in grainy documentary style with police asking the man to re-enact the 
crime), comes out from the screen to haunt us as we enter it to feel the 
images viscerally.
Marcos, psychologically unstable after the murder of Ana, joins the 
procession of individuals to church to celebrate the Lady of Guadalupe. 
He dons a head cover and attempts to trek the sidewalks and steps of 
the church on his knees. At one point he missteps and smacks his skull 
on the concrete ground. He does eventually reach the church and finds 
himself a seat in a pew. Bertha, Marcos’s wife, soon finds him kneeling 
and inert (his head still covered and bloody). She nudges Marcos and he 
falls over, dead. Thus we again miss the precise moment of a character’s 
passing from existence to non-existence.

88   T. Bordun
Post Tenebras Lux has two deaths: Juan’s and Seven’s. The one follows 
the typical pattern of representation in Reygadas’s oeuvre, while the latter 
is expressed through CGI.
When Juan returns home to retrieve the forgotten stroller and other 
items, the camera positions itself at a distance from the family’s household 
and maintains that distance for most of the scene. As Juan confronts Seven 
and his partner in crime, only then do we get a medium shot, used to 
establish a stronger sense of danger and urgency. Seven aims a gun at Juan, 
and Juan demands that Seven give him the gun back: the weapon that will 
end Juan’s life is his own. However, Seven does not return Juan’s gun. The 
camera repositions itself to the location of the opening long shot. Seven 
chases Juan up the house’s patio stairs and a shot rings out. The two crimi-
nals flee. A very odd thing happens next, a shot that is unlike Reygadas’s 
familiar style: we cut to a view from the floor of the patio, tilted, which 
is probably Juan’s perspective. The refracted lens shows us some trees in 
the distance. This POV shot demonstrates that Juan really was shot and 
is immobile, and we hear Jarro’s voice in the distance calling out for Don 
Juan. We have here a subtle critique of gun culture, and thus after Juan is 
shot and we leap ahead to a routine hunting party, Reygadas suggests that 
the proliferation of gun violence is due, in part, to the willingness of so 
many individuals to purchase guns. He mentions to Koehler (2013: 12) 
that the dominant color of the film is red-orange, the color of blood: “it’s 
the color of Mexico for me, because Mexico is bleeding. More people died 
[due to drug and gang-related violence] in Mexico in the last six years than 
in Afghanistan. Our land is bleeding.”8 So, with this cut to a hunting party, 
we await the result of the gunshot in a state of suspense. Juan does survive 
for one last episode, for one last speech from his deathbed—but the death-
bed is a frequently misused place in cinema. Its clichés overwhelm.
Reygadas knows melodramatic tropes well. Breillat is aware of them 
too, as I detail in the next chapters. Thus when Juan delivers his final 
speech, it is not accomplished with a convincing air, for Castro is a 
non-professional actor. Due to Castro’s inability to deliver an authen-
tic speech, a tearful moment for the spectator is denied, and instead 
Reygadas poses the question of just what we are weeping about when a 
fictional character dies. It is not a man who dies but his character. Thus 
the typical use of pathos in melodrama (Elsaesser [1972] 2011: 509) is 
8 Cf. my video essay (2015), “‘Mexico is Bleeding’: The Films of Carlos Reygadas.”

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   89
built up only to be made a mockery of by the director and his actors. 
To add to the attempt to distance the spectator from heightened emo-
tions based on character identification, Reygadas cuts the scene away 
from Juan, turning to the bedroom window as a conversation ensues 
between Juan and Natalia. Juan provocatively says he cannot remember 
who shot him. Images of the dogs follow next, as I noted above, and 
then we return to an unconvincingly weeping Castro. Jonathan Foltz, 
writing on Cornelio Wall Fehr’s performance in Silent Light but similarly 
applicable here, contends that “Reygadas emphasizes the artificial inca-
pacity of the actor, who performs his sadness but does not convincingly 
embody it.” Foltz calls this an “uncanny pantomime” that creates a “gap 
between emotion and performance that renders Johan’s [and Juan’s] 
tears essentially incomprehensible as anything other than a strangely 
material and creaturely performance” (2011: 157). In addition to this 
immanent expression on the face of the actor, here in Post Tenebras Lux, 
as the representation of death is falsified in fictional film, Reygadas, by 
casting non-professionals and allowing them to test their acting abilities 
with long takes, points to the unrepresentable state of a real individual’s 
decline into death.
We learn about Juan’s passing from Eleazar. The little boy and his sister 
are not yet of an age to understand death and dying, and so their daily 
playtime continues on. Seven approaches, looking for Juan. Eleazar men-
tions his father’s passing and it seems secondary—the key thing is that 
Seven should play with him instead: “Come play with us cos Dad has died 
already.” The scene is presented not with shot-reverse-shot technique; 
when Eleazar delivers the news, we stay with him and Rut as they continue 
to play. What is Seven’s reaction? Again, an attempt for a non-professional 
to display such an emotion would be painfully faked. We cut instead to 
Seven’s empty home—his wife and children have left—then to the mur-
derer walking with purpose through the field in which the film began.
Reygadas cuts to close-ups of various parts of Seven’s/Torres’s body, 
shot with the refracted lens: the back of his legs, his hands, his right ear, 
his thighs and crotch (Figs. 3.7,3.8). Martine Beugnet argues that the 
close-up is a haptic image which frees the figure from its subjectivity. “It 
is here, at the point where the boundary between subject and object of 
the gaze appears to dissolve, that cinema most powerfully evokes a sense 
of loss of self, where the cinematic experience offers itself most strik-
ingly as an exultant combination of pleasure and terror” (Beugnet 2007: 

90   T. Bordun
89). Indeed, Gilles Deleuze ([1983] 1986: 70) calls the close-up the 
“affection image” par excellence. By fragmenting the body, shooting in 
close-up, and allowing the camera to contemplate Seven’s limbs for an 
excessive number of seconds, Reygadas also participates in the more gen-
eral tendency of recent art cinema observed by Beugnet (2007: 95)—she 
describes this common trait as an “opening […] the gaze [to] the realm 
of the ‘body-landscape’.” The body-landscape is an image or series of 
images whereby the camera “wanders” or “lingers” on a body, exceeding 
narrative motivation, and therefore allowing the body to exist for itself. 
Reygadas’s close-ups operate according to this logic.
Seven comes to a standstill and gazes out across the landscape. His 
hands twitch; they are readying themselves. In Reygadas’s oeuvre we 
have seen consistent employment of pathetic fallacy, and the scene of 
Seven’s suicide follows this pattern. We remember that Seven is a wood-
cutter. Shots of various trees tumbling down then symbolically prepare 
Fig. 3.7  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   91
the man for his imminent death. Since these trees fall without the visible 
aid of humans, we can see that even within a diegetically real sequence 
Reygadas turns to fantasy. For Seven, this fantasy takes on a literalness: 
we have no marker that these trees are diegetically unreal, either via a 
sound, an edit, or the style of cinematography. They simply point to 
Seven’s immanent experience.
In yet another effort to counter narrative cinema’s tendency to try 
to present death accurately, as if it were happening in the profilmic, 
Reygadas turns to CGI in Post Tenebras Lux. This is the first film in which 
the director has used this technology. We were introduced to a CGI devil 
in the opening of the film proper, the very antithesis of realist aesthet-
ics. The devil had no resemblance or likeness to a made-up, costumed, 
or realistically drawn devil. It radiated redness, lit up the dark room, 
and bounced its color off objects and walls. Bradshaw finds (2013) this 
scene to be “as bizarre and gripping as any conventional scary movie.” 
Fig. 3.8  Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas 2013)

92   T. Bordun
But there is nothing menacing about this creature—“I don’t see him as 
a ‘mean’ devil,” Reygadas has said (Solórzano 2013: 53). The devil does 
carry a real toolbox, however (Reygadas’s father’s toolbox to be exact 
[Reygadas in Koehler 2013: 12]), as if going to work, as if part of its 
regular activity (Dargis 2013).
Critics have similarly noted how the creature seems to situate himself: 
he “skulks” (Uhlich 2013), “strides in and surveys the abode” (Koehler 
2013: 10). The creature and Reygadas take their time. The devil’s long 
stroll down the household’s hallway, shot with a static camera, is not 
unlike Tsai Ming-liang’s preference for extended shots of passageways 
and corridors. This exceedingly slow and contemplative cinematographic 
gaze at an obviously unreal image seems to go against both the realist 
imperative and the purpose of CGI. Given a realist aesthetic, we are sup-
posed to be presented with things as such, their indexical quality; with 
CGI we are supposed to experience the sense of something really occur-
ring, usually an image or series of images quickly edited, with reverse 
shots of characters amazed, shocked, or scared by the CGI, and camera 
movements with pseudo-documentary authenticity (Allen [2002] 2009). 
As Michael Allen succinctly puts it, “The success or failure of any digi-
tal image lies in the degree to which it persuades its spectator that it is 
not digital, but is photographic” (2009: 825). Reygadas would seem to 
know this contemporary use of CGI in cinema and asserts his distance 
from it in this sequence and later with Seven’s suicide.
After we have seen Seven fragmented, and after the trees have fallen, 
the camera takes one last look at the character, framing him in a medium 
shot. Reygadas cuts to a long shot from behind. Seven places his hands on 
his neck and appears to struggle; he groans slightly, then suddenly pops 
off his head. Blood spurts from the wound as Seven lays motionless on the 
ground. In typical Reygadas style, it begins to pour rain over the corpse.
For Lev Manovich, cinema has historically been about the “art of the 
index.” He claims that contemporary cinema, with its increasing invest-
ment in special effects and CGI, is more akin to painting than photog-
raphy: the realms of photochemical processes which take an impression 
of reality and computer animation are no longer easily distinguished 
([2002] 2011: 1060–1061). The profilmic event is lost once “live action 
footage is digitized” and subsequently manipulated by computer soft-
ware, argues Manovich (2011: 1064). While this seems true for much 
of popular cinema today, most powerfully in Alfonso Cuarón’s Gravity 

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   93
(2013),9 I think Reygadas offers us something different in both the devil 
episode and Seven’s suicide episode. In the latter, with the emphasis on 
Torres’s body, the shot length, and the treatment of reality as I have 
articulated it in this chapter and the previous one—that is, attempting to 
present the immanent experience of characters, even if those experiences 
take place in dreams, fantasies, and desires—the CGI sequences present 
the digital “as if” it was filming the raw material of the profilmic event. 
This is not to pull the wool over our eyes; we have no doubts about the 
images and their status. Rather, because Reygadas wants us to feel with 
the images and the events taking place on-screen, in the same way he 
films the raw materials of the profilmic event to grant spectators sensu-
ous engagements, CGI scenes are aesthetically treated as really exist-
ing things. Again, the devil and Seven’s irreal suicide exist immanently 
and are themselves real within the diegesis, real for the experience of 
the characters. Just as Reygadas wants us to feel dreams, fantasies, and 
desires, so too we can sense the devil and Seven’s bloody end.
Thus Seven’s suicide, presented in an irreal style, suggests that it need 
not be indexical in the fashion described by Manovich, Bazin, and oth-
ers. His head is torn from his body and shown to us surrealistically. For 
de Luca and others, “surrealism is predicated on the rejection of ration-
ality and logic, aiming instead for a purely unconscious and free mental 
functioning” (2014: 221). The experimental use of CGI in a realist film 
leads us to posit several hypotheses, each an expression of Reygadas’s 
attempt at crafting a cinema of immanence. For Seven, perhaps the act of 
suicide felt like the represented gruesome death; or the suicide may have 
taken on this appearance as if a child were seeing it—Rut for instance, 
or possibly, given the complex nature of the film, a child remembering it 
later in life; or, given the shot that immediately follows the act, namely, 
a cow chewing grass, the suicide is “as if” from that animal’s perspec-
tive. Reygadas does not provide simple answers. What he demands of us 
9 A short film made by Cuarón’s brother Jonas, Aningaaq (2013), accompanies the 
feature-length film on the Warner Brothers Blu-ray edition. The short film functions as 
an alternative setting and story for one of the feature film’s episodes. Reygadas’s director 
of photography, Alexis Zabé, and his editor, Natalia Lopez, both worked on the short. 
Reygadas received a thank you in the credits.
The Cuaróns are acquaintances of Reygadas. Alfonso had some very kind words to say 
about the director’s debut. Cf. Wood 2006: 116.

94   T. Bordun
instead is that we view his films with all that human perception allows. 
Perception is not rooted in a cause-and-effect logic, nor does sense per-
ception segregate altered states of mind. Reygadas’s film aims to con-
vey this phenomenological account of embodiment. Moreover, this has 
implications for spectatorship. Reygadas’s viewers are not held by the 
hand and told the precise meaning or temporality of a given scene. As we 
have seen, spectators can sensually grasp the content and meaning, and 
in turn have an experience of their own motility and spatiality, and of the 
relationship between their body and the film’s body.
The impossibility of shooting real death is all the more pronounced by 
its artifice in Post Tenebras Lux. A death by a more cinematically realistic 
means is moot, for the scene would still offer us the character’s mortality 
either way. Further, an attempt to represent an act of suicide could not do 
justice to the lived emotional experience of a real person. Seven’s suicide 
turns out to be aesthetically pleasing in spite of its distance from verisi-
militude. The film’s narrative (almost) concludes where we began, in the 
damp field, giving the whole feature a definitive finale through symmetry.
In my analysis of the narrative, cinematography and framing, the dream 
and fantasy sequences, documentary aesthetics, and the theme of death, 
we see that Reygadas’s film is challenging and difficult, to be sure, but 
squarely within an experimental narrative cinema tradition as well as a doc-
umentary tradition. Yet there is more at stake than merely my close read-
ing of the film. It has implications for the intersections between film and 
philosophy: namely, the practice of filmmaking as a philosophical experi-
ment. Post Tenebras Lux demonstrates that we do not need verisimilitude 
in the cinema; our reality, as it is lived through the body, is already attuned 
to strange modes of perceiving, whether we dream, hallucinate, or fanta-
size. Post Tenebras Lux also demonstrates that cinema has functioned and 
continues to function according to Cartesian logic, separating dream and 
fantasy states from embodied and conscious ones. Reygadas’s film, in my 
proposed reading, is therefore a treatise on post-Cartesianism. Yet the 
rethinking of cinematic dream sequences also provided a visual descrip-
tion of problems typical to married couples. I argued that issues of sexual 
difference permeate Natalia’s sex sequence when we view it as a fantasy. 
Moreover, while in the strict mode of neither documentary nor pornog-
raphy, given the non-professional actors in the film are still in fact acting, 
Reygadas expresses the social subjectivities of contemporary husbands 
and wives—relationships are still steeped in sexism despite all the progress 
we claim to have made. Fortunately, lurking behind traditional marriages 

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   95
is a radical feminine desire waiting for the appropriate time to actualize 
itself. For Natalia, this time still remains a fantasy, and it remains a fantasy 
because, as Angela Willey argues in her convincing paper on the effects 
of compulsory monogamy on women, “[m]onogamy is assumed normal 
and natural for ‘females’ and so the non-monogamous woman—whether 
in reality or imagination—is pathologised” (Willey 2014: 9). Nevertheless, 
Post Tenebras Lux begins to question the social and cultural demonizing of 
alternatives to monogamy.
With his narrative and documentary aesthetics, Reygadas also treads 
a thematic path similar to Braidotti’s reading of Irigaray’s An Ethics of 
Sexual Difference (1993). Braidotti writes: “Irigaray has been adamant 
[…] that the politics of radical heterosexuality as the underlying theme of 
the thought of sexual difference is a necessary step in order to ensure the 
emergence of female subjectivity and of an imaginary and symbolic sys-
tem morphologically suited to female corporeal reality” (1994: 133). This 
philosophical position develops “the feminism of sexual difference [… 
as] the active affirmation of women’s ontological desire, of our political 
determination as well as our subjective wish to posit ourselves as female 
subjects – that is to say, not as disembodied entities but rather as corporal 
and consequently sexed beings” (Braidotti 1994: 174). Thus Reygadas’s 
film does not help us further theoretical considerations of female specta-
torship: it is about neither the place of women in film, nor the exchange 
of looks within in the film, nor the spectators’ look(s) at the film (de 
Lauretis [1984] 2011). In treating Natalia’s sex scene as desire itself 
within the context of her failing marriage—that is, as an embodied fantasy 
rather than part of the film’s diegetic reality—Reygadas surprisingly offers 
us a filmic treatise on sexual difference in the twenty one century (from a 
man’s point of view). To complete his treatise, Post Tenebras Lux does not 
simply employ the generic tropes of documentary aesthetics to minimize 
the apparent illusion of the fictional film; instead, Reygadas utilizes the 
profilmic event as a style of narrative filmmaking that reveals the illusion 
of fiction. The film then becomes an expression of the director’s social 
and ethical concerns. The documentary genre’s conceit that it presents 
truths is, in fact, all the more powerful when fashioned as a fiction instead.
Now that we have introduced and assessed how one director blends 
sensation in Post Tenebras Lux is the sensation, aesthetics, and ethics to 
produce what I have called a cinematic work of post-Cartesianism, we 
can apply these conclusions to a discussion of contemporary art cinema’s 
affinity (or lack thereof) with other film genres. I mentioned several 

96   T. Bordun
genres in the preceding sections under the larger theme of the avant-
garde: Western, documentary, pornography, melodrama, and horror. 
These brief citations and applications in the film with both narrative and 
aesthetic conventions open up my study to more specific claims about 
the nature of genre in contemporary art cinema. In the following pages I 
will demonstrate the ways in which three genres constitutes themselves as 
sites for sensation and ethics in Breillat’s films. I will first briefly dive into 
the narrative aspects of genre filmmaking. Genre theorists have been too 
hasty to assess and define particular fictional narrative components and 
tropes. The next chapters will demonstrate how Breillat challenges these 
assumptions about the narrative conventions of melodrama through 
experimentation with semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic qualities that are 
conventional to pornography and horror.
References
Allen, Michael. [2002] 2009. The Impact of Digital Technologies on Film 
Aesthetics. In Film Theory & Criticism, eds. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 
7th ed., 824–33. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Bradshaw, Peter. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux—Review. The Guardian, 21 March, n.p.  
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/21/post-tenebras-lux-review. 
Accessed 22 April 2014.
Braidotti, Rosi. 1994. Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in 
Contemporary Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cooper, Sarah. 2006. Selfless Cinema? Ethics and French Documentary. London: 
Legenda.
Dargis, Manohla. 2013. Juggling Primal Conflicts of Innocence and Sin. NY 
Times, 30 April, n.p. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/01/movies/post-
tenebras-lux-directed-by-carlos-reygadas.html?_r=0. Accessed 22 April 2014.
De Lauretis, Teresa. [1984] 2011. Desire in Narrative, from Alice Doesn’t, in 
Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. 
Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 573–593. Boston and 
New York: Bedford/St.Martin’s.
De Luca, Tiago. 2014. Realism of the Senses in World Cinema: The Experience of 
Physical Reality. London & New York: I.B. Tauris.
Deleuze, Gilles. [1983] 1986. Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, trans. Hugh 
Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Elsaesser, Thomas. [1972] 2011. Tales of Sound and Fury: Observations 
on the Family Melodrama. In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and 

3  !QUE VIVA MÉXICO!: REYGADAS AS DOCUMENTARIAN   97
Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta 
Mazaj, 498–511. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Fay, Jennifer. 2008. Seeing/Loving Animals: André Bazin’s Posthumanism. 
Journal of Visual Culture 7 (1): 41–64.
Gordon, D. 2002. These Peasants are the Real Thing. Toronto Star, 12 
September, n.p. http://search.proquest.com/docview/438507282?accoun
tid=14391. Accessed 12 Jan 2013.
Koehler, Robert. 2013. What the Hell Happened with Terrence Malick? Cineaste 
38 (4): 4–9.
Kuhn, Annette, and Guy Westwell. 2012. Oxford Dictionary of Film Studies, 1st 
ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laine, Tarja. [2011] 2013. Feeling Cinema: Emotional Dynamics in Film Studies. 
New York & London: Bloomsbury.
Lim, Dennis. 2013. All the Dreaminess of Reality. NY Times, 26 April, n.p. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/movies/post-tenebras-lux-by-car-
los-reygadas-at-film-forum.html?_r=0. Accessed 22 April 2014.
———. 2011. Violence and Splendor. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Lübecker, Nicholas. 2011. Lars Von Trier’s Dogville: A Feel-Bad Film. In The 
New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck and 
Tina Kendall, 157–167. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Manovich, Lev. [2002] 2011. What is Digital Cinema. In Critical Visions in Film 
Theory, 1058–1070.
Marlow, Jonathan. 2006. Carlos Reygadas and ‘A Perfect Universe’. Greencine, 
February 15. http://www.greencine.com/article?action=view&articleID=273. 
Accessed 3 Feb 2013.
———. [1994] 2011. Performing Documentary, from Blurred Boundaries. 
In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. 
Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj, 672–687. Boston and 
New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Renov, Michael. 2004. The Subject of Documentary. Minneapolis and London: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2013. Carlos Reygadas: The Devil. ICO. http://www.you-
tube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tFqWAkaa8PQ Accessed 24 
April 2014.
Romney, Jonathan. 2013. For and Against: Carlos Reygadas. Sight & Sound 23 
(4): 74–75.
Russon, John. 2003. Human Experience: Philosophy, Neurosis, and the Elements of 
Everyday Life. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Smith, Paul Julian. 2003. Japón (March 2003). https://sites.google.com/site/
pauljuliansmithfilmreviews/Home/japon-march-2003 Accessed 15 Jan 2013.
———. 2005. Batalla en el cielo/Battle in Heaven (Nov 2005). https://sites.
google.com/site/pauljuliansmithfilmreviews/Home/batalla-en-el-cielo-bat-
tle-in-heaven-nov-2005. Accessed 15 Jan 2013.

98   T. Bordun
Sobchack, Vivian. 2004. Carnal Thoughts: Embodiment and Moving Image 
Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Solórzano, Fernanda. 2013. The Devil in the Detail. Sight and Sound 23 (4): 
50–53.
Uhlich, Keith. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux: movie review. Time Out, April 30. 
http://www.timeout.com/us/film/post-tenebras-lux-movie-review Accessed 
22 April 2014.
———. 2011. Naked Women, Slaughtered Animals: Ulrich Seidl and the Limits 
of the Real. In The New Extremism in Cinema, 93–101.
Willey, Angela. 2014. Constituting Compulsory Monogamy: Normative 
Femininity at the Limits of Imagination. Journal of Gender Studies, 1–13.
Williams, Linda. [1989] 1999. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the “Frenzy of the 
Visible”. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Williams, Linda. [1991] 2009. Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, Excess. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 602–616. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

99
Since James Quandt’s seminal essay defining New French Extremity, 
“Flesh and Blood: Sex and Violence in Recent French Cinema” ([2004] 
2011),1 Catherine Breillat is perhaps the trend’s most written-about 
auteur. The overarching thematic at work in her oeuvre is sexual differ-
ence and problems with that difference under patriarchy: for example, 
issues associated with “female curiosity” (Yue 2012: 34), “female sexu-
ality” (Rushton and Russell-Watts 2010: 1), “women’s ‘sexual identity’ 
and particularly the way in which patriarchal society makes women feel 
ashamed of their bodies and their desires” (Keesey, quoting Breillat 
2009: 1). Sex, Breillat observes (2004), is one of the most impor-
tant experiences in life, an experience she believes that everyone must 
have. Breillat and her critics subdivide the themes of her features—
namely, sexuality, curiosity, and female shame—into teenage and adult 
manifestations.
CHAPTER 4
I Don’t Know It When I See It: Catherine 
Breillat’s Pornography
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_4
1 The word “seminal” comes from the Latin semen, something James Quandt overem-
phasizes in his viewings of the then recent French cinema. He writes (2011, my emphasis), 
“Bava as much as Bataille, Salò no less than Sade seem the determinates of a cinema sud-
denly determined to break every taboo, to wade in rivers of viscera and spumes of sperm, to 
fill each frame with flesh, nubile or gnarled, and subject it to all manner of penetration, 
mutilation, and defilement.” The period of cinema Quandt identifies had very little semen 
in its features. As is my contention in this book, extreme cinema is dangerous precisely 
because, as demonstrated by Quandt, one can watch a film yet miss it at the same time.

100   T. Bordun
Breillat’s stark and often obtrusive engagements with sexuality at any 
age has sparked some debate around the pornographic in her work. Yet 
most debates and studies have accounted insufficiently for the direc-
tor’s proximity to or distance from body genres. According to Martine 
Beugnet (2007: 34, citing Phil Powrie), Breillat “does not establish a 
novel pattern but, on the contrary, arguably partakes in a long tradition 
of French artistic subversion.” The codes of horror, melodrama, and por-
nography are appropriated by Breillat and then seemingly misrepresented 
to produce a particular message or meaning about sexual relations: the 
shame of feminine sexuality under patriarchy. Breillat, part of the French 
literary tradition from Sade to Bataille, to be sure, is not a genre film-
maker, particularly if we take genre theorists and critics seriously in their 
definitions. Leo Braudy, for instance, observes that genres are closed off 
places with “pre-existing motifs, plot turns, actors, and situations [… 
that are] a respite from the more confusing and complicating worlds 
outside” ([1976] 2009: 540). Thomas Schatz sums up genre films as 
“essentially [involving] one dimensional characters acting out a predict-
able story pattern within a familiar setting” (cited in Wheatley 2009: 80).
For Steve Neale, on the one hand, generic elements orient the viewer 
and assist him or her in making a film “intelligible and therefore expli-
cable.” On the other hand, genre is also more than the plot, characters, 
and other recognizable traits: it includes filmmakers’ efforts to adhere to 
or surprise spectators’ expectations and theories about generic qualities. 
Of great significance to the arguments in this book, Neale writes that 
“genres are […] best understood as processes […] dominated by repeti-
tion [to be sure], but [also] marked fundamentally by difference, vari-
ation, and change” (Neale 1995: 160, 166, 170). Finally, according to 
Rick Altman, the semantic and syntactic elements of a genre—a genre’s 
“building blocks” and the “structures into which they are arranged”—
are mutually agreed upon to greater and lesser degrees by a “generic 
community” made of up producers, critics, and spectators (1999: 219, 
156ff),2 and this approach works both as a marketing strategy and as a 
2 Altman 1999: 219: “While there is anything but general agreement on the exact 
frontier separating semantic from syntactic views, we can as a whole distinguish between 
generic definitions that depend on a list of common traits, attitudes, characters, shots, loca-
tions, set, and the like—thus stressing the semantic elements that make up the genre—and 
definitions that play up instead certain constitutive relationships between undesignated and 
variable place-holders—relationships that might be called the genre’s syntax. The semantic 
approach thus stresses the genre’s building blocks, while the syntactic view privileges the 
structures into which they are arranged.”

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   101
lens to study or criticize particular films, trends, or movements. Given 
Neale’s claims about spectators’ expectations and genres as processes 
and Altman’s concept of the generic community, my contention is that 
the apparent stability and simplicity of genres is an inaccurate charac-
terization for much of filmmaking and also for spectators’ experience of 
non-genre specific films, the exemplary instances of which comprise the 
chapters in this book. Spectators’ assembly of images and sounds often 
do not conform to the identifiable genres with which theorists and critics 
maintain. As Stanley Cavell put it ([1978] 2005: 9), what we see in the 
film, the objects and persons, are those things which “matter to us.” Yet 
this theory of spectatorship does not foreclose the involvement of the 
filmmakers or the forms and narratives of their films. Indeed, the films 
studied in this book allow, if not command, spectators to remain active 
and vigilant in their collection of visual and aural elements. As we will see 
in the next two chapters, Breillat seems to enjoy frustrating spectators’ 
expectations by not clearly marking her films’ genre interventions.
The following chapter further highlights the porous quality of genre 
and the insufficiency of generalized or universal accounts of film genres 
which articulate a predetermined relationship between spectator and the 
images and sounds. Altman identifies this predetermined relationship 
as genre films’ attempt to turn spectators into a “single homogenous 
block” (1999: 151). Film critics and theorists have differently noted that 
extreme cinema is without generic codes, although the directors associ-
ated with the trend appropriate these codes for their own artistic ends 
(Beugnet 2007; Horeck and Kendall 2011, 2012; Frey 2016: 171–173). 
While many theorists of extreme cinema are content to note the asso-
ciated filmmakers’ ties to pornography and horror, and Linda Williams 
goes as far as establishing extreme cinema as a subgenre of pornography, 
naming it “hard core art” (2008: 259)—a term that never quite “caught 
on” (2014: 15)—few wish to study the production trend exclusively 
from the perspective of these genres.
If extreme cinema is simultaneously pornographic and horrific while 
also displaying a disregard for these genres, extreme cinema has much 
to offer genre theory. I will first argue that Breillat’s films play with the 
semantic and syntactic components of pornography.3 My semantic and 
3 Butler 2012 reads Breillat against the genre of pornography. Despite our disagreements 
about Breillat’s status as a pornographer, Butler and I generate similar conclusions.

102   T. Bordun
syntactic analysis would then make possible a study of extreme cinema 
from a pragmatic approach, the next stage of analysis in Altman’s pro-
posed reading of genres (semantic/syntactic/pragmatic). A pragmatic 
study of genre would consider one user group and place it alongside 
competing user groups to accomplish “a broader process-oriented and 
interactive analysis” (Altman 1999: 211). Indeed, my approach has less 
to do with the adult entertainment industry as it currently stands than 
with developing “broader conceptualizations of porn[ography],” an 
undertaking similar to that of Helen Hester in Beyond Explicit (2014: 
13–14).4 Unlike Hester, who demonstrates that the term “porno-
graphic” no longer only applies to sexually explicit displays and that we 
should therefore do away with the notion of porn as a genre (2014: 
121–124), I demonstrate the genre’s shifting terrain and the merits of 
including Breillat within it.
I maintain the use of genre because most spectators know what por-
nography is today, and because of this seemingly ubiquitous knowledge, 
according to Williams, they are quick to confuse sexually explicit dis-
plays with hardcore porn. Williams thus considers an analysis of sexually 
explicit art cinema in light of the pornography genre a valuable endeavor 
(2014: 9). When one user group attends to the sex scenes in Breillat’s 
films, her works are in direct competition with their preconceived ideas 
and habitual responses to pornography. A definition of pornography, 
similar to other genres, is arrived at via individual spectators’ processes 
of interpretation and prior knowledge of it (and, of course, that knowl-
edge is derived from film production, distribution, exhibition, consump-
tion, criticism, and theory), but, as mentioned above, this does not mean 
that the films viewed by the critical spectator are not without form and 
style. Breillat’s films, by aiming to elicit spectators’ processes of interpre-
tation in regards to pornography and the pornographic, open a path for 
viewers to grasp her message regarding the status of women’s desire and 
sexuality in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Contrary 
to Thomas Sobchack’s claim that all genre films are aesthetically and 
politically “conservative,” Breillat recuperates the genre of pornography 
4 For a quick overview of some popular contemporary subgenres of mainstream hetero-
sexual pornography, see Tibbals 2014.

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   103
from a genre scholarship which argues that the practice necessarily pro-
duces one-dimensional elements, such as plot and characters. In the next 
chapter we will see that Breillat and horror have a similar relationship 
as well. In the two sections of this chap. 1 map out Breillat’s theory of 
pornography.
Spectatorship is a process of collecting and assembling images into a 
coherent whole. This practice of spectatorship was easily identifiable in 
Carlos Reygadas’s Post Tenebras Lux (2013), and my chapter on this 
film sought to replicate this experience. I brought my own narrative to 
bear on an experimental narrative film. For Cavell ([1998] 2005: 253), 
“the idea that what holds a collection together, specifically perhaps 
in the aspect of its exhibition, is a narrative of some kind.” Following 
Cavell’s brief remark, and turning to genre identification, I contend that 
the spectator’s theoretical, critical, or opinionated categorization of a 
film into a pre-established genre or mode is often after the film event 
because the narrative must come to a close. Altman contends that films 
are multivalent in their appropriation of genres. My task is to make sense 
of this in Breillat’s features but not insofar as there is an appropriation or 
mixing of genres to thereby increase the appeal of the work. I consider 
the effect her films can have on spectators’ sense-experience and genre 
classification.
Erotic and/or Pornographic
When pornography abandons its quality of existential solitude and moves out 
of the kitsch area of timeless, placeless fantasy […, i]t begins to comment on 
real relations in the real world. Therefore, the more pornographic writing 
acquires the techniques of real literature, of real art, the more deeply subver-
sive it is likely to be in that the more likely it is to affect the reader’s perceptions 
of the world. The text that had heretofore opened up creamily to him, in a 
dream, will gather itself together and harshly expel him into the anguish of 
actuality.
- Angela Carter, The Sadeian Woman and the Ideology of Pornography, 1979
Before we can unravel Breillat’s use of pornography a few prelimi-
nary remarks on the hardcore genre are appropriate. First, I will assess 
Breillat’s distance from erotica and pornography traditionally associ-
ated with and for a male viewer, and then argue that she overturns the 
laws of that genre and its pre-established film experience. Breillat’s films, 

104   T. Bordun
according to my reading, are exemplary objects to trace just how a film-
maker can work against positing pornography as a stable and universally 
agreed upon genre. Indeed, there are a number of moving-image por-
nographies, and many theorists have made the case that pornography 
does constitute a genre, beginning, of course, with Williams’s canonical 
volume Hard Core ([1989] 1999). Breillat’s pornography is one type 
among many, so my intervention in genre studies is to expand the hori-
zon of possibility for inclusion within the generic community of por-
nography cinephiles and scholars. Second, I will lay out the problem of 
the imaginary (identification) and its relation to the exchange of looks I 
locate in Breillat’s films. Since Breillat places the burden of sense-making 
and organization on spectators, however, there is a chance that the trans-
mission of her message may misfire or be blocked by spectatorial aversion 
to pornography or by spectators’ heightened arousal to the profilmic 
event (the real bodies of the performers). At the same time her message 
can be transmitted only by taking this risk. Mathias Frey summarizes 
Breillat’s philosophy, derived from her interviews, as “experiments” for 
the “benefit” of others (2016: 27).
To think through Breillat’s films, we must first make a distinction 
between erotica and pornography, then follow with definitions of two 
versions of pornography, call them classic or common sense and non-
pornographic. I use non-pornographic as a descriptor of Breillat’s work 
to retain her films’ status as explicit displays of bodies while also mark-
ing a clear separation between her version of fictionalized sexual acts 
and those found in classic and contemporary pornography. Williams also 
argues we should maintain this distinction in our studies of cinematic 
sex. In films such as Blue is the Warmest Color (La Vie d’Adèle, Chapitres 
1 et 2, Abdellatif Kechiche 2013), Stranger by the Lake (L’inconnu du lac, 
Alain Guiraudie 2013), and Nymph()maniac (Lars Von Trier 2014), she 
names the sexual scenes “relatively explicit sex” (2014: 15). In the fol-
lowing pages we shall see how this dichotomy operates.
Erotic art, defined as either softcore or the display of female nudes, 
has been traditionally associated with an embodied male viewer. John 
Berger (Williams [1989] 1999: 59–60, quoting Berger), writing on 
the history of European painting of nudes, locates “the real subject” of 
the canvas outside the object of art: “He is the spectator in front of the 
picture and he is presumed to be a man […] It is for him that the fig-
ures have assumed their nudity.” Angela Carter also observes that por-
nography, up to the time of her writing, has been produced by men  

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   105
and correspondingly aim at the sexual fantasies of men ([1979] 2000: 
533–536). Breillat echoes this position on erotic art, stating the erotic 
“is a mysterious woman in suspenders, spreading her legs, turning men 
on” (Best and Crowley 2007: 59, quoting Breillat, trans. Crowley). I 
suggest that eroticism contains an idea of a composed viewer’s aesthetic 
appreciation additionally, a kind of admiration or awe at the sight of 
the nude woman. We can find this in extreme cinema from Pier Paolo 
Pasolini’s Salò (1975) to Julia Leigh’s Sleeping Beauty (2011). In a 
manner similar to Justice William Brennan, who in 1957 said hardcore 
pornography only has one “idea,” namely that “there is pleasure in 
sexual gratification” (Williams 1999: 88, quoting Brennan), erotic art 
in my definition here has only one idea—the pleasures of viewing the 
unclothed woman. Contemporary erotic literature, by contrast, accord-
ing to Susanna Paasonen’s research on the website Literotica (2010: 
151), establishes that “character motivation, desire, and sexual buildup 
are central, and characters may have insecurities and traumas.” Indeed, 
erotica can be judged and assessed based on the criteria of plot and 
character development, style, “complexity, and nonexplicit elements” 
(Paasonen 2010: 144).
Cinematic pornography is something quite different from erotica, 
although, as Justice Potter Stewart would have it, we all know it when 
we see it. Williams’s rudimentary definition of pornography, in her 
ground-breaking study Hard Core, is what most of us would expect to 
find in a pornographic film: “the visual (and sometimes aural) repre-
sentation of living, moving bodies engaged in explicit, usually unfaked, 
sexual acts with a primary intent of arousing viewers” (1999: 30). 
However, there is more to pornography than this semantic dimension. 
Williams also writes that in pornography, from Eadweard Muybridge 
to contemporary DVDs ([1981] 1986, 2008), there is an attempt to 
find the truth of female bodies, pleasures, and sex generally—a kind 
of science through plot, “maximum visibility,” and the money shot.5 
Furthermore, aligning pornography with the musical, she contends that 
5 Williams 2008: 363n96: “Maximum visibility is the term I have used to describe the 
imperative of all pornography to prove that real sex takes place. It includes the privileging 
of close-ups of body parts over other shots, the overlighting of otherwise easily obscured 
genitals and, of course, with the rise of feature-length porno in the early seventies, the 
money shot […] John Waters has noted that such shots are what make porn look to him 
like ‘open-heart surgery.’”

106   T. Bordun
“in cinematic hard core we encounter a profoundly ‘escapist’ genre that 
distracts audiences from the deeper social or political causes of the dis-
turbed relations between the sexes” (1999: 154). Pornography, then, 
has at least two functions as opposed to erotic art’s singular aim: to 
really move the viewer—in the form of arousal or otherwise, as I will 
argue—and to develop and posit some form of escape but also, para-
doxically, some version of truth. In Breillat’s case, more paradoxically 
still, she attempts to undermine popular conceptions about what a por-
nographic film is while also attempting to transmit a particular vision 
of contemporary heterosexual romance. My reading of this film follows 
on the heels of Beugnet’s remarks about Claire Denis’s extreme film 
Trouble Every Day (2001). Beugnet argues that employing generic con-
ventions in extreme cinema often means (or at least suggests), on the 
part of the auteur, “a critical vision[, …] underlying message, or […] 
underpinning discursive strategy” (Beugnet 2007: 38).
The line between eroticism and pornography is “leaky”—the bound-
aries are blurry at best (Paasonen 2010: 153–154). Paasonen contends 
that, rather than semantic or syntactic elements distinguishing the two, 
the affective dimension highlights the individual’s definition (and expe-
rience) of the genre. She neatly summarizes this difference as follows, 
clearly at odds with Breillat’s distinction between pornography and the 
erotic: “The affective power of pornography depends on the detailed 
yet hyperbolic depictions of sexual arousal, scenarios, acts, and sensa-
tions aiming to turn the reader on, whereas the affective power of erotica 
revolves around desire and emotional realism” (Paasonen 2010: 151). 
The director suggests the reverse is true for her art. Given such a reversal 
of our generic terminology, Martin Crowley contends that it is appropri-
ate to state that Breillat’s directorial brilliance is that she treads a path 
that is pornographic yet not erotic (Best and Crowley 2007: 60), but it 
is perhaps more appropriate to work with Paasonen’s above definition: 
Breillat blends the affective power of pornographic depictions with an 
emotional realism to produce multiple and perhaps conflicting effects for 
the spectator. In fact, such an experience is how some women use porn. 
Clarissa Smith’s qualitative research (2012b) suggests that the interplay 
between a viewer’s sexual arousal and her emotional and critical recep-
tion of a film, such as critiquing plot, performance, cinematography, 
and violent sexualities, is common. I therefore situate Breillat within a 
style of pornography that recuperates the term from otherwise hostile 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   107
or dismissive definitions; I contend that she must be pornographic, and 
explicit, if some element of truth in obscenity is to be found.
In my proposed reading of Breillat, her films find a generic home in 
Williams’s critical evaluation of the body genres, films capable of pro-
ducing intense sensations in the spectator (1999: 284–285).6 The sen-
sation received from Breillat’s films is not the satisfying discharge of 
the “scratch,” identified by Williams in the classic porno chic film Deep 
Throat (Gerard Damiano 1972); Breillat would perhaps want viewers to 
feel an “itch […] that ‘seeks nothing better than its own prolongation, 
even its own intensification’” (Breillat [2001] 2008: 46–48, quoting 
Bersani, 112–143), similar to Bernardo Bertolucci’s Last Tango in Paris 
(1972). We can additionally state the Breillat’s films produce a cinematic 
displeasure, oftentimes a shock to moral sentiments, and it is this method 
of moving spectators which allows her to articulate her message regard-
ing women’s shame, desire, and sexuality. Unlike the pornographic fea-
tures Williams outlines in her book-length study, sexuality as shot and 
enacted in Breillat’s films “is no longer any fun” for the fictional char-
acters (Best and Crowley 2007: 10); encounters are rife with dissatisfac-
tion, distaste, and misery (Best and Crowley 2007: 24), and therefore 
a radical departure from the arousing quality of erotic images or main-
stream porn designed to titillate a specifically male viewer. “Pornography 
is ugly,” the director states, “and I prefer ugly” (Best and Crowley 2007: 
60, quoting Breillat, trans. Crowley).7
In Romance (1999), Marie (Caroline Ducey) appears indifferent to per-
forming and receiving oral sex, cries during bondage, and thinks about sex 
and the relations between the sexes more than she enjoys the act. Elena 
(Mesquida), in Fat Girl, is immobile and in tears while nude; she moans 
in agony rather than sexual ecstasy when the male finally conquers her. 
The woman (Amira Cesar) in Anatomy of Hell (Anatomie de l’enfer 2004) 
bleeds from her wrists, menstruates, and is depressive. The sex in Breillat’s 
films, although resembling the acts we would see in porn—naked men and 
6 Pornography, defined as producing sensation in the spectators, seems to be the only 
universally agreed upon definition. Cf. Ellis [1980] 2006: 29, citing Lord Clark; 30, citing 
Angela Carter; 32, citing The Williams Report.
7 Breillat, in attendance at my panel at Cine-Excess VII: The International Conference 
and Festival on Global Cult Film Traditions (hosted by the University of Birmingham 
and the University of Brighton, November 16, 2013, at the Midlands Arts Centre in 
Birmingham, UK), re-stated this preference after my presentation.

108   T. Bordun
women engaging in sexual intercourse—is as dissatisfying for the characters 
as it is for viewers. It would greatly miss the point of Breillat’s pornographic 
work if we were to suggest she is creating a piece of erotic art: for exam-
ple, feminists who want eroticism as for example, some feminists might 
do, wanting eroticism as a product of and for women’s sexuality and as an 
opposition to male-centered pornography. “To be honest, I don’t think 
there is such a thing as erotic art. Art compromises you,” the director says 
in an interview. “It’s subversive. So it can’t be erotic” (Best and Crowley 
2007: 59, quoting Breillat, trans. Crowley). Neither would it be helpful 
to assimilate Breillat into established definitions of porn: “I’m opposed to 
the porn industry’s confiscation of the representation of sex. For me, the 
X-rated film industry […] signifies the indignity of the female sex” (Keesey 
2009: 135, quoting Breillat, trans. Keesey). However, she also states that 
pornography can retain respect, integrity, and dignity if the performer’s sex-
ual acts are indeed what the woman wants to do (Best and Crowley 2007: 
59; Sklar 1999). But we must be careful in merely nodding in agreement 
with Breillat’s remarks—there is more at stake here than being complicit 
with art cinema trends and auteur discourse (Bordun 2017). Given these 
preliminary analyses and remarks from the director, and following Eugenie 
Brinkema in her essay on the director, I name the dominant genre at work 
in Breillat’s oeuvre non-pornographic pornography. A non-pornographic 
pornography would be a sexually graphic film crafted in such a manner as 
to convey not just arousal—or better, no arousal at all—but so as to operate 
as a challenge to existing sexual relations and the power dynamics therein, 
both on-screen and off. This is a re-conceptualizing of the genre’s syntax.
At a cursory glance, the common-sense use of the term pornography 
can be applied to Breillat’s narratives about feminine sexuality and patri-
archy in contemporary times. But without the (obvious) rhythm of the 
sexual numbers and narrative, maximum visibility, the money shot, etc., 
those semantic elements of the genre so well identified by Williams and 
others, Breillat displaces or puts sex somewhere else, outside of eroti-
cism and sexual arousal and into critical thought. She uses long takes, 
close-ups of faces instead of genitals, no moans or groans except dur-
ing the male orgasm as a counterpoint to the silence of the woman, and 
highlights the frequent inactivity of the female character, always immo-
bile and often in tears while the man has his pleasure. Breillat’s female 
characters are at first glance intentionally passive in the sense described 
by Laura Mulvey in her famous essay ([1975] 2009), but what is active 
in the film experience is not the male spectator or his scopophilia; it is his 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   109
critical engagement with the message through style, content, and nar-
rative. Thus the director’s tactics work together to show that “the tel-
eology of sex is clearly meant to ‘lead to’ something nonsexual—[…] 
contemplation, thought, a gesture of aesthetic or political engagement 
that is not located solely in the lower enclaves of the body” (Brinkema 
2006b: 101). Brinkema suggests the affected spectator is split between 
her arousal, which is present because of the sexualized bodies on-screen, 
and the ideas Breillat is trying to convey through these bodies (Brinkema 
2006b: 101–102).
Like the women separated by the partition in the brothel scene of 
Romance—this partition which symbolizes the irreconcilability of mind 
and body or love and desire for women who still unfortunately live under 
the oppressiveness of male desire and fantasy—viewers too should be 
split. Spectators are split between, first, their call to arousal, the S/M 
images on-screen in this instance habitually linked to porn they have seen 
before or have seen in their imaginations when one says “Imagine S/M 
porn,” and second, the viewer’s forced entry into the realm of critical 
judgment. By the end of the scene, concluding with a rapidly cut money 
shot onto the abdomen of an unidentified woman, a number of filmic, 
cinematic, and social and political ideas call our attention: our visual, 
aural, and cognitive engagement is ignited due to the out-of-place-ness 
of this fantasy within an otherwise realist narrative, the strangeness of the 
setting, the length of the shot, the absence of cuts to maximum visibility, 
and the dismal lighting. To do justice to this sequence of the film, spec-
tators must examine and assess why it finds its way into the feature: what 
is its power, its fascination, and why, if we saw it under different circum-
stances, say without the view of the upper halves, it would be pleasurable.
My preliminary assessment is that the money shot does not “‘fix’ the 
exact moment of the sexual act’s involuntary convulsion of pleasure,” 
as Williams suggests (1999: 113). In Romance it transmits a message: 
namely, the orgasm is on the side of the man while the woman’s mind 
is occupied elsewhere. Breillat’s other films provide additional evidence 
for my experience of this scene. I find this theme in 36 fillette (1988), 
in Fat Girl, and in Brief Crossing (Brève traversée 2001): Lili’s (Delphine 
Zentout) first sexual intercourse is not about her pleasure but ridding her-
self of the stigma of still being a virgin; Elena is overly mindful of whether 
Fernando (de Rienzo) loves her during her first time; and Alice (Sarah 
Pratt) has sex with her young man (Gilles Guillain), then quickly dismisses 
him, as payback for the harms done to her by men from her past.

110   T. Bordun
Brinkema observes (2006a: 149) the complexities associated with pos-
iting the director within a tradition of pornography whose products are, 
on the one hand, easily verifiable to any consumer of media and, on the 
other, so frequently impossible to limit, define, and categorize convinc-
ingly. In Breillat there is something new produced within a field of por-
nographic work, what Brinkema calls a non-pornographic body, which 
Breillat herself has named pornocracy (2008). Etymologically the term 
opposes pornography, the writing about prostitutes, and suggests some-
thing new about art and sexuality. Etymologically the term means the 
strength of the prostitute (Angelo 2010: 50). In my work here we can 
identify a non-pornographic body as, first, a subject in her conditions or 
situation—in Breillat’s view a situation still quite horrible under the vis-
ible and invisible forces of patriarchy. Second, a body can be non-por-
nographic when feminine interiority is fully explored, a subjectivity on 
display and narrated, exemplified most powerfully in Marie’s voiceovers 
in Romance, Alice’s critical reflections on relations between the sexes 
in Brief Crossing, and Elena in Fat Girl, through  the extended use of 
medium close-ups of her face. In this film we do not need an internal 
monologue; Elena’s tears, stillness, and resistance to sexual advances are 
enough for us to see beneath the skin. James Hansen writes (Dooley 
2014: 116, quoting Hansen), with reference to Anatomy of Hell but 
equally applicable to Fat Girl, “the visibility of explicit sex, violence, and 
characters’ varying responses to them ‘allows the body to become a sym-
bol of power, pleasure, and weakness, capable of communication, emo-
tion, and psychological depth—three abilities of the body that could not 
be made evident through dialogue.’” This argument regarding Elena’s 
stillness will be pursued in more detail below, and the fourth chapter 
further considers Mesquida’s performance in Fat Girl as well as Sex is 
Comedy (2002).
Marie asserts, “Sex is metaphysical,” a claim which posits an outside, 
beyond what is presented on-screen, and not for a moment does Breillat 
cease to remind us of this in any one of her films. This is also a reminder 
to be attentive to the manner in which bodies are framed and shots are 
organized, as well as to give critical consideration to the depicted acts 
and events within their respective contexts, stories, and prior and suc-
ceeding plot elements. For Breillat the concealed reality of woman’s 
shame under patriarchy is revealed in and through the appropriation of 
and experimentation with the pornographic genre; her films function as 
alternatives to generic stylistic and plot devices in an effort to generate 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   111
new ideas about the genre as well the heterosexual romantic situation, 
both diegetically and in the world as lived by (Western) individuals.
We are now in a position to assess more carefully the film experience 
itself.
Looking-At Breillat’s Films
Hardcore pornography is a thoroughly fictional representation, an 
appearance of what an actual sexual act might look like (thus the con-
cerns and fears that the genre is also a guide to sexuality). This is some-
thing porn actors and actresses consistently remind us of.8 I put forward 
a rather Platonic account of pornography here (Badiou 2012: 316–
322): what the painting is to a real object, hardcore pornography is to 
real sex—the former is by as many degrees separated from the latter. In 
Breillat’s films there is instead a fictional act that is also a living inscrip-
tion of sexuality; there is a reality presented on-screen, re-presented to 
viewers as the presence of something really occurring, which is quite dif-
ferent from a representation of something: that is, what it could be like 
or containing an objective correlative. André Bazin saw in photography 
the tracing or mummification of things as such, and furthermore, this 
mummification in cinema is not the static image but of duration and 
space. He writes ([1945] 2005a: 13–14), with cinema “we are forced 
to accept as real the existence of the object reproduced, actually re-pre-
sented, set before us, that is to say, in time and space.” It is not a direct 
presentation, but the really existing thing is presented, set before us, as a 
fact of reality.
In this now naive view I nevertheless maintain that the depiction of 
sexual relations in Breillat’s films is fictionally re-presented, not as the 
image or imaginary of sexuality, but as the immediate, on-screen pres-
ence of sex itself as Breillat defines it, an experience of watching some-
thing real—or, if we like, Breillat gives us the fact of her view of sexuality, 
a fictionalized view of a reality seen through her eyes. I will argue a simi-
lar point in the next chapter during my discussion of the sexual perfor-
mances in Reygadas’s Battle in Heaven (Batalla en el cielo 2005). It is 
important to note here that through critical engagement with that reality 
re-presented we should gain valid concepts and ideas about the director’s 
8 Cf. Bryce Wagoner’s documentary After Porn Ends (2010).

112   T. Bordun
position on contemporary sexual relations. Arguably this is part of the 
formal and narrative techniques employed, as I noted above, but Breillat 
also works through classical definitions of pornography and spectators’ 
associations with the genre. Her films then challenge us to organize our 
film experience not as a series of images which titillate or arouse, but 
through her unappealing and unpleasurable re-presentation of the reali-
ties of sex in a given film, and through this re-presentation, they move us 
to dissect if not accept her view.
Her films cannot therefore be strictly part of a commonplace genre, as 
the sex and sexuality would be a representation or reproduction of sexual 
intercourse—real sex and relations between real bodies—but also of what 
is deemed typical for its generic category: awkward and comedic, arous-
ing yet fake, brutal and horrific, sensual and emotional. As it stands, the 
indifferent or shocking sex scenes have no generic or genre-specific home 
in comedy, pornography, horror, or melodrama—thus my deployment of 
the term non-pornography. In fact, they fall somewhere amongst the lat-
ter three.
To tease out what this means for the spectator, and how Breillat wills 
us into an active engagement with her work, we can think of Christian 
Metz’s and Laura Mulvey’s theories of the gaze. Breillat seems keenly 
aware of their brand of universalizing spectatorship theories to then 
make us aware of the power cinema has to foster multiple kinds of view-
ing. If cinema is the unobstructed perception of a cinematic reality, the 
apparatus masked by various stylistic and narrative devices (Metz), and 
the perception of that reality through those devices consequently pro-
duces an objectification of women, or women are taken as a spectacle for 
an active male viewer (Mulvey), Breillat and other contemporary auteurs 
of hardcore art, according to Williams (2014), create films which point 
to the limitations of these respective modes of engaging both filmmaking 
and the film experience.
Metz and Mulvey suggest spectators identify with the camera and/
or with a character as an extension of themselves (Metz, Christian. 
[1975] 2009; Mulvey [1975] 2009). Spectators perceive an imaginary 
world in which they are wholly immersed. The film experience is stand-
ardized in the Metz/Mulvey account, and this attempt to universalize 
the spectator has brought forth a strong critique. Sarah Cooper states 
(2013: 104–105) that Metz’s position is ultimately “blind to the dif-
ferences between human beings, their bodies, and their psyches,” lead-
ing to a homogenizing of the spectator, namely as “the white male of 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   113
a predominantly heterosexual society.” Mulvey, though attempting to 
reconcile gender and sexual differences at the cinema, similarly posits a 
male spectator at the expense of other viewing positions. According to 
Michele Aaron (2006: 34–35), Mulvey denies the possibility of the man 
as object of the gaze and further, seeks to do away with narrative film-
making altogether because of its explicit and implicit ties to patriarchal 
society.
The position I develop, in contrast to Metz’s and Mulvey’s, resonates 
with Tom Gunning’s critique of the former. According to Gunning, 
Metz provocatively argued that modern cinema audiences want to 
believe that early cinema audiences were terrified by the apparent real-
ity of moving images. These modern spectators are to early spectators as 
an adult’s laughter is to a child’s belief in Santa Claus (Gunning [ 1989] 
2009: 737). Yet, Metz claims, the modern audience is subject to the 
same psychic responses as the prior one: “No longer a historical spectator 
in the Grand Café in 1895, the naïve spectator ‘is still seated beneath the 
incredulous one, or in his heart’” (Gunning [1989] 2009: 738, quot-
ing Metz). We see Metz trying to bridge the historical gap between the 
misinterpreted early film experiences—as terror in the aisles—and the 
illusion of reality presented in classical narrative cinema; regardless of 
historical situatedness the spectator remains constant. Contrary to Metz, 
Gunning’s insight ([1989] 2009: 748, my emphasis) that cinema does 
not operate as a medium of “illusionistic absorption” parallels my own 
position, namely, that Breillat’s films “continually remind […] the spec-
tator of the act of watching by a succession of sensual assaults.” The key to 
the critique of Metz and Mulvey is that the cinema does, in fact, open up 
a multiplicity of viewing positions. My aim is not to dismiss these theo-
rists but to place them alongside Breillat’s cinema: I assess which aspects 
of their theories reveal important traits about her films in relation to 
spectatorship as well as critique those which foreclose unique viewings 
and interpretations.
Thus neither Metz’s nor Mulvey’s angle will be sufficient to account 
for the actual film experience, an experience which is determined by the 
spectator for him—or herself through critical appraisal of the forms, nar-
rative, and style of a given film as well as his or her knowledge of and 
engagement with film genres. Breillat’s cinema offers numerous vantage 
points from which to be affected. Her camera leads us not to the truth 
of the sexual situation, such as the fact of the sexual act through maxi-
mum visibility, but rather to a technologically mediated presence of the  

114   T. Bordun
scene of sexual relations: that is, the power dynamics, desires, and feel-
ings of shame. If a spectator is prone to identify with a male protago-
nist, take up his perception of a passive female object, for example, this 
is not the case for Breillat’s most discussed film. There is not a clear-cut 
identification with the body of Rocco Siffredi in Romance; Siffredi’s 
presence next to Ducey is nearly absent as the camera focuses instead 
on the actress’s face, and the sounds are of a voiceover rather than the 
sex act. Efforts are made on Breillat’s part not to “reproduce as accu-
rately as possible the so-called natural conditions of human perception” 
(Mulvey 2009: 717): for example, a look which resituates itself to get 
the best point of view. Unlike the mirror, Metz writes, the cinema does 
not return (an image of) our body (2009: 697), but I argue Breillat 
does return the spectator to his or her physicality. I encounter myself as 
a body and a social body and not, as Metz writes, as the all-perceiving 
subject of the film or as an ego-ideal produced through the star system 
(Mulvey 2009: 714).
Conscious memory (unlike unconscious structures, or repressed 
moments of infancy and childhood) provides spectators a source for 
finding themselves in and with the characters and events on-screen or, 
in other words, identification that fosters the production of thought and 
ideas. John Phillips sees this in Romance, Marie’s voiceover lending men 
and women alike a sense of identification through psychological interior-
ity (Phillips 2001: 133), and Martin Barker’s audience research on Fat 
Girl drives this argument home (2011: 113–114). Women find them-
selves in Elena and, against Breillat’s claims that men cannot identify 
with the male characters, surveyed respondents successfully identified 
Fernando’s seduction and coercion tactics in their own romantic and sex-
ual pasts. Breillat’s men are not ideals but types we recognize.
This identification is possible not because, as Bazin simply claimed, 
reality is exhibited as such through the passive lens of the camera. 
At this juncture it is more accurate to say with Cavell (1979: 26) that 
we see neither humans nor imaginary signifiers on-screen but “human 
somethings.” We see a thing that is both there—we know it is a real 
person—but also absent—he is not there in our presence. In our knowl-
edge that there exists a real person who becomes a star for the camera, 
we watch his performance of a role through “his physical and tempera-
mental endowment.” He is therefore not the character authored by the 
screen or storywriter—the star is the kind of character “real people are: 
a type” (Cavell 1979: 28, 29; cf. 36–37). These somethings on-screen 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   115
are human precisely because we know ourselves and others as a certain 
type. I can speculate that the same identification experienced in Romance 
and Fat Girl holds true for Anatomy of Hell’s male viewers; as Asbjørn 
Grønstad puts it (2006: 166) about the unnamed man in the film, men 
abhor “the truths of the female body.” The unnamed man is of a certain 
type—the intellectual misogynist. Breillat thus counters Mulvey’s claims, 
then, as the male protagonist, with whom we should identify as ideal 
ego, does not have the kind of freedom of the stage exhibited in other 
narrative features. The unnamed woman is in control of his movements, 
his look, his sex. In this way he does not become a “screen surrogate” 
for the male spectator’s “ideal ego” (Mulvey 2009: 716). In Romance 
and Anatomy Siffredi is not “more perfect, more complete, more pow-
erful” than the man in the audience because, in the former, the actor/
character is barely present on-screen (in frame, through dialogue, or 
narrative importance), and neither does he appear omnipotent in either 
feature as his sexuality, strength, composure and “manliness” are at best 
questionable.
We can distance ourselves from the look of Metz’s and Mulvey’s 
voyeur if we return to Breillat’s female characters, who exhibit height-
ened indifference, passiveness, and a lack of enthusiasm. Paul Willemen 
([1980] 2006: 50–51, 54) and Slavoj Žižek (1991: 110–111, 180n6) 
note the power of the fourth look in porn,9 the seductive look back at 
the spectator by the performer, which both situates the performer on-
screen as “to-be-looked-at” and throws the experience of film off-kilter 
as the absent performer seems to be made aware of the spectator, who, 
in seeing the fourth look, now experiences the “to-be-looked-at-ness” 
himself. But the actresses and characters in Breillat’s films are not there 
to be looked at by other characters, or there for spectators’ scopophilia 
or narcissistic ego (Mulvey 2009: 714, 721), and neither do they make 
us aware of their absent presence by the fourth look. No one part of 
the body is emphasized in Romance, as Beugnet and Phillips argue 
(Beugnet 2007: 48; Phillips 2001: 135), and efforts are made in Fat 
9 Cf. Heath [1977] 1981, 119–121, ellipses in text. “Classically, cinema turns on a series 
of ‘looks’ which join, cross through and relay one another. Thus: (1) the camera looks (a 
metaphor assumed by the camera) […] at someone, something: the profilmic; (2) the spec-
tator looks […] at—or on—the film; (3) each of the characters in the film looks … at other 
characters, things: the intradiegetic.”

116   T. Bordun
Girl to conceal rather than reveal both Elena’s and Anaïs’s bodies.10 
Moreover, through the twist at the end of this latter film Breillat unveils 
the story’s revelatory power by concealing her message. This message 
requires viewers to decode it: to use their cognitive faculties to make 
sense of it. I turn to this revealing and concealing in this film in the next 
chapter.
Further countering the position Metz and Mulvey outline as unique 
to cinema—that is, the to-be-looked-at-ness of women characters/
actresses—Phillips notes (2001: 134) that Marie is a “searcher” in that 
she “looks for” men in the narrative. Similarly, Elena and Anaïs (Reboux) 
in Fat Girl are searching for their seducers, and in the two very differ-
ent forms of rape that take place in the film Breillat may force us to look 
away from the screen rather than receive pleasure from it. We see how 
Breillat again opposes the kind of gaze posited by Mulvey: the woman 
is there on-screen “to freeze the flow of action in moments of erotic 
contemplation [for the male character/viewer]” (Mulvey 2009: 715, 
my emphasis). The women of her films push ahead the action or drama 
and do not remain static for us to contemplate. The thesis of Anatomy 
of Hell, for instance, is evinced by a series of looks: in order to feel ade-
quate, whole, or whatever psychological interpretation we want to pro-
vide, an unnamed woman asks a strange and unnamed man to watch her 
where she is “unwatchable” (or “unlookable,” as translated by Paul Buck 
and Catherine Petit [Breillat 2008: 29]): that is, a gaze without patri-
archal oppression. Ultimately this request is left unfulfilled as the pair 
spends four nights together dissecting patriarchy, masculinity, feminin-
ity, and sexuality with no real progress or purpose. Adrienne Angelo has 
suggested (2010: 51) of Anatomy additionally that the look as producer 
of knowledge is halted by the impossible to “reciprocate gaze” of the 
unnamed man, on the one hand, and, on the other, the impossibility of 
him fully seeing the woman where she is “unwatchable.” Thus the film 
ends much like real life—in aporia.
Provided these examples, it seems that the spectator Metz and Mulvey 
posit is affirmed by Breillat to then present to us cinema’s power to con-
trol the four looks, and in this process of making the spectator aware 
10 Alice Haylett Bryan (2013), in her conference presentation at Cine-Excess VII, thor-
oughly disagrees with claims such as Phillips’s—she notes the power of the mirror in 
Breillat’s films to fragment women’s bodies in an effort to critique patriarchy.

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   117
of the cinematic looks, her films are therefore aesthetically and politi-
cally charged. Mulvey succinctly summarizes her essay (2009: 721, my 
emphasis): “It is the place of the look that defines cinema, the possibil-
ity of varying it and exposing it […] It is […] cinematic codes and their 
relationship to formative external structures that must be broken down 
before mainstream film and the pleasure it provides can be challenged.” 
Cinema presents a spectacle, to be sure (Mulvey 2009: 721), but it can 
also present ideas: bodies and narrative can be shot and organized, by 
director and spectator, to foster critical thinking about a particular 
subject.
The formalizing of the content of a film therefore provokes specta-
tors to order and organize the images appropriately and does not, as so 
many critics and internet message board participants have done, reduce 
the film to a series of images and sounds representing sex (for the indi-
vidual viewer’s ego) and thereby dismiss the sexual act’s far-reaching 
consequences. What takes precedence in frame, however, is up to the 
filmmaker, thus my emphasis on the director as auteur: “An image exists 
only when you give it meaning, and that meaning depends on your 
vision, the way you look at things […] Cinema never films reality, it films 
only the director’s thoughts, the director’s vision, his/her way of looking 
at things” (Breillat in Sklar 1999: 26). The way Breillat materializes sex-
ual images is without representation, as in a painting which represents or 
stands in for the really existing thing, but a re-presentation of the body, 
even if it is a powerful and intentional illusion, evinced by the afore-
mentioned films and most poignantly in the preface and relevant scenes 
of Anatomy of Hell.11 The re-presentation then, in Grønstad’s viewing 
of this 2004 film (2006: 166), is confronting the real and abject body 
with the “stock complacencies” of sexual images. While what goes into 
the frame is left to the whim of the director, collection and recollection 
of the images, scenes, and sequences are part of spectators’ active par-
ticipation in the meaning-generating quality of the cinema. Grønstad’s 
claim clearly has to do with the collecting of images, some of which are 
11 Preface to Breillat’s Anatomy of Hell: “Cinema is an illusion and is based not on ‘true 
stories’ or some kind of happening, but on the reality of the work. In this film, in the most 
intimate shots of the girl’s body, she is played by a body-double. In these scenes, there is 
no question of seeing the actress, but rather a fictional construct of the girl’s body.”

118   T. Bordun
pleasing to the senses, and replacing commonplace pornography with 
Breillat’s images, which are, to say the least, unpleasant.
If Romance and Anatomy of Hell depict re-presentations of the body, 
sexual acts are not reducible to representations which are satisfying or 
arousing for viewers, for they have been replaced with feminine interior-
ity and Breillat’s account of feminine desire under patriarchy. She accom-
plishes this by subjectivizing rather than an objectifying the character’s/
actor’s body: that is, turning the body on-screen into a subject with 
her own desires, as opposed to an object of (male) scopophilia. Both 
Brinkema and Grønstad agree, as do Martine Beugnet (2007: 47–49) 
and Emma Wilson (2001: 154), and the abovementioned Crowley (Best 
and Crowley 2007: 81–82), that Breillat is “interested in the more tac-
tile, haptic, warring encounter between text and reader. She wants our 
blood to run too” (Brinkema 2006a: 158; cf. Grønstad 2006: 167–168). 
Brinkema explicitly makes herself and her affectations (that which is her 
personal and immediate experience of the images and sounds of the film) 
part of the essay.12 If a real in/of the film is undeniable, quite apart from 
the imaginary signifier that I know to be absent from my real experience 
of the darkened cinema and the socially constructed activity of going 
to the cinema—for example, the real of Alice’s/Charlotte Alexandra’s 
urination in A Real Young Girl (Une vraie jeune fille 1976),13 with 
Romance, Marie’s/Ducey’s vaginal secretions,14 Marie’s/Ducey’s mas-
turbation, and the S/M scene,15 and the tactility of menstruation in 
12 This is my one-line critique of Brinkema’s The Forms of the Affects (2014). She con-
tends that affect study, in regards to film, must do without the spectator altogether. 
Instead, I would claim that a study of a film’s affects also includes the theorist’s affectations 
(in response to a film). I discuss Brinkema’s criticism of the current state of affect studies in 
the next chapter.
13 Best and Crowley 2007: 81: “Charlotte Alexandra urinates into the sand: the reality of 
the act itself is beyond qualification, whatever this scene might also be taken to mean. Just 
as the pornographic use of any image persists to haunt its symbolic ascent, so does the bare 
flesh we watch—a meaningless index, the irreducible, resistant, literal body—here remains 
mutely, pulsatingly present, even with its filmic elevation.”
14 Brinkema 2006a: 152: “The truth of [Breillat’s] films is nothing less than the material-
ization of sex, a verification of the ontological realism of the image that is indistinguishable 
from the sticky fluid that calls out to our gaze.”
15 Emma Wilson notes (2001: 154) the scene of Marie’s untying after having been bound 
and gagged to the point of physical anguish. It becomes troublesome because this unty-
ing is staged, to be sure, but also appears as the untying of actress Ducey. Her tears and 
anguish seem “genuine”, observes Wilson, and this is the pushing of performance to its 

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   119
Anatomy of Hell16—there is inevitably a charge produced in Vivian 
Sobchack’s sense (2004), discussed in the previous chapter, when the 
image reaches out to touch us. When the imaginary and symbolic orders 
fail to make sense of our filmic and cinematic experience, we are pro-
voked by the Real, which contacts or reaches out to our senses. We are 
required then to think what it is on-screen that has produced the sensa-
tion, thus compelling us to assess image and narrative in aesthetic and 
ethical terms.
Breillat therefore takes an immense risk. Ultimately the subversive 
quality of art—its intention to provoke a reaction from its spectators into 
some kind of thought about the conditions in which they live—is on the 
shoulders of the viewers. If some assemble the sex scenes in Romance, 
Fat Girl, and Anatomy of Hell into a collage of nudity, or forcefully 
demand to know whether the actress “really had sex,” we may have the 
experience of eroticism and/or arousal in viewing the actresses’ bodies. 
Matthias Frey observes that for many spectators and fans of extreme cin-
ema, these films “literally function as pornography” (2016: 203). Other 
spectators—for example, critics who declare a film “teen porn” or see fea-
tures as a work to showcase under-age actresses naked—also miss their 
mark. If we collect the images and sounds in a manner befitting the critic 
or engaged spectator, through our attentiveness the images and sounds 
begin to matter to us on their own merits, and not through their prox-
imity to habituated viewing positions and definable genres. It is the task 
of the spectator-critic to remember, to re-collect, and to assemble the 
images of a film in order to “account for the frames of the film being 
what they are, in the order that they are in” (Cavell 2005: 6). Nowhere is 
this a more necessary precondition for viewing than with Breillat’s oeuvre. 
As Barker discovered, her films should turn us back on ourselves and our 
interpersonal, social, and cultural situation. We should see the difference, 
limit which renders the experience of it haptic. “Breillat manages to convince her audi-
ence that, as in various scenes of intercourse, and in the scene where Marie masturbates, we 
are witnessing ‘real’, unstaged physical responses and reactions. This lack of mediation is 
shocking for the viewer… and promotes the film's immediacy, its tactile presence.”
 
16 Grønstad 2006: 167: “What can possibly be more remote from the pristine, impene-
trable non-tactility of the film image than the hideous, all-too-tangible fluids of the human 
body? Breillat’s emphasis on ‘forbidden’ liquids such as menstrual blood, vaginal secretion 
and semen upsets the gratifying exteriority of the film.”

120   T. Bordun
then, between the spectator of Breillat’s cinema and the universalized 
spectator of Metz and Mulvey: the former is granted the opportunity 
to reflect and engage critical ideas. Perhaps, with careful study, we can 
locate other directors who acfcomplish similar feats with their own spe-
cific methods and means.
A pornographic film can therefore be non-pornographic if it proceeds 
toward the unveiling of the director’s version of (likely subversive or rad-
ical) truth—social, cultural, psychoanalytic, depending on what matters 
to us. And it may be real insofar as spectator, critic, or theorist is touched 
by the images and assembles them not into a sequence likened to tradi-
tionally pornographic features, in which arousal is a given, but into what 
they accomplish for other bodily sensations and, through the media-
tion of the body, produce in us thoughts and ideas about the oftentimes 
oppressive quality of heterosexual romance.
References
Aaron, Michelle. 2006. Spectatorship: The Power of Looking on. London & New 
York: Wallflower Press.
Altman, Rick. 1999. Film/Genre. London: BFI.
Angelo, Adrienne. 2010. Sexual Cartographies: Mapping Subjectivity in the 
Cinema of Catherine Breillat. Journal of Cultural Research 14 (1): 43–55.
Badiou, Alain. 2012. Plato’s Republic: A Dialogue in 16 Chapters, trans, Susan Spitzer. 
Introduction by Kenneth Reinhard. New York: Columbia University Press.
Barker, Martin. 2011. Watching Rape, Enjoying Watching Rape…: How Does a 
Study of Audience Cha(lle)nge Mainstream Film Studies Approaches? In The 
New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck & Tina 
Kendall, 105–115. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Bazin, André. 2005a. What is Cinema? Volume i, trans. and ed. Hugh Gray. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press.
Best, Victoria, and Martin Crowley. 2007. The New Pornographies: Explicit Sex 
in Recent French Fction and Film. Manchester and New York: Manchester 
University.
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Flm and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Bordun, Troy. 2017. The End of Extreme Cinema Studies. Canadian Review of 
Comparative Literature 1 (44): 122–136.
Braudy, Leo. [1976] 2009. From The World in a Frame. In Film Theory & 
Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 535–551. New York 
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Breillat, Catherine. 2004. Director Interview. In Brief crossing. Wellspring Media. 
DVD.

4  I DON’T KNOW IT WHEN I SEE IT: CATHERINE BREILLAT’S PORNOGRAPHY   121
Breillat, Catherine. [2001] 2008. Pornocracy. Trans, Paul Buck and Catherine 
Petit. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006a. Celluloid is Sticky: Sex, Death, Materiality, 
Metaphysics (in some films by Catherine Breillat). Women: A Cultural Review 
17 (2): 147–170.
——. 2006b. A Title Does Not Ask, But Demands You make a Choice: On the 
Otherwise Films of Bruce Labruce. Criticism 48(1): 95–126.
Bryan, Alice Haylett. 2013. “I Only Like Seeing Myself in Small Bits”: Catherine 
Breillat’s Reflections on the Female Body. Presented at European Erotic Cinema: 
Identity, Desire and Disgust, Cine-Excess VII: The International Conference 
and Festival on Global Cult Film Traditions, University of Birmingham and 
University of Brighton, Midlands Arts Centre, November 15–17.
Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film, 
Enlarged ed. Cambridge and London: Harvard University.
Cavell, Stanley. 2005. Cavell on Film. ed. William Rothman. Albany, NY: State 
University of New York.
Cooper, Sarah. 2013. The Soul of Flm Theory. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Dooley, Kath. 2014. When You Have Your Back to the Wall, Everything 
Becomes Easy: Performance and Direction in the Films of Catherine Breillat. 
Studies in French Cinema 14 (2): 108–118.
Frey, Mattias. 2016. Extreme Cinema: The Transgressive Rhetoric of Today’s Art 
Film Culture. New Brunswick, NJ and London: Rutgers.
Grønstad, Asbjørn. 2006. Abject Desire: Anatomie de l’enfer and the 
Unwatchable. Studies in French Cinema 6 (9): 161–169.
Gunning, Tom. [1989] 2009. An Aesthetic of Astonishment: Early Cinema and the 
(in)credulous Spectator. In Film Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall 
Cohen, 7th ed., 736–750. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heath, Stephen. 1981. Questions of Cinema. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hester, Helen. 2014. Beyond Explicit: Pornography and the Displacement of Sex. 
Albany, NY: State University of New York.
Horeck, Tanya, and Tina Kendall (eds.). 2011. The New Extremism in Cinema: 
From France to Europe. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Horeck, Tanya and Tina Kendall (eds.). 2012. The New Extremisms: Rethinking 
Extreme Cinema. Cinephile 8 (2): 4–7.
Keesey, Douglas. 2009. Catherine Breillat. Manchester and New York: 
Manchester University Press.
Metz, Christian. [1975] 2009. From The Imaginary Signifier. In Film Theory & 
Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 694–711. New York 
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mulvey, Laura. [1975] 2009. Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 711–722. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

122   T. Bordun
Neale, Steve. [1990] 1995. Questions of Genre. In Film Genre Reader II, ed. 
Barry Keith Grant, 159–183. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Paasonen, Susanna. 2010. Good Amateurs: Erotica Writing and Notions 
of Quality. In porn.com: Making Sense of Online Pornography, ed. Feona 
Attwood, 138–154. New York: Peter Lang.
Phillips, John. 2001. Catherine Breillat’s Romance: Hard Core and the Female 
Gaze. Studies in French Cinema 1 (3): 133–140.
Quandt, James. [2004] 2011. Flesh and Blood: Sex and Violence in Recent 
French Cinema. In The New Extremism in Cinema, ed. Tanya Horeck and 
Tina Kendall, 18–25. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2013. Carlos Reygadas: The Devil. ICO. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tFqWAkaa8PQ. Accessed 24 April 14.
Reygadas, Carlos, and Charlotte Higgins. 2005. I Am the Only Normal Director 
(Interview). The Guardian, 22 August, n.p., http://www.theguardian.
com/film/2005/aug/22/edinburghfilmfestival2005.edinburghfilmfestival. 
Accessed 14 Jan 13.
Rushton, Richard, and Lynsey Russell-Watts. 2010. Introduction. Journal of 
Cultural Research 14 (1): 1–3.
Sklar, Robert. 1999. A Woman’s Vision of Shame and Desire: An Interview with 
Catherine Breillat. Cineaste 25 (1): 24–26.
Smith, Clarissa. 2012b. I Guess They Got Past Their Fear of Porn: Women 
Viewing Porn Films. In Peep Shows, Cult Film and the Cine-Erotic, ed. Xavier 
Mendik, 155–167. London and New York: Wallflower.
Sobchack, Vivian. 2004. Carnal Thoughts: Embodiment and Moving Image 
Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wheatley, Catherine. 2009. Michael Haneke’s Cinema: The Ethics of the Image. 
New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Willemen, Paul. [1980] 2006. Letter to John. In Pornography: Film and 
Culture, ed. Peter Lehman, 48–59. New Brunswick, NJ and London. Rutgers 
University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1981] 1986. Film Body: An Implantation of Perversions. In 
Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A Film Theory Reader, ed. Philip Rosen. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1989] 1999. Hard core: Power, Pleasure, and the Frenzy of the 
Visible. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
——. 2014. Cinema’s Sex Acts. Film Quarterly 67 (4): 9–25.
Wilson, Emma. 2001. Deforming Femininity: Catherine Breillat’s Romance. In 
France on Film: Reflections on Popular French Cinema, ed. Lucy Mazdon, 
145–157. London: Wallflower.
Yue, Genevieve. 2012. Two Sleeping Beauties. Film Quarterly 65 (3): 33–37.
Žižek, Slavoj. 1991. Looking Awry: An Introduction to Jacques Lacan Through 
Popular Culture. Cambridge and London: The MIT Press.

123
Catherine Breillat’s most recognized film is Fat Girl (À ma soeur!, 
2001), starring non-professional actress Anaïs Reboux and budding per-
formers Roxane Mesquida and Libero de Rienzo. I set Chap. 4’s con-
clusions about Breillat’s genre interventions into practice  in regard to 
Fat Girl and demonstrate how this melodramatic film also functions 
as pornography. I next turn to horror and theorize why this genre has 
significance for the film’s penultimate sequence. Breillat is not a direc-
tor of horror, but is a director of the “horrible.” With the work on hor-
ror I stress the link between psychoanalytic interpretations of film and 
spectatorship and the haptic cinematic experience, a theoretical bridg-
ing that I significantly build upon in the next chapter as well. If genre is 
obscured after the experience of the film, the address of the images—that 
is, the immediate experience of them—is to spectators’ senses. A haptic 
approach to cinema begins when psychoanalytic approaches are pushed 
to their theoretical and experiential limits. Following my conclusions in 
the previous chapter, my accounts and descriptions are more attuned to 
the multivalent modes of perception possible in the film experience.
Breillat founds a non-pornographic pornography and uses horror 
unconventionally. Obscene and horrible as the pornography and horror 
are, I am nevertheless enthralled by the unpleasant cinematic experience.
CHAPTER 5
Horrible Pornography: Fat Girl (À Ma 
Soeur!, 2001)
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_5

124   T. Bordun
Sexual Numbers
If Breillat re-conceptualizes and reconfigures the pornography genre’s 
semantic and syntactic elements, it is insufficient simply to suggest that 
extreme cinema might look like pornography or that the two different 
modes of cinema may converge (Kerner and Knapp 2016: 125–126). 
As I have undertaken to demonstrate here, given the leaky boundaries 
amongst genres, a rigorous, close reading of some extreme films that will 
reveal their preoccupations with sexual representation turns out, despite 
authorial intention, to sometimes quite “literally function as pornogra-
phy,” both internal to the form and narrative of the respective film and 
to its respective audiences (Frey 2016: 203). I will now work through 
Breillat’s Fat Girl in the manner of Williams’s most elaborate categoriza-
tion of the pornographic feature film. The 1970s–1980s generic feature-
length pornographic films find formal resonances with the musical genre, 
for both have “numbers”—song and dance or sex acts—which break 
narratives or dissolve into narratives to varying degrees.1 A spectrum of 
numbers can be identified: from an alternative fantasy space outside the 
diegetic reality to a complete dissolution of the number into the every-
day life of characters.
What is a sexual number composed of? First, there must be a money 
shot, evidence of male satisfaction spurted onto the face or body of the 
female performer. Second, formal conventions must be met: that is, show-
case differing sexual acts, “offered to satisfy a diverse, but not all-inclusive, 
range of sexual tastes” (Williams [1989] 1999: 126). These sexual num-
bers include, but are not limited to, masturbation, straight sex, lesbian 
sex, oral sex, ménage à trois, orgies, anal sex, S/M.2 Despite the decades 
between this list and my current writing, I do not think more numbers 
need to be added for the mainstream porn genre. Third, whatever the 
sexual number, it must emerge from an established narrative. Stephen 
Ziplow asserts in Film Maker’s Guide to Pornography (1977) that narrative 
should occupy at least 40% of the feature—he does not, however, state 
exactly why this must be so. Williams hypothesizes that, like the musical, 
pornographic numbers are not frivolous or merely spectacle: a narrative 
is required in both genres to establish a number (in the case of straight 
1 Cf. Willemen [1980] 2006: 58–59 for an earlier and much too brief account of the 
similarities between musicals and pornography.
2 Cf. Williams 1999: 126–128 for the details on this list of sexual numbers.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   125
romance or sex) “as a sublimated expression of heterosexual desire and 
satisfaction” (1999: 132). Characters want to sing and/or have sex 
with each other based on preceding events and conversation and, at the 
moment of “discovery” of mutual love or that event of sexual “union,” 
writes Paul Willemen ([1980] 2006: 58–59), “It cannot be mere coinci-
dence that [these moments …] tend to be the obvious points where the 
rhythmical interactions are […] inserted.” There is thus an attempt at 
equilibrium in turning to a sexual number, then returning to narrative. In 
this manner the director can build upon the numbers and show characters 
developing newer and more adventurous sexualities (Williams 1999: 130). 
We will see in the final chapter how Slavoj Žižek has no understanding of 
the significance of the porn narrative.
As an example of porn narrative equilibrium, we can look to a per-
sonal favorite, Gerard Damiano’s The Story of Joanna (1975). The film 
follows a basic premise, giving the sexual numbers significance and 
meaning internal to the film and outside the film for viewers to follow 
with some degree of continuity: Joanna is trained (pseudo-scientifically) 
in sexual pleasures and sadomasochism to eventually assist with the sui-
cide of her slowly dying master. Joanna accomplishes the homicide and 
subsequently, having completed her education in depravity, assumes the 
sadistic role of the master she had just dispensed with. Despite the entire 
backlash against the supposedly trite narratives and dialogue in porno-
graphic features, a story is necessary for the viewing experience to make 
the feature and its hour or longer projection of images coherent, and 
comprehensible, as a finished work.
Given these complex concerns with the voyeuristic and pornographic—
from Metz and Mulvey to Williams, the preliminary examples from 
Romance, Fat Girl, and Anatomy of Hell, and the numerous articles already 
engaged with the first and third films—I ask with detailed reference to Fat 
Girl, working from the conclusions of the sensual, haptic, and tactile film 
experience as well as Williams’s canonical essay on body genres ([1991] 
2009)3: how do the above analyses of pornography fit with the images and 
narrative? How do Breillat’s narratives and numbers displace a sense of visual 
and cognitive equilibrium, rupture our expectations of genre? If Breillat does 
3 Frances Ferguson had argued (2004) that pornography is evaluated within a particu-
lar context. While many interpretations are possible for Breillat’s films, the abundance of 
references to the haptic and tactile give a certain validation to this view and further, to the 
prominence of phenomenological film theory in the twenty-first century.

126   T. Bordun
not represent teenage and adolescent sexuality, what does she in fact present 
for spectators’ critical evaluation? What messages and meanings are revealed, 
and what others are concealed? With the two sisters of Fat Girl under-age—
Mesquida was 19 at the time of shooting but portrays a 15-year-old, and 
13-year-old Reboux portrays a 12-year-old—do Breillat’s pornographic 
shots and scenes empower the teenage girl against the tyranny of patriarchy, 
or do claims of child pornography hold sway given the recent surge of dis-
plays and descriptions of under-age sexuality in film and literature (Best and 
Crowley 2007: 212–241)? I do not set out answer these questions directly; 
however, answers should reveal themselves as I relate and discuss Fat Girl 
and the theory of genre and spectatorship that develops from it.
Fat Girl: Synopsis and Sexual Numbers
While on a family vacation in Italy, 15-year-old Elena seduces college-
aged Fernando at a picturesque café patio after she and her 12-year-old 
sister Anaïs bet on who can get a guy first. The older and more attrac-
tive, we should have immediately guessed, will win this contest with ease 
over the younger and less attractive. We discover, however, that Elena, 
during the long scene in which the older boy practices his charm and 
sophistry, is a virgin, and a conflicted one at that: she is falling in love 
with Fernando, and yet a (Catholic) purity has been engrained. We see 
here how society mediates in private sexual affairs. “[V]irginity belongs 
to society,” Breillat asserts (2004). Anaïs recognizes this, and she seals 
her own fate by stating in the opening sequence, “Personally, I want my 
first time to be with a boy I don’t love.” Elena, on the other hand, wants 
her body to be given to the man she singularly desires.
We have all the necessary components for a (teenage) melodrama 
here, a film “addressed to women in their traditional status under patri-
archy—as wives, mothers, abandoned lovers, or in their traditional status 
as bodily hysteria or excess” (Williams [1991] 2009: 604, my emphasis). 
Shockingly, Breillat will incorporate pornographic numbers to disrupt 
our expected viewing of melodrama, but it is that melodramatic narra-
tive which intensifies the numbers. At the same time, the sexual num-
bers are themselves part of the narrative. For Breillat the heterosexual 
embrace and the form it takes in the story could not develop without 
depicting the act. Since the emphasis is less on dialogue and a causal nar-
rative chain leading the characters from one exact point to the next, the 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   127
body has magnified significance and itself becomes the essence of a nar-
rative, however sparse that narrative may be.4 Such an emphasis on the 
body in cinema is not without cinematic antecedents. Bertolucci’s Last 
Tango in Paris and the late Nagisa Oshima’s In the Realm of the Senses 
(L’Empire des sens 1976) characterize protagonists through their inti-
mate and wordless encounters.5 Breillat follows the sort of storytelling 
opened up by Bertolucci and Oshima, magnifies the social concern, and 
further troubles genre distinctions between pornography and melodrama 
(and horror, as we will see later on).
Late in the night Fernando sneaks into Elena and Anaïs’s room. The 
older sister has told the younger to pretend to sleep. This first sex scene, 
from seduction to morning after, is an astounding twenty-five minutes 
in length. The two lovers lie in a single bed—the young girl in a sheer 
nightgown while the boy, who is older, is fully dressed, and they first swap 
stories of sex and romance. The pillow talk soon escalates into a battle 
of wills when Fernando’s unsurprising arousal must be quenched. Anaïs 
had warned her sister of Fernando’s ruse, his apparent fondness a façade 
for sexual desire. Following a macho proclamation—Fernando enjoys 
humiliating older women who think they are the seducers—we get a 
quick cut from the entangled characters to Anaïs, unfortunately bedded 
on the other side of the room in their family’s vacation home. Williams 
notes the power and intensity of this cut: the close-up of Anaïs in this 
first instance, leering at first then peeping through her fingers, “punctu-
ates [Fernando’s] bad faith, for [Anaïs] perceives the violation [of Elena] 
despite its apparent lack of violence” (Williams 2008: 280–281). The 
camera returns to frame the lovers and picks up the seduction again. We 
have moved from a camera on the left of the bed, in medium close-up, to 
a medium shot from the right. Elena is alone stretched out on the bed, 
sex exposed, and nightgown covering half her face. Fernando appears 
4 Breillat takes a cue from François Ozon, who similarly refuses conversational exchanges 
and replaces them with sexual acts: “for me, these are moments when characters no longer 
project their discourse, but reveal themselves through their bodies” (Palmer 2011: 62, 
quoting Ozon). On extreme cinema and the lack of narrative momentum, see Beugnet 
2007: 15; Palmer 2011: 60; Kerner and Knapp 2016. While I agree in part with these 
scholars’ assessment of the lack of narrative momentum in extreme films, my close readings 
demonstrate that extreme cinema has extremely rich narratives.
5 Cf. Williams 2008: 188, 214–215, for the similarities between Last Tango in Paris and 
In the Realm of the Senses.

128   T. Bordun
from the left of the frame, now with pants removed and a very large erec-
tion, and the camera slowly tracks to a close-up. Through many minutes 
of threats and degradation—this theme of female shame cutting across 
almost all of Breillat’s films—Fernando coerces Elena into anal sex because 
vaginal is too sacred for her; the “back way” “doesn’t count,” yet would 
be a “demonstration” of her love.6 “It is not uncommon,” writes Simone 
de Beauvoir ([1949] 1989: 383), “for the young girl’s first experience to 
be a real rape and for the man to act in an odiously brutal manner; in the 
country and where manners are rough, it often happens that—half-con-
senting, half revolted—the young peasant girl loses her virginity in some 
ditch, in shame and fear.” There is another cut to the younger sister’s gaze 
upon penetration, anxiously flapping her forearm against her face then 
looking askance, as her sibling is raped.7 When Fernando finishes with 
Elena, he casually mentions he might like to marry her.
The morning after, Fernando tries to push Elena’s head down to per-
form oral sex on him. She says she is uncomfortable because her sister 
is on the other side of the room. Anaïs awakes; the sisters have a heated 
exchange. Elena walks Fernando to the gate of their house, willingly per-
forms oral sex, and he stops the act partway out of fear of being caught 
and subsequently jailed for sex with a minor.
Elena’s mother (Arsinee Khanjian) purchases her a red dress later on 
that day, a dress that is short and tight against Elena’s skin. This comes 
after Elena had tried a more proper green dress that Anaïs then decided 
upon as the outfit for herself. The two sisters argue, and this argument, 
collected with the scene of Elena and Fernando on the beach that fol-
lows the dress purchase—the young lovers leaving the sad and lonely 
Anaïs squatting naked on the shore—is the conflict necessary for the 
6 Fernando argues from every angle: sex is not a big deal; all the girls do it; if she does 
not have sex with him, he will find it elsewhere; he is aroused and should not have to get 
himself off into the trash bin; he loves her; and, as mentioned, the back way does not 
count. On children and sexuality, the author and artist Kate Millet observes (1984: 221): 
“There is a predatory energy even in courting, when what is courted is youth – the help-
lessness, the vulnerability, the innocence, the ignorance. The prey can be tripped, caught, 
seduced, tricked, talking into it, and beguiled, like a pocket picked by a thief. There is an 
exercise of power linked with what used to be called gallantry.”
7 There is no question about the rape despite (male) critics’ attempts to suggest the 
ambiguity: for instance, Hilderbrand (n.d.), who writes, “[Fernando] essentially rapes 
Elena.”

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   129
sisters to rekindle their affections for one another before Fernando, at a 
later point, will sneak into their vacation home to finish what he began. 
An unidentified evening some days later, Elena will make a gift of her vir-
ginity or, better, will exchange it for a promise.
The second number: Anaïs, alone in the bathroom, lifts her shirt to 
expose her breasts for herself, the mirror, and viewers. She names the 
person in the mirror putain [whore] …
Number three: in the shared bedroom, this time without the end-
less minutes of badgering and coercion, the camera is again on the right 
side of Elena’s bed and she is fully nude. Kneeling between her legs, 
Fernando rolls on a condom. Akin to the first sex scene, the camera 
slowly tracks into the lovers, medium close-up, and Elena’s new engage-
ment ring screams for our attention. “I’m scared,” Elena whispers, “Be 
gentle.” Fernando replies, “No. One hard push is best, then it’s over.” 
He penetrates. Cut to Anaïs, turned away from the event, sobbing and 
wiping tears from her eyes. At the far side of the room, slightly out of 
focus, the camera shoots the calves and feet of Fernando and Elena; the 
former groans with pleasure and the latter cries out in pain. The camera 
stays with Anaïs until Fernando lets out that final grunt of satisfaction. 
Her crying slowly recedes.
Pornography “Too Late!”
Douglas Keesey is incorrect in naming Anaïs’s look as a register of “her 
sister’s pain” in the first number (2009: 45). Anaïs’s face exhibits and 
makes pronounced her already established cynical outlook on love, as well 
as exhibiting the maturity of a parent, expressing both disappointment 
and an “I told you so” as the cries escape Elena’s mouth and reverber-
ate in the room. Breillat notes (2011c) of the relationship between the 
sisters: Anaïs is “like a judge who shows no mercy. She sees [the real rela-
tions between Elena and Fernando] and experiences it. It’s unbearable.” 
Anaïs’s expression stems from her earlier, and shown again later as well, 
questioning of Elena’s foolishness and gullibility. She is “more intelli-
gent about the world” and “She’s much more lucid and mature” than 
her older sister (Breillat 2011c). Here the reality of the situation (the 
coercion and dupery) is “translated into truth” by shifting the frame to 
Anaïs’s perspective (Best and Crowley 2007: 65). The rebellious Anaïs 
possesses the objective perspective on Elena’s conformist behavior, 
especially when an object with the most sacred value—the engagement 

130   T. Bordun
ring—is offered to Elena by Fernando, more or less to purchase her vir-
ginity, a deflowering that occurs on the lovers’ second late-night rendez-
vous.8 Trevor H. Maddock and Ivan Krisjansen accurately observe: “The 
defilement Anaïs must witness is mere confirmation of what she already 
knows. Hers is the innocent knowledge of a child who is not fooled by 
the allure of utilitarian existence. She waits [or gazes], all the while know-
ing the truth of sexual relations” (2003: 176). Anaïs’s perspective was 
also my own during that first viewing: the melodramatic appears in the 
diegesis in the situatedness of Anaïs, who knows what is happening and at 
the same time with spectators who weep because we too know the truth 
of Elena’s situation.
Maddock and Krisjansen’s reflection is reiterated in the scene located 
temporally between the first and second sexual event: that is, in the same 
sequence as the second sexual number, Elena and Anaïs staring into a 
mirror cheek to cheek. Elena muses on their differences: “No one would 
think we’re sisters… It’s funny, we really have nothing in common.” 
Following these comments they bridge differences and assert same-
ness, developing what Keesey argues (2009: 53) is one soul in two bod-
ies, “one soul split between dreaming and dreading, each sister feeling 
the other’s physical longings and apprehensions because they are also 
her own.”9 But Anaïs reasserts the dual nature of this singular soul they 
share, suggesting, “at times I have the feeling you’re the exact opposite.” 
This is the apparent truth Anaïs is aware of, and also their marked dif-
ference: Elena’s illusion of love divides them existentially, and Anaïs is 
disturbed at having watched her sister’s dignity shattered “as Elena forces 
herself to believe Fernando’s lies in order to license her desire to be sex-
ual with him” (Horeck 2010: 205). The film is thus an outcry, and per-
haps a rallying cry, for daughters, mothers, and siblings to protect the 
girls and women they love as well as shatter the sexual scripts of many 
Western men.
Much has been made of Anaïs’s gaze in the two sex scenes that occur 
in their room late at night. Keesey may be right about Anaïs register-
ing her sister’s pain in the second sex scene, Elena’s loss of virginity, 
8 Beauvoir writes (1989: 393): “Women who were defiant and unbending with a lover 
have been transformed by a wedding ring – happy, flattered, with clear conscience, all their 
inhibitions gone.” For a more detailed analysis of Elena’s engagement ring, see Keesey 
2009: 48–49.
9 Cf. Breillat 2011d: 12–13; 2011c.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   131
when the cut to Anaïs takes us to her tears. But the intimate scene, more 
pronounced as it gets re-envisioned and re-performed in Sex is Comedy 
(2002) by Mesquida and Grégoire Colin, reinforces the recent theories 
which argue that spectators are embodied and sensuously effected by film 
images and sounds—I, as a viewer and voyeur, intrude upon the other-
wise private event of seduction (coercion) and rape.10 Anaïs’s unwanted 
presence in the room intensifies the unfortunately commonplace act 
because her presence is simultaneously the viewer’s. She does not 
cry in the first number; Anaïs and the audience are not yet sure about 
Fernando and Elena’s romance, how it will shape up, turn out. Will this 
couple find love, or will their love be torn apart by social and cultural 
forces, as in the many melodramas we have seen before? It is only in the 
second sexual act that we become emotional, get choked up over Elena’s 
gullibility, her defloration, because we, alongside Anaïs, have seen her 
mental and physical rape and have done nothing to stop it—whether the 
film is a tear-jerker or not is answered with certainty by this point.
In Fat Girl, with the long duration of shots, we do not see penetra-
tion or many of Fernando’s thrusts in either scene, but there is never-
theless something pornographic in this melodrama. Visibility has not 
been maximized, and there is no cinematic pleasure or arousal. This is 
the unique feature of extreme cinema. While we and Anaïs pretend not 
to notice the acts taking place between Fernando and Elena, Breillat has 
nevertheless convinced us of the sex act over there on the other side of 
the room without resorting to close-ups of genitals and the required 
money shot.11 While the spectator and Anaïs are pretending to be asleep 
and not to notice what is taking place between the aggressor and his vic-
tim, a pretended sleep that distances us from responsibility, we do hear 
Fernando grunting.
Williams spends some pages in Hard Core noting the importance 
of sound for pornographic films. The inclusion of sound is additional 
10 This is how Mulvey ([1975] 2009: 714, italics mine) describes the experience of cin-
ema itself: “[T]he extreme contrast between the darkness of the auditorium (which also 
isolates the spectators from one another) and the brilliance of the shifting patterns of light 
and shade on the screen helps to promote the illusion of voyeuristic separation. Although 
the film is really being shown, is there to be seen, conditions of screen and narrative con-
ventions give the spectator an illusion of looking in on a private world.”
11 In the year 2000 the Adult Film Association of America stated that a film is only por-
nography if it contains a money shot (Cornell 2000: 5).

132   T. Bordun
evidence of the maximum visibility of penetration and eventual ejacula-
tion/pleasure, but not to the same end (1999: 121–126). The “oohs” 
and “aahs” are often dubbed, which gives the sexual acts a surreal rather 
than real quality, much like the music atop the lip-syncing actors and 
actresses in musicals. “Although [sex sounds] seem to arise spontane-
ously,” Williams writes (1999: 126), “they are not as involuntary as the 
‘frenzy of the visible’ of the male orgasm.” Breillat’s sound and mixing, 
on the other hand, are much more powerful than hardcore. Fernando 
has convinced us in both scenes, with his masculine groan, that he has 
possessed the girl and achieved his goal. Without the frenzy of the vis-
ible all we have is Fernando’s vocalizations paired with the reaction shots 
of Anaïs, together assuring us of the reality of the act as well as its emo-
tional and physical damage. It should be noted that the reaction shot 
without the counter shot of the viewed event (rape) is a common tactic 
for extreme cinema’s films. Contrary to John Belton ([1985] 2009: 333, 
334), who suggests sound is lacking in objectivity and authenticity—
much like what Williams hears when viewing pornography—Fernando’s 
grunts of pleasure and Elena’s cries of pain register as really happening 
when we perceive the seduction and rape through Anaïs. We receive the 
sense of “presence” in the midst of an absence of character on-screen 
(Doane [1980] 2009: 320)—Fernando is wholly present, whether in 
Anaïs’s line of sight or not, although not wholly in the frame. Sounds 
are indicative of pleasure in pornography and in Fat Girl, much more so, 
aurally inducing us to the pleasures and pains of sexuality. We will also 
see how this links Breillat to the horror genre in a later section.
Equally significant for a pornographic feature is the enthusias-
tic activity of the performers, particularly the enthusiasm of women in 
heterosexual films (Smith 2012a). Williams does not address this quite 
carefully enough. The culmination of pleasure may require the male 
ejaculation, a sure sign that pleasure did occur, but prior to the dams 
bursting and bells ringing, women moan, groan, cajole and berate their 
fuckers. Performances are thoroughly acted and fictional, and therefore 
the industry can, just like Hollywood, award those who do it best. In 
Breillat’s films, on the other hand, the female characters lie motionless, 
and rarely does the sexual act last for longer than a minute or two. The 
long scene of Fernando’s seduction and anal rape, as well as the sequence 
of Elena’s deflowering, has Mesquida pose in the sense described by 
Mulvey in “The Possessive Spectator” (2006: 152). She exhibits a 
“controlled stillness” that performs the contradiction of “the fusion of 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   133
energy” and immobility. The body barely moves alongside Fernando’s 
caresses; it does not writhe or contract, curve with his hand or lead that 
hand to other parts of the skin. Her posed stillness marks part of the 
film’s affect of trauma and of sorrow—the pose of a performer is surely 
a formal quality of the scene (Brinkema 2014: 109). In the first sexual 
number, Elena covers her face to hide her shame and terror, and tears 
run down her cheeks after the repeated verbal assaults by Fernando, who 
argues like a lawyer, the profession he is training for in college. But Elena 
cannot resolve or find the language to resist. Jean-François Lyotard calls 
such a situation the differend, a dilemma in which the wronged party 
has difficulty testifying to the wrongs committed against them because, 
in Elena’s case, the feeling that something is wrong cannot quite be 
expressed in comprehensible and transmittable language (Lyotard 
1988: 12, 22, 23). The sexual act should not come to fruition—this 
much Elena knows in the first number. How to defend herself against 
her assailant becomes the problem, eventually resolved by giving into his 
advances.
Mesquida performs this stillness for her second sex scene addition-
ally, with a quietness of body but the paradox of love, desire, and fear 
spinning in her mind. The scene begins with her splayed out completely 
naked and completely immobile on the bed. Fernando, as in the first 
scene, appears with a large erection—his transcendence, de Beauvoir 
would say. When Fernando finally penetrates her vaginally, although the 
young man has his orgasm, there is nothing active in Elena’s participa-
tion and the act is without real (and equal) pleasure. De Beauvoir (1989: 
379) suggests that the young girl requires a separation from her “virgin 
body” as well as the neuroses of the mind, such as “taboos, prohibitions, 
[and] prejudices”; only then can there be feeling.
Cinema is the only artistic medium with the ability to re-present 
contrary emotions simultaneously, Breillat mentions, which is why she 
moved from literature to film (Breillat 2011d). It is also possible to say 
of Mesquida in Fat Girl that her face, posed as it is, accomplishes much 
more than spoken language. The close-up emphasizes Elena’s con-
flicted desire about performing nudity and sexuality. In the next chapter 
I argue this conflicted desire is intense in the film due, in large part, 
to Mesquida’s similar disconcerting feelings about nudity and fictional-
ized sexuality. For now, I argue that an exhibition of controlled stillness 
would lose its meaning if shot from afar. The apparent truth pornogra-
phy discovers through the visualization of pleasure in the money shot is 

134   T. Bordun
here replaced: that is, close-ups up of genitals in the pleasurable sexual 
act for close-ups on the face contorted and in tears. Contrary to what 
Beugnet finds (2007: 89) about contemporary French cinema, particu-
larly in Philippe Grandrieux’s La Vie nouvelle (2002), where subject and 
object dissolve in the blurry outlines of a face close-up, with Breillat 
this shot has a revelatory function rather than a “desubjectivization.” 
As with Marie in Romance, Elena becomes much more subject than 
(female) object (for male visual consumption). Her integrity is (initially) 
restored by focusing attention, in close-up, on the troubling desire for 
sex and love, and the emotional and physical rape. The facial close-up 
reveals not orgasmic pleasure, the truth that real sex is really occurring 
in the pornographic film, but Breillat’s truth about physical and emo-
tional rape.
This stillness and conflicted desire is the melodramatic appearing in 
the pornographic. We too weep—the melodramatic weep—as Elena real-
izes it is “too late!” to argue with her rapist. “In these [melodramatic] 
fantasies the quest for connection is always tinged with the melancholy 
of loss,” Williams observes (2009: 615), which is to say, for Elena, the 
eventual loss of her virginity and integrity. Paraphrasing Franco Moretti, 
Williams continues (2009: 615), “what triggers our crying is not just 
the sadness or suffering of the character in the story but a very precise 
moment when the characters in the story catch up with and realize what 
the audience already knows. We cry […] not just because the charac-
ters do, but at the precise moment when desire is finally recognized as 
futile.” But we must not forget in the moments of loss and sadness that 
Breillat’s pornographic, as introduced via Romance, is also the interiority 
of the female character taken seriously; the close-up of Elena reveals, like 
Marie’s voiceover narration and philosophical musings, a subject utterly 
devastated by the force of male oppression and violence. The porno-
graphic in Fat Girl, then, can be a collapsing of melodrama, depending 
of course on which images we collect for ourselves and which ones we 
reject. Alternatively, what began as a Hollywood teen flick turns out to 
be “a much darker view of teenage sexuality”—this “is no American Pie” 
(Horeck 2010: 197, quoting Linda Ruth Williams). The opening of the 
feature, a stroll through some trees and two young girls goading each 
other about their budding sexual drives, takes a turn for the worse when 
those sexual urges are co-opted by male aggression and satisfaction. The 
teen drama withers away, the melodrama disappears, and we are left with 
an experience of a work of pornography that has its apparent truth not 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   135
in sexual pleasure located on-screen but in the sexual displeasure many 
young girls and young women experience. A genre film, especially the 
teen comedy, would not be capable of formalizing this close reading I 
have accomplished here. The same holds for generic pornographic fea-
tures: images of sex, for Breillat, as I quoted above, always lead to some-
thing more than the lower enclaves of the body—we see in these images 
the presence of sexuality under patriarchy.
Yet something is at stake in Breillat’s work that is not just about this 
message. In what I have unraveled here, she is implicitly making a strong 
claim against the establishment of consistent and coherent genres. We 
see in her oeuvre a theory of film—what is common to a genre does not 
warrant a feature being labeled as a genre film despite its use of those 
elements. The viewer is left to craft the genre in a way that matters to 
them; for myself, through pornography, melodrama, mise-en-scène, tears, 
and patriarchy. Fat Girl is non-pornography pornography. It includes 
representations of sex, to be sure, but also articulates concepts and ideas 
through those representations.
It is also true that Fat Girl does not matter to some viewers. Perhaps 
because American Pie was expected, the film was, according to an audi-
ence member at a screening of the film I hosted, quite a bore.12 I agreed 
that, in the terms used here, Fat Girl certainly lacks narrative suspense, 
an aspect the film shares with the film discussed in the second chapter. It 
is not that the film is boring, or slow, or any such negative response. Fat 
Girl operates more along the lines of “tableau oriented […] rhythm.” In 
the dismantling of cause-and-effect narrative, the gestures and significance 
of the performer’s pose(s) in stillness, when viewed rhythmically, “turns 
out to be as carefully choreographed as a ballet” (Mulvey 2006: 155).13 
We can further postulate that the lack of activity in both sex scenes, the 
sexual act itself taking place behind the camera’s back in the first and 
behind Anaïs’s back in the second, is not just the delay of appearance 
that Gunning describes ([1989] 2009: 741) in the early film experience 
to produce the astonishment of film motion. In Fat Girl, and Breillat’s 
other features additionally, the motions are negated or restrained, thus 
12 “Trent Film Society Presents: Catherine Breillat’s Fat Girl”, Thursday, October 4, 
2012, Artspace, Peterborough, ON.
13 Echoing the position Mulvey outlines, Breillat states (2011b), “You have to combine 
freedom of movement with enormously precise choreography, and emotion must be pre-
sent as well.”

136   T. Bordun
fulfilling the promise and warning in the preface to Anatomy of Hell of an 
extremely effective illusion. Breillat has collected here, through images, 
scenes, and sequences, a thoroughly (non-)pornographic work by not 
shooting the activity of sex at all.
In Breillat’s films we have a promise of cinematic sex, yet it fails to be 
represented in images one would expect of cinematic sex. She hunts not 
for the duplication of the sex act but for the act as it would appear in this 
situation, in itself. We therefore believe we see a re-presentation of an 
act that never actually, or really, took place in the profilmic event. I claim 
this is why I found less literature on Fat Girl’s representations of sex and 
its proximity to the pornographic. When the performers “really have 
sex” in Romance and Anatomy of Hell, there is immediate and identifi-
able material to work with; when no one “really” has sex in Fat Girl, we 
nevertheless feel the force and reality of the depicted sexual acts, and the 
linkages to the pornographic and the critical analyses rooted in a study of 
genre are all the more challenging.
Pornography Under-Age
On the other hand, we witness the real exhibition of Anaïs Reboux’s 
breasts. Censors had to address this scene directly, and in the case of the 
British Board of Film Classification (BBFC), they were quite precise in labe-
ling the problem as one of possible “haebophilia,” “a category putatively 
depicting men who are by nature sexually attracted to just-pre-adolescent 
girls” (Barker 2011: 105).14 In Canada in November 2001, the Ontario 
Film Review Board decided to ban the film, a decision that was later over-
ruled (“Ontario” n.d.). But their concern was that of the BBFC’s: namely, 
the depiction of nude girls under the age of 18. Ontario has no clause 
granting allowance to under-age nudity, unlike the province of British 
Columbia, whose film review board, within the provincial legislation, can 
grant an allowance for it if they claim the picture has artistic merit. Like any 
good cinema of attractions, marketing for the film in British Columbia and 
other provinces used Ontario’s decision for censorship to their advantage. 
The scene with Anaïs in the mirror exhibiting her nudity demands atten-
tion at the theoretical level because censorship is a form of spectatorship, a 
14 Cf. Barker 2011: 105; Horeck 2010: 205. The BBFC’s additional concern was that 
Fernando’s seduction could be used “as a script for seducing underage girls.”

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   137
spectatorship that clearly resonates with this idea of collecting images and 
sounds into a narrative. In the case of censorship, then, what is collected 
is precisely the images and scenes that seem to demand cutting, often at 
the expense of the images and sounds that would commonly not require it. 
Keesey, however, who provides the most extensive analyses and synopses of 
Breillat’s films, does not discuss the scene in detail—and neither does most 
of the literature.
Anaïs briefly reveals her body to us. Unlike Elena, whose nudity is the 
precursor to Fernando’s overpowering of her, Anaïs, at least within the 
diegesis, willingly exposes her chest but cannot hold back from labeling 
herself perverse. I named this the second number of the film because it 
links with Ziplow’s advice on pornographic filmmaking: to shoot a scene 
of (female) masturbation and nudity, or what internet pornography has 
named “solo girls.” But what masturbation does for a pornographic film 
in depicting female pleasure through manual sexual stimulation, Anaïs’s 
nudity does for the revealing of an cultural problem: the shame of female 
desire, of a young person’s desire, and the unfortunate position of being 
a helpless observer to her sister’s seduction and rape (Horeck 2010: 
200–201). Her shame is conveyed through her mirrored gaze, a blos-
soming teenager whose sexual encounters have been mediated by Elena’s 
own encounters. She is at that difficult time in pubescence where her 
body begins to take the form of an adult: a body with large breasts but 
a visage remaining child-like, “a ‘forbidden body’,” describes Breillat, “a 
body that is a mixture of a little girl and at the same time an incredible 
sexual opulence” (Keesey 2009: 44, quoting Breillat, trans. Keesey; cf. 
Breillat 2011d: 12). Although the actress was under-age, it was never-
theless crucial to Breillat’s cinematic reality to include Anaïs’s breasts to 
stress the significance of the character’s position—stuck between Elena 
and Fernando, amongst her youth, burgeoning sexuality, and society.
There is nothing controversial about my conclusion that it was neces-
sary to have Anaïs naked. The under-age nudity is as significant to the 
character development as the highly contested rape scene was in Virginie 
Despentes and Coralie Trinh Thi’s Baise Moi (2000). While certainly fak-
ing a rape, the performers fictionally raped are nevertheless penetrated 
and shown in close-up, thus warranting, from the BBFC, a cut of the 
respective shots of maximum visibility (Hickin 2011: 124). The con-
cern with Baise Moi was the possibility of inciting arousal in the rape 
sequence, unlike Gaspar Noé’s Irreversible (Irréversible, 2002), whose 
nine-minute rape “contains no explicit sexual images and is not designed 

138   T. Bordun
to titillate” (Hickin 2011: 126, quoting BBFC). These three cases, Baise 
Moi, Fat Girl, and Irreversible, point to an experience of film as assem-
bling images without the aid of generic categories—how critics and cen-
sors put together what they saw, and further, tried to bring words to 
the experience of the film, validates my thesis that genre is not so easily 
applicable to extreme cinema. But each case here requires the tools of 
the pornography genre to assess its sex scenes. Neither verifiably pornog-
raphy nor art, for critics and censors something must nevertheless be said 
and done with these films in the early 2000s. I claim that the images of 
Anaïs, although exposing her breasts as sites of sexual arousal, within the 
context of the narrative and her clearly troubled emotional state, do not 
titillate. Such would be the erotic for Breillat, as I explored above: an 
art or image with only one purpose, namely, to turn a man on. On the 
other hand, via pornography as I have understood it above, Fat Girl con-
tains a pointed message about their subject as well as a secondary object 
apart from but nevertheless linked to arousal: an attempt at articulate the 
complex power relations through Anaïs’s display of shame—sparked by 
Elena’s inauguration into the sexual realm—for viewers of any gender.
Fat Girl, then, is thoroughly pornographic in the manner I have col-
lected it here, but not exactly in the sense of Williams’s early (working) defi-
nition cited above. There is nothing erotic in Anaïs’s display of her body, 
and even Elena, played by the more classically attractive Mesquida, loses that 
beauty in her inactivity and stillness. It cannot be “teen porn” (Lane n.d.) 
or shot for the purpose of seeing “underage actresses naked” (Blackwelder 
n.d.); nor is it an outlet for Breillat’s “sick rape fantasies” (Anderson n.d.; 
Blackwelder n.d.). In reducing Elena to an object for Fernando’s pleasure 
to such an extreme degree, viewers would find it difficult to be thrown into 
sexual ecstasy. Elena’s breasts, pubic hair, and thighs and register sympa-
thy and compassion for the foolish girl, who is, after all, like many other 
girls, according to a British audience member’s surveyed response to the 
film (Barker 2011: 113). Rather than the original intention of the porno-
graphic to sexually excite, Victoria Best writes (Best and Crowley 2007: 
214) of recent pornographic French literature and film: the “images and 
scenarios […] are repeatedly placed in contexts and perspectives that negate 
the possibility of arousal or else use it to trouble and disquiet the reader 
or spectator.” The initial reaction to one of Breillat’s films, Fat Girl espe-
cially, is that the disquieting features demand a critical response as opposed 
to a quick dismissal, because the expected resolution and narrative thrust 
are too confusing, boring, inappropriate, or offensive. I will return to just 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   139
how confounded genre and spectatorship become in Fat Girl when I trace 
Breillat’s appropriation of horror.
It suffices to conclude that pornography was well used for Breillat’s 
directorial goals. I have argued just how far she is willing to utilize and 
also dispense with pornography, turning the genre on its head and ever 
more producing that effective impression of reality for which cinema has 
come to be appreciated. Or rather, to be more precise, what one claims 
of any genre in Fat Girl is a result of how the spectator, with his or her 
pre-conceptions of genre, collects and assembles the images for them-
selves. The interpretations and classifications of the film can come in 
several forms: particularly pornography, horror, and melodrama. Prior 
to an interpretation there is the experience of assembling images into a 
whole, which, as I have argued above, does not accurately cohere into an 
established and common-sense category. The viewer, critic, and scholar 
are tasked with comprehension and critical assessment through the tools 
available to them: in my case, and I would argue others as well, the 
tools of genre are valuable for accounting and recounting the merits of 
Breillat’s oeuvre. For others, their collection of images and sounds may 
be lost, for instance, with the critics cited above.
Problems with the Pornographic
There is also room for a critique of Breillat’s use of the pornographic. It 
should be argued that she does not go far enough in her depictions of 
sexuality.15 Furthermore, few scholars account for the director’s heter-
onormativity and one-dimensional portrayal of female sexuality, a prob-
lem that should be more fully explored rather than merely championing 
the director’s insights into ambiguous sexual encounters. Lisa Downing 
(2004: 270) tries to link Breillat’s Romance to a critique of heteronor-
mativity but does not strongly develop the argument. The problem 
with sexuality in Breillat’s films remains exclusively heterosexual, and 
15 Aurélien Ferenczi (Wilson 2001: 155) observes, then asks: “One of the film’s moti-
vating forces is undoubtedly provocation. But what if, paradoxically, Romance didn’t go 
far enough? [… T]he film is quickly reduced to a series of scenes which we’ve seen before 
now and then, such as an attempt at fellatio or a condom being put on, et cetera. A sort of 
catalogue, exhaustive but hackneyed, of what can be shown on screen without crossing the 
boundary dividing ‘normal’ cinema from porn.”

140   T. Bordun
thus it does not fully do justice to contemporary sexuality, despite the 
attempts at ethical theory sparked by her oeuvre. Breillat’s films, much 
like generic pornography, hyper-sexualize girls and women to the point 
of stereotyping—no girl or woman can say no to sexual encounters in 
her films, and as a reviewer said of Fat Girl, the characters are more 
“ciphers” for Breillat’s philosophical musings than something more sub-
stantial (Barker 2011: 114). Also problematic are the rapes depicted, 
which often appear more initiatory than traumatizing. Many of her films 
replay the same seduction routine: a rape, and then the female character’s 
spiked interest in things sexual, a feature which bears a striking resem-
blance to 1970s and early 1980s feature-length hardcore pornography 
(Williams 1999: 169–170). And although Breillat’s films end in aporia, 
as in hardcore porn, the solution to sexual problems is always more and 
better sex (Williams 1999: 170). For example, the most hotly contested 
issue in Romance is whether Marie willed and enjoyed a rape in a stair-
well. In this scene we are barely introduced to a man who propositions 
her to provide cunnilingus. She agrees and in the midst of the act pon-
ders the thought of rape—whether by this very man or at some other 
point is left unclear. Whatever the time of her fantasy, this man in the 
stairwell turns her over and forces vaginal or anal sex. Marie shouts “Pay 
me!,” the man comes, and the victimized woman, who by this point is in 
tears, confounds our expectations: “I’m not ashamed!” she yells, then, 
in voiceover, reflects on nymphomania. All this seems to be as a result 
of her boyfriend’s lack of interest in sex: perhaps, if they had a healthy 
sexual life, Marie’s extra-monogamous encounters would be unnecessary.
The difficultly in assessing the rape scene, Breillat in general, and 
much of extreme cinema lies in the question of whether the on-screen 
acts, dialogue, and behaviors are the representations of social and cul-
tural forces or are a director’s adoption of sexism and violence in their 
own terms for social and political critique. This ambiguity in Breillat’s 
work is the reason why film theorists and critics have found it so engag-
ing. Taken out of its context, a scene appears to be ethically reprehensi-
ble or utterly incomprehensible, as the above scene synopsis of Romance 
suggests. If we were to unravel a given film’s story, each of the porno-
graphic elements is insufficient to stand on its own. Each number must 
be collected alongside its narrative. This is the difficulty with the porno-
graphic: its refusal to be pinned down to static images, practices, sounds, 
etc. Art cinema complicates this, Brinkema observes: “[E]ven images of 
art cinema might be read as pornographic, and even stills from the basest 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   141
obscenity might appear to have been formed for sublime contempla-
tion. Such a confusion/anxiety is understandable – the two fields have 
much in common. After all, both art cinema and pornography are con-
sidered ‘adult’ genres, and for similar reasons” (Brinkema 2006c: 99). 
The moments these genre expectations are frustrated are precisely those 
moments when spectators have found a gap in their collection of images. 
When this gap appears, I argue, the demand is placed on the spectator to 
assemble the images until they make sense. This will require the expan-
sion of one genre, as these sections have done with Breillat’s relationship 
to pornography, and inclusion of other genres which are perhaps at first 
seemingly incompatible with the anticipated or initially experienced cat-
egory. As the next sections work out, thinking through Fat Girl within 
the parameters of pornography does not account for the entire feature. 
Nevertheless, as I have argued in this chapter, the inclusion of Breillat 
within the genre of pornography raises larger questions about representa-
tions of sexuality in the cinema as well as about feminine sexuality in the 
twenty-first century.
Subcategorizing New Extremism from the branch of the art film 
genre, as James Quandt proposed and developed, followed by more rig-
orous and theoretical treatments from other scholars, is inadequate and 
insufficient to make sense of the overwhelming shock of/at a particu-
lar scene or sequence. The gamut of cinematic transgressions must be 
included in an analysis of the extreme art film genre, whether cinemato-
graphic or through acting and performance or because of the disruption 
of conventional associations of narrative, spatiality, temporality, and, as 
I elucidated above, the common tropes and clichés of a particular genre 
(cf. Beugnet 2007: 32–41; Hickin 2011: 127; Chamarette 2012: 190–
192). The case of Breillat’s Fat Girl overturns critical accounts of the 
“shock tactics” (Quandt 2011) of extreme cinema; scenes are not shock-
ing in themselves, and oftentimes sequences are not graphic enough to 
warrant mass outrage. As I have argued about Fat Girl’s recourse to the 
pornographic, it is the entire production which works over the spectator 
because the film is lackluster compared with even softcore features. Each 
and every sequence of Breillat’s film contributes to the overall shock and 
excess of the film experience. What the overall shock means for specta-
tors is something I pursue in the last section of this chapter.
Any critical or uncritical praise of the transgression of genre conven-
tions and the trite shocks of sex and gore is not without further impli-
cations. I will argue in the sixth chapter that there are ethical concerns 

142   T. Bordun
when asking or demanding under-age and non-professional actresses to 
perform nudity, sexuality, and vulnerability. Barker’s audience research 
on Fat Girl revealed that spectators were less concerned about the por-
nographic and moral implications of under-age sexuality than they were 
about possible exploitation and endangerment of the young actresses 
(2011: 110). I make the case that these responses are legitimate and 
were likely expected by Breillat when she let the profilmic event slip into 
viewings, intruding upon our melodramatic, pornographic, and hor-
rific expectations. The sixth chapter also pursues my analyses of Breillat’s 
films in more theoretical terms when I connect Fat Girl with its fiction-
alized making-of film Sex is Comedy. Prior to that analysis, I now turn 
to Breillat’s brief glimpse of the horror genre in the dénouement of Fat 
Girl. In Breillat’s appropriation of the genre I show that its use facilitates 
and intensifies the disparities between genre categorizations which, as I 
have demonstrated, are the director’s means of demanding that view-
ers assemble the images from her films in a way that conveys a particular 
message regarding adolescent sexuality.
Horror “on Time!”
I must leap into the finale of the film at the same pace as it arrives for 
viewers. The theoretical underpinnings of this section—Williams on psy-
choanalysis and sensation, Lisa Coulthard and others on a haptic cinema, 
what Brinkema describes as the horrible cinematic image—should follow 
at the same frantic speed. As we saw in Chap. 2, according to Laura U. 
Marks a haptic film experience is defined as an implacable and impre-
cise sensorial experience of sounds and images, a kind of touching with 
one’s eyes and ears—in other words, an experience prior to (recognized) 
cognition. The classic definition of horror and a new definition of it cre-
ated by recent filmmakers, one within the realm of haptic images, col-
lide in Breillat’s conclusion to Fat Girl. It should be noted before we 
begin that there is no equivocation between extreme cinema and torture 
porn (Horeck and Kendall 2012: 6–7; Kerner and Knapp 2016).16 The 
16 Kerner and Knapp 2016: 52–53 define torture porn as a subgenre of horror which 
consists of American films such as Hostel (Eli Roth, 2005) and Saw (James Wan, 2004). 
The torture porn cycle “violently returns the horror genre to the body and forces us, as 
viewers, to face our physical essence during a time in which technologies seem to discon-
nect us from it.” See Kerner 2015 for a book-length treatment of the cycle.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   143
climactic shock and concern with sensation, not just in brutality but also 
in the composition of images, framing, and their assemblage or collec-
tion through editing, put the former at odds with the repetitive scenes 
of disgust and bloody violence in the latter. Moreover, extreme cinema 
is at odds with New Horror Cinema. In films such as The Hills Have Eyes 
(Aja 2006), Halloween (Zombie 2007), and 28 Weeks Later (Fresmadillo 
2007), characters are gored and mutilated in a manner totally unlike 
the subdued violence of the art cinema trend under discussion. Thus 
extreme films may appeal to the horrific, yet rarely could we classify, 
with certainty, a film as part of the horror genre as such. “Nonetheless, 
[extreme films] often horrify viewers, or induce in them feelings of revul-
sion such that pleasure no longer forms part o the viewing experience 
[… This new genre is] designed specifically to make us question our 
enjoyment of viewing horrific acts, particularly in a world where images 
of cruelty abound” (Brown 2013: 27, 28). What horror and extreme 
cinema share, following Angela Ndalianis here, is the appeal to the spec-
tators’ senses through which meaning may be extracted (2012: 6). While 
Ndalianis as well as Kerner and Knapp (2016) find the key to horror aes-
thetics in the affect of disgust, the aesthetic of Breillat’s Fat Girl, as we 
have seen thus far, is here entwined with melodrama and pornography. 
I now argue in the following sections that the sensation of seeing (and 
feeling) real bodies on-screen, instead of the made-up and thoroughly 
unreal of a gore picture, allows for a productive analysis of extreme cin-
ema (in) between the pornographic and the horrific.
Fernando’s mother (Laura Betti) appears at the family’s vacation 
home to reclaim the engagement ring her son had given to Elena. It was 
not an engagement ring after all, but one of the mother’s accessories. 
Elena and Anaïs’s mother abruptly and furiously ends their vacation; she 
shoves the girls into their car and begins the long drive home. Each char-
acter is in frame for the ensuing dialogue, emphasizing the effect that the 
entire event has on each family member. The mother may want Elena to 
visit a doctor, to see if her hymen is still intact, and the (absent) father 
may want a report published in the paper, a statement regarding an 
adult’s fornication with his daughter. Elena’s parents adopt Kate Millet’s 
observation from a few decades ago (1984: 219–220): “Shame, invented 
by adults and laid upon children, is still pervasive and continues to color 
adolescence, particularly that of female children. Their lives are a con-
tinual apology for something that they probably haven’t done and do 

144   T. Bordun
not really understand. But they might […] And the possibility of sexual 
activity is what adults guard against relentlessly.”
On the highway, large trucks and 18-wheelers swerve around the 
mother’s Mercedes. Multiple perspectives—from the trucks, truck driv-
ers, the mother, the side-view mirror—of the car itself make it feel as 
though an accident is imminent. The mother gasses, brakes, smokes, 
and argues with her daughters—Elena wishes for her own death, Anaïs 
desires to live, they both explain. The mother takes two breaks, one for 
Anaïs to vomit and another at a gas station to fuel up and get a quick 
bite. The tension increases as day passes into night. The driving goes on 
and on. The girls cry and whimper; the mother blasts music to keep her-
self company; and Anaïs eats junk food. Carol Munter (1984: 239, my 
emphasis), from her personal experience as a “fat” individual and psy-
chotherapist, could perhaps be speaking of Anaïs here when she writes: 
“Every time a woman reaches for food when she has no physiological 
need to do so [… s]he is attempting to deal with some bit of external 
or internal reality which has made her uncomfortable: a sexual longing 
or fantasy, a feeling of envy or rejection, the impulse to violate a sexual 
taboo.” The driving scene lasts for more than ten minutes: “We expe-
rience another time in this scene, the time of pre-trauma, the time of 
anticipation” (Brinkema 2006a: 158). The mother eventually needs 
sleep. She parks the car at a rest stop and quickly falls into a deep slum-
ber. Elena, turning around in her front seat, and Anaïs, leaning forward 
from the back, share a heart-warming exchange in which the latter tries 
to comfort the former. Fernando has already forgotten you, she says. Go 
to sleep … Lock your door. Elena sleeps, and Anaïs stuffs her mouth 
with sugary treats.
The fourth sexual number: shot from Anaïs’s perspective, a man, 
likely a truck driver, suddenly smashes the windshield and scrambles 
atop the hood. His axe bashes Elena’s skull, instantly killing her. He and 
Anaïs then have a long stare at one another, completely outside time, 
“which is not to say that it occurs out of time – what on earth would 
that mean? – but that the time of the diegesis is compressed and com-
pressible in relation to our time” (Brinkema 2006a: 159). The mother 
should have awakened, screamed, shouted, but she does not as the mur-
derer and Anaïs hold each other’s gaze. Anaïs urinates.17 The murderer 
17 Brinkema 2006c: 159: “you are not wrong to think that the clear fluid on her thighs 
reminds you of another.”

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   145
finally strangles the now awake mother, and Anaïs escapes through the 
passenger door. The two exchange another set of intense looks, and 
Anaïs seems to be saying with her eyes that nothing this psycho can do is 
against her will. A quick cut takes the young girl and the murderer to a 
nearby shadowy wooded area, not unlike the location of the film’s open-
ing sequence. The man tackles Anaïs, rips her panties off, and shoves 
them in her mouth like the junk she had been eating all day. He rapes 
her amidst the trees and dirt. It is brief; she does not cry, and there is 
very little struggle.
The morning after, police officers and a forensic team are on the 
scene. An officer brings Anaïs out from the shrubs and trees. “She says 
he took her in the woods, but he didn’t rape her,” he tells another 
officer. Anaïs replies, “If you don’t want to believe me, then don’t.” 
Freeze-frame on her face followed by the soft and pleasant acoustic gui-
tar of Luigi Balducci’s “Vene Carnevale” and the end credits.18
These final few minutes have been an object of much debate, aca-
demically, theoretically, and on message boards. I think they can be 
explained most accurately, or assembled best, from the texts and interests 
that are my own, from a study of the horror genre and what I have said 
above regarding pornography. Scholars and critics maintain that, similar 
to most genres, “the horror genre has no clearly defined boundaries” 
(Wells 2000: 7) (and the worlds of horror films are known for “crossing 
boundaries” of social and cultural “rules, morals and ideological struc-
tures” [Ndalianis 2012: 15]). I have taken Williams as a key theorist for 
Breillat’s use of the pornographic, so I again make reference to her work 
below. In “Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess,” Williams identi-
fied the time of fantasy in slasher horror to be “too early!”, which for 
Williams and her appropriation of psychoanalysis is the discovery of sex-
ual difference before one is ready. The female victims meet the monster/
psycho/murderer “unexpectedly” and are killed in their state of unpre-
paredness. “This surprise encounter, too early, often takes place at a 
moment of sexual anticipation when the female victim thinks she is about 
to meet her boyfriend or lover” (Williams 2009: 614–615). Elena’s anal 
rape is initially the fantasy time of melodrama, defined by Williams as a 
18 A second ending was shot, but it does not have the same intensity. Anaïs is being 
attended to by a doctor in his office; he has just examined her, and he asks why she did not 
tell the police about the rape. She delivers the same line as in the final cut.

146   T. Bordun
(female) character’s search for the ideal familial romance, ultimately 
unattainable (for various reasons internal to the diegesis), tinted with 
loss and therefore “too late!” In Elena’s case, she loses her virginity and 
catches up with what the audience already knows: Fernando’s ruse.
It is possible to suggest that Elena is dispensed with, additionally, 
because of her inability to ward off the rapist Fernando, arriving at sex-
uality too early. I interpret Breillat here (2011d: 14) as explaining the 
blending of melodrama and horror, suggesting the melodramatic reap-
pears in the midst of horror: “[Elena] is killed because this desire for illu-
sions that we so badly need in order to live our lives is lost in her.” We 
might also want to say Elena is killed, as in many horror films, due to the 
generic plot device of “the sexually active ‘bad’ girls” being punished for 
their pleasure (Williams 2009: 610). The latter resonates with the idea of 
shame much pursued in Breillat’s oeuvre.
Given the murder that took place only moments earlier, the final 
sequence of the film adopts the generic horror trait of displaying “fun-
damental fears” such as corpses, rape, and violence (Wells 2000: 10). 
However, when compared with Williams’s assessment of horror, Anaïs, 
in this last chapter of Fat Girl and in a twist of the genre, regains the 
utopian “on time!” of pornography, whereby two subjects encounter 
each other at the precise moment when both are ready and willing for sex 
(Williams 2009: 614). Thus Anaïs is not the Final Girl of horror genre 
theory (and correspondingly horror spectatorship), the last remaining 
(virginal) girl who dons the phallus to confront and kill the assailant(s), 
turning from a powerless femininity to a “gendered masculinity.”19 
Anaïs’s fantasy, stated at the beginning of the narrative—getting rid of her 
virginity in an emotionless embrace—is finally fulfilled; she empowers her-
self by playing the active role but not in relation to a stronger masculinity. 
The limited activity that femininity is allowed is affirmed by Anaïs, and 
this is the real horror Breillat is trying to convey: a girl who has been con-
vinced that she would rather be raped than suffer the illusions of love.
I wrote above that in her look at the rapist, situated between her exit-
ing of the vehicle and prior to the jump cut to the woods, Anaïs is agree-
ing to whatever transpires next. Brinkema writes, (2006c: 160): “No, you 
are not mistaken to see that she puts her arms around [her rapist]. You 
19 On Final Girl theory, see Clover [1987] 2011.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   147
are not wrong to hear the same grunt Fernando issued earlier. You are 
not morbid to think the encounter looks identical to the one in Elena’s 
bed. You are not guilty to wonder if they are.” Similar to Mesquida’s 
close-up in the first sexual number, to express her tension between love/
sex and shame, in the event of the rape Anaïs is shot in close-up so we 
can see her brief struggle followed by indifference as her rapist fulfills 
her wish. With the sexual assault on Anaïs in the final sequence it is easy 
to forget, however, according to Breillat, that Elena’s pains are much 
greater. The director relates in interviews:
The older sister is the real rape in the film because she is in a position 
where you have to combine sentimentality with the physical act. I think 
this is mental rape, the worst rape—because it’s a rape in which the woman 
gives up her self-esteem, a rape that does not even show up as a rape, 
because everyone lives like that—lives for romantic love. (Rich 2001, typo 
corrected)
Elena […] is the victim of a mental rape. What is more shameful than let-
ting yourself be fooled by lies that you know are such from the beginning? 
(Breillat 2011d: 14)20
Anaïs, comparatively, knows the apparent truths of existence, love, and 
sex. Like Marie in Romance, who shouts she is not ashamed after she is 
raped, Anaïs too has willed the fantasy into existence and for that reason 
will not lie about being assaulted against her will. But the younger sis-
ter’s fantasy is not in the time of the body genres Williams outlines—I will 
argue how the sequence of Anaïs’s rape (phantasy/fantasy) has the “on 
time” of the pornographic genre and not that of the “too early” in horror. 
My contention that Fat Girl is without strict genre co-ordinates is evinced 
by this penultimate sequence’s distance from Williams’s theory of gen-
res. Williams nevertheless provides me with the tools to discuss Breillat’s 
excessive example of what many young women endure from men.
20 This is the “typically French” position Martin Barker 2010 finds in his research of 
British audiences on French film—according to Brits, the French are cynical and pessimistic 
about love. On the challenges associated with theorizing rape and seduction in Breillat’s 
films, see Wheatley 2010.

148   T. Bordun
Williams argues for her body genre’s theoretical times of fantasy 
through the writing of psychoanalysts Jean Laplanche and J.B. Pontalis. 
In the body genre film (horror, pornography, melodrama) the time of 
fantasy of the main protagonist is as such depending upon an “irrecov-
erable original experience presumed to have actually taken place [in the 
person’s infancy/childhood …] and the uncertainty of its hallucina-
tory revival” in that person’s teenage years (Williams 2009: 612–613; 
Laplanche and Pontalis [1964] 1986, especially 13–14, 24). Fantasy is 
that place of discrepancy or disjuncture where the real of the past and 
an imagined event of the past come together to form “the origin of the 
subject,” that time when the infant or child first discovers their sexual 
difference, sexual desire, and/or familial romance or primal scene and 
which is then replayed as a real and memorable event of adolescence 
(Williams 2009: 613, quoting Laplanche and Pontalis). For Laplanche 
and Pontalis, this origin is not only structural, part of the unconscious 
and wholly an interior experience; “we must accept,” the authors write 
(1986: 11), “the idea of an intrusion from without in an interior which 
perhaps did not exist as such before this intrusion.” The intrusion from 
without, at that same moment, is the beginning of the fantasy, which 
is to say that the origin of the subject and the origin of the fantasy co-
presently arrive from the outside to reveal, from a subject’s interiority, 
a past trauma in the form of castration/sexual difference, seduction/
sexual desire, and the family romance/lost love of the Oedipal complex 
(Laplanche and Pontalis 1986: 18–19). The filmic and spectatorial inter-
est in the genres of horror, pornography, and melodrama operate accord-
ing to these psychoanalytic principles on the role of fantasy. It appears as 
though both the diegetic world and the spectator’s relationship to that 
world are as they are because of the truth of these claims: for example, 
the horror of horror is an image or fictionalized event which registers for 
the spectator at the level of the sub- or unconscious, a horror of the cas-
tration complex and first viewing of sexual difference as a child.
While convoluted in her exegesis of Laplanche and Pontalis’s exegesis 
on Freudian hysteria and fantasy, Williams nonetheless provides a strong 
foundation for an analysis of the sexual assault on Anaïs. Anaïs’s rape is 
this precise originary moment that Laplanche and Pontalis identify. She 
does not find her subjectivity too early, however, that is, the discovery of 
sexual difference before she is ready—such would be the typical structure 
of fantasy for the horror genre (Williams 2009: 614–615). Instead she is 
on time with the primal fantasy of seduction, one where the seduction is 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   149
not tied to the recognition of castration/sexual difference (too early!) or 
the trauma of lost love on the side of the maternal or paternal (too late!), 
but already she grasps the (psychoanalytic) truth of the relations (her 
sexual desire) between the sexes. “It is apt that this moment [of Anaïs 
and the madman exchanging gazes], when the isolated Anaïs finally 
comes face to face with the ‘monster’ of her dreams, is temporally out 
of joint, more in line with her psychic registering of events than with any 
ordered reality of happenings” (Horeck 2010: 206). Phantasy has turned 
into fantasy for Anaïs, perfectly on time.21 The repressed memory of a 
childhood trauma is turned into the real memory from the exterior in 
the event of the rape. This is the unconscious phantasy co-habiting and 
becoming the real event of a conscious fantasy (Laplanche and Pontalis 
1986: 20–21). But we must not link the fantasy to the precise object of 
desire—for Anaïs the murderer/rapist—because fantasy is the re-staged 
scene in its entirety of that originary childhood trauma. In this second 
hallucinatory experience (the rape), Anaïs becomes subject, or her sub-
jectivity, her drives, and her desires are “articulated into the [setting of] 
fantasy.” This literal setting is the “on time!” of the rest stop and the 
woods, the “favoured spot” of fantasy outside of the “defensive mecha-
nisms through which the psyche deals with […] prohibition” (Laplanche 
and Pontalis 1986: 26–27). In other words, Anaïs finds her structural 
and literal setting for her desire. This setting into place of a psychic real-
ity is indeed how Breillat constructs her films, quite apart from notions 
of realism.
Breillat’s goal is to portray the “reality of feelings” rather than of an 
objective reality, which is to say a cinematic realism along the lines Bazin 
prescribed, insofar as the latter is taken as a proponent of a theory of 
imaginative realism rather than verisimilitude. Keesey suggests (2009: 
147) that, like the bloody endings of A Real Young Girl (Une vraie jeune 
fille, 1976), Romance, and Anatomy of Hell, and also, perhaps he may 
agree, Bluebeard (Barbe Bleue, 2009), Anaïs’s rape and the prior murders 
are “metaphorical rather than realistic.” Breillat has not commented on 
this, but periodically she notes the significance of myth and the imagi-
nary, and thus fantasy, in her films (Breillat 2011d: 15). The imaginary, 
21 Cf. Laplanche and Pontalis 1986: 19, 32n40. Phantasy is the unconscious memory or 
“mental processes” such as a repressed trauma or originary structure of sexuality (sexual 
difference, etc.). Fantasy is at the level of the conscious or subliminal: a daydream, for 
instance.

150   T. Bordun
and thus the unconscious, as I outlined above, need to be given a more 
important place in film. Breillat loathes the demand placed on filmmakers 
to neglect the ephemeral quality of images and stories (2011d: 15). In 
the final scene of Fat Girl, for instance, Anaïs emerges from the woods 
escorted by cops, some hours after being violated by the murderer. The 
heads of the cops are not shown; no one cares about an individual cop—
what stands out are the officers in white and “the plastic gloves used to 
protect the evidence,” that is, placed on the hands of the corpses, Elena 
and the mother (Breillat 2011d: 15). But the events that transpired ear-
lier—the murderous man smashing the windshield of the vehicle, the 
killings and rape—register not in an objective reality but as part of an 
imaginary or dreamlike world through its temporal confusion and the 
film’s defiance of the expected conclusion of a homogeneous narrative. 
One debate about this ending, then, is over whether it is just in Anaïs’s 
mind or really occurs in that world. I suggest that it is somewhere in 
between and this in-betweenness, this interruption of our habituated 
viewing experience by this unforeseeable finale, perhaps shocks us in a 
way that a happy or structurally satisfying ending cannot.22 This disrup-
tion is the final and most powerful effect in the film, as well as evidence 
for film narrative’s affective and terrifying force.
Body genres are perhaps categorized as simply as their respective times 
of fantasy. On the other hand, according to Williams, they are also con-
cerned with spectacle—in the case of horror, its “portrayal of violence 
and terror,” “of the body ‘beside itself’ [or a form of ecstasy] with […] 
fear and terror” (Williams 2009: 604, 605). The body genres follow 
from the tradition of a cinema of attractions defined by Gunning: that is, 
their aggressive address to the spectator. The bodies on-screen, in their 
fear and terror, are imprecisely mimicked by the bodies of the specta-
tors, and the success of a film is oftentimes dependent upon the degree 
of sensation that images and narratives are able to produce: that is, from 
the formal qualities there are certain hypothesized and/or visible bod-
ily effects. Horror, for instance, “measure[s] success in terms of screams, 
22 Breillat’s penchant for the imaginary, I would argue, began with her first feature. A 
Real Young Girl’s Bataillean heroine spends more time in her imaginary world than in one 
connected to and dependent on others. Her love interest, most explicitly, is frequently seen 
striking poses like a model: dripping water across his chest, elegantly smoking a cigarette, 
etc.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   151
fainting, and heart attacks” (Williams 2009: 605–606). However, 
Williams’s definition here reminds me of Siegfried Kracauer’s notion of 
the pornographic, briefly mentioned in my introductory chapter ([1960] 
2009: 270). The pornographic is any cinematic event that “overwhelms 
consciousness”: “Elemental catastrophes, the atrocities of war, acts of 
violence and terror, sexual debauchery, and death.” A definition of the 
pornographic, from Kracauer’s point of view, also provides a description 
of the final chapter of Fat Girl. Yet spectators can experience the por-
nographic/horrific in two separate yet linked ways: as singular images/
events, such as the murders  and rape, and through the force of the 
whole feature—which is to say, the social and cultural reality presented.
Returning to a screening of Fat Girl I held in the fall of 2012, I saw a 
woman nearly jump out of her seat as the on-screen murderer broke the 
windshield and made quick work of Elena. This is what Breillat calls “the 
monster,” “the thing in the film that produces sensation in the viewer” 
(Brinkema 2006a: 160; Breillat 2011a). Breillat is thoroughly con-
cerned with sensation, making the spectator leap from her chair in that 
moment of horror. But, the director continues, it is not merely the sin-
gular event of shock that defines this monster; it is more accurate to say 
that the sensation cannot be precisely located, is felt “from nowhere in 
particular” (Brinkema 2006a: 160). Ndalianis (2012: 16), building upon 
much of the same phenomenological film theory as I employ through-
out this volume, conceptualizes spectators’ experience of horror films 
across the “horror sensorium:” “The sensorium […] refers both to the 
sensory mechanics of the human body, but also to the intellectual and 
cognitive functions connected to it: it’s integral to the process of perceiv-
ing, and to processing the gamut of sensory stimuli the individual may 
experience in order to make sense of their understanding and impression 
of the world around them.” Although Breillat’s address to the specta-
tors’ senses is imprecise, their intellectual and cognitive functions are 
also appealed to, as I described at length above. Viewers are required 
to organize the images and sounds for themselves, making sense of the 
film despite its misuse of genre conventions. Through this misuse we can 
uncover a view of the world Breillat believes is often masked or hidden.
I now want (to attempt) to locate a different sense of horror in the 
film’s narrative with some precision, in and through a closer analy-
sis of horror genre conventions. I make a distinction between classical 
horror and a new kind of cinematic image which Brinkema names the 

152   T. Bordun
“horrible.” I examine how this distinction fits with the pornographic and 
continues to break further from Williams’s cursory definition and out to 
a much more Kracauerian one.
Breillat’s Horrible Fat Girl
I claim that the sensations experienced during the dénouement of the 
film—spectators’ presumed shock and fear after my own experience dur-
ing the first viewing—is a product of Breillat’s appropriation of horror 
and its amalgamation into the genres of teen melodrama and pornog-
raphy. Yet the exact experience or sensation received from the penulti-
mate sequence is difficult to define and locate because it comes as a result 
of the entire feature: its images, sounds, and narrative taken as a whole. 
Furthermore, the difficulty in pinpointing an exact moment of horror, 
besides the killing of course, is due to the film containing very little hor-
ror (as genre) that can be identified accurately; or, better, the horror is 
not solely in the most striking and horrific scene at the finale.
Tania Modleski’s essay “The Terror of Pleasure: The Contemporary 
Horror Film and Postmodern Theory” (1986), provides a precise account 
of the narrative features in the slasher subgenre. She begins by identifying 
the postmodern war against narrative and cinematic pleasure, tracing this 
line of thought through the Frankfurt School, Roland Barthes, Christian 
Metz, Jean-François Lyotard, and Julia Kristeva (Modleski 2009: 617–
622). Each of these theorists, in their own way, posits narrative pleasure 
as a key component of “the supreme ideological construct – the ‘bour-
geois ego’” (Modleski 2009: 621). The argument is that in spectators’ 
narcissistic (ego-swapping) identification with the “novelistic” or “family 
romance” narratives and characters, the bourgeoisie supplies certain class 
values that keep the ruling class and the current system in power. The 
details of this theoretical position are outlined by film theorists such as 
Jean-Louis Baudry and Stephen Heath through a rigorous engagement 
with psychoanalysis and Louis Althusser’s Marxism. While Modleski sets 
out to disprove this claim via the horror genre, her text is also significant 
for its fundamental descriptions of its common traits. Breillat, although 
clearly working with fear and terror in that penultimate sequence, will not 
conform to the genre as Modleski defines it.
The first is the denial of closure (Modleski 2009: 622). Horror films 
are often open-ended, defying audiences’ expectations of a neat and 
tidy finish, and opening the possibility for endless sequels. For Modleski 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   153
this is the opposite of the closure found in the “novelistic” or “family 
romance” cinema that Heath classifies, which, he argues, aids in iden-
tification with characters and construction of a particular kind of sub-
ject (1981: 125–128, 157–158). Second, horror films “tend to dispense 
with or drastically minimize the plot and character development that is 
thought to be essential to the construction of the novelistic” (Modleski 
2009: 622). Characters are “interchangeable” so we have no climax 
(Modleski 2009: 623); the focus is instead on the chase, the killings, and 
possible salvation for those who have crossed the path of the monster/
psycho/murderer. Third, since characters are interchangeable and lack 
personality, they are nearly impossible to identify with. Horror films are 
thoroughly anti-narcissistic, Modleski concludes; audiences delight in the 
slashings and bashings and in having their “expectations of closure frus-
trated” (2009: 624). With contemporary Hollywood’s penchant for end-
less sequels and prequels, Modleski’s observation still holds true today.
While the open-endedness of horror films is now a staple of the genre, 
Breillat, by contrast, will close the book on Anaïs’s initiation into sexu-
ality; the narrative may not be closed in the conventional sense of an 
ending—a happy or, at worst, an indifferent resolution—but Fat Girl nev-
ertheless concludes with the most brutal of events: namely, the murders 
and rape. The pleasures of terror in the finale of a horror feature become 
the displeasure of the closure of Elena and Anaïs’s story. Breillat does 
retain the minimal plot, writing, as Bazin suggests, a simple story with-
out touching the level of documentary. But this minimal plot does not, 
like the horror feature, refuse to build to a climax. Fat Girl progresses 
despite the characters’ stagnation, marked by the introductory conversa-
tion between Elena and Anaïs, in which the two set out their philosophy 
of love—love required for sex for the older sister, love as bad faith for the 
younger—followed by the narrative adopting these philosophies, or mak-
ing their dreams come true, to an excessive and climactic degree.
Since the characters are caricatures, it is also untrue that identification 
becomes impossible for spectators. Martin Barker’s audience research 
(2011: 113, 114) strongly reveals that the affective dimension for some 
viewers was the characters’ link to their own lives, whether Elena’s gul-
libility or Fernando’s macho posturing and coercion for sexual pleasure. 
Better, I do not see Elena and Fernando as characters of the world that 
Breillat presents, but as what Cavell names “types” (1979: 33–37, 174–
179), through which we see individualities. In Fat Girl we see the bour-
geois teen longing for love and the bourgeois college student searching for 

154   T. Bordun
sex, and in them we see individuals who are, to a greater or lesser degree, 
like ourselves. In Barker’s research, spectators do not just re-collect the 
events which took place in the feature but re-collect themselves in similar 
happenings in their own past—their bodies, in some sense, are there too 
in the film. The male identification Barker observed is also despite the fact 
that Breillat’s “majority of […] male characters seem to be unsympathetic 
at best, uncaring, cruel, violent — even murderous — at worst” (Russell-
Watts 2010: 72). The director succinctly sums up the role of men in her 
oeuvre:
There is no masculine psychology in my cinema. They contain only what 
women feel and desire. Therefore, men must not try to recognise them-
selves in my male characters. However, the films can help them acquire a 
better understanding of women, and knowledge of the other is a higher 
goal. (Russell-Watts 2010: 72, citing Chollet, trans. Russell-Watts)23
Yet in Fernando’s seduction men find the truth of their real-life relations 
with women, quite unlike, for example, the rape of Jennifer in I Spit 
on Your Grave (Meir Zarchi 1978). In this film the men are so vile and 
depraved that male viewers cannot identify themselves with the rapists 
and cannot therefore gain any pleasure from the images of (forced) sex 
(Fulfs 2010: 256–258). Fernando, on the other hand, is all too kind, all 
too persuasive, and all too familiar. Thus Breillat’s own aim is overtaken 
by real spectators in this instance. A generic horror film, according to 
Modleski, should not contain this level of identification.
We see how far the French director deviates from Modleski’s theory. 
Breillat is not so much a director of horror as she is perhaps a director of 
the horrible. Brinkema develops this distinction in an essay on Michael 
Haneke’s Funny Games (1997), and I suspect someone, in the near 
future, will conduct a rigorous comparison of Haneke’s and Breillat’s 
oeuvres. Many scholars of extreme cinema write on both directors, and 
so appropriating Brinkema’s argument about Haneke and the horrible 
seems appropriate.
The horrible is engaged not as a direct opposition to horror, whose 
Latin horrere is defined by a bristling, a standing up of the hairs on 
23 See the rest of Russell-Watts’s essay for a critique of Breillat’s “marginalized males,” 
their processes of sexuation, and how the divergent male leads in Romance are ultimately 
productive for rethinking one-dimensional accounts of masculinity.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   155
the nape of one’s neck in those scenes of anticipation and excitement 
(Brinkema 2006b: 156; Williams 2009: 606). As Brinkema explains, the 
horrible in Haneke is the failure of horror to appear as such. In much 
of Haneke’s work, from The Seventh Continent (Die Siebente Kontinent, 
1989) to Benny’s Video (1992) to The White Ribbon (Das Weisse Band, 
2009), violence often appears off-screen or out of frame; we get the 
sounds but not the image, making the horrible appear in our imagina-
tions rather than on the nape of necks. For Brinkema this is precisely 
the anxiety, the tension, and the encounter of the Lacanian Real within 
Haneke’s film itself. For the purposes of the discussion here, the Real 
is defined and limited to an eruption or interruption in the Symbolic, 
which is to say genre expectations “as frustrated representation(s)” 
(Brinkema 2006b: 155).24 According to Lorenzo Chiesa (2007: 126–
130), we must not locate the Real as objectivity, a thing without the 
mediation of a human subjectivity, or a primordial undifferentiated mat-
ter. It is instead the psychic effects not reducible to everyday reality, part 
of the unconscious processes that allow the Symbolic and Imaginary to 
function. Chiesa calls this the Real-of-the-Symbolic, the Real within the 
Symbolic, and beyond the knowledge of the Symbolic. When the specta-
tor is cut off from the (Symbolic) representations of genre, the Real is 
that thing missing from an otherwise ordered and habituated film experi-
ence, and is therefore a lack (Chiesa 2007: 131).
In Funny Games, something has gone missing from our view-
ing experience—that is, the cinematic image itself—and the image 
we expect to be horrified by disintegrates into sounds: groans of pain, 
screams, and silences. Coulthard quotes Haneke on aurality (2012: 
19), linking the sounds of his films to a haptic experience for specta-
tors, “Asserting that ‘the ear is fundamentally more sensitive than the 
eye’ and that it ‘provides a more direct path to the imagination and 
the heart of human beings.’” With his filmic silences and lack of non-
diegetic music, “Haneke has argued for the primacy of hearing in ensur-
ing cinema’s affective and intellectual impact.”25 It is the auditory 
24 Brinkema 2006b: 155–156 spends much more time than I do here developing Jacques 
Lacan’s affect of anxiety though Sigmund Freud’s notion of the uncanny. On Lacanian 
anxiety, see also Brinkema 2014: 201–208.
25 Cf. Laplanche and Pontalis 1986: 18–19. Consider the role of sound from a psycho-
analytic perspective as well: a sound, if Coulthard and Haneke are correct, can equally serve 
as that signifier, that noise of a childhood trauma rekindled.

156   T. Bordun
element of Haneke’s films that renders a phenomenological and senso-
rial experience possible, pulling the spectator out the more cognitive- or 
psychoanalytic-based spectatorship of “narrative logic” or “charac-
ter identification” (Coulthard 2012: 18; Barker 2009: 51); or, better, 
Breillat’s and Haneke’s films demonstrate that identification and sensa-
tion are not mutually exclusive film experiences. When psychoanalytic 
approaches are limited to issues of identification, this form of theorizing 
is insufficient to account for the phenomenological experience: if, on the 
other hand, the eruption of the Real into the Symbolic is experienced 
sensuously when viewing a film, then I have found a way to retain the 
value of psychoanalytic theory insofar as I can integrate it into recent 
developments and research on spectatorship as an engagement with the 
senses.
To put Chiesa’s point on the Real differently, a haptic hearing, 
according to Marks, can be located in that moment whereby sounds are 
“undifferentiated,” not as matter but as sounds for a subject prior to his 
or her choice to turn attention (or register psychically) to one in par-
ticular (Marks 2000: 182–183). In that instant of equalized sound, that 
which registers with the senses from the object itself, in the case of films 
the celluloid, moves out toward the spectator to “quite literally” move 
their body in sometimes “thought provoking, contemplative and ethi-
cally implicated ways” (Coulthard 2012: 18). Breillat accomplishes this 
with Fat Girl. Fernando’s grunting, as I suggested in a section above, 
is both pornographic and horrible. In the silence of Elena and Anaïs’s 
room, without the aid of non-diegetic music, we become another witness 
to the indignities Elena (and other young girls) come to face, because 
sound carries with it, like an image, a duty and responsibility to address 
what is heard (Coulthard 2012: 26–28).
If the horrible is the sounds and anxiety of the Real encroaching 
on our habitual viewing experience—that is, as a defiance of our cin-
ematic, narrative, and genre expectations—what better film to accom-
plish this than Breillat’s Fat Girl? In Breillat’s film we do not see much 
of the physical rape, as we do in Jonathan Kaplan’s The Accused (1988), 
Katheryn Bigelow’s Strange Days (1995), and other similar spectacular 
features. These two films operate according to classical Hollywood logic, 
a logic that utilizes fast cuts and slow-motion in the former, and a point-
of-view shot in the latter, to fabricate a convincing on-screen event. With 
Elena, the sexual assaults happen in Anaïs’s presence, and it is through 
her that we must position ourselves rather than with stylized editing or 

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   157
heightened verisimilitude. We hear the sounds of Elena’s rape neverthe-
less, and, again Breillat forces us to imagine the horrible taking place in 
front of Anaïs in the first instance and behind her back in the second.
Breillat’s Perfect Love (Parfait Amour, 1996) achieves the same with 
its horrible images. At the beginning of the feature a police inspec-
tor commands a murderer to re-enact his deed; the murderer’s brutal 
actions, comic in this instance as they lack both the killer’s aggression 
and a live body upon which the stabbing is committed, thus forces us 
to imagine the killing. When we reach the last chapter of the narrative, 
Breillat does not show us this climactic stabbing, but rather brings us 
to a close-up of the young man as he ends his lover’s life, full of anger, 
aggression, and blood splatter. The two murders, then, one re-created 
and the other actually occurring in the diegesis, do not offer spectators 
a chance to verify (with their eyes) the killing. Thus the final sequences 
of Fat Girl and Perfect Love as well are not Breillat’s only recourse to 
the horrible, although they are perhaps the most evident and affective—
the films, as a whole, are also rife with it. The horrific image, graphically 
detailed, has been replaced by the horrible of the imagination. Because 
we are forced to imagine something horrible, this is where I locate the 
spectator’s sensation(s) in viewing the film; spectatorship is a collecting 
of particular images and sounds, on-screen and imagined, followed by 
their re-collecting and evaluating.
Thus a horrible cinema, I can conclude here with Brinkema (2006b: 
151), “locates itself elsewhere than in the image.” We can see the anal-
ogy here to the Lacanian Real and how a haptic cinema operates as the 
replacement for the missing Symbolic representation of expected narra-
tive and image. When the psychic reality falters, cinema offers the sen-
sation of image and sound to produce effects in the spectator’s body. 
This is the import of the haptic and tactile film experience when psy-
choanalytic analyses refer only to the Imaginary order. It is not, as Anna 
Powell suggests, that psychoanalysis is insufficient for horror film the-
ory (2005: 1–3). We can discuss the “visceral, sensory nature of view-
ing” (Powell 2005: 5) by finding holes and gaps in the theory available 
to us. What we need is to bring a variety of tools to our research. In 
the seventh chapter, I will further explore the details of these two 
divergent film theories—psychoanalysis and phenomenology/affect  
studies—by paying closer attention to haptic visuality and its relationship 
to the pornographic genre as elucidated in this chapter. It was never-
theless important to introduce haptic aurality in Breillat’s feature at this 

158   T. Bordun
point, as Williams notes the significance of sound for the pornography 
genre and Brinkema’s and Coulthard’s arguments on sound for horror.
For Brinkema the horrible is not a genre but a strange relation or, 
as I have been expounding here, an expansion of generic categories that 
function to confound expectations rooted in the spectator’s mode of 
perception. If Haneke, and by proximity Breillat, are classified by pre-
established generic categories, the effective presence of the filmmakers’ 
depicted reality disappears. “The problem with genre, for [Haneke], 
resides in a problem with the cynical marketing of expectations as a pal-
liative for an unthinking, uncritical audience” (Brinkema 2006b: 148). 
With the reluctance to produce genre films and in an effort to move 
beyond generic categories, similarly Breillat first challenges our assump-
tions about genre and, second, she challenges spectators to develop the 
courage to see the presence of oppressive sexual relations between men 
and women.
For myself, critics, theorists, and audiences, the reality or world 
depicted in an extreme feature is consistently overshadowed by the 
scenes and sequences of sex and violence, scenes that are perhaps too 
much to handle in terms of either the trauma induced or the incompre-
hensibility for typically Bazinian (art cinema) spectators who are resist-
ant to cinematic sex and death. Audiences and critics are often unsure 
how to respond to Fat Girl. One reviewer bluntly asks, “What is this 
all about? What is the point?” (Barker 2011: 112). The theoretical aims 
of a picture are occasionally misplaced, but this is the risk the director 
must take in order to get the critical reception desired. Breillat cannot 
be assimilated into generic expectation; her films demand the careful 
attention of a theoretical text—one view is insufficient to grasp or feel 
the presence of the social or cultural reality depicted.26 This required a 
careful examination of body genres, psychoanalysis, haptic visuality, and 
sound studies to fully account for Breillat’s oeuvre.
Fat Girl defies three genres: melodrama, pornography, and horror. I 
argued that the implacable sensation—arousal, shock, fear, terror, pathos—
is due not to any event in particular but to the structure of narrative and 
26 Thus the recent turn in art cinema to a slowness of narrative, cuts, dialogue, and 
action. In the second chapter, on Carlos Reygadas’s Post Tenebras Lux (2013), I provide 
an account of this recent cinematic trend, and how it functions to convey a certain type of 
reality.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   159
plot, the shots and length of the scenes, the sounds and bodies on display, 
all of which contribute to confounding the expectations of viewers. And, 
“Like in all fine horror,” Beugnet writes on contemporary extreme films 
from France (2007: 45), “shock is the gateway between the plane of sen-
sation and that of discourse.” This conclusion follows a growing body of 
literature that finds extreme cinema opens up debate about ethical engage-
ment with the world (Wheatley 2009: 85–88; Lübecker 2011; Brown 
2013; Frey 2014; Dooley 2014).
The discourse and conversation that emerge from the film cir-
cles around the utterly frightening position young girls have been put 
in: “a quick rape is actually preferable to a long seduction, and [...] the 
raped sister exercises more control over her fate than the seduced one” 
(Williams 2008: 283). Reading the ending through Georges Bataille, 
Beugnet finds it “a manifestation of sexual economy’s ‘accursed share,’” 
the violence demarcating that part of human nature that cannot be 
co-opted to social, cultural, and economic use-value (2007: 49). The 
meaning of Anaïs’s rape is not “a potentially liberating experience,” as 
Vincendeau suggests (2011: 6), nor is Breillat’s aim to show a com-
ing-of-age story, highlighting the significant event that allows Anaïs to 
emerge from her “shell,” as described by the actress Reboux (Breillat 
2011d: 14). As I stated above, part of the difficulty in writing about 
extreme cinema is trying to decode the director’s social/political cri-
tique. Fat Girl contains a most devastating  critique of the existing sexual 
relations between men and women because of its apparently testimonial 
quality (evinced by the audience responses) and its ability to provide an 
existential situatedness without resorting to the documentary genre (the 
film is, after all, a classical fictional narrative with a beginning, middle, 
and end). This persistent sexism and violence are part of adolescent and 
teenage sexuality for Breillat. Men are seducers and rapists—the only 
freedom allowed young girls is the ability to pick which act of deflower-
ing seems the least damaging. The director reveals this message through 
the concealing (screening, masking, or hiding) of the sexually explicit 
image and forcing spectators to imagine the film’s horrors. Breillat 
offers no solution to the problem of sexual difference under patriarchy, 
merely showcasing it for our cinematic displeasure, which is to suggest 
that the viewing of this film should produce negative emotions in the 
viewers. A potential social and ethical change hopefully results from such 
displeasure.

160   T. Bordun
References
Barker, Martin. 2011. Watching Rape, Enjoying Watching Rape…: How Does a 
Study of Audience Cha(lle)nge Mainstream Film Studies Approaches? In The 
New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck, and 
Tina Kendall, 105–115. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Belton, John. [1985] 2009. Technology and Aesthetics of Film Sound. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 331–40. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Best, Victoria, and Martin Crowley. 2007. The New Pornographies: Explicit Sex 
in Recent French Fiction and Film. Manchester and New York: Manchester 
University Press.
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Breillat, Catherine. 2004. Director Interview. In Brief Crossing. Wellspring 
Media. DVD.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011a. The Making of Fat Girl. In Fat Girl. The Criterion 
Collection. Blu-Ray.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011b. Catherine Breillat Talks About Her Film. In Fat Girl. 
The Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Breillat, Catherine. [2001] 2011c. 2001. Berlin International Film Festival. In 
Fat Girl. The Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011d. One Soul in Two Bodies: An Interview with 
Catherine Breillat. In Fat Girl, 10–15. The Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006a. Celluloid is Sticky: Sex, Death, Materiality, 
Metaphysics (in some Films by Catherine Breillat). Women: A Cultural 
Review 17 (2): 147–170.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006b. ‘Not to scream before or about, but to scream at 
death’: Haneke’s Horrible Funny Games. Caligari’s Heirs: The German 
Cinema of Fear After 1945, 145–59. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006c. A Title Does Not Ask, But Demands You Make a 
Choice: On the Otherwise Films of Bruce LaBruce. Criticism 48 (1): 95–126.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2014. The Forms of the Affects. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.
Brown, William. 2013. Violence in Extreme Cinema and the Ethics of 
Spectatorship. Projections 7 (1): 25–42.
Chamarette, Jenny. 2012. Phenomenology and the Future of Film: Rethinking 
Subjectivity Beyond French Cinema. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Chiesa, Lorenzo. 2007. Subjectivity and Otherness: A Philosophical Reading of 
Lacan. Cambridge and London: The MIT Press.
Cornell, Drucilla (ed.). 2000. Feminism and Pornography. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   161
Coulthard, Lisa. 2012. Haptic Aurality: Listening to the Films of Michael 
Haneke. Film-Philosophy 16 (1): 16–29.
De Beauvoir, Simone. [1949] 1989. The Second Sex. ed. and trans., H.M. 
Parshley. New York: Vintage Books.
Doane, Mary Ann. [1980] 2009. The Voice in the Cinema: The Articulation of 
Body and Space. In Film Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall 
Cohen, 7th ed., 318–30. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Dooley, Kath. 2014. ‘When You Have Your Back to the Wall, Everything 
Becomes Easy’: Performance and Direction in the Films of Catherine Breillat. 
Studies in French Cinema 14 (2): 108–118.
Downing, Lisa. 2004. French Cinema’s New ‘Sexual Revolution’: Postmodern 
Porn and Troubled Genre. French Cultural Studies 15 (3): 265–280.
Ferguson, Frances. 2004. Pornography, The Theory: What Utilitarianism did to 
Action. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Frey, Mattias. 2014. The Ethics of Extreme Cinema. In Cine-Ethics: Ethical 
Dimensions of Film Theory, Practice, and Spectatorship, ed. Jinhee Choi, and 
Mattias Frey. New York: Routledge.
Frey, Mattias. 2016. Extreme Cinema: The Transgressive Rhetoric of Today’s Art 
Film Culture. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers.
Fulfs, Patricia Ann. 2010. The Horror of Feminism: Understanding the Second 
Wave through the Reception of Controversial Films. Ph.D. Diss: The University 
of Texas at Austin.
Gunning, Tom. [1989] 2009. An Aesthetic of Astonishment: Early Cinema and 
The (In)Credulous Spectator. In Film Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy 
and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 736–50. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Hickin, Daniel. 2011. Censorship, Reception and the Films of Gaspar Noé: 
The Emergence of New Extremism in Britain. In The New Extremism in 
Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck and Tina Kendall, 117–28. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Horeck, Tanya and Tina Kendall (eds.). 2012. The New Extremisms: Rethinking 
Extreme Cinema. Cinephile 8: 2. 4–7.
Horeck, Tanya. 2010. Shame and the Sisters: Catherine Breillat’s À Ma Soeur! 
(Fat Girl). In Rape in Art Cinema, ed. Dominique Russell, 195–209. New 
York and London: Continuum.
Keesey, Douglas. 2009. Catherine Breillat. Manchester and New York: 
Manchester University Press.
Kerner, Aaron Michael, and Jonathan L. Knapp. 2016. Extreme Cinema: Affective 
Strategies in Transnational Media. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Kerner, Aaron Michael. 2015. Torture Porn in the Wake of 9/11: Horror, 
Exploitation, and the Cinema of Sensation. New Jersey: Rutgers University 
Press.

162   T. Bordun
Kracauer, Siegfried. [1960] 2009. From Theory of Film. In Film Theory & 
Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 262–72. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Laplanche, Jean, and Jean-Bertrand Pontalis. [1964] 1986. Fantasy and the 
Origins of Sexuality. In Formations of Fantasy, eds. Victor Burgin, James 
Donald, and Cora Kaplan, 5–34. London and New York: Routledge.
Lübecker, Nicholas. 2011. Lars Von Trier’s Dogville: A Feel-Bad Film. In The 
New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck and 
Tina Kendall, 157–67. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Lyotard, Jean-François. [1988] 1989. The Differend: Phrases in Dispute, trans. 
Georges Van Den Abbeele. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Maddock, Trevor H., and Ivan Krisjansen. 2003. Surrealist Poetics and the 
Cinema of Evil: The Significance of the Expression of Sovereignty in Catherine 
Breillat’s À ma soeur (2001). Studies in French Cinema 3 (3): 161–171.
Marks, Laura U. 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, 
and the Senses. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Millet, Kate. 1984. Beyond Politics? Children and Sexuality. In Pleasure and 
Danger: Exploring Female Sexuality, ed. Carole S. Vance. Boston and 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Modleski, Tania. [1986] 2009. The Terror of Pleasure: The Contemporary 
Horror Film and Postmodern Theory. In Film Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo 
Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 617–26. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Mulvey, Laura. [1975] 2009. Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 711–22. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Mulvey, Laura. 2006. The Possessive Spectator. In Stillness and Time Photography 
and the Moving Image, ed. D. Green and J. Lowry, 51–63. Birghton: 
Photowork/Photoforum.
Munter, Carol. 1984. Fat and the Fantasy of Perfection. In Pleasure and Danger: 
Exploring Female Sexuality, ed. Carole S. Vance. Boston and London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul.
Ndalianis, Angela. 2012. The Horror Sensorium: Media and the Senses. Jefferson, 
NC and London: McFarland & Co.
Palmer, Tim. 2011. Brutal Intimacy: Analyzing Contemporary French Cinema. 
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Powell, Anna. 2005. Deleuze and Horror Film. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press.
Quandt, James. [2004] 2011. Flesh and Blood: Sex and Violence in Recent 
French Cinema. In The New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, 
ed. Tanya Horeck and Tina Kendall, 18–25. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.

5  HORRIBLE PORNOGRAPHY: FAT GIRL (À MA SOEUR!, 2001)   163
Rich, B. Ruby. 2001. End of Innocence. Filmmaker Magazine. http://film-
makermagazine.com/archives/issues/fall2001/features/end_innocence.php. 
Accessed 28 Dec 2012.
Russell-Watts, Lynsey. 2010. Marginalized Males? Men, Masculinity and 
Catherine Breillat. Journal for Cultural Research 14 (1): 71–84.
Smith, Clarissa. 2012a. ‘Reel Intercourse: Doing Sex on Camera.’ Hard to 
Swallow? Hard-core Pornography on Screen, ed. Claire Hines and Darren Kerr, 
194–214. London: Wallflower Press.
Vincendeau, Ginette. [2001] 2011. Sisters, Sex, and Sitcom, In Fat Girl. The 
Criterion Collection. Blu-ray booklet, 4–7.
Wells, Paul. 2000. The Horror Genre: From Beelzebub to Blair Witch. London and 
New York: Wallflower Press.
Wheatley, Catherine. 2009. Michael Haneke’s Cinema: The Ethics of the Image. 
New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Willemen, Paul. [1980]. 2006. Letter to John. In Pornography: Film and 
Culture, ed. Peter Lehman, 48–59. New Brunswick, NJ & London: Rutgers 
University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1989] 1999. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the “Frenzy of the 
Visible”. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Williams, Linda. [1991] 2009. Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, Excess. In Film 
Theory & Criticism, ed. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 602–16. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Wilson, Emma. 2001. Deforming Femininity: Catherine Breillat’s Romance. In 
France on Film: Reflections on Popular French Cinema, ed. Lucy Mazdon, 
145–157. London: Wallflower.

165
The occasional scholar writing on Carlos Reygadas’s films theorizes the 
performances of the director’s actors and actresses, often with reference 
to the similarities and dissimilarities they share with Robert Bresson’s 
“models.”1 Little has been written about performance in Catherine 
Breillat’s oeuvre. The limited scholarly engagement with acting and per-
formance in the works of these two contemporary directors is due, in 
part, to their ambiguous relationships with pornography. We can discuss 
the delivery of lines and observe the gestures of the performers, but it 
is much more challenging to accomplish an analysis or develop a theory 
on the exhibition of the nude body, or assess how well performers (pre-
tend to) fuck on-screen. As I argued in the previous chapter, the ambi-
guity of Fat Girl (À ma soeur!, 2001) is in the recognition that, despite 
the film’s sexual scenes and sequences, the film’s seemingly pornographic 
form and content, I cannot recite Justice Potter Stewart’s famous lines 
while watching or reflecting upon it: I discover that I do not, in fact, 
know pornography when I see it. Nevertheless, I argued that Breillat still 
offers us films in the pornography genre. Sexual performance, I contend 
in this chapter, is a significant part of this re-ordering or confusion of 
genre. I find that the most fascinating cases of this ambiguity are the per-
formances of Marcos Hernández and Anapola Mushkadiz in Reygadas’s 
CHAPTER 6
On-Screen and Off-Screen Flesh and Blood: 
Performance, Pornography, Spectatorship
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_6
1 For examples of the Reygadas/Bresson comparison see: Foltz (2011: 155–157), Penn 
(2013: 1161–1162); de Luca (2014: 76–77).

166   T. Bordun
Battle in Heaven (Batalla en el cielo, 2005) and Roxane Mesquida’s chal-
lenging if not traumatic performance as Elena in Breillat’s Fat Girl and its 
re-enactment in Sex is Comedy (2002). The fact that viewers may fall on 
the side of art cinema or pornography as they discuss these films and the 
performances therein demonstrates the fluidity of the concepts discussed 
throughout this book: genre, genre relations, and genre expectations. I 
collect these two films that have little in common to draw attention to 
the ways performance can interrupt genre identification. I question the 
claim that “body genres” universally, or at best typically, produce certain 
effects in and on viewers. I will argue that the performances in Battle in 
Heaven, Fat Girl, and Sex is Comedy re-organize sense-experience, against 
the grain of static accounts of the so-called body genres.
I have used the word performance rather than acting. Performance 
is not merely the “action/function” and “how the lines are said” (Dyer 
[1979] 2009: 480). Nor is it merely the aura Richard Dyer conceptual-
izes to discuss stars: the repeated “gestures, intonations, and so on that a 
star establishes over a number of films” (Dyer 2009: 481), although, for 
Mesquida, Dyer’s description is now applicable. She has had three roles 
in Breillat’s films: Fat Girl, Sex is Comedy, and The Last Mistress (Une 
vieille maîtresse, 2007). However, Marcos and Ana, as well as a third per-
former in the film, Bertha Ruiz, are all non-professional actors. In addi-
tion to Dyer’s slim definition of acting, the performances of actors and 
actresses in extreme cinema often test the limits of the body in a way 
that is productively likened to performance art. One does not register 
and evaluate the acting of John Giorno in Andy Warhol’s Sleep (1965), 
or the man in Blow Job (1963), or the stars of his various screen tests—
performance is the more appropriate descriptor. In the production trend 
known as extreme cinema, similarly, the “repertoire of gestures, into-
nations and so on” includes not just that which a star develops over a 
career—for most of the actors are non-professional—but requires a re-
enactment or performance of the lived body as it comports itself off-
screen in the most private realms.
In a chapter on extreme cinema, Linda Williams suggests (2008: 
275) that performance connotes “an avant-garde edge challenging the 
more safely contained boundaries of acting and role[,…] the art of open-
ing the body of the performer up to the physical and emotional chal-
lenges of the situation being performed.” The inclusion of sex within 
the narrative, Williams submits, performed even poorly, as in Michael 
Winterbottom’s Nine Songs (2004), accomplishes something much more 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   167
“genuine”—more “real”—than just delivering lines and gesturing: it 
highlights an ambiguous quality in sexual relationships and incites a criti-
cal thinking about those relationships. Therefore, new methods of per-
formance evaluation and theorizing are necessary to discuss productively 
contemporary art cinema’s move to more “genuine,” and at times phys-
ically real, depictions of sexual acts. I begin to give this method some 
flesh in this chapter, alongside my extended investigation of performance 
in the ambiguous space of art cinema and pornography, their relations, 
and their connections.
In Reygadas’s and Breillat’s films, I see individuals capable of repeated 
performances of physically and emotionally intense scenes and sequences. 
Intensity is used here in the sense of affecting the well-being and bodily 
integrity of the performer; repeated performance is defined as drawing 
from the performer’s “somatic archive” (Paasonen 2011, 2013), a con-
cept further discussed in the relevant section below, and in Mesquida’s 
case, additionally, performing in one film while drawing creative energies 
from a prior one. This complicated separation between acting and per-
formance will be further defined as I progress through the chapter. It 
suffices to note, in the case of the performers under discussion, that it 
is not the embodiment of a screen persona that precisely captures and 
defines the essence of the film; rather, it is embodying this persona on-
screen while simultaneously balancing the demands from outside the 
frame—this would signify the essence of a scene and film as a whole.
The first part of this chapter considers the sexual performances in Battle 
in Heaven. In this narrative film about a botched kidnapping and an extra-
marital affair, characters and actors participate in some of the most explicit 
sexual scenes in contemporary art cinema. The “grotesque” and “heav-
enly” bodies of Marcos and Ana (de Luca 2014: 49–52; Lahr-Vivaz 2008: 
146–147), alongside their sexual performances, disturb the co-ordinates 
established by mainstream cinema, art cinema, and pornography.2 I coun-
ter Reygadas’s claim that this nudity and sexuality demonstrate a kind of 
authenticity, or genuineness, in Williams’s analysis, with a revised version 
of Susanna Paasonen’s concept of the “somatic archive.” I link this con-
cept with the documentary quality many critics and theorists reference 
2 I will refer to the actors by their first names to accentuate the film’s blurring of reality 
and fiction. In Battle in Heaven, the characters portrayed by the actors share their real-life 
names.

168   T. Bordun
in Reygadas’s oeuvre, an aspect I discussed in Chap. 3. It is false to say 
we have the person as such on-screen, but we do have their bodies which 
contain the embodied memories of sexual acts performed off-screen.
The second part of this chapter is a careful study of Sex is Comedy, 
particularly its final sequence. This is a fictional film that stages the 
making-of Scènes Intimes, a film-within-a-film that more or less replays 
scenes from Fat Girl and stars Mesquida, re-performing similar acts and 
dialogue. Mesquida’s performances bleed between the two roles of Fat 
Girl and Sex is Comedy. In my subsequent examination of Mesquida’s 
roles, I uncover how performance is one of the possible formal qualities 
of the films: as I explain below, we can locate the affect of a given film 
through its form. The roles and the films are paired by their materiality 
and narratives, but this pairing also transcends an immanence or imme-
diacy of either film taken alone (as a kind of shock or force that effects 
a spectator). Through the films’ diegetic and extradiegetic connections, 
I theorize the forms that bind them: pornography (genre), performance 
(in narrative film), pornographic performance (sexual acts in a narrative 
film). This chapter, at least in a minimal fashion, tries to integrate pro-
duction history into theoretical discourse. For Mattias Frey (2016: 171), 
many extreme cinema scholars discuss the trend in solely “philosophi-
cal” terms when they actually should be attending to production history, 
especially when they aim to dissect scenes of a sexual nature.
We might also call the method of this chapter an intratextual reading. 
Intratextuality means not just self-reflexivity: that is, Breillat, diegetically, 
referring to herself or her oeuvre. The “intratextual approach,” writes 
Song Hwee Lim, “allows for productive reading strategies that interre-
late one film to another” (de Luca 2014: 101, quoting Lim). It is true 
that Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy may be approached separately, but by 
pairing them I claim they attain a sense of completeness, and in the next 
chapter I assess how they work together and allow for a re-evaluation of 
certain strands of spectatorship theory.
Intratextuality calls for a close reading of the films as well as using 
methods related to auteur theory. I appropriate theoretical concepts as 
well as interviews with Breillat in which she discusses her filmmaking 
methods and experiences with her performers. The director ill-treats 
and exploits her star(s) to varying degrees so as to push them toward 
becoming an artist, an actor-auteur, even if that auteurism flirts or is 
tinged with the pornographic. Breillat coerces a performance from 
Mesquida and, following Williams’s praise of art cinema performance 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   169
quoted above, we could argue that the actress’s physical and emotional 
exertion effectively transmits the director’s scathing critique of patriar-
chal society.3 In other words, the effect of the films is produced by the 
films’ forms and affects. I would rank such skilled performances, whether 
by professionals or non-professionals, at the level of the auteur if the 
performer were able to achieve this feat across several films. However, 
given the coercive quality of Breillat’s method and the evident traumas of 
Mesquida’s performances, a discussion of performer as auteur also needs 
to be framed in terms of ethics.4
A further methodological consideration for the study of Breillat’s 
Sex is Comedy: I now expand the boundaries of phenomenological 
inquiry used throughout this book. To some degree I follow Eugenie 
Brinkema’s radical de-subjectification of the affects in her essay on 
“some” Breillat films and in her recent volume The Forms of the Affects: 
the so-called affective dimension of a film, or its “forms of the affects,” 
exists “independent of its realization in representation” and without the 
body of the spectator (2006a: 148, 2014). Rather than turning critical 
attention to the hypothesized intentions of the director or hypothesized 
reactions by an ideal spectator, Brinkema argues for and employs a close 
reading of form, and therein we find the affects. However, I hope to 
show that the intentions of the director and a close reading of affects are 
not mutually exclusive. Nor must we exclude analyses of narrative and 
spectatorship, as Brinkema does in her study. And finally, as a critique of 
Brinkema’s strict attention to form, I must heed Stanley Cavell’s warning 
(1981: 36–37):
So many remarks one has endured about the kind and number of feet in a 
line of verse, or about a superb modulation, or about a beautiful diagonal in 
a painting, or about a wonderful camera angle, have not been readings of a 
3 Kath Dooley’s thesis is worth quoting at length (2014: 109): “by taking risks as a direc-
tor, notably by pushing cast and crew into fearful and uncomfortable situations, Breillat is 
able to capture moments of on-screen intimacy in an affecting and subversive manner. I 
believe that one must consider her specific approach to performance, alongside approaches 
to cinematography, mise-en-scène and editing, as key when investigating the level of emo-
tion generated within the director’s intimate scenes.”
4 For a treatment of the actor-auteur, see Dyer (2009: 483–485); on treatment of ama-
teur actors and the star system, see Austin (2004); and for an argument that one cannot do 
auteur theory when placing the actor in the limelight, see Wollen ([1969] 1981: 143–144).

170   T. Bordun
passage at all, but something like items in a tabulation, with no suggestion 
about what is being counted or what the total might mean. Such remarks, I 
feel, say nothing, though they may be, as Wittgenstein says about naming, 
preparations for saying something (and hence had better be accurate).
My method, while certainly drawing from Brinkema’s theory of the 
affects, likewise resonates with Claudia Breger’s method of “configuring 
affect(s).” In a postscript following her essay on this topic, Breger writes 
(2014):
“‘Configuring Affect’ […] conceptualizes narrative as ‘a realm of affec-
tive encounters’: ‘a world-making “assemblage” of affects, associations, 
images, sounds, and words.’ Thus, I propose a more inclusive, multilayered 
notion that transcends (unsustainable) form-vs.-content oppositions [as in 
Brinkema’s volume] and connects a broad range of compositional elements—
from screenplay and dialogue via mise-en-scène to editing and music—to the 
audience responses (re)configuring these elements into a reading of the film.
Provided with Breger’s methodological considerations, I retain my 
emphases on narrative and spectatorship. While my investigation here 
does not fully counter Brinkema’s critiques of spectatorship theory, I 
will demonstrate that my method of studying film does not entirely fall 
victim to an “affective fallacy” (Brinkema 2014: 31–36). Films offer 
themselves up to be read as separate or paired entities according to the 
logic of the viewer or scholar. For the corpus known as extreme cinema, 
nudity, sexuality, and the performances of both are “absolute necessities” 
that grant a status to the films as one of this nature (Brinkema 2006a: 
148). In this chapter, a close reading of form begins with a key component 
of narrative cinema’s mise-en-scène: the performers. A discussion of per-
formers and their performances, however, cannot do without considera-
tions of narrative and other elements of the mise-en-scène.5 These close 
readings can then be brought to bear on spectatorship theory.
5 Yacavone (2015: xix), by way of Alan Goldman, expands notions of spectatorship via 
his concept of the “film world.” “As philosopher Alan Goldman has suggested, to be fully 
engaged with any artwork, including a film, is ‘not simply to pay attention to formal detail 
and complex internal relations in the object’s structure, but also to bring to bear one’s 
cognitive grasp of those external and historical relations that inform one’s aesthetic experi-
ence, and to be receptive to the expressive qualities that emerge through this interaction. 
Knowledge that can inform one’s experience of a work includes that of the artist’s inten-
tions, techniques, attitudes, problems overcome, and so on.’”

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   171
Once I have accomplished my study of the films by Reygadas and 
Breillat, in Chap. 7 I transition to the body of the spectator, not in terms 
of how he or she is affected by the films, but to theorize a possible expe-
rience of the films given the analyses of form and content in the prior 
sections. Current and popularized theories of pornography spectatorship 
do little to address the films discussed in this chapter. Affects shift, slide, 
coincide, and collide when Breillat’s films are paired. Neither Brinkema’s 
affect theory, Slavoj Žižek’s psychoanalytic theory nor phenomenological 
film theory can adequately situate the spectator in relation to the forms 
of the affects I uncover. I work through various theories of pornography 
spectatorship and turn to my analyses of the three films in this chapter to 
enhance my contention, and prior demonstrations, that genre and genre 
spectatorship are more ambiguous and porous than we have perhaps 
been willing to grant.
Blow Job (2005)
Reygadas’s second feature shares a theme with Fyodor Dostoevsky’s 
Crime and Punishment (Пpecтyплeниe и нaкaзaниe, 1866). In Battle 
in Heaven, however, we are not privy to the character’s inner turmoil: 
Marcos apparently feels not “remorse but a natural revulsion” to a kid-
napping that resulted in the infant’s death (Reygadas in James 2005: 
32). “Natural revulsion” permeates and indeed sets the tone for many of 
the scenes and sequences. I take revulsion, as Reygadas uses it, to mean 
not “extreme disgust, shock, or repugnance; feeling of great loathing,” 
but “a sudden, complete, and violent change of feeling; abrupt, strong 
reaction in sentiment” (Webster’s New World 1999). Marcos and his 
wife, Bertha, abduct a sister-in-law’s baby, to be returned at a price, but 
through their maltreatment or neglect the infant dies. Yet this criminal 
act is largely the backdrop and not the narrative concern. Narratively, 
the film is more interested in Marcos, a chauffeur for a General, begin-
ning an affair with the prostitute-by-day Ana, also the daughter of the 
General. Ana partakes in sex work seemingly for fun and, similar to the 
protagonists in Julia Leigh’s Sleeping Beauty (2011) and François Ozon’s 
Young and Beautiful (Jeune et Jolie, 2013), the young and beautiful girl’s 
motivations for this career path remain unexamined and unimportant. As 
an additional move against narrative conventions, the question or debate 
about the extramarital affair between Marcos and Ana is not pursued in 
any depth.

172   T. Bordun
In the couple’s first, unsuccessful sexual encounter, Marcos reveals the 
botched kidnapping, and Ana recommends he turn himself over to the 
police. A later and quite graphic sexual encounter serves as their only and 
last (sustained) physical contact. Ana again recommends he confess to his 
crimes once they have finished their brief and boring sex. For further rea-
sons unknown to spectators, Marcos visits Ana at her boyfriend’s home, 
perhaps to say his final goodbye. The two lovers share a passionate kiss, 
then Marcos leaves. In a long shot in the hallway, he urinates in his pants, 
a shot and act emphasizing Reygadas’s contention that Marcos feels a 
natural revulsion. Marcos returns to Ana’s apartment, fetches a knife, 
and puts an end to her life. Perhaps finally accepting his guilt, Marcos 
proceeds to walk on his knees with thousands of others on their way to 
church to celebrate the Feast of the Lady of Guadalupe, a significant holi-
day in Mexico. On his trek, Marcos stumbles and bumps his head on the 
concrete, a fall that will a few minutes later be the cause of his death.
Battle in Heaven exhibits something of the “melodramatic tradi-
tion” (Penn 2013: 1160). On the genre of melodrama, following Peter 
Brooks, Williams suggests ([1984] 2011: 728):
[the] late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century melodrama […] took 
on the burden of rewarding the virtue and punishing the vice of undivided 
and comparatively powerless characters. The melodramatic mode thus took 
on an intense quality of wish-fulfilment, acting out the narrative resolution 
of conflicts derived from the economic, social, and political spheres in the 
private, emotionally primal sphere of home and family.
But Reygadas’s film, despite its thematic concerns with the private 
sphere, does not fully deploy the melodramatic in Brooks’s definition. 
According to Elena Lahr-Vivaz (2008: 140–144), Battle in Heaven 
instead intensifies the characteristics of the genre or, in the terms of the 
narrative analysis in Chap. 2, renders it excessive. The gestures, tears, 
intimacies, lack of clarity in characters’ psychological motivations, and 
the traditional bonds of “faith and family […] are stretched beyond the 
breaking point” (Lahr-Vivaz 2008: 142). While it is important not to 
undermine Lahr-Vivaz’s study of the film’s proximities to melodrama, 
in the previous chapter we saw that the difficulty in assessing Fat Girl’s 
genre had much more to do with the pornographic than it did with the 
melodramatic (although Breillat’s film could certainly be recollected as 
a teen melodrama). Reygadas’s feature, first and foremost, was received 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   173
as a scandal, one of the key criteria for identifying a film as part of the 
extreme cinema trend (Frey 2016). The director faced challenging inter-
viewers who asked about these melodramatic qualities, to be sure, but 
more to the point, they wanted to know about the sex, the sex scenes, 
and the recourse to what James Quandt dismissively calls extreme cin-
ema’s “shock tactics” ([2004] 2011). Again we find a conflict here, as in 
the last chapter, between two body genres: pornography and melodrama.
I want to exclusively focus on the pornographic in Battle in Heaven 
as it relates to the performances therein and what, if anything, unstead-
ily tethers them to that genre. The ambiguity of genre identification has 
already been demonstrated by reference to the melodrama. The use of 
the pornography genre also has a productive resonance with the docu-
mentary genre. Reygadas’s film and Breillat’s Sex is Comedy are simulta-
neously documents of bodies and sexual practices. In Chap. 3 I briefly 
discussed Battle in Heaven. I now focus on two heretofore unmentioned 
sexual numbers in the film: the oral sex performed in prologue and epi-
logue.6 “Natural revulsion” appears in the opening sequence and finds 
an out-of-body solution in the last three shots.
It was not unintentional in my earlier paragraph to draw a comparison 
between the performances found in extreme cinema and Warhol’s Blow 
Job. Battle in Heaven begins with a close-up of the shirtless and bloated 
Marcos. He stands in an unidentifiable gray room, a non-place perhaps 
6 The two other sexual numbers in the film (Marcos and Ana, Marcos and Bertha) are 
interesting for a number of different reasons. It would be redundant, however, to discuss 
them at length in this section. My close reading of the performance in the prologue and 
epilogue could help to locate the affective dimension of the longer sexual displays in the 
middle of the film. During the sex sequence with Ana and Marcos, Reygadas shoots the 
torsos and limbs of the performers in close-ups, rendering them into “unfamiliar shapes.” 
This is a different cinematographic technique from an eroticism, for instance, in Abdellatif 
Kechiche’s successful Blue is the Warmest Color (La Vie d’Adèle—Chapitres 1 & 2, 2013). 
De Luca continues (2014: 62): “We are then offered their hands, feet and even their geni-
talia, all of which magnified by close-ups. This is followed by yet another close-up of the 
actress’s vagina, which, taking up the entire screen, threatens to overflow the borders of the 
figurative, with the porosity of her skin and the texture of her pubic hair taking on an emi-
nently tactile quality.” Where de Luca’s analysis falls short is identifying the affect(s) of the 
film itself, particularly in this sequence. With the still poses of the performers Marcos and 
Ana, and the succession of shots of body parts, we could follow Reygadas and declare the 
affect as a natural revulsion (to the death of an infant, one’s own death [Marcos and Ana 
lie on the bed as if corpses], and religiosity). On the sexual performances of Marcos and 
Bertha, and the ties to religiosity, see de Luca (2014: 46–52).

174   T. Bordun
outside of reality. His spectacled visage remains expressionless, and his 
body is uncomfortably still. The grayness of the space, his posture, and 
his immobility suggest a statue, but an unfamiliar and grotesque one. The 
camera continues to pan down slowly; it zooms out to reveal the dreaded 
hair of a fellator (Fig. 6.1). Next, continuing this long take, a slow pan 
right of the fellator eventually cuts just prior to reaching a maximum visi-
bility shot of Marcos’s penis. Now to Marcos’s left, the camera tracks for-
ward and shoots a close-up of the young Ana with a mouthful of Marcos. 
Her hand covers the base of his member, perhaps masking the suturing 
of fake genitalia and his own. Ana is indifferent to this performance, per-
haps not bored, but she does not reach the intensity or the enthusiasm of 
some online porn performers. There is no variation in her technique—it 
is as slow and steady as the camerawork. As time passes, the camera, still 
slowly panning, replaces Marcos’s member; the extreme close-up of Ana’s 
closed eyes cuts when her eyes open wide and a tear descends first from 
the right and then the left (I will have more to say about tears when I 
turn to Sex is Comedy). Marcos’s heavy breathing began the scene and the 
Fig. 6.1  Battle in Heaven (Reygadas 2009)

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   175
“saccharine string music” of Taverner fills the non-diegetic aural space as 
the sequence comes to an end (Hoberman 2012: 227). After the tears 
there is a cut to black. The music continues to play, the title appears, and 
a fade-in starts the film proper.7
The epilogue to the film documents a similar situation, but the deaths 
of Marcos and Ana suggests that this final fellatio scene takes place out-
side of time and space. The sequence is as follows: a POV shot of Ana 
fellating Marcos (a frequently employed shot in porn)8; a close-up, shot 
from below, of Marcos without glasses and smiling (not quite Ana’s 
POV); a return to the POV shot and Marcos’s off-screen voice, “I love 
you so, Ana.” She halts oral sex to utter the corresponding reply.
The first point to consider is Reygadas’s diatribe against pornographic 
interpretations or readings. He compares the prologue and epilogue to 
the symmetrical narratives of opera. He further notes the “layers of signifi-
cance” to the scene (James 2005: 33): the ambiguous facial expressions, the 
differences in age and body type, and the tear that concludes the prologue 
allow for multiple (non-pornographic) interpretations and a recollecting of 
this sequence as the narrative unfolds. Taverner’s music, the director con-
tinues, provides aural pleasure alongside the “cold and difficult” sexual act 
(James 2005: 33). The emotional ambiguity lends the scene a serious qual-
ity, quite apart from arousal, Reygadas concludes. This is not porn.
But what is porn if not images of sex whereby spectators experience 
what Paasonen, borrowing a phrase from Anu Laukkanen, names “kines-
thetic empathy” (Paasonen 2011: 202, 2013: 360), a theoretical empathy 
not unlike the kind Jennifer Barker identified as part of her phenomeno-
logical film theory and I referred to in Chaps. 1 and 2? Paasonen would 
contend that Ana’s performance of and Marcos’s reception of oral sex 
offer an imaginary relation to that act via our own “somatic archives.” 
Paasonen further argues that kinesthetic empathy is made possible by the 
somatic archive and affectation as defined by Henri Bergson, “that part of 
aspect of the inside of our body which we mix with the image of external 
bodies” (Paasonen 2011: 202, quoting Bergson). Thus the perception of 
fellatio on-screen “calls forth responses in one’s own body,” an experi-
ence Paasonen links to the body genres discussed at length by Williams 
and in Chap. 5 above (2011: 202–203). In the reversible exchange of 
7 See Smith (2012) on the merits of studying pornographic performances.
8 For a treatment of the POV shot in a stag film, see Williams (1995: 34–37).

176   T. Bordun
spectator and screen, the latter informs and activates spectators’ “somatic 
reservoirs” while these reservoirs, in turn, “orient ways of looking and 
sensing pornography” (Paasonen 2011: 203). But the effects of a piece 
or pieces of pornography are not universal. Indeed, these reversible 
exchanges offer themselves in varying degrees of force and intensity, from 
“faint” to “overwhelming” (Paasonen 2013: 361). For Paasonen, a video 
that centers upon the act of forceful fellatio resulting in gagging serves 
as an example. She writes: “my discomfort as viewer grows through 
my ability to relate to sensations of suffocation, the excessive proximity 
of another body (inside and next to oneself), body heat, saliva, and the 
lack of air” (2011: 204). Paasonen describes her own moment of being 
affected as an example of the ways in which hypothesized spectators may 
engage similar materials—not a universalized revulsion to gagging, but an 
account of one of many possible bodily responses. Similarly, any specta-
tor that has been the active agent or passive receiver of fellatio will feel 
accompanying sensations while viewing this opening sequence.
Brinkema calls an analysis such as Paasonen’s an “affective fallacy” 
(Brinkema 2014: 31–36). Rather than discuss or theorize affects in a 
work itself, Paasonen has described the experience of one who is affected 
and the intentions of those who produce pornography: that is, to cause 
this aversion, but perhaps also be aroused by the aggressive behavior. 
Brinkema, on the other hand, accomplishes an analysis of narrative and 
experimental films without the mediating intervention of a hypothetical 
spectator or with personal accounts of one’s affective responses. Inherent 
in works themselves are forms of the affects, material expressions that are 
not bound to kinesthetic empathy, somatic archives, or any spectator at 
all (Brinkema 2014: 36). This entails a close reading in the usual sense of 
formal analysis, such as mise-en-scène, cinematography, etc., as well as the 
“grammatically impossible” “mise-n’en-scène”: “more ephemeral prob-
lematics such as duration, rhythm, absences, elisions, ruptures, gaps, and 
points of contradiction (ideological, aesthetic, structural, and formal).” 
More enigmatically, she adds to the definition, “what is not put into 
the scene; what is put into the non-scene; and what is not enough put 
into the scene” (Brinkema 2014: 37, 46).9 However, we do not need 
9 Breger asks the following questions as a critique of Brinkema’s methodology (2014): 
“In going ‘a step further’ even than Deleuzian affect scholars and discarding not only ‘the 
subject’ with its presumably stable emotions, but also ‘bodies’ and ‘spectatorship,’ doesn’t 
Brinkema’s ‘radical formalism’ advocate a new purism entangled in a web of theoretical 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   177
to discard Paasonen’s contribution to affect studies nor do we need to 
adopt Brinkema’s methodology entirely (is it even possible to study the 
forms of affects in gonzo and amateur pornographies?). Is not one of the 
forms of the affects a performance or performances informed by somatic 
archives? The specificity of Reygadas’s cinema, I argued in Chap. 2, is 
his investment in the profilmic event. What is expressive in Ana’s and 
Marcos’s performances is not the naive view held by the director that the 
on-screen presence is the person as such. In my efforts to demonstrate 
the fluidity of the categories of art cinema, pornography, and genre more 
generally, it is appropriate to claim that the profilmic event in narrative 
cinema is also an expression of the somatic archive of the performer 
received and experienced in and through the somatic archive of the spec-
tator. This would be one part of the formal qualities of the film.
The action of fellatio differs greatly from online mainstream porn to the 
pornographic content in Battle in Heaven. As Mattias Frey demonstrated, 
for the extreme cinema scholar it is much too easy to separate these to 
subgenres of pornography. In fact, without explicitly stating it, Frey 
believes such a scholarly endeavor may be a waste of energy (Frey 2016: 
166–169; Bordun 2017: 8–9). As I have argued throughout these chap-
ters, perhaps extreme cinema demands that we read the films alongside 
mainstream pornography, not necessarily as equal to it but positing both 
as existing along a continuum of sexual representations. The performer in 
mainstream porn, as in classical narrative cinema, adopts a screen persona. 
The affects of the performance—in heterosexual porn the woman’s exag-
gerated enthusiasm during fellatio, the man’s loud and perhaps aggressive 
commands—are not those of the performance of the non-professional 
Mushkadiz in Reygadas’s film. Her apparent indifference to the actions 
marks the natural revulsion of the story and style. If we follow Jonathan 
Foltz’s (2011), Sheldon Penn’s (2013), and Tiago de Luca’s (2014) 
assessment of Reygadas’s performers—the non-professional performances 
disrupt the cinematic codes of “acting naturally” and, in fact, they perform  
tensions and unsuited to actually developing newly complex readings of film? With spec-
tatorship removed from the equation, who is doing the reading that is of such central 
importance to Brinkema’s new formalism? And with all ‘narrative or thematic expression’ 
stripped away also, do The Forms of the Affects not return film scholarship to a poststructur-
alist celebration of absence and ‘negation,’ as indicated by Brinkema’s guiding concept of 
‘mise-n’en-scène’?”.
 

178   T. Bordun
quite poorly—Ana and Marcos perform sexually in what Thomas Waugh 
calls a “hybrid” manner ([1990] 2011: 83). Drawing from the distinc-
tions between acting styles in modern dramatic theatre, Waugh opposes 
the “representational” mode of acting in documentary filmmaking, as a 
feigned naturalness, with the “presentational” mode, defined as an aware-
ness of “presenting oneself explicitly for the camera” (2011: 76). The 
hybrid mode combines both these elements. Although Waugh does not 
frame the hybrid mode in these terms, provided his study of documen-
tary performance and my appropriation of Paasonen’s concept, Ana and 
Marcos offer their somatic archives “presentationally” within a “represen-
tational” scenario. My use of concepts developed from a study of docu-
mentary performance here is not controversial. As I mentioned in Chap. 
3, de Luca (2014: 77) emphasizes the documentary aspects of Reygadas’s 
oeuvre when he notes the films’ “ethnographic qualit[ies].”
The ethnographic quality in Battle in Heaven, de Luca continues, is 
the camera lens’s passive recording of an “unlikely couple.” Revisiting 
my discussion of presentation versus representation in Breillat’s films 
from the last chapter, similarly, the sexual intercourse between Marcos 
and Ana is not a representation of their respective ethnic, class, and age 
differences: “To borrow Nagib’s words, here the film medium is used 
‘as a means to produce, as well as reproduce reality’ […,] meaning that 
these are fictions which are also, and perhaps more importantly, facts” 
(de Luca 2014: 88–89). In other words, there is no social or sexual 
situation outside of the film in which the two performers would come 
together; however, neither of them has the practice or talents to adopt a 
screen persona. Thus Battle in Heaven, regardless of the director’s inten-
tion or performers’ experience at the time of filming, presents sexual sce-
narios that are more real than what the mainstream porn genre depicts: 
the techniques of “acting out” a (representational) blow job are drawn 
from the non-professional performer’s (presentational) somatic archives 
and this blow job is real simply because the performers do not know how 
to perform. As I argued in Chap. 3, and following de Luca, the mate-
rial presence of the performers is on display, not to capture the individ-
ual’s essence, but, here, to document the presentational performance in 
a representational context. Or, to put it differently, I have argued for the 
form—non-professional pornographic performance—in which natural 
revulsion is configured.
The hybrid quality of the performances is emphasized by Ana in an 
interview. She notes that she wore her own clothes during the shoot 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   179
and “declared herself ‘to be even more ‘excessive’ than her character” 
(de Luca 2014: 89, quoting Paul Julian Smith).10 Marcos, similarly, is a 
chauffeur in film and life, and, as in the film, has an obese wife. The ges-
tures and sexual performances of Ana, Marcos, and Bertha (the fictional 
wife of the fictional Marcos, apparently less obese than his real wife) are 
several of many forms of natural revulsion. When Marcos and Bertha 
have intercourse in the film, my argument about the performers’ somatic 
archives and Reygadas’s persistent shooting of the profilmic event again 
appears: the gestures, the postures, the holds, are in some ways those 
that are intimately familiar to Marcos due to his sexual practices with 
his real wife.11 To determine the way natural revulsion is configured in 
this sequence would take another close reading. But revulsion here and 
in the oral sex sequences is not an observable part of the mise-en-scène: 
for instance, in a pool of vomit on the floor or the heaving and choking 
in the process of vomiting (Brinkema 2014: 141–145). Revulsion is in 
the bodies of the performers during their poorly performed sexual scenes. 
Marcos is immobile, and Ana cannot alter her pace of fellating. The per-
formers must be in a state of discomfort and unease lest they begin to act. 
Once they begin to act, they become part of the mainstream porn genre. 
I have instead argued here that their pornographic performances exist on 
the other side of what I have called the pornography genre continuum.
The point of this section is not to study Battle in Heaven closely, as 
I did with Post Tenebras Lux and Fat Girl, but to introduce my differ-
ing methodological approach in this chapter and to introduce and put 
into practice the concept of the somatic archive. These will be significant 
developments for the following sections. It is also an attempt to com-
plicate Frey’s criticism of extreme cinema scholar’s and our “real sex” 
discourse. While I appreciate Frey’s taking us to task over champion-
ing unsimulated sex to conventional narrative cinema’s simulated sex, I 
have demonstrated that this is not a straightforward practice for the film-
maker, nor is it clear how it affects the spectator and his or her recep-
tion and understanding of the film. As I argued in the last chapters, Fat 
10 For an illuminating discussion on the specific qualities of Ana’s performance, see 
Reygadas (2009).
11 By bringing the somatic archive to bear on these performances, I do not intend to 
draw a parallel between this idea and “the performance of everyday life.” I explore the lat-
ter in a video essay, “Camera-Confessional/Camera-therapist” (2014).

180   T. Bordun
Girl does not use unsimulated sex, yet I argued that is nevertheless func-
tions as pornography. Here I have used Battle in Heaven as an exemplary 
instance not merely as an example of the blurring of high and low genres 
that “irrevocably change[s] our experience of film” (Frey 2016: 172). In 
Chap. 8 I employ my analyses to make claims about our social, cultural, 
philosophical, and personal investment in this art we call the cinema. 
My choice to work with this production trend is in the service of larger 
claims about spectatorship and the ontology of film. Extreme cinema 
proves to destabilize our sense-experience such that we may come to see 
that other films, artworks, and experiences accomplish the same.
Mesquida’s Tears
[Libero de Rienzo] said, ‘[Mesquida] wants to talk to you. She’s not okay with 
me being nude.’ I said, ‘If she doesn’t come talk to me – The point is, I don’t 
want to talk to her. I swear I’m right.’ Actors must be drawn into a scene. You 
mustn’t talk to them. The scene will do the talking. They’ll see it’s not like they 
imagined it.
Catherine Breillat, “The Making of Fat Girl”
In Fat Girl, Mesquida exhibits her nudity, and further, her sexuality—the 
nude and sexually active body, in its private and secluded appearance, is 
on full public display. The distinction between private and public, inte-
rior and exterior, withers in extreme cinema. This blurred division is a 
space of critique and concern, from those critics and viewers who see 
Elena’s/Mesquida’s tears and body as not merely part of the act, but also 
as the traumatic expression of performing sexually for a camera. Sex is 
Comedy, as a fictional behind-the-scenes and making-of Fat Girl, restages 
the trauma of performative vulnerability. In this feature we have Jeanne 
(Anne Parillaud), the director of the film-in-progress, Scènes Intimes. 
Jeanne is clearly Breillat and the film-in-progress is certainly Fat Girl. 
Mesquida plays an unnamed actress—that is, herself performing in Fat 
Girl—and Grégoire Colin plays an unnamed actor: undoubtedly the 
male star of Fat Girl, Libero de Rienzo. The film replays various scenes 
from Breillat’s (2001) feature, and the narrative fictionally documents 
the challenges and difficulties in directing and performing.
Katherine Ince (2006: 159) declares that this autofiction (an auto-
biographical account that is fictionalized) is an account of Breillat’s 
experience of making a film, which is of course true. Ince’s conclusion 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   181
is that Sex is Comedy is a creative enterprise that uses self-reflexivity to 
offer a “general theory on how women may achieve auteurship” (2006: 
163). Ince’s analysis and argument additionally apply to Mesquida’s leap 
into auteurship herself. I therefore attempt to include Sex is Comedy as 
an account of Mesquida’s experience as a young actress and, in doing 
so, continue the discussion of Breillat’s appropriation of pornography. 
How one performs is constitutive of a particular genre. I connect these 
films to further challenge notions of stability in regards to pornography. 
Studies of this genre have neglected the performers and their respec-
tive performances; however, with the concept of the somatic archive, as 
I transformed it from Paasonen’s writing—from a conception of specta-
tors’ empathetic experience of characters and actions to a concept which 
assesses actors’ relationship to their extradiegetic selves and on-screen 
performances—much can be said about the bodies on-screen in the same 
way as I have discussed other formal aspects of specific films.
Sex is Comedy re-stages the conflict between Mesquida and Breillat 
quoted in this section’s epigraph. The unnamed male actor informs 
director Jeanne that the unnamed female lead does not want to do the 
scene: “She doesn’t know I’ll be naked. She won’t agree. She says total 
nudity isn’t in her contract.” The director and actress will not discuss 
this matter in detail as the conversation continues—it will go ahead as 
planned. Jeanne, echoing Breillat’s words on the set of Fat Girl, men-
tions that the actress can talk to her personally about any problems, and 
“Until she tells me, things are fine.” This is a harsh and yet necessary 
response from a director whose art depends on specific acts accom-
plished on-screen (Dooley 2014: 117). Breillat reiterates this point in 
an interview for Fat Girl: she mentions that she simply could not talk 
to Mesquida nor provide her with precise direction (2011c). Elsewhere 
the director acknowledges (2011b) the stresses she places on her per-
formers. “Sometimes you have to spur an actor on,” she mentions. “The 
actor will think he did well because you were nice, but if you hadn’t been 
mean first, he wouldn’t have done well. […] It’s changing gears like that 
that helps you get the shot.” Jeanne in Sex is Comedy echoes Breillat 
again: “You know, I think they have to hate me to act well. Once they 
don’t care if I love them, they can face my look, my judgment, without 
being afraid to disappoint me.”
For my purposes here, much of Sex is Comedy does little to advance my 
argument about genre trouble, so I focus instead on what I believe to be 
the key sequences. With the above preliminary remarks, I turn to the most 

182   T. Bordun
challenging episode in Fat Girl—the long seduction and rape sequence 
between Elena and Fernando—and its modified repetition at the end of 
the Sex is Comedy. During this latter film and on the set of the fictional 
film-in-progress Scènes Intimes, we see the unnamed actress/Mesquida 
in tears just before the long take. Jeanne/Breillat exploits her anxiety 
and forces into her the character’s conflicted desire of love and sex. The 
camera is close up; Jeanne embraces the unnamed actress and tells her to 
scream. This is the attempt to put the actress into a “state of crisis” similar 
to that of the character (Dooley 2014: 115). She screams several times, 
and a cut takes us to the appalled faces of the crew. The shot-reverse-
shot works against the affect of fear. A scream is often a scream of terror 
coming from the body as a paralyzing response to a horrifying situation. 
Mesquida’s powerful vocalization, alongside the shot-reverse-shot, exudes 
a bravery—to scream at the thing that one fears in order to conquer it. 
Douglas Keesey describes the scene (2009: 65) and importantly, for my 
argument here, refers to Mesquida not by her fictional character’s name 
but by her own: “Jeanne prompts Mesquida to express herself in extremis, 
to push through her pain in order to affirm the cry of longing within it, 
a desire strong enough to live through mortifying shame.” For narrative 
economy, Jeanne’s directing does the trick; the actress is ready and the 
scene can now be shot.
The unnamed actress’s tears are justifiable. The interaction between 
the characters Fernando and Elena in Fat Girl is troubling, first, because 
of its emotional intensity: the character must resist yet submit, love and 
hate, cry and show the shame of the sexual act. Second, the push of the 
real, the demand to perform, as is revealed in Sex is Comedy, is much 
too great for Mesquida. The unnamed actress mentions she must call her 
boyfriend—and we can hypothesize problems for monogamous relation-
ships and performed sexual acts—because the actor’s penis, in various 
positions throughout the scene, will no doubt come into contact with 
Mesquida’s body. Sex is Comedy then plays with the comedy of resolv-
ing this issue (Ince 2006: 160), a little comedy amidst the seriousness of 
bodily integrity. But the comedy itself is perturbed by the genitals of the 
unnamed actor.
I was compelled, then, to bring together Battle in Heaven and Sex is 
Comedy not because of the similarity in props, but because of what I dis-
covered in the use of these props and what they add to the discussion of 
performance. The penis as a prop is pushed to hyperbolic lengths when 
the member itself is faked. The unnamed actor’s large prop is chosen out 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   183
of a suitcase, suggesting that the real penises in videos and films are but 
a means to an end, as a narrative device. The largeness of a penis in por-
nography is frequently commented upon by the performers, and its size 
marks the degree to which it is capable of violation. However, unable to 
bring his real genitals to the screen, the unnamed actor mockingly flaunts 
and swings his prosthesis around, perhaps to compensate for his fear of 
not being able to perform—that is, get erect—when necessary. He can-
not scream about his performative difficulties, or overcome them, so he 
stands isolated and apart from cast and crew in a long shot. If we believe 
Simone de Beauvoir, the actor’s trepidation does not come as much of 
a surprise. De Beauvoir contends that the male is overly concerned with 
his activity, his transcendence. An erection, she writes ([1949] 1989: 
381), “becomes activity, potency, the sex organ is no longer an inert 
object, but, like the hand or face, the imperious expression of subjectiv-
ity.” The joke of the film, perhaps, is that the actor has no subjectivity: 
the actor is a prop.
While the male actor therefore shares some of the unnamed actress’s 
concerns about performing sexually, in an unethical move both actor 
and director neglect her wishes and desires not to be nude. If we believe 
de Beauvoir again, the male gaze both frightens a woman—in terms of 
being dissatisfied with her nudity—and is the requirement for the unveil-
ing in which he is judge to her flesh and commends it (1989: 381–382). 
Although de Beauvoir’s account of women’s experience is subject to 
criticism, and perhaps some of her phenomenological descriptions of 
the relations between men and women are less applicable now than in 
the 1940s, it is nevertheless the case that Breillat seems to be taking up 
de Beauvoir’s ideas and putting them into her narratives and even into 
form. Sex is Comedy is therefore superficially comedic if we set aside 
Mesquida’s distress; better, it is as if contemporary patriarchy were still at 
work 50 years after de Beauvoir penned her opus.
The comedic aspect of the film, foreshadowed by the title, is immedi-
ately questioned in the first sequence of an uncomfortable Mesquida kiss-
ing the male actor poorly. Due to the lack of chemistry between the actor 
and actress, the director herself replaces the male actor and demonstrates 
how to perform the kiss. The comedy is then entirely devastated by the 
final sequence. Following from the actress’s scream “in extremis,” the two 
unnamed performers are shot in medium close-up. Mesquida’s character 
is still in tears following that initial panic and multiple screams. Her tears 
now fully complicate the division between on-screen and off-screen; we 

184   T. Bordun
have lost track of the realities depicted in the film, much like Emma Wilson 
observed (2001: 154) of her viewing Caroline Ducey’s/Marie’s scene of 
sadomasochism in Breillat’s Romance (1999). The author could not iden-
tify her own affective engagements with the performer and character: 
Wilson asked herself whether Ducey was crying about the pain of bondage 
or performing the difficult scene—that is, crying in the profilmic event—
or whether these were the character’s tears after the brief trauma of sado-
masochism. Kath Dooley received Ducey’s performance in similar terms, 
but with reference to the character’s tears after the fictional rape (2014: 
110). But, as I noted above, Brinkema is critical of theory merely describ-
ing personal affective experience. Her discussion of Marion’s (Janet Leigh) 
single tear in Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho (1960) is more applicable to my 
discussion of Breillat’s performers—the tear in her films is no longer tied 
to a specific character or body (2014: 22). As Brinkema undertakes in her 
readings across three of Breillat’s films, I trace an affect and read the mate-
riality of the tear(s) in Romance, Fat Girl, and Sex is Comedy as a fold: what 
does the tear do as it bleeds through these three films, three films turning 
on the theme of feminine desire and patriarchal oppression?12 The personal 
accounts of Wilson and Dooley describe the layers of reality. My reading 
of Elena’s tears in the previous chapter and of Mesquida’s tears in this one 
speaks to the characters and performers, to be sure, but also to the count-
less tears shed by young girls and women at the hands of horrible men.
In this last scene of Sex is Comedy, one which warrants so much pref-
acing and theoretical investigation across not one but two chapters 
of the volume, the unnamed actor recites the same lines as Fernando: 
namely, the apparent truth that all the girls do it from behind, so “it” 
does not count. Anaïs’s perspective on the anal rape has been exchanged 
for the film crew’s. Without direction, the unnamed actor and the 
unnamed actress begin to play out the scene. Breillat states, “we never 
have rehearsal[s] – I film them right away” (Dooley 2014: 113, quot-
ing Breillat). This is Breillat’s tactic, to get “the magic and surprise of 
the spontaneous gesture” (2011c). “It’s terrifying. I don’t tell the actors 
a thing. I throw stuff at them. Even for complicated scenes, I don’t 
tell them anything,” she says elsewhere (Breillat 2011a). The unnamed 
12 Cf. Brinkema 2006. Brinkema provides a treatment of an affective bleed between A 
Real Young Girl (Une vraie jeune fille, 1976), Romance, and Fat Girl.

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   185
actor does not even bother to lubricate—in Fat Girl, Fernando licked 
his fingers and then lubricated her anus (shown not in a close-up, but 
in a diegetically implied gesture). In a passionate several minutes the 
unnamed actor gets astride, thrusting, and valiantly attempts to quell 
her still flowing tears by kissing her neck, cheek and ears. He chokes her 
slightly as well, and seems to enjoy this empowerment after his repeated 
emasculation regarding the donned fake member. Mesquida’s breasts 
spill out of her nightshirt, accomplished not as planned, it seems, but in 
the heat of the moment.
A repetition such as this would be obscene if we considered André 
Bazin’s philosophy of film. There are two unrepeatable moments that are 
subjects of the camera’s “impassive lens” yet violate the ontological prin-
ciples of life and film: the sexual act and death. The sexual act is meta-
physical and is experienced firsthand: death is “the unique moment par 
excellence” (Bazin [1958] 2003: 30). In a strange and incomplete effort 
at filmic self-censorship, Bazin claims that if cinema portrays the former, 
it is possible for the spectator to demand the latter ([1957] 2005b: 173). 
This is because sex and death are unrepresentable events that do not hap-
pen twice, and thus documenting them constitutes an obscenity, first, 
ontologically as a “desecration” to love and to the dead, and second, 
cinematically as fictions without “imagination” (Bazin 2003: 31, 2005b: 
174).13 “Ontological pornography” is the perversion of realist aesthetics, 
a perversion which neglects the abundance of creative and imaginative 
potential of film-production (Bazin 2005b: 173). It is “unaesthetic and 
therefore out of place” (Williams [1989] 1999: 186) to depict real sex 
and real death—it is what Williams calls a perversion of cinema, a mis-
use of (Bazinian) cinematic forms and codes (1999: 189). Despite the 
obscenity of shooting and playing back sex and death, the profilmic 
event is not entirely Bazin’s concern—that is, its indexical quality—but 
the actual emotions and physicality of the actors. Sexuality in the cin-
ema could lead spectators to confuse acting with real life. However, in 
13 Cf. Bazin (2003: 31): “I imagine the supreme cinematic perversion would be the pro-
jection of an execution backward like those comic newsreels in which the diver jumps up 
from the water back onto his diving board.” The opening of Michael Haneke’s Benny’s 
Video (1992), perhaps an antecedent to New Extremism, shoots Bazin’s fear. The execu-
tion of a pig is rewound then played back in slow motion.

186   T. Bordun
a contradictory move, Bazin claims that the ontologically real of pho-
tographed sex and death is, in fact, impossible to reproduce accurately. 
Any attempt to reproduce such a scene distorts the capacity for active 
spectatorship. The activity of spectatorship should instead be in the realm 
of imagination and illusion: the importance of a “simple story […] which 
never touches the level of reality,” never reaching a “documentary qual-
ity,” is imperative to cinematic realism (Bazin 2005b: 174). I argued in 
Chap. 3 that a “documentary quality” is essential to Reygadas’s aesthet-
ics, and in Chap. 4 the same held for Breillat’s aesthetics. But Bazinian 
realism only gets theory so far. We see the limits of Bazin’s philosophy 
of film when we consider these two directors’ oeuvres. If Sex is Comedy 
is a repetition, or a repeated performance of a prior performance, and 
Bazin’s assessment and criticism of cinematic sex and death have numer-
ous “objections” that could be rallied against them (Bazin 2005b: 174), 
there remains a theoretical void to be considered.
On the one hand, there is the here-and-now of spectatorship, the 
experience of pure presence of movement on-screen. “On the other 
hand, there is also the inevitable past tense of a recording that is also a 
reiteration, of inscribing the traces of an event that can circulated and 
witnessed far from the place and time of its original occurrence” (Doane 
2006: 35). Mary Ann Doane’s reflection on the ontological character 
of photography and film can be transposed to the reflexivity of Sex is 
Comedy. The film produces a reiteration of a scene in the past, thus dou-
bly constituting an ontological failure as the scene showcases that which 
should not be re-presented, the sexual act within the diegesis, and fur-
ther, is a repetition of the sexual act from the prior obscenity in Fat Girl. 
This repetition is also the here-and-now of spectatorship, a real bear-
ing witness to the nudity and performed sexuality. Therefore, the final 
sequence in the autofictional film drags on and carries a much heavier 
weight than Fat Girl. Mesquida must struggle, Keesey suggests (2009: 
64), like Elena; both must undergo an experience of shame, and feel 
ashamed during the performance, for authenticity. And not only does she 
embody this in the profilmic event; long takes and their duration can add 
an affective weight or heaviness to a sequence (Brinkema 2014: 105). 
Thus the re-performance of the rape scene carries the affects of the first 
film and brings them to bear on the later. Breillat’s observation (2011b) 
of the twentieth take in Fat Girl now seems more apt for Mesquida’s 
re-enactment in Sex is Comedy: it was “something heavier, more pain-
ful, more muted.” Additionally, unlike the previous film, we do not see 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   187
and hear a male orgasm to mark its finish—Jeanne softly addresses the 
crew with “cut” to put the motions to an end, and “the cut equates to 
an existentialist conception of death: it is the punctuation that allows 
what would otherwise be articulated, to become meaningful” (Best and 
Crowley 2007: 77). The simulated sexual act fades into oblivion with 
a lingering resonance on-screen or, like tears that leave salty traces on 
cheeks, so too does the heavy, painful, and muted sexual performance 
leave its mark on the black screen. This trace, I will argue in the next 
chapter, also embeds itself in spectators’ memories.
Mesquida’s performance is for the crew, exhibited by the shot-reverse-
shot. Additionally, Keesey contends (2009: 64) that Jeanne, behind her 
monitor, is the stand-in for the shaming gaze of the public eye. But 
the director is also her sympathetic companion as the unnamed actress 
continues to weep uncontrollably after the cut. Jeanne wraps her arms 
around the performer; then, unexpectedly, the unnamed actress smiles. 
The fade to black that concludes the film marks it with a sense of joy. 
“[W]hen you go to the end of an intimate scene, the actors take on an 
enormous pleasure from it, as does everyone on the set, even if, after-
ward, no one wants to admit it” (Keesey 2009: 65, quoting Breillat). 
In the filming of Fat Girl, Breillat mentions (2011b), after she uttered 
“Cut,” she went over and thanked both performers for participating in 
such an “ordeal.” Her kind words exhibit her satisfaction with the scene.
During filming, Roxane [Mesquida—in the role of Elena] and Libero [de 
Rienzo—in the role of Fernando] were amazingly brave. I think of cinema 
as an initiation, so ordeals are a part of it. For sex scenes, I make the actors 
do things that I don’t film. Then I film the state that it’s put them in. 
(2011c)
The affective dimension finds a home in the blurred space between 
fiction, reality, and the fictional repetition of a prior reality. The 
extradiegetic, intratextual, and the profilmic event contribute to the form 
of the film, the intensity of the scene perhaps largely dependent upon 
them. Breillat knows this. Yet there is room for a productive critique, 
especially given some of the director’s statements about young actors. 
Whether Mesquida’s roles were given ethical consideration by the film-
maker and her audiences will be the next question for this chapter. I look 
to Breillat’s (2001) feature Brief Crossing (Brève traversée) to situate this 
concern, then link it back to Mesquida’s performances.

188   T. Bordun
The Extradiegetic and Profilmic Event  
in Breillat’s Brief Crossing
Immediately following Fat Girl, Breillat directed a made-for-TV film for 
the Arte channel, as part of the series of ten on the topic of masculine/
feminine. Brief Crossing presents, in near real-time, the journey of the 
16-year-old and virginal Thomas (Gilles Guillain) and 30-something Alice 
(Sarah Pratt) from Le Havre to the shores of England via ferry. The title 
is quite literal in the sense of crossing the English Channel as well as the 
(brief) hours of onboard sex and romance. Breillat develops a number of 
the same themes of patriarchal oppression, male seduction, etc., in the dia-
logue between Thomas and Alice—the latter wounded terribly by men in 
the previous years of her life, the former not yet part of the world in which 
men consistently damage women emotionally. The brief crossing, however, 
will be Thomas’s rite of passage into the horrors he may one day com-
mit as an adult male: the narrative is centered upon the production of a 
misogynist. Keesey suggests (2009: 102–103) that Thomas, after his aban-
donment by Alice when they reach the shore, will go on to lose his sen-
sitivity and tenderness—traits he expressed in his romance with the older 
woman—and further, will likely never open himself up to love—that is, 
present his vulnerability—ever again. Alice shatters the illusion of love by 
lying to him about her life—alone, divorced, mistreated by men—and left 
the young man in the rain. More tears appear in a Breillat film: Thomas’s 
eyes turn red and moist as Alice speeds away with husband and child, with-
out as much as a look of acknowledgment, appreciation, or farewell.
Keesey proposes that Thomas is the younger version of Christophe 
from Breillat’s earlier feature Perfect Love (Parfait amour, 1996). There 
a 28-year-old man falls for a 40-year-old woman, and this man cannot 
control his jealousy and hatred of women, leading to a brutal murder. 
Reading Breillat’s films intratextually, we may also say that in just a few 
years Thomas could become Elena’s Fernando. It would also be appropri-
ate to hypothesize Alice as the older Elena, had the teenager not been slain 
in that story. Alice spends a great deal of time proclaiming generally the 
psychological horrors men have committed against women. If an affect is 
to be located here, it is withdrawal from or apathy to the world, and this is 
all the more emphasized by the low resolution of the digital camera. The 
duration of Alice’s partial monologues creates a rhythm, enhanced by the 
conflict of opinions between Alice and Thomas as the camera slowly pans 
back and forth between the protagonists during their arguments. “There’s 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   189
no love,” she quips in the middle of foreplay with Thomas, “just ploys to 
bed us,” giving a voice to Elena’s deflowering by Fernando in Fat Girl.
Keesey does not pay enough attention to the sexual and emotional 
performances or to the formal qualities of Breillat’s films. An affective 
consideration of the performances would reinforce his conclusions about 
the film’s message and how it was possible for him to be affected by the 
film’s images and narratives (2009: 9). For instance, the most popular dis-
cussion on the IMDB.com message board is about Brief Crossing’s sex 
scene. Similar to many debates surrounding extreme films, the one about 
Brief Crossing initially centered on whether or not “real sex” occurred 
between the performers and if so, the complications with Guillain being 
a minor (under age 18) on the one hand (he was actually 19 at the time, 
although this was his first film), and praising Breillat’s use of unsimulated 
sex in narrative cinema on the other. After a lengthy seduction—who is 
seducing whom becomes one of the more interesting questions of the 
story—Thomas and Alice go to the latter’s room. Thomas undresses anx-
iously, hiding his genitals, evidently ashamed. His gestures mark a depar-
ture from Breillat’s earlier focus on the shame exhibited by her female 
protagonists. “Inside [the room], the virginal Thomas is initially shy: he 
undresses with his back to Alice and shuffles toward her in his underwear 
while biting his thumb as if sucking it like a little boy” (Keesey 2009: 
101). The probably simulated sex that follows is shot from the head of 
the bed, and the two lovers/performers roll atop one another. Thomas, 
obviously the more enthusiastic, wraps up the intercourse rather quickly.14
While the cinematography offers an intimate portrait of sexual inter-
course with the use of a close-up, it is more significant to note the changes 
in Guillain’s skin tone and bodily comportment, seemingly caught una-
wares by the digital camera. The redness of Thomas’s skin (heightened 
by the low resolution) and his shaking and nervousness are described by 
Breillat, if we believe her, as the embodied responses of the actor: he is, in 
fact, a virgin—he has “never done that with a girl before” (Breillat 2004). 
To shoot the scene without rehearsal, then, was significant if the affect 
of his (fictional) loss of virginity was to come across to viewers. Reygadas 
used the same tactic in Battle in Heaven, shooting the penetrative sex scene 
14 This is something Breillat depicts in all of her films. While she is known for the long 
take and graphic simulated and unsimulated sex, the men are inadequate in their longevity. 
The male orgasm is always accomplished in under two minutes.

190   T. Bordun
between Marcos and Ana before the two had the chance to work together 
on set under more normal circumstances. In both Battle in Heaven and 
Brief Crossing, the documentation of the sexual performances offers embar-
rassment and shame not only diegetically but also visibly in the bodily com-
portment of the actors. Similar to Marcos, Ana, and Mesquida, the limits 
of acting are tested as Guillain exhibits his abilities to get into a role slightly 
thwarted by his embodied experiences. Thus film criticism and theory 
requires a shift from an assessment of acting—for example, delivering dia-
logue and exhibiting “the grain of the voice”—to an evaluation of perfor-
mance alongside both the demands of the scene and from the embodied 
existence of the performer. Whether Guillain’s and Mesquida’s roles are 
given ethical consideration by the filmmakers and audiences will be the final 
question for analysis, focusing on the latter, Mesquida, to answer for both 
of the young and then burgeoning performers.15
The Ethics of Breillat’s Method
It must be difficult. If it’s easy for the actors, there will be no suffering, no 
danger, no beauty.
Catherine Breillat, “2001 Berlin International Film Festival”
Given that performances in her films require an extra amount of bravery 
and produce an excessive amount of anxiety—for example, the scream in 
Sex is Comedy and the countless tears across several works—Breillat should 
show some form(s) of responsibility to her actors. The demand placed on 
Breillat’s actors and actresses is incalculable: consider the twenty takes of a 
scene Mesquida did not wish to perform, the scene’s emotional intensity, 
plus a performed sexual act bordering on the real (or at least causing some 
discomfort for both Mesquida and boyfriend). If Breillat invokes some-
thing like de Beauvoir’s description of deflowering—as “destruction”, 
15 Since working on Breillat’s The Last Mistress, Mesquida has continued to have a mod-
erately successful career. She has a starring role in Philippe Grandrieux’s Malgré la nuit 
(2015), a filmmaker associated with extreme cinema (although, like Reygadas, he has 
moved beyond using the shocks of sex and violence in his films—Grandrieux’s formal 
excesses are much more experimental in nature). Guillain has had much less success than 
Mesquida. He has played roles in a few shorts and an occasional feature-length film.

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   191
“defilement”, and “violation [viol]” (1989: 155, 375, 383)—and power 
relations between the genders, then perhaps a re-performance of that 
trauma needs to be taken into account. Yet, when asked after the film-
ing of Brief Crossing whether she felt responsibility for her young actors, 
Breillat shirked it, saying she is “not a social worker,” and besides, “actors 
are pretentious” (2004). “The first thing to protect is the film,” she una-
bashedly states (Wiegand 2001).
This seemingly unethical remark is all the more troubled by Catherine 
Wheatley’s argument about Sex is Comedy. Wheatley argues that the twenty-
five-minute seduction scene in Fat Girl—that is, the rape performed by the 
fictional Fernando—is similar to, in Sex is Comedy, Jeanne’s long seduction 
of the unnamed actress. In this sequence, equally long, the director coerces 
the actress to shoot the final sex scene in the nude despite her desire to 
remain clothed. The latter sequence’s duration and abuse thus rival that of 
the former. Wheatley concludes (2010: 37) that both Fernando and Jeanne 
conquer Elena/the unnamed actress/Mesquida with a kiss, punctuating 
the man’s rape and director’s coercion into performance as “the symbol 
of the seducer’s ultimate betrayal of their victims, feigning love in the pur-
suit of self-serving gratification.” We may invoke de Beauvoir again (1989: 
152): she suggests that it is not only sexual pleasure that men seek, but the 
desire “to conquer, to take, to possess.” Thus the fictional film centered 
on the loss of virginity is the mise en abyme of Breillat’s filmmaking meth-
ods. Where de Beauvoir (1989: 385) describes deflowering as the act of 
aggressor who takes a woman’s body from her, and humiliates, overpowers, 
forces, and conquers her, she may well be speaking of Breillat’s art.
Breillat works as an aggressor. Sex is Comedy shows the unnamed 
actress immobile and in tears: she has been transformed from a young 
girl into a woman after her first filmic sexual encounter. The woman “lies 
in the posture of defeat […] She feels passive: she is caressed, penetrated; 
she undergoes coition, whereas the man [or Breillat] exerts himself 
actively” (de Beauvoir 1989: 385).16 Nevertheless, in 2007, countering 
16 We might locate Georges Bataille’s influence on Breillat in the latter’s connection with 
de Beauvoir. Bataille and Breillat’s similarities are not merely in the likenesses between their 
transgressive heroines, particularly Simone in Story of the Eye (Histoire d’oeil, 1928) and 
Alice in A Real Young Girl, or in the transgressive sex found in Romance and Anatomy of 
Hell (Anatomie de l’enfer, 2004). Breillat is at her most Bataillean in Fat Girl and Sex is 
Comedy: the sexual act, for the philosopher and the filmmaker, is always in the domain of 
violence.

192   T. Bordun
any possible controversy surrounding unreasonable requests, Mesquida 
asserted that Breillat “teaches me to discover my emotions, at the risk 
of being submerged by them. But it’s so good! I have such confidence 
in her that I completely let myself go, because I know very well that she 
will not abandon me” (Keesey 2009: 9, translation Keesey). Mesquida 
can say, post-filmmaking, that her job “was really easy.” “It was really 
easy and I’ve never been so happy in my life,” Mesquida had told 
Breillat. Mesquida, after Fat Girl and according to Breillat, had become 
a “real actress […] whose intimate feelings are revealed to the world” 
(2011b). “She could say these words to the camera, at the same time 
blushing with shame. For a young girl, she was just marvelous” (Breillat 
in Rich 2001). Returning to the starting point of my chapter, Mesquida, 
after Fat Girl, was becoming an auteur. Breillat positively asserts 
(Wiegand 2001) that one must get into a role because that is the chosen 
career, then get out of the role and put personal identity back together 
again. Mesquida, through much work, was able to ignore the reality 
of the set and focus on the reality of the role despite her humiliation, 
shame, and tears. She performed as a young girl in a world where men as 
well as women such as Breillat, in various ways, seduce and coerce.
While the analogy can be drawn between Breillat as seducer and 
Mesquida as coerced victim, the director employs the same tactics with 
her male actors, thereby leveling the power dynamics between the gen-
ders on set and, as Keesey contends, in the film as well. Ince (2006: 162) 
observes that Jeanne’s treatment of the male actor is likewise coercive, 
hence the numerous conversations “tête-a-tête […] in which she coaxes, 
cajoles, and bullies him into a convincing performance.” We find within 
the film a further message about gender and power, both on-screen and 
culturally. Keesey observes (2009: 69):
[t]his exchange [between Jeanne and the unnamed male actor] denatu-
ralizes the ‘active male’ and ‘passive female’ roles to show that they are 
indeed roles, with either sex able to play both parts, desiring and desired. 
[…] Thus, by mocking certain gender roles and by revealing that these are 
indeed performances […], Jeanne/Breillat shows that sex is comedy.
According to Breillat, the cinema can simultaneously represent contradic-
tions. Ambiguities over directorial responsibility are rendered as ambigu-
ous as the motives, desires, and pleasures and pains depicted on-screen. 
Consequently, the fictional narrative of a deflowering and the fictional 

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   193
narrative of the filmmaking of a fictional deflowering are doubly complex 
and meaningful, speaking to ethical problems within the respective diege-
sis and then, as paired films, out to the spectator who mobilizes these 
ethical problems not just for the obvious issue of male aggression and 
patriarchal oppression but also to question the techniques filmmakers can 
use to present and represent these social and cultural concerns. Placing 
Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy side-by-side revealed an ethical mode of film-
making. For Sarah Cooper’s theory of documentary ethics (2006: 23), 
“the documentary subject is always more than his or her image. [This 
excess of the subject/image] becomes a space of responsibility which per-
sistently resists any attempt to reduce those we see either to their image, 
or to an image of ourselves.” In the final section of this chapter, I put 
forward a theory of ethical spectatorship for extreme cinema audiences.
Affective and Possessive Spectatorship
In the last paragraph I noted how spectators can mobilize the affects of a 
film to address social, political, and ethical issues. This is not to fall victim to 
an affective fallacy. For Brinkema, the affects are not internal to the viewer, 
nor does the viewer receive them as a force from the film itself. She contends 
that affects are inherent in the form of the film and therefore require a close 
reading of the work. Earlier in the chapter, I expanded the scope of close 
reading of form to include performances, extradiegetic materials, and intra-
textuality. In this section I move from the film itself to discussion of specta-
torship. What do my earlier investigations unveil about the spectatorship of 
Battle in Heaven and Sex is Comedy, and in the Chap. 7, prior conceptualiza-
tions of pornography spectatorship? I use the latter film to assist me in refor-
mulating an argument about the nature of pornography spectatorship and, 
where appropriate, I connect the discussion to Reygadas’s work.
In extreme cinema performers are required to strain their physical 
and emotional strength up to the point of encroaching upon personal 
and private values, acts, and practices. The body of the performer is 
pushed to its limits by directors such as Reygadas and Breillat, and their 
performers exert themselves no less than artists testing their respec-
tive physical forms for aesthetic or political ends. These roles, I have 
been arguing, give the interactions between characters, whether physi-
cal or emotional or both, their supposed intensity/affectivity, because 
performing, Williams suggests (2008: 296–297), “involves the feeling 
of emotions generated between the actors, who are not just putting on 

194   T. Bordun
an appearance, but on some level, necessarily feeling.” Performance is a 
revealing to the world of one’s “intimate feelings” (Breillat 2011b). In 
Breillat’s films this is accomplished through sexual acts and other inter-
personal contact as well as fictional traumas which may impact the star’s 
world outside the film. This is done at the performer’s risk. Yet spectators 
can minimize the risk by implicating themselves in the film and by being 
attentive to their responses to the work. It is perhaps not incongruent to 
suggest a viewing position that includes absorption, critical thinking, and 
ethical consideration as the best way to understand Breillat’s oeuvre.
Laura Mulvey’s conclusion in “The Possessive Spectator” is help-
ful here. She problematizes apparatus theory, stating that the automata 
(the human bodies that appear in the cinematic image) are in fact “an 
actual, literal inscription of the figure’s living movements” (2006: 161). 
Her account addresses the problem of Cavell’s “human something,” 
a concept invoked in Chap. 4 of this volume. Cavell saw that the cin-
ema produces a strange relation between actor and audience: the former 
is in the presence of the latter while the latter is not present to the for-
mer. Precisely “who is present” on-screen becomes a topic for Cavell’s 
investigation. He concludes that the star “explores his role like an attic 
and takes stock of his physical and temperamental endowment; he lends 
his being to the role and accepts only what fits” (Cavell 1979: 28). In 
Mulvey’s terms, the real and extradiegetic elements “intrude from out-
side the scene and off screen giving an unexpected vulnerability to a star’s 
on-screen performance” (Mulvey 2006: 160). Signification is blurred by 
the iconicity, in the case of a star, or, as I argued above, drawing from the 
performer’s somatic archive as a component of his or her performance. 
This extradiegetic quality (for Mulvey, “semi-biography, anecdote and 
gossip”; for my analysis, trauma, boyfriends, and nudity) is a compulsory 
component of the star’s image on-screen, becoming “inextricably woven 
into the narrative by performance, in gesture and action.” Bazin believed 
the same when he observed that Carl Th. Dreyer’s The Passion of Joan of 
Arc (La Passion de Jeanne d’Arc, 1928) has a timelessness due, in part, 
to viewers’ knowledge of the extradiegetic conditions of the filmmaking 
([1951] 2005a: 109). Indeed, we may suggest with Cavell that the “per-
former is not an actor at all: he is the subject of study, and a study not his 
own” (1979: 28). Thus I possess the star, Mesquida, across the paired 
films, the latter film providing extradiegetic and profilmic elements which 
further that possession when I re-watch/re-think the former. This is 
what I call an “affective bleed.” Affective bleed names this moment when  

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   195
a film breaks spectatorship from pre-discursive immanence and activates 
our memory of a related film. Further, in the affective bleed, the conse-
quence of pairing the films is that an unknown actress becomes iconic in 
the sense Mulvey describes.
The crucial point I want to make is that reception and spectator-
ship are tied to the following elements identified in the affective bleed 
between Breillat’s paired films: the performer and her past, including 
the difficulties in shooting a film, her performance and use of her body, 
and finally the moving images where these two personages—one real 
and one fictional—coincide, shift, and change places depending on the 
viewer and the viewing experience. This consideration runs counter to 
Lisa Coulthard’s claim (2010: 64), paraphrasing Slavoj Žižek, that “the 
filmed sexual act always relies upon a derealization, an emphasizing of 
the performative and spectatorial contract – even when it is clearly pre-
sented as actually occurring.” Sex is Comedy has shown us that the experi-
ence of this fictional film is quite real in a number of different registers.
We can therefore draw three interconnecting ethical nodes, each of 
which has been implicit in my above arguments: (1) ethical filmmaking 
requires that the director be aware of the degree in which their film(s) 
blurs the fiction/reality boundary—once considered, possible coercive 
directing methods may be employed, at the risk of both director and 
performer; (2) in conjunction with the first point, performers must fully 
consider the risks they are willing to take for their art and be prepared 
for the possible repercussions, on set and in the world; and (3) specta-
tors should not reduce a difficult performance to a display of nudity as an 
attempt to arouse, and neither should spectators, and producers of films 
for that matter, let one sexual performance hinder an actor’s or actress’s 
chances of performing in future roles and artistic endeavors. On all three 
levels, ethical filmmaking and ethical spectatorship pose great challenges; 
however, this is what Breillat desires: “I hope people will leave the film 
troubled, totally uneasy yet totally happy” (2011c).
References
Austin, Guy. 2004. The Amateur Actors of Cannes 1999: A Shock to the (Star) 
System. French Cultural Studies 15 (3): 251–263.
Bazin, André. [1958] 2003. Death Every Afternoon. In Rites of Realism: Essays 
on Corporeal Cinema, ed. Ivone Margulies. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.

196   T. Bordun
Bazin, André. 2005a. What is Cinema? Volume 1, trans. and ed. Hugh Gray. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press.
Bazin, André. 2005b. What is Cinema? Volume 2, trans. and ed. Hugh Gray. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press.
Best, Victoria, and Martin Crowley. 2007. The New Pornographies: Explicit Sex 
in Recent French Fiction and Film. Manchester and New York: Manchester 
University.
Bordun, Troy. 2014. Camera-Confessional/Camera-Therapist. http://www.vimeo.
com/troybordun.
Bordun, Troy. 2017. The End of Extreme Cinema Studies. Canadian Review of 
Comparative Literature 1 (44): 122–136.
Breger, Claudia. 2014. Configuring Affect: Worldmaking in Fatih Akin’s Auf der 
anderen Seite (The Edge of Heaven). Cinema Journal 54 (1), Afterthoughts 
and Postscripts.
Breillat, Catherine. 2004. Director Interview. In Brief Crossing. Wellspring 
Media. DVD.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011a. The Making of Fat Girl. In Fat Girl. The Criterion 
Collection. Blu-Ray.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011b. Catherine Breillat Talks About Her Film. In Fat Girl. 
The Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Breillat, Catherine. [2001] 2011c. 2001 Berlin International Film Festival. In 
Fat Girl. The Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006a. Celluloid is Sticky: Sex, Death, Materiality, 
Metaphysics (in Some Films by Catherine Breillat). Women: A Cultural 
Review 17 (2): 147–170.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2014. The Forms of the Affects. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film, 
Enlarged ed. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 1981. Pursuits of Happiness: The Hollywood Comedy of 
Remarriage. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Cooper, Sarah. 2006. Selfless Cinema? Ethics and French Documentary. London: 
Legenda.
Coulthard, Lisa. 2010. Desublimating Desire: Courtly love and Catherine 
Breillat. Journal for Cultural Research 14 (1): 57–69.
De Beauvoir, Simone. [1949] 1989. The Second Sex, trans. and ed. H.M. 
Parshley. New York: Vintage Books.
De Luca, Tiago. 2014. Realism of the Senses in World Cinema: The Experience of 
Physical Reality. London and New York: I.B. Tauris.
Doane, Mary Ann. 2006. Real Time: Instantaneity and the Photographic 
Imaginary. In Stillness and Time: Photography and the Moving Image, ed. D. 
Green and J. Lowry, 23–38. Brighton: Photowork/Photoforum.

6  ON-SCREEN AND OFF-SCREEN FLESH AND BLOOD: PERFORMANCE …   197
Dooley, Kath. 2014. ‘When You Have Your Back to the Wall, Everything 
Becomes Easy’: Performance and Direction in the Films of Catherine Breillat. 
Studies in French Cinema 14 (2): 108–118.
Dyer, Richard. [1979] 2009. From Stars. In Film Theory and Criticism, ed. 
Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen, 7th ed., 480–485. Oxford and New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Foltz, Jonathan. 2011. Betraying Oneself: Silent Light and the World of 
Emotion. Screen 52 (2): 151–172.
Frey, Mattias. 2016. Extreme Cinema: The Transgressive Rhetoric of Today’s Art 
Film Culture. New Brunswick, NJ and London: Rutgers.
Hoberman, J. 2012. Film After Film Or, What Became of 21st Century Cinema? 
London and New York: Verso.
Ince, Katherine. 2006. Is Sex Comedy or Tragedy? Directing Desire and Female 
Auteurship in the Cinema of Catherine Breillat. The Journal of Aesthetics and 
Art Criticism 64 (1): 157–164.
James, Nick. 2005. Angels and Demons. Sight & Sound 15 (11): 30–33.
Keesey, Douglas. 2009. Catherine Breillat. Manchester and New York: 
Manchester University Press.
Lahr-Vivaz, Elena. 2008. Unconsummated Desires and the Fragmented 
Nation: Contemporary Latin American Film and Fiction. Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania.
Mulvey, Laura. 2006. The Possessive Spectator. In Stillness and Time: Photography 
and the Moving Image, ed. D. Green and J. Lowry, 51–63. Brighton: Photowork/
Photoforum.
Paasonen, Susanna. 2011. Carnal Resonance: Affect and Online Pornography. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Paasonen, Susanna. 2013. Grains of Resonance: Affect, Pornography and Visual 
Sensation. Somatechnics 3 (2): 351–368.
Penn, Sheldon. 2013. The Time-Image in Carlos Reygadas’ Stellet Licht: A 
Cinema of Immanence. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 90 (7): 1159–1181.
Quandt, James. [2004] 2011. Flesh and Blood: Sex and Violence in Recent 
French Cinema. In The New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, 
ed. Tanya Horeck and Tina Kendall, 18–25. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2009. Interview with Director Carlos Reygadas and Actress 
Anapola Mushkadiz. In Battle in Heaven. Palisades Tartan. DVD.
Rich, B. Ruby. 2001. End of Innocence. Filmmaker Magazine. http://filmmak-
ermagazine.com/archives/issues/fall2001/features/end_innocence.php. 
Accessed 28 Dec 2012.
Smith, Clarissa. 2012. Reel Intercourse: Doing Sex on Camera. In Hard to 
Swallow? Hard-core Pornography on Screen, ed. Claire Hines and Darren Kerr, 
194–214. London: Wallflower Press.

198   T. Bordun
Waugh, Thomas. 2011. The Right to Play Oneself: Looking Back on Documentary 
Film. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Webster’s New World: College Dictionary. 1999. 4th ed. Foster City, CA: IBG 
Books Worldwide, Inc.
Wheatley, Catherine. 2010. Contested Interactions: Watching Catherine Breillat’s 
Scenes of Sexual Violence. Journal for Cultural Research 14 (1): 27–41.
Wiegand, Chris. 2001. A Quick Chat with Catherine Breillat. Kamera. http://
www.kamera.co.uk/interviews/catherinebreillat.html. Accessed 12 Dec 2012.
Williams, Linda. 1995. Corporealized Observers: Visual Pornographies and the 
‘Carnal Density of Vision’, In Fugitive Images: From Photography to Video, ed. 
Patrice Petro. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1989] 1999. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the “Frenzy of the 
Visible”. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Williams, Linda. [1984] 2011. ‘Something Else Besides a Mother:’ Stella Dallas 
and the Maternal Melodrama. In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic and 
Contemporary Readings. ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta 
Mazaj, 725–739. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Wilson, Emma. 2001. Deforming Femininity: Catherine Breillat’s Romance. In 
France on Film: Reflections on Popular French Cinema, ed. Lucy Mazdon, 
145–157. London: Wallflower.
Wollen, Peter. [1969/1972] 1981. The auteur Theory (Extract). In Theories of 
Authorship: A Reader, ed. John Caughie, 138–151. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Yacavone, Daniel. 2015. Film Worlds: A Philosophical Aesthetics of Cinema. New 
York: Columbia University Press.

199
Pornography and Psychoanalytic Film Theory
Continuing the theoretical investigations of Chap. 5—that is, my link-
ing of Williams’s psychoanalytically inspired theory of body genres to 
recent accounts of embodiment in the film experience—in this chapter 
I will expand upon this theory of spectatorship and genre in regards to 
the films investigated above. To begin, I will argue that spectatorship of 
pornography cannot be accounted for by psychoanalytic theory alone, 
despite widespread attempts to do so. A pornographic film tinged with 
melodrama and horror, such as those in Breillat’s oeuvre, is a haptic and 
tactile engagement. This claim substantiates itself from the analyses of 
forms in the previous sections.
The spectatorship theory I put forward here requires the combi-
nation of three differing yet intertwined modes of the film experience. 
First there is psychic reality at work, explained in the previous chapter’s 
section on horror as the symbolic representation of genre as well as the 
imaginary component whereby certain viewers identify and relate to the 
fictional characters; second, as the psychic reality dissipates or malfunc-
tions, disrupting both the symbolic and imaginary orders, spectators 
embody the emanations from the celluloid, performers, and narrative, 
the result of which is an engagement with the senses; and third, the 
paired films discussed above involve psychic and bodily processes which 
were necessary to remember the events and details of both the features. 
To articulate this last mode, I will expand the concept developed by 
CHAPTER 7
Reframing Spectatorship Theory 
with Extreme Cinema
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_7

200   T. Bordun
Victor Burgin: “the remembered film.” Before discussing Burgin, I will 
detail the conflicting accounts of one psychoanalytic theory and one phe-
nomenological theory.
In Looking Awry (1991), Žižek argues that cinematic enjoyment is 
lost when viewing pornography. There is something amiss with this 
genre when compared with the pleasures of otherwise narrative cinema. 
First, he asserts (1991: 109) that, from the look of the viewing subject, 
pornography is supposed to reveal all that is hidden, echoing Williams’s 
discovery that pornography has always had this function, from Kinsey 
to Deep Throat (Gerard Damiano, 1972) and beyond. But this reveal-
ing is too much for the spectator: “it misses what remained concealed in 
a ‘normal’ nonpornographic love scene” (Žižek 1991: 110).1 In “going 
too far,” pornographic representations unveil the narrative function as 
a superfluous element; narrative takes a back seat to the sexual perfor-
mance, showing instead “a stupid plot serving as a pretext for the actors 
to begin copulation.” The actors appear to launch out of the plot and 
become extradiegetic performers as these introductory formalities need 
“to be gotten over as quickly as possible so as to begin tackling the 
‘real thing’” (Žižek 1991: 111). This is the “on time!” of pornography 
Williams discusses in her essay “Film Bodies.” Žižek additionally suggests 
that the actors in porn films always already have the knowledge of which 
genre they are in: that is, the characters on-screen are ready, willing, and 
able for sex when the moment/camera beckons. He calls this a “knowl-
edge of the real,” a kind of knowing too much of something (Žižek 
1991: 44), namely the truth of the falsity of the cinematic illusion. I 
interpret this knowledge as the real outside of the film, including the 
actor who knows his or her place in the respective genre as well as the 
spectator who looks upon the film with visual pleasure if it aligns with 
the subject’s desire (at the level of the symbolic and imaginary orders).
This leads Žižek to his second point about pornography. For Lacanian 
psychoanalysis, the gaze is always on the side of the object. “When I look at 
an object,” Žižek writes (1991: 109), “the object is always already gazing 
at me, and from a point in which I cannot see it.” He then quotes Jacques 
1 Cf. Heath (1981: 184–186). The psychoanalytic film theorist Stephen Health dismisses 
pornography in much the same way as Žižek and, following Christian Metz on the film 
experience generally, identifies it as a genre which promises to show everything, but reveals 
instead “the absence of the body.”

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   201
Lacan, who claims we cannot see the things that are looking at us, or, in 
other words, we cannot see the object’s gaze. There is something a priori 
to the normally seeing eye, Lacan argues ([1964] 1998: 72), namely “the 
pre-existence of a gaze—I see only from one point, but in my existence I 
am looked at from all sides.” Further, it is not the gaze Jean-Paul Sartre 
describes, as being caught in the midst of voyeurism by an other/Other 
and the accompanying shame. Lacan’s notion of the gaze, as the elusive 
and indiscernible gaze from an object, is constitutive of a subject’s function 
of desire. The gaze is the threat of castration or an otherwise perpetual state 
of anxiety which constitutes the field of human experience (Lacan 1998: 
84–85, 88–89). It is important to stress this elusive something that is out-
side the field of phenomenological experience—Lacan calls it the stain of 
perception (1998: 72–74), the mark on the object which signifies “the pre-
existence to the seen of a given-to-be-seen.” Working against certain strains 
of phenomenological theory, Lacan contends that a stain occurs in percep-
tion which haunts a subject as that which is there, in existence, without a 
human awareness, consciousness, and intentionality. The stain is the neces-
sary point from which the object gazes at us; according to Žižek, this stain 
that “sticks out” and has no meaning, leads the subject to try continually to 
produce meanings: “it is a driving force of endless compulsion” (1991: 91). 
The stain organizes desire around the elusive search for an object that can 
never be truly possessed. A lack, then, seems to constitute psychic reality, 
resulting in an anxiety of castration or in other words, the knowledge of the 
real (Žižek 1991: 83–87).
Žižek’s most potent example of this lack/real problem is from Alfred 
Hitchcock’s Vertigo (1958). He writes:
The hero [Scottie] puts all his effort into transforming Judy into a new 
‘Madeleine,’ into producing a sublime object, when, all of a sudden, he 
becomes aware that ‘Madeleine’ herself was Judy, this common girl. The 
point of such a reversal is not that an earthly woman can never fully con-
form to the sublime ideal; on the contrary, it is the sublime object herself 
(“Madeleine”) that loses her power of fascination. (1991: 85)
In Vertigo, when the knowledge of the real is attained, the fantasy is 
crushed, and desire ceases to function. The validity or details of Lacan’s 
claims about the gaze as well as Žižek’s are not the objects of interest 
here, merely how they describe the functions of the psyche and its rela-
tion to spectatorship. We can now bring these psychoanalytic concepts to 

202   T. Bordun
bear on Žižek’s writings on pornography spectatorship. The organization 
of desire, Žižek claims, is off-kilter in the pornographic film experience.
After the first claim that pornography is narratively stupid, Žižek’s sec-
ond criticism of pornography is that it positions the viewing subject as 
an object and, further, the films in this genre do not contain the mysteri-
ous point—the stain—in the form of a gaze. Žižek suggests it is we who 
stupidly gaze at the actors copulating, and subsequently the viewer also 
becomes an object for the look of those performers. “[T]he fundamental 
prohibition determining the direction of the gaze of actors on the screen 
is suspended in a pornographic movie, the actor – as a rule, the woman – 
in the moment of intense sexual pleasure looks directly into the camera, 
addressing us, the spectators” (Žižek 1991: 180n6). The real subjects, he 
continues, are the actors who try to stimulate our sexual and voyeuristic 
pleasure; spectators are objects for them. Paul Willemen ([1980] 2006: 
51) locates this look more in line with Sartre, stating that the direct 
address to the spectator from the porn actress surprises the viewer and 
causes shame. Willemen also establishes that in the midst of this surprise 
there is the mark of the not-to-be-looked-at of copulating bodies: that 
is, from the censorship of the superego, or the legalized censorship of 
authorities, or possibly the two combined. Whatever definition we need 
to give this exchange of looks and gazes, the whole of the organizational 
structure of desire is thrown out of joint by the malfunctioning image in 
the pornographic feature.
Combining the two arguments, Žižek concludes that what we view in 
a pornographic video is a fundamental incongruence between an image 
and the narrative: along with the misplaced gaze—the performer looks 
at the viewer, the viewer becomes object for the performer—porn nar-
rates too much and shows us what we should only imagine, thus dis-
rupting our fantasy.2 Porn films constitute disillusionment in the viewer 
2 Cf. Willemen (2006: 56): “Porn imagery directly addresses the viewer with the fantasy 
itself. The fantasy no longer needs to be reconstructed. But now it is the very incarnation 
of the fantastic that cannot but produce a mismatch: the actors’ bodies […] the lighting, 
the sets, the noises on the sound track, everything is excessively concrete and never quite 
coincides with the selective vagueness of a fantasy image. A sexual fantasy can proceed very 
satisfactorily without having to specify the pattern of the wallpaper. A filmic fantasy cannot. 
In porn, and perhaps in all films, it is the loss generated by the friction between the fantasy 
looked for and the fantasy displayed that sustains the desire for ever-promised and never-
found gratification.”

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   203
who wanted to be shown all—the viewer realizes the film object is una-
ble to (re)produce his or her fantasy. Instead, the spectator experiences 
the images and narrative as so obviously a fake—what is produced is “an 
effect of depressing desublimation” (Žižek 1991: 111). In other words, a 
flat image or the death of a viewer’s imagination. The psychoanalytic film 
theorist Stephen Heath argues that the foundation of spectatorship is the 
imagination, an imagined ideal whereby the ego finds the body it wants 
in or from the cinema—not the ideal body for the ego itself, but what it 
wants out of the cinema (1981: 188–189). Pornography, according to 
Žižek, halts this process, and no exchange of imagined bodies is possible. 
A harmony of narrative and explicitness, ego exchange and ideal body, is 
dissolved and not to be resolved (Žižek 1991: 110–111). Twice Žižek 
calls the joining of narrative and graphic sexuality “structurally impos-
sible.” His last few sentences in his short section on the genre deserve to 
be quoted at length:
Even if [the live sexual act in a narrative feature] were to be shot, it simply 
‘would not function’; the additional ten minutes would derail us, for the 
rest of the movie we would be unable to regain our balance and follow the 
narration with the usual disavowed belief in the diegetic reality. The sexual 
act would function as an intrusion of the real undermining the consistency 
of this diegetic reality. (Žižek 1991: 111, my emphasis)
In Chap. 3 I adopted the phrase “the intrusion of the real” from the film 
critic Paul Julian Smith to discuss Reygadas’s Post Tenebras Lux (2013). 
I now want to implement the term and its theoretical associations to dis-
cuss the experience of Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy. With the appropria-
tion and misuse of the pornography genre explicated in Chaps. 4 and 
5, and this new revelation elaborated in the previous chapter about the 
affects of the latter film, Žižek’s description of pornography turns into 
the theoretical foundation for Breillat’s films. Pornography is a failure, 
Žižek says, and Breillat seems aware of the genre’s failure to produce 
a harmonious narrative and series of congruent images. However, as I 
have argued, genre and spectatorship are not reducible to universalizing 
accounts such as Žižek’s. I therefore read a critique of naively classical 
notions of spectatorship in her work, particularly as a response to the 
desperate need of both theory and culture to develop multivalent con-
cepts and ideas about pornography.

204   T. Bordun
Breillat’s “monster” (Breillat 2011a) reappears when we try to find a 
link between psychoanalytic film theory and the theories of haptic visu-
ality and sensation. She says of Fat Girl: “Yes, there’s a story and there 
are scenes, but when they come together, they resonate with each other, 
and we feel the emotions that come not from any particular scene, but 
from nowhere specific.” Brinkema argues (2006: 160–161) that the 
monster is not the rape or murder but the celluloid from which we 
receive these emanations: “far from sanitizing it and protecting it from 
the male violence in the film, this material, temporal formulation should 
leave us shattered because our encounter with the cinema is not with 
flesh but always […] with the film proper.” But we must not forget, 
Jennifer Barker reminds us (2009: 29–30), the film experience is much 
more than screen and celluloid. She names it the “film’s skin,” a con-
tact between the concealed, invisible, and untouchable elements of the 
images and sounds—up there, on the screen—and the spectator’s body, 
which empathically embodies the revealed images and sounds. This is not 
an effort to describe what the experience is as such, the kind of criticism 
Brinkema notes as an affective fallacy; rather, it is a careful treatment of 
the film experience as it is lived in a mutual exchange amongst screen, 
apparatus, and observer. Laura U. Marks, similarly, names this a haptic 
visuality. “By engaging with an object in a haptic way,” Marks wrote, 
prior to Barker’s formulation (2000: 184), “I come to the surface of my 
self […], losing myself in the intensified relation with an other [the cel-
luloid, screen—the apparatus] that cannot be possessed.” Thus we see the 
“the film seeing,” Jennifer Barker writes, following Vivian Sobchack addi-
tionally (2009: 9), “we see its own (if humanly enabled) process of per-
ception and expression unfolding in space and time.” As I revealed in the 
previous chapters, Marks, Sobchack, Barker, and I share this theoretical 
point of departure whereby the bodies (images) on-screen are co-consti-
tuted with the bodies of spectators. The so-called “monster” that Breillat 
strangely identifies in Fat Girl—the affect from “nowhere specific,” 
an implacable and imprecise moment of co-constitution in the form of 
shock—is revived in Sex is Comedy through sensorial memory.
The Confrontation with the Real of the Film
Žižek seemed to be arguing that pornography is a failure of cinematic 
and narrative pleasure. Once pornography has been codified, its con-
ventions understood by its consumers, the images and sounds lose their 

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   205
capacity to produce sensation in the viewer. It is too much of a jumbled 
mess to function. Breillat’s films, on the other hand, have yet to be or are 
completely unable to be categorized and coded with certainty. This is her 
tactic, to refuse to be pigeonholed within generic terms. With neither 
definitive symbolic representation—in producing a genre film or in the 
form of being classified as a genre filmmaker—and imaginary representa-
tion—in the form of spectators’ direct identification with characters, an 
investment in their lives, and in an expected cause and effect pattern that 
clearly establishes a narrative arc—Breillat confronts viewers with the two 
notions of the real that are tied to the affective dimensions of the paired 
films. These two notions of the real are: (1) the extradiegetic materi-
als, the profilmic event, and the intratextuality discussed above in Sex 
is Comedy; and (2) the Lacanian version, which I discussed in Chap. 5 
(that part of our psychically mediated experience which is indefinable 
and allows the Symbolic and Imaginary orders to function). Marks’s 
theory in The Skin of the Film (2000) and Burgin’s in The Remembered 
Film (2004) can help explain the paired films’ affects and their implica-
tions for spectatorship theory: in other words, to build a bridge between 
two concepts of real/the real. The key concept Marks develops is haptic 
visuality. While discussing Marks, Jennifer Barker argues (2009: 37) that 
haptic visuality is the “horizontal look along a flat surface,” and in that 
look something of the surface of the images make contact with a specta-
tor; it is a touching with the eyes, a tactile perception. But we will see 
that the reduction of the film experience to a theory of tactility is, like 
the case for Žižek’s psychoanalytic account of spectatorship, insufficient 
to account fully for the experience of watching Breillat’s films.
Žižek’s theory of spectatorship fails to account for Breillat’s porno-
graphic films because it posits something like a command over the image. 
Pornography, for Žižek, is voyeurism, which entails, according to Marks, a 
distance between object and viewer. Marks would rather posit an eroticism 
of the image, a closeness to what is seen without possessing or mastering 
it. “Visual erotics,” she claims (2000: 184), “allows the object of vision 
to remain inscrutable.” In the incomprehensibility of the image we find 
ourselves implicated because a haptic visuality is a relationship of “mutu-
ality,” opposed to the psychoanalytic description of spectatorial opposi-
tion and distance (Marks 2000: 183, 184). Marks thinks of the image as 
an other that cannot be possessed, and therefore this element of mutu-
ality or mutual recognition, as an intersubjective relationship between 
“beholder and a work of cinema,” is erotic—the viewer gives herself over 

206   T. Bordun
to the image and loses herself in it (2000: 183, 184). Haptic visuality is 
not merely what is seen, the relationship to a narrative or character, or the 
aura of an actor for that matter; with co-constitution, spectators arrive at 
the “surface of the image,” not just what is represented therein. Marks 
describes it (2000: 185) as a dialectical movement between the surface 
and “depth of the image” (its content). As I outlined in the Introduction, 
this requires the passivity and activity of spectatorship, the ability to lose 
oneself while also willingly giving up a mastery of the image.
From the conclusions Marks posits, Jennifer Barker (2009: 36) sug-
gests that we simultaneously experience our own body and that of the 
surface of the image, or what she calls the “film’s body,” in a sense 
which is both “here” with our own bodily surfaces and “there” in con-
tact with the surfaces of the film’s body. Barker describes the film’s body 
as a lived body “capable of perception of expression and the expression 
of perception.” In other words, the film’s body is not a human body, a 
subject or subjectivity, but acts as if embodied and material in a “irreduc-
ible relation with the world […]: the film […] perceives, experiences, is 
immersed in, and has a vantage point on the world, and without a doubt 
the film signifies, or otherwise there would be nothing at all for us to 
see, hear, feel, or interpret” (Barker 2009: 9). Following Marks, Barker 
claims that there is an exchange or mutuality or reversibility between the 
human body and the film’s body (2009: 19). In Chap. 2 I demonstrated 
how the theory of the film’s body works in Post Tenebras Lux. In Marks’s 
terms (2000: xii), we can speak of the relationship to the image as a 
brushing up against another body: the film is “impressionable and con-
ductive, like skin.” What is haptic, then, is the relinquishing of control in 
favor of this reversibility and grazing over the surface of an image before 
one has the time to “come to one’s senses” (so the phrase goes). Thus 
for Barker and Marks the film experience can be thoroughly about tex-
ture rather than “illusionistic depth” (Barker 2009: 38, quoting Marks).
In the spirit of erotics, Marks posits a caressing gaze. Barker, alterna-
tively (2009: 39), whose expanded ideas about the haptic are useful for 
Breillat’s features, includes the “gentle” as well as “aggressive or cruel, 
comforting or uncomfortable” gaze. Marks and Barker therefore appear 
to be correct about the film experience when we try to recount an image 
or scene within a particular film. On the one hand, the content is impor-
tant for fostering a spectator’s haptic visuality; however, in proximity to 
Brinkema’s theory of the affects, we can also consider something more 
formal: a haptic visuality can manifest in a feature that does not give us 

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   207
the frequent edits we are accustomed to. To give an example of how 
haptic visuality works in Fat Girl, I provide not a particular object or 
body in an image but the work of temporality and duration.
Tanya Horeck observes that many extreme films contain lengthy 
scenes, in terms not just of the duration of action but also of the fre-
quent employment of the long take. She likens the nine-minute (per-
haps “excessive and grotesque”) rape scene in Gaspar Noé’s Irreversible 
(Irréversible, 2002) to Fat Girl’s rape scene, noting that their respective 
duration is essential to “their brand of cinematic realism” (Horeck 2010: 
203). Realism, for Breillat, as we went along with Martin Crowley and 
Eugenie Brinkema at the beginning of Chap. 4, is a pornography that 
is restorative of female dignity through the explicitness of the portrayed 
acts. This aesthetic turns to the unconscious or irreal and thus refers to a 
reality that is not a correlation to an objective world. In addition, the sit-
com (Breillat 2011b; Vincendeau 2001) quality of Fat Girl—that is, the 
melodramatic or teen comedy elements that show common and banal 
events—is made epic and indeed timeless, argues Sarah Cooper (2010: 
107), by the respective length of the scene. This is the novelty and origi-
nality of these films for Williams (2008: 282): their explicitness and 
duration “allow the battle over the loss of virginity to become a more 
psychologically and emotionally accurate ordeal […] The scene is true, 
sad, funny, and devastating all at once.” Duration is a formal indicator 
of a film’s affect—in Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy, a fear or dread from 
the traumas of rape and performance. In some shape and form, then, the 
realism of performance and duration coincide, and in this form I read the 
“horrible” as a leaky genre in Chap. 5.
On the spectatorial side, we can surmise that the horrified viewer will 
perhaps ask when a shot will end, when will it cut, and when the assault 
on the senses will conclude. According to my analyses and those of other 
extreme cinema scholars, this assault is productive for theorizing spec-
tatorial ethical engagement (Grønstad 2006; Beugnet 2007; Lübecker 
2011; Brown 2013). For our discussion of haptic visuality here what 
is important is that the time of the shot prolongs its effect on viewers; 
the unbearable duration and the affect of trauma are embedded in view-
ers’ memory because of the aesthetic choices. The long take enhances 
the possibility for remembering the sequence when it is re-staged in Sex 
is Comedy. Haptic visuality is therefore bound to memory, something 
Barker neglects in Marks’s work—a haptic viewing is impossible, or at 
best incomplete, without embodied memory (Beugnet 2007: 12–13).

208   T. Bordun
On the one hand, with Žižek, we have the requirement for total 
control over the pornographic image and that control exists insofar as 
narrative and image are able to deliver on their promise of resembling 
the fantasy viewers had in mind (prior to and during the watching of 
the film). If an image or film cannot provide the conditions necessary 
for mastery, the feature fails or does not function; a real intrudes on our 
otherwise narrative pleasure. With Marks’s and Barker’s account, specta-
tors give themselves over and become “vulnerable to the image” (Marks 
2000: 185) by relinquishing mastery and thereby experience the surface 
of the image, which, through this optical absorption, comes into con-
tact with their senses. But I think there can be a middle ground between 
these two positions, and with this middle ground I can provide a con-
clusive statement on the experience of Breillat’s paired films, for neither 
Žižek nor Barker via Marks gives a completely satisfying theory. Haptic 
visuality must be recounted in full, stressing the importance of the spec-
tator’s relationship with the world, including their memories, with-
out which the visualization of images would not be possible—it is not 
enough to describe haptic visuality as a correlation between bodies on-
screen and the spectator’s own. In my efforts to define and locate the 
film experience of Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy, a theory of spectatorship 
must include the inner reality of the spectator, the relationship between 
perceiver and world, their co-constitution, the apparatus, the co-consti-
tution of viewer and film, haptic visuality as just outlined, and finally, the 
memory of the film, including all of its attractions and, in the case of 
Breillat’s two films, their conjunction and co-constitution with the spec-
tator who embodies (remembers) them.
The Remembered Film
For both Marks and Burgin the film experience is more than the image, 
content, or even the surface of the image and haptic visuality. It is the 
material of the film, to be sure, as well as the “institution of cinema,” 
“cinema-going” (Marks 2000: xii), and attractions:
posters, ‘blurbs’, and other advertisements, such as trailers and television 
clips; […] newspaper reviews, reference work synopses and theoretical arti-
cles (with their ‘film-strip’ assemblages of still images); […] production 
photographs, frame enlargements, memorabilia, and so on. Collecting such 
metonymic fragments in memory, we may come to feel familiar with a film 
we have not actually seen. (Burgin 2004: 9)

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   209
The important thing here is that the film itself, cinema-going, and its 
various attractions shape and help us recollect a feature. Burgin’s last 
sentence reflects not only the “not-seeing” of a film: the experience of 
a work is often remembered as a single element, image, gesture, effect, 
scene, poster, etc. To articulate the experience of Fat Girl and Sex is 
Comedy I must go further than Barker on tactility and describe the pro-
cesses involved in remembering. To turn my attention to embodied 
memory is to wrench an analysis of Breillat’s paired films from merely 
their materiality (original celluloid and subsequent digital, DVD, and 
Blu-ray incarnations).
Marks repeats her thesis of The Skin of the Film over and over. The 
sensuous experience of a film, and of cinema, is activated by a memory 
stored not in the mind but in the body (Marks 2000: 75). This means 
not just the perceptual or audible—Marks includes (2000: 26) all the 
other senses as well. As Maurice Merleau-Ponty had argued, perception 
is an experience of the whole body, and the perception of cinema follows 
similarly (Marks 2000: 48–49). The link to memory is in the nature of 
embodiment in which each sensuous encounter with the world is stored 
in the body, then later recalled to engage with the phenomenological 
present. When the senses are awakened by cinema, it is from both an 
individual’s memory and a cultural memory of institutions, practices, 
etc. (Marks 2000: 147, 110). Marks calls this “attentive recognition,” a 
more participatory form of spectatorship: “We move between seeing the 
object, recalling the virtual images that it brings to mind, and compar-
ing the virtual object thus created with the one before us” (2000: 147; 
cf. 48). The mode of attentive recognition can produce a sensation in 
the viewer. For example, if a film depicts the cooking of a certain meal, 
a meal that is associated with a particular culture, the spectator who is 
familiar with that food or meal will not only register it perceptually but 
might also, through her remembering of the film image and associations 
with that culture, sense smells and tastes.
Food is the most obvious test case, but Marks will also employ many 
different film and video images to show how certain directors use images 
to revive their own memory, and memories of the dead and of forgotten 
communities, and finally to create new memories for the spectators who 
engage haptically with the work. Her focus on intercultural cinemas and 
cinemas of diasporas rests heavily on this form of embodied spectator-
ship; only bodies not limited by sight and sound “bear […] the marks 
of sense memories” of peoples, homes, communities, and territories lost 
(Marks 2000: 129).

210   T. Bordun
Marks brings to light two different types of memory: voluntary and 
involuntary. The former was developed by Bergson. He posited an 
unconscious or latent memory that can be willfully recalled to engage 
the present. On the other hand, from the fiction of Marcel Proust and 
the theoretical writing of Walter Benjamin, Marks suggests there is also 
an involuntary memory. “Involuntary memory cannot be called up at 
will but must be brought on by a ‘shock’ [… e.g.,] the fragrance of the 
madeleine Proust dunked in his cup of tea” (Marks 2000: 64). What 
Marks relates here is similar to Roland Barthes’s experience of James van 
der Zee’s portrait photograph of a family, dated 1926. Barthes is first 
uncontrollably moved by the ankle-strap of a woman in the photograph; 
then, reflecting more carefully, he decides that the woman’s necklace 
actually generated the feeling. He explores his memory and finds a simi-
lar necklace worn by his mother and, by association he feels the dullness 
and dreariness of his provincial childhood. Burgin (2004: 60) also calls 
this kind of memory involuntary, although this is not immediately so 
in Barthes’s case. Barthes must willfully search before he can locate the 
exact appeal of the photograph, the accompanying memory, and I would 
add the recalled sensation of a dull and dreary provincial childhood.
The location of a bodily sensation produced by the involuntary mem-
ory is imprecise or disassociated from the representation as such. Burgin 
finds a similar event in one of Sigmund Freud’s patients. This patient one 
day broke into sobs in the street. She subsequently imagined a fantasy of 
being abandoned by a lover, and this fantasy, according to the patient, 
led to the tears. This patient’s fantasy as well as Barthes’s fantasy about 
the photograph described above are dissociative affects and demonstrate 
“how in the course of everyday life a chance encounter with an image may 
give rise to an inexplicable feeling, and how, by retracing the path taken 
by the affect, we may be led back to its origin in a suppressed or repressed 
idea” (Burgin 2004: 61). Burgin names (2004: 21) the factual image 
that accomplishes this—not a daydream, hallucination, or delusion—the 
“sequence-image,” “a transitory state of percepts of a ‘present moment’ 
seized in their association with past affects and meanings.” This associative 
affect is often tied with psychoanalytic markers for Burgin (2004: 16), such 
as “death, childhood, the mother.” His formulation of the sequence-image 
and the discussion of Barthes aid him in developing a general theory of 
film as one that is not just phenomenologically present to spectators but is 
remembered. With film spectatorship there is more to the experience than 
the story, feelings, and judgments of a single viewing: namely, spectators’  
remembered or associative images (Burgin 2004: 59). Further, with new 

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   211
technologies, remembering or being re-shocked is ever more possible and 
accessible: one can endlessly repeat “a favorite sequence” or fix “upon an 
obsessional image” (Burgin 2004: 8).
Is this not what Reygadas put into practice in Post Tenebras Lux? His film 
travels back in time and leaps ahead to impossible futures, and these tempo-
ral and fantastical leaps, I argued in Chap. 2, were shot with a realist style 
to capture the ontological condition on the one hand—namely, daydreams 
and fantasies as embodied aspects of existence—and, on the other, to grant 
the spectator a bodily experience “as if” they too were experiencing day-
dreams and fantasy. In Chaps. 4 and 5 have I have not fixed upon Fat 
Girl and Sex is Comedy, argued at length about my favorite sequences and 
images? With Breillat’s paired films there is something simpler transpiring 
than in Burgin’s more complicated account. The affective bleed of the fea-
tures does not need recourse to psychoanalytic concepts such as the mother 
or death. Indeed, such theorizing is perhaps overly complex, as exhibited 
in Steve Reinke’s short film. Reinke mocks psychoanalytic (film) theory in 
Instructions for Recovering Forgotten Childhood Memories (1993). We see 
an extreme close-up of the artist’s tongue inserting canned fruits and veg-
etables into his nostrils. Marks notes (2000: 197) the short film’s critique 
is of psychoanalysts’ wishful thinking on the ease of recovering “forgot-
ten memories.” On the one hand, this practice of inserting vegetables into 
his nostrils (presumably) invokes a childhood practice. On the other hand, 
by simply reproducing the childhood practice we are (likely) no closer to 
rekindling childhood memories. Without resorting to unconscious associa-
tions, I have here argued that what is affective in Breillat’s features is a rep-
etition with a difference: in Sex is Comedy, Elena’s rape is re-staged with 
all its formal qualities. This repetition with a difference is then involuntarily 
revived by spectators and involuntarily fixated upon (while viewing Sex is 
Comedy after Fat Girl or vice versa). Breillat’s monster, then, is Mesquida’s 
doubled performance, a performance which evokes an affective response.
This process, as I have been explaining, is not simply a mapping of the 
images of one film onto another for, in Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy, the 
scenes and sequences of the latter are completely re-staged in a differ-
ent context, form, and even tone. We have instead the experience of the 
“recollection-image,” a concept Marks adopts from Gilles Deleuze and 
through which she re-states the importance of attentive recognition (the 
mental comparison between an actual image and the virtual image it 
“brings to mind”). She writes (2000: 50): “A recollection-image embodies 
the traces of an event whose representation has been buried, but it cannot 
represent the event itself. Through attentive recognition it may provoke 

212   T. Bordun
an imaginative reconstruction, such as a flashback, that pulls it back into 
understandable causal relationships.” The final sequence of Sex is Comedy, 
then, is not merely the recollection of the appropriate scene in Fat Girl; 
the affect of the autofictional film contains all the forms of the affects 
I discussed in Chap. 5 in relation to the Fernando/Elena rape sequence 
and the narrative. Moreover, the entirety of the difficult shooting condi-
tions, depicted in Sex is Comedy, cuts across the entirely of our imagined 
projection of the making of Fat Girl. Put differently, a recollection of the 
previous rape sequence undergoes a substantial revision when Mesquida’s 
fictionalized performance of vulnerability and distress is considered. And, 
if we return to or rewatch Fat Girl, the involuntary revival of Mesquida’s 
trouble with the performance saturates our reception of the feature. We 
therefore do not have the event of Mesquida’s fear, anxiety, and unease as 
such in either film; what we do see is the actress, in this latter feature, work-
ing through a “traumatic interrogation” (Marks 2000: 5) of a past shoot 
that was difficult if not exploitative—this interrogation is why I stressed 
Mesquida’s becoming-actress and the actor-auteur. For the spectator of 
these events, through combined recollection—the triad of co-constituted 
elements amongst the embodied spectator, his or her memories, and the 
two films—we have a sensuous experience of the imagined reconstruction 
of Mesquida’s troubles, her overcoming of them, and other involuntary 
links between the films. It is as Burgin states: an image is associative, which 
is to say not direct, but happens involuntarily and with much attentiveness.
I previously theorized the sensuous encounter with the profilmic 
event and extradiegetic materials in Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy. The first 
of the paired films has an ability to convey the emotional state of its char-
acters, and in the second film these states are mobilized by spectators to 
overwhelm themselves with involuntarily shocks, spurning an imagined 
recollection of the conditions under which the prior film was shot. A new 
experience for spectators is born out of the pairing, beyond what is avail-
able to theorizing the immanent materiality of a single film.3 Sensation 
is therefore not limited to the surface of the image alone, and it need 
not be associative in the psychoanalytic sense; or if it is associative, it is 
3 I am only recounting a positive experience of Breillat’s paired films. It is possible that, 
in the “‘physical shock effect’” which reorders “common-sense patterns of sense experi-
ence” and makes “room for new cultural organizations of perception” (Marks 2000: 195, 
quoting Benjamin), the trauma of form and content would be too much for the viewer to 
handle and the spectator may block the film both perceptually and from his or her memory 
(Marks 2000: 152).

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   213
associated with the embodied experience (past and present) of the indi-
vidual spectator.4 Memory is therefore housed in the senses because the 
earlier film was itself such a shock, as I argued in Chap. 5, through its 
content, its representations, its misappropriating genre and confusing 
spectatorial expectations, and Breillat’s message. We need not even re-
watch Fat Girl to feel its force once we experience the apparently accu-
rate accounts of its filmmaking, the relationship between Mesquida and 
Breillat, and Mesquida’s (feigned) apprehension in Sex is Comedy—we 
need only our memories.
Postscript
On the other hand, one cannot help but sometimes laugh during the col-
lective experience of watching pornography. Williams’s first experience 
of Deep Throat was arousal, perhaps, but more precisely, she remembers 
“how much we laughed” (2008: 131). Manohla Dargis (2005), upon her 
first viewing of Battle in Heaven at Cannes, echoes Williams: “When I 
wasn’t laughing at the film, I loved it.” I held a screening of this film, 
and the prologue got a few chuckles as well.5 Indeed, Taverner’s music 
in the opening sequence is an absurdity. But rather than addressing the 
seriousness of Reygadas’s and Breillat’s films and the directors’ forays into 
the pornographic as something either narratively valuable or “silly and 
misjudged” (Bradshaw 2005), I think the critical incongruity between 
art and porn is also accurately addressed in such moments of collective 
laughter and personal memory. In other words, the form of the film com-
bined with the recollection of those forms is the film. Bruno Dumont, a 
key figure in New French Extremism, asserts (Gibert [2010] 2013): “The 
reward is in remembering the film, not watching the film […] That’s 
cinema, what we do with it later. The film will leave you with a fantastic 
memory, but the day you watch it, it’s an effort. It’s all in retrospect.” 
4 Cf. Marks (2000: 148). The author has her own associative experience during a view-
ing of Shani Mootoo’s Her Sweetness Lingers (1994). The garden on display in this film 
“calls up associations with gardens I have known in my ancestral Alabama.” Marks does not 
posit anything psychoanalytic about this association; what is most powerful in the film is 
the magnolia flowers, thus reinforcing Marks’s claim that cinema can be viewed haptically, 
for she experiences through the images the smells of Alabama.
5 “Trent Film Society Presents: Carlos Reygadas’s Battle in Heaven,” Artspace, 
Peterborough, ON, Tuesday, February 12, 2013.

214   T. Bordun
The theory I developed in the preceding sections seems to do justice to a 
larger portion of the film experience, not merely assessing the mediation 
between spectator and screen (psychoanalysis) or the relationship between 
particular images and the viewer’s embodied relationship to them (phe-
nomenology). We must not forget to include the extradiegetic, profilmic 
event, intratextuality, and spectators’ memory in either Bergsonian or 
Benjaminian forms. To accomplish a close reading of the above films and 
articulate a theory of the pornography genre and its spectatorship requires 
going beyond the film object and its materiality.
References
Barker, Jennifer M. 2009. The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press.
Beugnet, Martine. 2007. Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of 
Transgression. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Bradshaw, Peter. 2005. Battle in Heaven. The Guardian, October 28, n.p. 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2005/oct/28/1. Accessed 14 Jan 2013.
Breillat, Catherine. 2011a. The Making of Fat Girl, in Fat Girl. The Criterion 
Collection. Blu-Ray.
———. [2001] 2011b. 2001 Berlin International Film Festival, in Fat Girl. The 
Criterion Collection. Blu-Ray.
Brinkema, Eugenie. 2006. Celluloid is Sticky: Sex, Death, Materiality, Metaphysics 
(in some Films by Catherine Breillat). Women: A Cultural Review 17 (2): 
147–170.
Brown, William. 2013. Violence in Extreme Cinema and the Ethics of 
Spectatorship. Projections 7 (1): 25–42.
Burgin, Victor. 2004. The Remembered Film. London: Reaktion Books.
Cooper, Sarah. 2010. Breillat’s Time. Journal for Cultural Research. 14 (1): 
103–116.
Dargis, Manohla. 2005. Reygadas’s Latest Effort Is an Acquired Taste. NY Times, 
May 15, n.p. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/15/movies/15cannes-dar-
gis01.html?_r=0&pagewanted=print&position. Accessed 03 Feb 2013.
Gibert, Pierre-Henri. [2010] 2013. The Essence of Forms, in A Man Escaped. Dir. 
Robert Bresson. The Criterion Collection. Blu-ray.
Grønstad, Asbjørn. 2006. Abject desire: Anatomie de l’enfer and the unwatch-
able. Studies in French Cinema 6 (9): 161–169.
Heath, Stephen. 1981. Questions of Cinema. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.

7  REFRAMING SPECTATORSHIP THEORY WITH EXTREME CINEMA   215
Horeck, Tanya. 2010. Shame and the Sisters: Catherine Breillat’s À Ma Soeur! 
(Fat Girl), in Rape in Art Cinema, ed. Dominique Russell, 195–209. New 
York and London: Continuum.
Lacan, Jacques. 1998. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis. London: 
Hogarth Press.
Lübecker, Nicholas. 2011. Lars Von Trier’s Dogville: A Feel-Bad Film. In The 
New Extremism in Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck and 
Tina Kendall, 157–167. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Marks, Laura U. 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, 
and the Senses. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Vincendeau, Ginette. [2001] 2011. Sisters, Sex, and Sitcom. In Fat Girl, 4–7. 
The Criterion Collection. Blu-ray booklet.
Willemen, Paul. [1980] 2006. Letter to John. In Pornography: Film and 
Culture, ed. Peter Lehman, 48–59. New Brunswick, NJ and London: Rutgers 
University Press.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Žižek, Slavoj. 1991. Looking Awry: An Introduction to Jacques Lacan through 
Popular Culture. Cambridge and London: The MIT Press.

217
The means by which Carlos Reygadas and Catherine Breillat chal-
lenge the assumptions of spectatorship theory and genre theory were 
explored in Chaps. 2 to 7. Reygadas and Breillat serve as examples to 
bolster my claim that spectatorship is a process of collecting images and 
sounds that matter for the individual. Based on the embodied qual-
ity of the film experience as well as an individual’s personal knowledge 
of and familiarity with notions of genre, this interpretive process deter-
mines a film’s genre. The directors’ works then push the generic film 
experience to its inevitable end: the impossibility of declaring the sta-
bility of one or more genres. Through the style and narrative of films 
such as Reygadas’s Battle in Heaven (Batalla en el cielo, 2005) and Post 
Tenebras Lux (2013), and Breillat’s Romance (1999), Fat Girl (À ma 
soeur, 2001), Brief Crossing (Brève traversée, 2001), and Sex is Comedy 
(2002), these works  allow for a multivalent experience of genre. These 
films are experimental, documentary, melodramatic, pornographic, and 
horrific, sometimes all at once. The films under analysis aim to facili-
tate the spectator in his or her collection and recollection of images and 
sounds, not as forms and narratives that make sense within one sensu-
ous experience of pornography or horror, for example, but as a having 
sense of the film as such. In turn, this having sense of the film allows for 
a reflection on film experience itself and thereby solicits an engagement 
with the embodied quality of that experience and the role genre plays 
(or does not play) in that experience. As Barry Keith Grant reminds us 
(1995: 115), “it would seem impossible to appreciate in any meaningful  
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion: Know Genre, No Trouble
© The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0_8

218   T. Bordun
way individual genre films without considering the special manner in 
which we experience them.” In this book I have also discussed the ways 
these films are assemblages of the directors’ formal, narrative, and ethical 
and political visions. As much of the cited and quoted scholarship attests, 
Reygadas and Breillat have been largely successful in conveying a sense of 
the issues of class and race in Mexico and patriarchy and rape in France.
However, this sensuous account of the film experience is also con-
tested as I moved through the sixth chapter to eventually posit a spec-
tatorship theory that does not rely solely on immediacy in the sixth. In 
a consideration of Breillat’s Fat Girl and Sex is Comedy, I built a bridge 
between one version of a phenomenological theory and one theorist’s 
psychoanalytic theory. The pay-off from this analysis, the concept I call 
an affective bleed, expands my original thesis that the film experience 
is a collection of images and sounds that matter to an individual. The 
ways these two films speak to each other are not just to present Breillat’s 
vision of patriarchy in the twenty-first century: they also address issues of 
performing sexually in a narrative film, from the perspective both of the 
actor and/or actress and of the director. In developing my argument, I 
required the affective bleed between these films and thus put into prac-
tice an intratextual theory of spectatorship. Breillat’s films are much 
more than an immanent experience.
The sixth chapter also situates an obvious yet frequently overlooked 
aspect of an analysis of the pornography genre. Performance is one ele-
ment of the formal qualities of a film. The manner in which an actor or 
actress performs and the way the director chooses to document that per-
formance play a significant role in spectators’ collection and recollection 
of the film. This is similarly the case with numerous elements of Fat Girl, 
the film I discussed at length in Chap. 5: mise-en-scène, performance, 
duration, fantasy, sexual desire, among other techniques and themes, 
constitute a particular type of film experience or, at least, aim to do so. 
A critique of patriarchy is possible through Breillat’s filmmaking method 
and vision.
Chaps. 2 and 3 are concerned with Reygadas’s observations on class, 
race, and sexual difference; on the other, these chapters are invested 
in placing Post Tenebras Lux up against dream sequences that popu-
late cinema’s rich history. The discussion of the avant-garde in Chap. 2  
was to emphasize the role sensuousness has in the director’s vision. 
Much of Post Tenebras Lux exists as dream and fantasy sequences; 
however, Reygadas is devoted to the realist style, and so the film, as a 

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   219
philosophical and cinematic experiment, demonstrated that dreams are 
better expressed as part of embodiment and, through the expression of 
this idea, the film aims to generate a spectatorial experience “as if” in a 
dream or fantasy (through the mediation of the cinematic apparatus).
My aim was to elaborate, in a philosophical way, interpretations of 
films within the parameters of genre theory and phenomenological film 
theory. The research may have minimized contextualization, cultural his-
tory, and genre history, but this was to provide close readings of the very 
objects under investigation. In Stanley Cavell’s words, my readings of 
these films allowed “the object of interpretation [… to] become a means 
of interpretation” (Macarthur 2014: 96, quoting Cavell). This present 
study of two filmmakers and contemporary film theory generates three 
broad conclusions that are applicable to contemporary art cinema to be 
sure, but also to spectatorship and genre theory as well.
1.  Scholars of extreme cinema have been too quick to demarcate the 
tendency as art porn, horror, or some kind of hybrid genre. Based 
on my work here, such passive remarks or conclusions about genre 
and the boundaries of genre are not sophisticated enough to either 
do justice to the films or genre theory and spectatorship. According 
to my account of extreme cinema, these films facilitate or make 
more apparent that spectators collect and recollect individual ele-
ments of a given film or attempt to think the film as a whole. 
The film may fail to move spectators—for example, Post Tenebras 
Lux may be too boring and Romance may be interesting because 
of its display of bodies and sex. Conversely, Post Tenebras Lux, in 
line with the director’s claims about his work, may be successful in 
demonstrating the experimental possibilities of the medium; and by 
being formally rigorous, Fat Girl, despite its presentation of nude 
bodies and sex, is successful in communicating the director’s mes-
sage about contemporary romance and patriarchal structures.
2.  Given that extreme cinema confounds genres and genre theory, 
new conceptions of genre and methods of studying it are neces-
sary. As Rick Altman notes, genres do not exist over and above, or 
prior to, a film’s production and its reception. Genre is more com-
plex than tracing a body of films’ semantic and syntactic elements. 
The moment one speaks of genre, one must also attempt to locate 
its pragmatic components: how is the film advertised, how was it 
received, and in its reception, how do spectators’ reactions inform 

220   T. Bordun
and shift producer-driven definitions of genre? Genre theory, pro-
duction, and audiences exist in circuitous communication with one 
another. I replicate this communication process by recognizing 
my personal investment in particular genres and trends, which is a 
transition from a style of genre criticism that “remain[s] detached, 
‘objective,’ [and] simply descriptive” (Grant 1995: 127). I accom-
plish close readings of individual films and expand the range of 
scholarly understanding of these films by utilizing director inter-
views, critical reviews and commentary, and theoretical essays and 
books. This method better approximates to both the concept and 
experience of genre.
3.  Extreme cinema fosters a re-conceptualization of genre and spec-
tatorship. If we are to theorize the distinctions between genres 
(or lack thereof) more appropriately, many strands of spectator-
ship theory are insufficient to help provide a satisfactory account. 
It was necessary to bring phenomenological film theory to bear 
on extreme cinema. Spectatorship is an immanent experience first, 
from which differing analyses of films and their relationship to 
genre(s) may be studied. An immanent experience of film does not 
foreclose the influence of memory; in fact, genre is possible in and 
through preceding experiences with genre films and discussion of 
films. Memory thus plays a role in both the collection of an indi-
vidual film and a recollection of one or more films. It is this process 
of recollection that also generates another affective engagement 
with the film(s), albeit of a different sort from the immediacy of 
the film experience. My argument in this book provides alternative 
means to assess the spectator and generates new conclusions about 
spectatorship.
My intervention in spectatorship theory demonstrates that extreme 
cinema is a risk insofar as the meaning or message of a film may be lost on 
its viewers. Throughout the chapters, perhaps most importantly, I reflect 
upon the ethics of spectatorship: in Chaps. 2 and 3, ethical spectatorship 
would understand Reygadas’s depictions of class, race, and sexual differ-
ence; Chaps. 4 and 5 contest certain film critics’ assertions that Breillat’s 
films are naught but shock and sex; and concretely, in Chap. 6 I posit 
three ethical modes in which Sex is Comedy (and other films with narrativ-
ized sex scenes) might be viewed. If we wish to assess these films as criti-
cal works of art, then scholars need to continue to develop theories that 

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   221
speak to the ethics of collection, recollection, and curatorship. Indeed, 
my work on specific films and on the film experience redresses possible 
criticisms, such as art for art’s sake, since Reygadas and Breillat immerse 
their viewers in social and cultural critique, and dismissive criticisms that 
cinematic violence and sex serve no critical or ethical purpose. The latter 
argument, in fact, was shown to be quite untrue. However, the universal-
izing of interpretation is not entirely my aim here. Cavell demonstrates 
that films may reveal themselves to us as objects about us and, for D.N. 
Rodowick, Cavell’s work on cinema is also an ontology. Cavell evaluates
a particular way of Being. This is not the being or identity of a film or what 
identifies film as art, but rather the ways of being that art provokes in us or 
more deeply, how film and other forms of art express for us or return us 
to our past, current, and future states of being […] Cavell comprehend[s] 
cinema as expressing ways of being in the world and of relating to the 
world. In this respect, cinema is already philosophy, and a philosophy inti-
mately connected to our everyday life.
[…]
If, as Cavell argues, the reality that film holds before us is that of our own 
perceptual condition, then it opens the possibility of once again being 
present to self or acknowledging how we may again become present to 
ourselves […] Cinema takes up where philosophy leaves off, as the pre-
conceptual expression of the passage to another way of being. (Rodowick 
[2007] 2011: 1120, 1121, 1122)
Put in the terms of this volume, when a film turns us back on ourselves 
to have a sense of our bodies, of our social, cultural, and gendered situa-
tion, of our relationship to the screen and those human somethings that 
appear therein, we are confronted with an imperative to assess, evaluate, 
and interpret what we see and feel according to our pasts, the contempo-
rary moment, and what the film reveals about our futures. Or, as Robert 
Sinnerbrink writes (2014: 61, quoting Cavell), “It is not that all cine-
matic images have a profound ontological import. It is rather how par-
ticular instances invite the philosophically-inclined viewer to find words 
adequate to the singular experience they afford; experiences that can 
have, once ‘perspicuously presented’ and articulated in thought, a more 
general philosophical significance.” If we collect and curate Reygadas’s 
and Breillat’s films with this in mind, we find their sometimes bleak 

222   T. Bordun
depictions nonetheless carry the possibility of individual (and thereby 
social) ethical transformations.
It is true that this book does not take up Cavell’s writing about film 
in great detail. What Cavell and I share in our different approaches to 
film philosophy is an “openness to questioning, to having our habitual 
ways of seeing and thinking put into question[. … This] makes film 
philosophical in the best sense” (Sinnerbrink 2014: 66). I bring together 
genres and theory in order to develop and assess the questions for film 
philosophy raised by Reygadas’s and Breillat’s respective oeuvres, and I 
accomplish this through a practice of writing that engages theorization 
and aesthetic criticism. What I see in and think about these films is thus 
a work of creative expression. As I wrote in the Introduction, perhaps 
the label of theoretical cinephilia might be appropriate for my work, and 
even for areas of film scholarship more generally.
While my study evaluates the film experience in theoretical and poetic 
ways, it simultaneously raises questions about the nature of Film Studies 
and Film Theory and how to take up those disciplines. This is not the 
place to reformulate in detail how one could or should study films; what 
my work in these chapters demonstrates, as well as Rodowick’s brief 
discussion of Cavell, is the imperative to connect studies of the embod-
ied engagement with film with ethical considerations. But this impera-
tive merely extends what filmmakers already know—Jean-Luc Godard 
had famously said that tracking shots are a “moral issue.” By way of a 
conclusion, I offer Breillat’s most recent film as a final example of stud-
ying the intersections of genre, extreme cinema, and ethical spectator-
ship. Similar to the placement of Post Tenebras Lux in Reygadas’s oeuvre, 
Abuse of Weakness (Abus de faiblesse, 2013) is a unique contribution to 
Breillat’s career. However, the film still functions as a Breillat feature—
she develops familiar themes but approaches them via a radically different 
story from in prior work. As with my discussions of Reygadas and Breillat 
alongside one another, Abuse has little in common with the Mexican 
director’s films. Nevertheless, with my brief discussion of the film, 
Breillat contributes yet another work on gender and power and adds age 
and illness to the narrative. The director demonstrates that the difficul-
ties facing young girls and young women carry forward as women age; 
furthermore, the ill body in this latest film complicates the issue more so.

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   223
A Courageous Supplement
Breillat’s recent film is her most poignant narrative about gender and 
sexuality or, in terms of discussed in the third chapter, sexual difference. 
However, unlike her earlier work, Abuse of Weakness does not contain a 
single scene of explicit sex. Breillat’s ability to navigate themes of sexual-
ity, gender, and power relations without resorting to representations of 
sexual acts perhaps marks the film as her greatest success (artistically, not 
necessarily commercially). Instead of paralleling or complementing the 
violent and sexual plot lines of Romance or Fat Girl, films I explore in 
the fourth chapter, Breillat’s newest work finds its thematic resemblances 
in her autofiction film (fictionalized autobiography) discussed at length 
in Chap. 6, Sex is Comedy.
As we know, Sex is Comedy fictionalizes Breillat’s experience of mak-
ing Fat Girl. It traces the heated relationship between Jeanne (Anne 
Parillaud) and the young, unnamed male lead (Grégoire Colin). Jeanne’s 
varied attempts to equalize the gender and power dynamics on set not 
only unveil Breillat’s directorial methods but also function as an exam-
ple of the fraught difficulties creative women experience while collaborat-
ing with men on artistic endeavors. The result, as depicted in the film, is 
that the young male actor refuses to drop his ego, pride, and apparent 
invulnerability—luckily, not at the expense of the finished product. Thus 
the inherently challenging process of filmmaking is made all the more 
so when a woman takes the helm. While Douglas Keesey observes that 
the aggressive exchanges between Jeanne and the actor “denaturalize … 
the ‘active male’ and ‘passive female’ roles to show that they are indeed 
roles, with either sex able to play both parts, desiring and desired” 
(2009: 69), Abuse displays a more ambivalent and complex relationship 
than the one between director and actor because there is no object or 
goal that the protagonists struggle toward—the object of Abuse is not 
the process of making a film, but the negotiation of illness, affection, and 
artistic integrity.
Before getting to the film itself, it would be helpful to first make a 
brief biographical note. Breillat suffered a stroke in 2004. In 2007 
she met Christophe Rocancourt and in the 18 months that followed, 
Rocancourt conned approximately €800,000 from Breillat. Finally, in 
2012, the director charged Rocancourt with an “abuse of weakness” and 
the conman was sent to prison. Abuse is the fictionalized account of this 
victimization. It depicts a filmmaker who has suffered a stroke, Maud 

224   T. Bordun
Shainberg (Isabelle Huppert), and an ex-con who exploits her weakness, 
Vilko Piran (Kool Shen).
Prior to depicting the story of Maud and Vilko’s relationship, a rela-
tionship built around the push-and-pull of dominance and submission, 
coercion and aid, the film begins with the event that rendered Maud 
physically weak. To a piercing score, the opening shot slowly tracks up a 
white blanket with the frail Huppert hidden underneath. When the cam-
era comes to frame her in medium close-up, Maud is distraught, clearly 
in some sort of shock and pain; she slaps her right arm in a gesture that 
suggests she has become disassociated from it. She then telephones for 
help, and in a humorous exchange Breillat almost imperceptivity pre-
sents another disassociation: between the pains experienced by an indi-
vidual and the inability of others fully to comprehend those sensations. 
Maud cries out to the emergency-line operator, “I need an ambulance. 
Half my body is dead,” to which the person responds, “You’re talking 
so you can’t be dead.”1 This ontological discontinuity between people 
establishes the affective and emotional tone for Maud’s relationship with 
Vilko.
After a year of convalescence and rehab for her severe cerebral hem-
orrhage, late one night a drowsy Maud happens upon a TV talk show. 
She watches Vilko answer questions about his new book on the years he 
spent in a Hong Kong “pokey” for conning the rich and poor out of 
$135 million. Vilko’s “icy hangdog look” and “bitter pride” appeal to 
Maud’s sensibilities. She repeatedly observes how “fascinating” he is and 
at one point describes him as a “caveman,” thus establishing Vilko as her 
inferior. This man, however, is precisely the type she needs for her next 
film. In her initial interview with Vilko, appropriately colored by Breillat 
with the director seated on a white couch and the conman on a black 
1 Carel (2008: 42–43): “The core idea of phenomenology is pertinent [in the discussion 
of illness and intersubjectivity]. If healthcare practitioners devoted more time to under-
standing the experience of illness, much of the misunderstanding, bad communication and 
sense of alienation that patients report would be alleviated. Phenomenologically inspired 
medicine would become a more human science, where each term in the phrase illumi-
nates the other. One way of developing such understanding is by enabling the medical 
practitioner to have first-hand experience of the patient’s world [e.g., by training them on 
devices that temporarily restrict breathing or mimic perceptual and motor impairment. …] 
Another phenomenological avenue uses Merleau-Ponty’s holistic approach to personhood 
in nurse training in order to shift the focus away from disease and symptom alleviation to a 
more holistic view of the experience of illness.”

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   225
one, Maud describes her next work as a love story with a bloody end, 
not unlike the one depicted by Breillat in Perfect Love (Parfait amour, 
1996).2 The caveman likes the ending and accepts the role. Once Maud 
seduces Vilko into becoming one of her “actors,” a word Breillat uses 
to demarcate her ownership and possession of performers, Vilko turns 
the tables on Maud by blocking her usual directorial methods. Maud 
does not usually see her actors before shooting, but Vilko states that 
she will see him often. His ensuing attention and modest affection over 
the months that follow as well as Maud’s apparent sexual attraction to 
this brutish man—a man who frequently appears in his boxer shorts 
and without a shirt—produce certain kinds of pleasure for the debili-
tated filmmaker. Breillat mentions (Von Hoeij 2013): “Perversely, what’s 
interesting is that an abuse of weakness is, in a way, absolutely delight-
ful while you are experiencing it. It’s just that the final result is a real 
nightmare.”
Although Vilko reveals his conning methods on the TV talk show as 
well as to Maud during their first meeting, and he supposedly recognizes 
the differing levels of intelligence between himself and the director, the 
latter cannot stop herself from signing checks over to him because he 
“just asked.” Maud’s justification for her behavior at the end of the film 
is slightly uninteresting, albeit honest. Instead, it is more provocative to 
suggest that Vilko exploits Maud’s desire to feel as if in control of her 
future creative endeavor. For instance, he tries to return the first check 
because her funds are also a loan from the bank, and later he places all 
responsibility on Maud to loan him €100,000 or he will again be sent 
to prison. With Vilko’s feint that Maud has seduced him into becoming 
one of her “actors”—for example, his frequent calls, flirtation, modest to 
severe verbal abuse, and reluctant aid—combined with Maud’s belief that 
she remains in control, Breillat reveals that sexuality and desire are signif-
icant objects to navigate when a woman requires the obedience of a man 
(or men) to achieve her personal goals. Indeed, Vilko is never mistrusted 
or questioned about his frequent demands for money; Maud simply buys 
his lies so that her film could eventually be produced as she envisions it 
with Vilko in the lead. He thus exploits Maud’s desire to create and the 
2 The film, never completed, was based on Breillat’s novel Bad Love (2007). Vilko steals 
this book from Maud’s bookshelf after their first meeting.

226   T. Bordun
conman ends up getting the better of her. For Breillat, this is the unfor-
tunate position women artists are forced to reckon with.
On the one hand, Abuse traces the difficulty of being both a woman 
and an auteur in contemporary times. On Sex is Comedy, but with simi-
lar applicability to the director’s latest work, Kathryn Ince concludes 
(2006: 163) that “Breillat has achieved a rare degree of reflexivity about 
the relationship of female sexuality to artistic creation (in this case, film 
directing)” and also “shows women’s film directing to be a tussle and a 
struggle involving an altered sexual economy, a redistribution of men’s 
and women’s death drives that allows a female director’s desire to be suc-
cessfully sublimated in the creation of her film.” Unlike that of Jeanne, 
however, Maud’s sexual desire is unsuccessfully sublimated into her art, 
but in this space of reflexivity we find Breillat’s sexual politics, her real-
life experience of the unfinished work of feminism, and a critique of the 
dominant “sexual economy.”
On the other hand, Maud is debilitated by the stroke. It is important 
now to remark on a heretofore unexplored theme of extreme cinema. As 
I explored in the Introduction, critics and theorists have noted the explo-
sion of extreme representations of violence, sexual violence, and sex in 
contemporary art cinema over the last two decades; however, extreme 
cinema is not limited to displays of sexualized flesh and blood alone. 
Some films have turned to another type of body in the throes of ecstatic 
states: namely, the ill or suffering body. Alternatively, Havi Carel (2008: 
26), using the language of Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology, 
has named these embodied states “the malfunctioning body.” Marina de 
Van’s In My Skin (Dans ma peau, 2002), Julia Leigh’s Sleeping Beauty 
(2011), Michael Haneke’s Amour (2012), and Breillat’s Abuse, among 
others, establish the aged, ill, or suffering body as one of many possible 
bodily comportments, although these depictions of the body are often-
times uncomfortable spectacles, to be sure. It is these films’ discomfort-
ing narratives, styles, and excessive displays that therefore situate them 
within the bounds of extreme cinema. It seems worthwhile, then, to 
end my comments on Abuse with a brief account of its visual displeas-
ures. The formal techniques of this film resonate with those explored by 
Breillat in her earlier films.
Reygadas and Breillat frequently employ the long take. The long take 
intensifies what is transpiring on-screen, and thus scenes of violence in Fat 
Girl, for example, become all the more jarring and unpleasurable to witness 
(Williams 2008: 280–282; Horeck 2010: 203–204). This technique also 

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   227
contributes to a sensuous experience of the profilmic event, a key device 
used in Post Tenebras Lux. Furthermore, the long take is testament to real 
time passing within the diegesis as well as at the level of spectators’ lived 
time, and for Yvette Bíró (2006) the long take thus heightens spectators’ 
sensuous engagement with the film. In Abuse, over 20 very long seconds, 
we watch Maud struggle to walk across a small street. Shortly thereafter 
Maud arrives at her home and attempts to remove her backpack full of gro-
ceries; instead of succeeding in this simple movement, she tumbles over 
and Breillat documents her incredibly trying process of getting up, lasting 
some two and a half minutes. Our day-to-day lives are generally healthy, 
with a rather “transparent” embodied existence; however, as this scene 
demonstrates, “[i]llness is an abrupt, violent way of revealing the intimately 
bodily nature of our body” (Carel 2008: 27). Carel’s observation is also 
borne out the visually uncomfortable scene of Maud’s second stroke, pre-
ceded by the excruciatingly long take of the fictional director attempting 
to open a package of cooked meat. After opening her package, Maud falls 
to the floor and convulses until the emergency operator is reached via her 
medical alert pendant—again, all accomplished in a single take.
While these scenes are certainly shocking, we should not reduce the 
film to its shock value or shock effects. Rather, Breillat deserves praise 
for the courageous act of representing herself with a great degree of veri-
similitude and, as she says through Maud and in the interview featured 
on the Strand Releasing DVD, for not pretending that a full recovery is 
possible or that death is still years away. The director demonstrates that 
“illness is not local but global, not external but strikes at the heart of 
subjectivity” (Carel 2008: 29). Additionally, in the final shot of the film, 
as a teary-eyed Maud looks directly into the camera after pathetically 
recounting her story of victimization to her lawyer, friends, and fam-
ily, it is undeniable that Breillat has challenged and shamed the real-life 
conman Rocancourt. Maud’s brave statement on her hopes for filmmak-
ing is also a statement from Breillat to her aggressor: “I’ve sunk like the 
Titanic, but if I ever resurface, I’ll be like an atomic bomb.” Abuse of 
Weakness is Breillat’s triumphant return to filmmaking post-con as well as 
an act of vengeance against the man who had ruined her.
Abuse demonstrates Breillat’s ability to change her narratives and style 
while also maintaining consistent themes. The film is perhaps the long-
est in terms of diegetic time. Due to the time of the narrative, there are 
more scenes and edits than we are used to in this auteur’s work. Non-
diegetic music also accompanies many of the scenes, again a filmic device 

228   T. Bordun
rarely used by Breillat. In no way do these slight changes make a bid for 
popular consumption; instead, the changes are appropriate for the nar-
rative and for the director’s vision. Several genres do resurface in Abuse 
but without the effect usually associated with them. First, Maud’s plight 
is thoroughly melodramatic. The obviousness of Vilko’s con is revealed 
even prior to the initial meeting. Vilko’s feint on the TV talk show that 
he has “served” his time for his crimes is clearly false, and each encounter 
between the conman and the director reinforces the former’s scheming 
interest in the latter. The film thus takes on a comedic aspect as Vilko’s 
shifty eyes glance in Maud’s direction each time she signs a check. But 
this comedy is contrasted with the horror of the ill body—the long 
takes of Maud suffering offset the tone of comedic melodrama. And 
with Abuse’s perspective on Maud, the thrill of the con shown in many 
Hollywood films is completely foreclosed. There is nothing entertaining 
about Vilko’s abuse of weakness. The film is in fact full of displeasures, 
and these displeasures push us to examine our relationship to gender and 
power, age and illness, film and ontology.
References
Bíró, Yvette. 2006. The Fullness of Minimalism. Rouge 9. http://www.rouge.
com.au/9/minimalism.html. Accessed 3 Feb 2013.
Carel, Havi. 2008. Illness: The Cry of the Flesh. Durham: Acumen.
Grant, Barry Keith. 1995. Experience and Meaning in Genre Films. In Film 
Genre Reader II, ed. Barry Keith Grant, 114–128. Austin: University of Texas 
Press.
Horeck, Tanya. 2010. Shame and the Sisters: Catherine Breillat’s À Ma Soeur! 
(Fat Girl). In Rape in Art Cinema, ed. Dominique Russell, 195–209. New 
York and London: Continuum.
Ince, Katherine. 2006. Is Sex Comedy or Tragedy? Directing Desire and Female 
Auteurship in the Cinema of Catherine Breillat. The Journal of Aesthetics and 
Art Criticism 64 (1): 157–164.
Keesey, Douglas. 2009. Catherine Breillat. Manchester and New York: 
Manchester University Press.
Macarthur, David. 2014. What Goes without Seeing: Marriage, Sex and the 
Ordinary in The Awful Truth. Film-Philosophy 18: 92–109.
Rodowick, D.N. [2007] 2011. An Elegy for Theory. In Critical Visions in Film 
Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings. ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia 
White, & Meta Mazaj, 1109–1126. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. 
Martin’s.

8  CONCLUSION: KNOW GENRE, NO TROUBLE   229
Sinnerbrink, Robert. 2014. Cavellian Meditations: How to Do Things with Film 
and Philosophy. Film-Philosophy 18: 50–69.
Von Hoeij, Boyd. 2013. On Set with Catherine Breillat: ‘I never really invent 
anything,’ Indiewire, January 15. http://www.indiewire.com/article/on-set-
with-catherine-breillat-i-never-really-invent-anything. Accessed 18 Feb 2015.
Williams, Linda. 2008. Screening Sex. Durham and London: Duke University 
Press.

231
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0
Filmography
Ascher, Rodney. 2012. Room 237.
Bertolucci, Bernardo. 1971. Last Tango in Paris.
Bigelow, Katheryn. 1995. Strange Days.
Breillat, Catherine. 1976. A Real Young Girl.
———. 1988. 36 fillette.
———. [1996] 2001. Perfect Love. Winstar Video. DVD.
———. 1999. Romance.
———. [2001] 2011. Fat Girl. The Criterion Collection. Blu-ray.
———. [2001] 2004. Brief Crossing. Wellspring Media. DVD.
———. [2002] 2005. Sex is Comedy. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. DVD.
———. 2004. Anatomy of Hell.
———. [2007] 2008. The Last Mistress. Métropole Film Distribution. DVD.
———. [2009] 2010. Bluebeard. Strand Releasing. DVD.
Campion, Jane. 1993. The Piano.
Cuarón, Alfonso. 2013. Gravity. Warner Brothers. Blu-ray.
Damiano, Gerard. 1972. Deep Throat.
De Van, Marina. 2002. In My Skin.
Denis, Claire. 2001. Trouble Every Day.
Despentes, Virginie and Coralie Trinh Thi. 2000. Baise Moi.
Dreyer, Carl. Th. 1928. The Passion of Joan of Arc.
Eisenstein, Sergei. [1924] 2011. Strike. Kino Video. Blu-ray.
———. 1928. October: Ten Days that Shook the World.
Gibert, Pierre-Henri. [2010] 2013. The Essence of Forms, in A Man Escaped. Dir. 
Robert Bresson. The Criterion Collection. Blu-ray.
Grandrieux, Philippe. 2002. La Vie nouvelle.
Guiraudie, Alain. 2013. Stranger by the Lake.

232   Filmography
Haneke, Michael. 1989. The Seventh Continent.
———. 1992. Benny’s Video.
———. 1997. Funny Games.
———. [2009] 2010. The White Ribbon. Sony Pictures Classics. DVD.
———. 2012. Amour.
Hitchcock, Alfred. 1958. Vertigo.
———. 1959. North by Northwest.
Kaplan. Jonathan. 1988. The Accused.
Kechiche, Abdellatif. [2013] 2014. Blue is the Warmest Color. The Criterion 
Collection. Blu-ray.
Leigh, Julia. 2011. Sleeping Beauty.
McQueen, Steve. 2011. Shame.
Oshima, Nagisa. [1976] 2009. In the Realm of the Senses. The Criterion 
Collection. DVD.
Ozon, François. 2013. Young and Beautiful.
Pasolini, Pier Paolo. 1975. Salò.
Renoir, Jean. Rules of the Game. 1939.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2002. Japón. Tartan Video. DVD.
———. [2005] 2009. Battle in Heaven. Palisades Tartan. DVD.
———. [2007] 2008. Silent Light. eOne Films. DVD.
———. [2012] 2013. Post Tenebras Lux. Strand Releasing. Blu-ray.
Seidl, Ulrich. 2003. Jesus, You Know.
Van Sant, Gus. 2002. Gerry.
Von Trier, Lars. 2014. Nymph()maniac.
Wagoner, Bryce. 2010. After Porn Ends.
Warhol, Andy. 1963. Blow Job.
———. 1965. Sleep.
Winterbottom, Michael. 2004. Nine Songs.
Zarchi, Meir. 1978. I Spit on Your Grave.

233
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0
Bibliography
Anderson, Jeffrey M. n.d. Plump Chump. Combustible Celluloid. http://www.
combustiblecelluloid.com/2001/fatgirl.shtml. Accessed 17 June 2013.
Austin, Guy. 2004. The Amateur Actors of Cannes 1999: A Shock to the (Star) 
System. French Cultural Studies 15 (3): 251–263.
Badt, Karin. 2009. The Disturbing Vision of Director Carlos Reygadas: ‘Life is 
Magic!’. Huffington Post, 28 July, n.p. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
karin-badt/the-disturbing-vision-of_b_243802.html. Accessed 25 Apr 2014.
Barker, Martin. 2010. ‘Typically French?’: Mediating Screened Rape to British 
Audiences, In Rape in Art Cinema, ed. Dominque Russell, 145–158. New 
York and London: Continuum.
Blackwelder, Rob. n.d. Is there a shrink in the house? Spliced Wire. http://
splicedwire.com/01reviews/fatgirl.html. Accessed 17 June 2013.
Bordun, Troy. 2015. Mexico is Bleeding: The Films of Carlos Reygadas. http://
www.vimeo.com/troybordun.
Butler, Eleri. 2012. Catherine Breillat: Anatomy of a Hard-Core Agitator. In 
Peep Shows: Cult Film and the Cine-Erotic, ed. Xavier Mendik, 57–69. London 
and New York: Wallflower.
Carter, Angela. [1979] 2000. Polemical Preface: Pornography in the Service 
of Women. In Feminism and Pornography, ed. Drucilla Cornell, 527–539. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Deren, Maya. [1960] 2011. Cinematography: The Creative Use of Reality. In 
Critical Visions in Film Theory, 144–156.
Ellis, John. [1980] 2006. On Pornography. In Pornography: Film and Culture, 
ed. Peter Lehman. New Brunswick, NJ and London. Rutgers University 
Press.

234   Bibliography
Frey, Mattias. 2012. Tuning Out, Turning In, and Walking Off: The Film 
Spectator in Pain. In Ethics and Images of Pain, ed. Asbjørn Grønstad and 
Henrik Gustafsson, 93–111. New York and London: Routledge.
Grønstad, Asbjørn. 2011. On the Unwatchable. In The New Extremism in 
Cinema: From France to Europe, ed. Tanya Horeck and Tina Kendall, 192–204.  
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Gunning, Tom. [1989] 2011. The Cinema of Attractions: Early Film, Its 
Spectator and the Avant-Garde. In Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classic 
and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, & Meta 
Mazaj, 69–77. Boston and New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Heath, Stephen. 1981. Questions of Cinema. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.
Hilderbrand, Lucas. n.d. Fat Girl. Pop Matters. http://www.popmatters.com/
pm/review/fat-girl/. Accessed 18 June 2013.
Keathley, Christian. 2006. Cinephilia and History, or The Wind in the Trees. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Lane, Jim. n.d. Idiotic Girl. News Review. http://www.newsreview.com/sacra-
mento/idiotic-girl/content?oid=10728. Accessed 17 June 2013.
Marquis, Elizabeth. 2013. Conceptualizing Documentary Performance. Studies 
in Documentary Film 7 (1): 45–60.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. [1948] 2005. The World of Perception, trans. Oliver 
Davis. London and New York: Routledge.
Nichols, Bill. 1991. Representing Reality: Issues and Concepts in Documentary. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Ontario Bans film Fat Girl. n.d. CBC. http://www.cbc.ca/archives/categories/
arts-entertainment/visual-arts/artists-busted-censorship-in-canada/ontario-
bans-film-fat-girl.html. Accessed 10 Sept 2014.
Perusse, B. 2003. Tedium: Then the End. In The Gazette, 21 March, n.p. 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/433919862?accountid=14391. 
Accessed 14 Jan 2013.
Quintin. For and Against: Carlos Reygadas. Sight & Sound 23 (4): 75.
Rayns, Tony. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux. Sight & Sound 23 (4): 101.
Reygadas, Carlos. 2009. Interview with Director Carlos Reygadas and Actress 
Anapola Mushkadiz. In Battle in Heaven. Palisades Tartan. DVD.
Reygadas, Carlos, and Demetrios Matheou. 2003. A Good Place to Die (inter-
view). Sight & Sound 13 (2): 10–12.
Sullivan, Dan. 2013. Post Tenebras Lux. Film Comment 49 (2): 67.
Tibbals, Chauntelle Anne. 2014. Gonzos, Trannys, and Teens – Current Trends 
in US Adult Content Production, Distribution, and Consumption. Porn 
Studies 1 (1–2): 127–135.
Vincendeau, Ginette. 2007. The New French Extremism. In The Cinema Book, 
ed. Pam Cook, 3rd ed., 205. London: BFI.

Bibliography   235
Waugh, Thomas. 2011. The Right to Play Oneself: Looking Back on Documentary 
Film. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Williams, Linda. 1995. Corporealized Observers: Visual Pornographies and the 
‘Carnal Density of Vision’. In Fugitive Images: From Photography to Video, ed. 
Patrice Petro. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Wollen, Peter. [1969/1972] 1981. The auteur theory (extract). In Theories of 
Authorship: A Reader, ed. John Caughie, 138–151. London and New York: 
Routledge.

237
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2017 
T. Bordun, Genre Trouble and Extreme Cinema,  
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-65894-0
Index
A
Abuse of Weakness (Breillat), 222, 223, 
225, 227
Accused, The (Kaplan), 156
Acevedo, Natalia, 35
Acting. See Performance
Affect
Breger on, 157, 169, 176
Brinkema on, 11, 118, 133, 141, 
155, 157, 168, 169, 171, 176, 
177, 184, 186, 195, 206
Affective bleed, 184, 194, 211, 218
Affective fallacy, 170, 176, 193, 204
After Porn Ends (Wagoner), 111
Altman, Rick, 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12, 24, 
100–103, 219
Amour (Haneke), 226
Anal sex, 45, 78, 124, 128, 140
Anatomy of Hell (Breillat), 107, 110, 
115–119, 125, 136, 149, 191
Animals, 37, 50, 67, 70, 80
in Japón, 69, 76, 83
in Post Tenebras Lux, 34, 35, 37, 
38, 46, 47, 49, 60, 78, 83, 84, 
89, 158
Arnheim, Rudolf, 21, 40, 56
Artaud, Antonin, 30
Art cinema, 1, 8, 10, 23, 25, 29, 60, 
69, 80, 82, 90, 95, 108, 158, 
177, 219
sexually explicit images in, 8, 33, 
102, 108, 159, 180
Aspect ratio, 53–55
Autofiction, 24, 180, 186, 212, 223
Avant-garde, 1, 3, 10, 29–32, 30, 34, 
42, 49, 54, 69, 96, 166, 218
B
Badiou, Alain, 111
Baise Moi (Despentes and Trinh Thi), 
137
Barker, Jennifer, 6, 16, 20–22, 24, 56, 
61, 154, 175, 204–207, 209
musculature, 20, 22, 53, 54
skin, 20, 21, 204
viscera, 8, 20, 33
Barker, Martin, 114, 119, 136, 138, 
140, 147, 153, 154, 158
Bataille, Georges, 22, 99, 100, 150, 
159, 191

238   Index
Battle in Heaven (Reygadas), 25, 
29, 35, 37, 52, 68, 69, 71, 76, 
87, 111, 166, 167, 171–174, 
177–179, 182, 189, 190, 193, 
213, 213, 217
Bazin, André, 31, 85, 93, 111, 114, 
149, 153, 158, 185, 186, 194
Benjamin, Walter, 210, 212, 214
Benny’s Video (Haneke), 155, 185
Bergson, Henri, 175, 210, 214
Best, Victoria, and Martin Crowley, 
106
Beugnet, Martine, 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 21, 
25, 31, 36, 48, 89, 100, 101, 
106, 115, 118, 134, 141, 159, 
207
Bigelow, Katheryn, 156
Bluebeard (Breillat), 149
Blue is the Warmest Color (Kechiche), 
104, 173
Body
in response to film, 2, 6–9, 11, 195, 
199, 203, 204, 206
phenomenology and, 6, 12, 16, 17, 
19, 21, 22, 23
Body genres, 7, 14, 23, 100, 107, 
125, 147, 150, 158, 166, 173, 
199
Bordwell, David, 10
Braidotti, Rosi, 77, 95
Brakhage, Stan, 2, 29, 30, 32
Braudy, Leo, 5, 100
Breger, Claudia, 170, 176
Breillat, Catherine
on actors, 180, 181, 184, 185, 187, 
190, 191, 225
on directing, 117
on Fat Girl, 135, 147, 156, 182, 
184, 186, 193, 204
on pornography, 99, 101, 106, 107, 
113, 114, 134, 199
on Sex is Comedy, 180, 181, 186
Bresson, Robert, 29, 165
Brief Crossing (Breillat), 109, 110, 
187–189
Brinkema, Eugenie, 118, 140, 144, 
146, 151, 154, 155, 158, 169, 
171, 176, 177, 179, 184, 186, 
204
on Breillat, 105, 107, 115, 118, 
138, 140–142, 144, 147, 195, 
199
on Haneke, 154, 155, 158
Brooks, Peter, 172
Burgin, Victor, 200, 205, 208–210
Butler, Judith, 9, 101
C
Carel, Havi, 224, 226, 227
Carruth, Shane, 33, 34
Cavell, Stanley, 2, 12, 25, 39, 62, 101, 
103, 114, 119, 153, 169, 194, 
219
Chamarette, Jenny, 43, 141
Chiesa, Lorenzo, 155
Cinematography, 20, 47, 49, 54, 57, 
91, 94, 106, 169, 176, 189
close-up, 17, 21, 46, 54, 87
crane, 54–56
hand-held, 52
long take, 31, 38, 51, 60, 182, 207, 
226–228
mounted camera, 20, 56
point-of-view (POV) shot, 50, 51
tracking, 20, 52, 54, 222
Cinephilia, 2, 24, 222
Clover, Carol J., 146
Colin, Grégoire, 131, 180, 223
Computer-generated images (CGI), 
51, 81, 88, 91, 92
Cooper, Sarah, 67, 112, 193, 207
Coulthard, Lisa, 142, 155, 156, 158, 
195

Index   239
D
Dargis, Manohla, 92, 213
Death
melodramatic, 36
murder, 46, 81, 151
suicide, 90
De Beauvoir, Simone, 128, 133, 183, 
191
Deep Throat (Damiano), 8, 107, 200, 
213
De Lauretis, Teresa, 95
Deleuze, Gilles, 21, 22, 90, 211
De Luca, Tiago, 6, 22, 25, 31, 34, 35, 
50, 55, 60, 62, 68, 69, 71, 80, 
165, 167, 173, 177, 178
Deren, Maya, 30
Difficult film, 33, 34
Direction
ethics of, 67, 187, 190, 218
Discourses of sobriety, 74
Doane, Mart Ann, 132, 186
Documentary
authenticity, 71, 72, 78, 92, 167
ethnographic, 71, 75, 178
performative, 68, 73–75, 77
Dooley, Kath, 110, 159, 169, 181
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 44, 171
Ducey, Caroline, 107, 114, 118, 118, 
184
Dulac, Germaine, 3, 49
Dumont, Bruno, 213
Duration, 111, 131, 176, 186, 207
Dyer, Richard, 166, 169
E
Eisenstein, Sergei, 81–83
Ellis, John, 107
Elsaesser, Thomas, 3, 88
and Malte Hagener, 3
Embodiment, 6, 17, 20, 47, 57, 199. 
See also Phenomenology
altered states of, 36, 43, 57
Merleau-Ponty on, 6, 12–15, 17
Eroticism
opposed to pornography, 106, 108, 
118, 200
Ethics
directing and, 67, 187, 190, 218
spectatorship and, 69, 193, 195, 
220, 222
Excess, 7, 24, 36, 38, 47, 70, 82, 126, 
141, 145, 153, 175, 176, 190, 
207, 226. See also Body genres
Extreme cinema
and body genres, 1, 7, 14, 23
history of, 2, 4
influences on, 9, 10
Quandt on, 1, 99, 141, 173
F
Fantasy, 7, 36, 37, 43, 44, 46, 57, 60, 
61, 68, 78, 80, 91, 94, 95, 109, 
124, 140, 144–150, 202, 203, 
210, 218
Fassbinder, Rainer Werner, 9
Fat Girl (Breillat), 24, 78, 115, 119, 
123, 124, 126, 131–136, 138, 
140–143, 146, 147, 150, 151, 
193, 207, 211, 217
close-ups in, 131, 134
duration, 131, 207, 218
horror and, 123, 142, 143, 151
identification with characters, 153, 
205
melodrama and, 143, 146, 152, 199
narrative suspense and, 135
non-pornography, 112, 135
nudity in, 119, 133, 136, 170

240   Index
performances in, 166, 167, 177, 
190
rape in, 147, 211
real sex in, 140
sexual numbers and, 108
sound and, 132
Fellatio, 37, 139, 175–177
Feminism, 95, 226
Ferretis, Alejandro, 35, 76
36 fillette (Breillat), 109
“Film Bodies” (Williams), 7, 8, 145, 
200
Film’s body, 20, 53, 60, 61, 94, 206
Forms of the Affects, The (Brinkema), 
118, 169, 171, 212
France, 10, 12, 17, 159, 218
Frey, Mattias, 1, 3, 10, 101, 104, 119, 
124, 159, 168, 173
Fried, Michael, 30
G
Generic crossroads, 5, 12
Genre. See Under individual entries
Genre
conventions, 141, 151
expectations, 141, 155
trouble, 24
Gerry (Van Sant), 50, 60
Grandrieux, Philippe, 22
Grant, Barry Keith, 217
and Steve Blandford and Jim Hillier, 
4
Gravity (Cuarón), 92
Grierson, John, 3, 68
Grønstad, Asbjørn, 1, 115, 117, 118, 
207
Guillain, Giles, 109, 188–190
Gunning, Tom, 113, 135, 150
H
Haebophilia, 136
Haneke, Michael, 154–156, 226
Hapticity, 21, 49. See also Beugnet, 
Martine; Marks, Laura U.
hearing, 155, 156
visuality, 21, 22, 25, 48, 55, 56, 62, 
157, 158, 204–208
Hard Core (Williams), 101, 102, 111, 
112, 131, 132, 140
Heath, Stephen, 115, 152, 200, 203
Hernández, Marcos, 35, 76, 165
Hitchcock, Alfred, 42, 184, 201
Horeck, Tanya, 1, 31, 101, 130, 134, 
136, 137, 142, 207, 226
Horror. See Modleski, Tania; Williams, 
Linda
Fat Girl and, 110, 123, 142, 146, 
159, 217
horrible, 152, 154–158
Huppert, Isabelle, 224
I
Identification, 42, 52, 53, 70, 89, 
152–154, 156, 205
Immediacy, 168, 218, 220
Ince, Katherine, 180, 182, 192, 226
In My Skin (De Van), 226
In the Realm of the Senses (Oshima), 
127
Irreversible (Noé), 33, 62, 82, 137, 
207
I Spit on Your Grave (Zarchi), 154
J
Japón (Reygadas), 29, 35, 51, 53, 68, 
76

Index   241
Jesus, You Know (Seidl), 77
Jiménez Castro, Adolfo, 35
Jonathan L. Knapp, 124, 127, 142, 
143
K
Keathley, Christian, 60
Keesey, Douglas, 99, 108, 129, 130, 
137, 149, 182, 186, 188, 189, 
223
Kendall, Tina, 31, 101
Kerner, Aaron Michael, 124, 127, 
142, 143
Khanjian, Arsinee, 128
Koehler, Robert, 33, 35, 38, 43, 46, 
50, 56, 73, 76, 88
Kool Shen, 224
Kracauer, Siegfried, 11, 151
Krisjansen, Ivan, 130
L
Lacan, Jacques, 22, 155, 200, 201
Laine, Tarja, 81
Laplanche, Jean, 148, 149
Last Mistress, The (Breillat), 166, 190
Last Tango in Paris (Bertolucci), 8, 
127
Laughter, 7, 213
Leys, Ruth, 4
Lim, Dennis, 37, 38, 50, 69, 76
Lingis, Alphonso, 13–15, 36, 47, 48, 
55, 57, 79
Lyotard, Jean-François, 133, 152
M
Maddock, Trevor H., 130
Madison, Gary Brent, 13, 16
Malick, Terence, 34, 56
Manovich, Lev, 92, 93
Marks, Laura U., 6, 16, 21, 48, 56, 
204, 205, 209, 210, 212
Melodrama, 7, 123, 127, 134, 158
and death/dying, 89
teen, 119, 134, 172
Memory, 17, 43, 46, 74, 114, 149, 
195, 204, 207. See also Burgin
involuntary, 210, 212
voluntary, 210
Men
identification with characters, 153
masculinity, 146, 154
Menstruation, 118
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 6, 12–20, 
37, 47, 53, 57, 59
Mesquida, Roxane, 24, 107, 123, 126, 
132, 138, 147, 169, 181–183, 
212, 213
Metz, Christian, 112, 113, 116, 200
Mexico, 10, 12, 17, 29, 35, 41, 54, 
74–76, 88
Minh-ha, Trinh T., 3
Misogyny, 115, 188
Modleski, Tania, 152, 154
Mulvey, Laura, 108, 112, 114, 116, 
117, 125, 132, 194, 195
Munter, Carol, 144
Mushkadiz, Anapola, 68, 165
N
Ndalianis, Angela, 143, 145
Neale, Steve, 4, 13, 100
Nichols, Bill, 73–75, 82
Nine Songs (Winterbottom), 166
Nymph()maniac (Von Trier), 104
O
Olvidados, Los (Buñuel), 59
Ontology, 180, 221
5x2 (Ozon), 62

242   Index
Ozon, François, 62, 127, 171
Ozu, Yasujirō, 54
P
Paasonen, Susanna, 105, 106, 167
kinesthetic empathy, 175, 176
somatic archive, 167, 175–179, 
181, 194
Parillaud, Anne, 180, 223
Passion of Joan of Arc, The (Dreyer), 
194
Penn, Sheldon, 36, 165, 172, 177
Perception, 2, 13–16, 19, 21, 31, 38, 
49, 54, 56, 60, 114, 205, 206, 
209. See also Embodiment
altered states of, 30, 31, 42, 50, 
54–58, 60, 94
levels, 37, 42, 48, 50, 54, 57, 58, 
60
phenomenology of, 13–20
Perfect Love (Breillat), 87, 157, 188, 
225
Performance, 20, 22, 24, 74, 89, 165, 
166
Dyer on, 166, 169
presentational, 178
representational, 178, 179
sexual, 68, 111, 165, 167, 179, 
187, 190, 195, 200
Waugh on, 178
Williams on, 166
Phenomenological film theory, 6, 12, 
16, 19, 22, 23, 25, 32, 53, 67, 
125, 151, 157, 171, 175, 199, 
204, 219, 220, 222
Phenomenology, 6, 12, 16, 17, 19–23, 
32, 48, 61, 214, 224, 226. See 
also Merleau-Ponty, Maurice
habit body, 13, 17, 24, 59
lived body, 13–15, 17, 62, 166, 206
Piano, The (Campion), 49
Plato, 30, 111
Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand, 148, 149
Pornography, 101. See also Williams, 
Linda
Breillat and, 10, 103, 104, 107–
112, 115–119, 123–129, 
131–134, 187–189
fourth look, 115
generic conventions, 9, 25, 34, 71, 
95, 96, 100–102, 106, 108, 
111, 113, 119, 124, 138, 158, 
165, 173, 179, 203
maximum visibility, 8, 105, 108, 
109, 113, 132, 137, 174
non-pornographic, 104, 108, 110, 
120, 123, 175
Reygadas and, 165, 167, 171, 186, 
189, 193
Postmodernism, 4, 10, 152
Post Tenebras Lux (Reygadas)
CGI in, 51, 88, 91
cinematography and, 17, 20, 30, 37, 
42, 49, 60, 91, 94, 106
death in, 68, 84, 85, 88, 89, 91, 94, 
211
difficulty of, 77
excess and, 24, 38, 39, 70
haptic visuality and, 48, 55, 56
performative documentary and, 68, 
73, 75, 77
profilmic event and, 68, 69, 72, 
75–77, 80, 85, 86, 92, 93, 
95, 104, 136, 142, 177, 179, 
184–188, 205, 212, 214, 227
sensation and, 6, 7, 12, 15, 23, 32, 
33, 36, 43, 48, 49, 62, 96, 159
sex in, 31, 59, 62, 77, 78, 200, 219
slow cinema and, 60
visionary realism and, 31, 34, 50
Powell, Anna, 157
Pratt, Sarah, 109, 188
Principal genres, 30

Index   243
Proust, Marcel, 210
Psychoanalysis. See Chiesa, Lorenzo; 
Lacan, Jacques; Laplanche, Jean; 
Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand; Žižek, 
Slavoj
Q
Quandt, James, 1, 99, 141, 173
R
Rape, 20, 116, 128, 131, 132, 134, 
137, 138, 140, 145–151, 153, 
154, 156, 159, 182, 184, 186, 
191, 204, 207, 211, 212, 218
Rayns, Tony, 42
Realism, 10, 85, 106, 118, 149
Bazinian, 85, 186
surrealism, 31, 93
visionary, 31, 34, 50
Reality
authenticity, 71, 72, 78, 92, 132, 
167, 186
extradiegetic, 168, 181, 187, 193, 
194, 200, 205, 212, 214
presence, 24, 25, 69, 72, 74, 76, 
80, 111, 158
profilmic event, 21, 25, 37, 68, 72, 
75, 79, 80, 95, 104, 136, 142, 
177, 205, 227
Real sex onscreen, 31, 105, 111, 112, 
134, 179, 185, 189
A Real Young Girl (Breillat), 118, 
149, 184, 191
Reboux, Anaïs, 116, 123, 136
Renoir, Jean, 82
Renov, Michael, 67, 70, 76
Reygadas, Carlos
on actors, 55, 68, 69, 72, 76, 167
on Mexico, 35, 41, 54, 74–76
on pornography, 171
on Post Tenebras Lux, 33, 37, 46, 
75, 85, 86
Reygadas, Eleazar, 30, 35
Reygadas, Rutilia, 35
Rodowick, D.N., 221, 222
Romance (Breillat), 107, 109, 110, 
114, 115, 118, 119, 125, 134, 
136, 139, 140, 147, 149, 184, 
217, 219, 223
Room 237 (Ascher), 58
Rossellini, Roberto, 29
Ruiz, Bertha, 68, 166
Russon, John, 14, 59, 70
Ryall, Tom, 4
S
Sadomasochism, 125, 184
Salò (Pasolini), 99, 105
Schatz, Thomas, 5, 100
Screening Sex (Williams), 8
Sensual catachresis, 57, 61
Seventh Continent, The (Haneke), 155
Sex is Comedy (Breillat), 17, 24, 69, 
78, 142, 166, 169, 173, 174, 
180–182, 184, 186, 190, 191, 
193, 195, 203–205, 208, 209, 
211, 212, 217, 218, 220, 223
document of bodies and sex, 154
long take in, 182, 186, 207
paired roles with Fat Girl, 146, 166
trauma and, 140, 166, 180, 212
Sexual difference, 32, 67, 77, 78, 94, 
95, 99, 145, 148, 149, 159, 218, 
220, 223
Sexual relationships, 100, 108, 111, 
112, 114, 130, 158, 159, 167
compulsory monogamy, 67, 77, 80, 
95
marriage, 67, 77, 78, 84
non-monogamous, 95
Shame (McQueen), 42

244   Index
Siffredi, Rocco, 114, 115
Silent Light (Reygadas), 29, 31, 35, 
36, 54, 69, 86, 89
Sitney, P. Adam, 31
Sleeping Beauty (Leigh), 105, 171, 226
Slow cinema, 60
Smith, Clarissa, 106
Smith, Murray, 29, 34
Smith, Paul Julian, 68, 203
Sobchack, Thomas, 5, 10, 13, 102
Sobchack, Vivian, 6, 19, 20, 22, 32, 
33, 49, 53, 57, 61, 62, 76, 82, 
83, 119, 204
Solórzano, Fernanda, 40–43, 72, 92
Staiger, Janet, 4
Strange Days (Bigelow), 156
Stranger by the Lake (Guiraudie), 104
Stratton, G.M., 13
T
Tarkovsky, Andrei, 29
Theatre, 30, 32, 53, 178
Thompson, Kristin, 38, 39, 46
Tolstoy, Leo, 44
Torres, Willebaldo, 35, 89, 93
Torture porn, 142
Transgression, 1, 4, 141
Trouble Every Day (Denis), 106
Tsai, Ming-liang, 23, 60, 92
V
Vertigo (Hitchcock), 201
Vincendeau, Ginette, 1, 159, 207
Virginity, 128–130, 134,  
146, 189, 191
W
Warhol, Andy, 166, 173
Waugh, Thomas, 178
Wees, Bill, 30
Wheatley, Catherine, 6, 82, 100, 147, 
159, 191
White Ribbon, The (Haneke), 155
Willemen, Paul, 115, 124, 125, 202
Williams, Alan, 30
Williams, Linda, 5, 7, 8, 11, 102, 104, 
105, 107, 109, 124, 134, 142
horror, 7, 132, 139, 142, 143, 145, 
199
melodrama, 7, 88, 96, 100, 112, 
126
pornography, 7, 24, 96, 100–102, 
104–107, 110, 111, 132, 140, 
176, 199, 200
Wilson, Emma, 118, 139, 184
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 10, 25, 170
Wollen, Peter, 169
Women
abuse of, 10, 32, 42, 191, 223, 
225–228
bodies of, 21
images of, 21
and sexual desire, 226
Y
Young and Beautiful (Ozon), 171
Z
Zabé, Alexis, 49, 93
Žižek, Slavoj, 25, 68, 115, 125, 171, 
195, 200–205, 208

