Y
iv
fvrw V-;
o.n~(y
V r-/ ~
4~1
~ ~ ~~SJ
54f
a - 0-14 S
LAA
5aM
F &t C4'sco
W . W_
,Ae tvjAU,,,t,
CHAPTER V
Evidence for the Psychological Reality of
Semantic Components: The Verbs of Possession
DEDRE GENTNER
This chapter is concerned with the way verbs are stored and pro-
cessed. I use a set of possession verbs as illustrative examples. The
first section of the chapter deals with the structural representation of
these verbs. The remainder of the chapter is concerned with issues
of processing and with experimental tests of the theory.
In this chapter I use the terms "components" and "chunks" to refer
to the underlying semantic units of verbs, rather than the term "primi-
tive elements," which is used iii the other chapters of this book. 1
make this change to emphasize that the components analyzed in this
chapter need not necessarily represent the members of some univer-
sal set of innate semantic features. If such a set exists, most of the
components that are described in this chapter are probably combina-
tions of the innate features.
The two main linguistic treatments of the possession verbs are those
by Bendix (1966) and Fillmore (1966). Bendix proposed a general
analysis of verbs of possession, and in a critique of this work, Fillmore
suggested some alternative representations. Schank and his collab-
orators have also studied verbs of possession (Schank, Goldman, Rie-
ger, and Riesbeck, 1972). My treatment differs from all three of these
approaches, although it has some points in common with each.
Gentner, D. (1975). Evidence for the psychological reality of semantic components: 
The verbs of possession. In D. A. Norman, D. E. Rumelhart, & the LNR Research 
Group (Eds.), Explorations in cognition (pp. 211-246). San Francisco: Freeman. 

212
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
REPRESENTATION OF THE POSSESSION VERBS
Possession: POSS
The first element needed to represent the family of possession
verbs is some expression of the state of possession. This stative, which
I call POSS, indicates possession of an object by a person from some
initial time to some final time. For example, the sentence
(1)
Mrs. Vandel owned the Kluge diamond from 1932 to 1939.
FIGURE 9.1
experiencer
object
from-time
to-time
( Mrs. Vandel) (Kluge diamond)
(1932)
(1939)
is represented by the structural network shown in Figure 9.1. In this
chapter POSS represents the intuitive notion of ownership. This does
not imply that POSS is an unanalyzable whole. It seems clear that
POSS shares elements of meaning with other statives. One such
stative is location (see E. Clark, 1970). Another is "inalienable posses-
sion," which is inherently nontransferable "possession," as in sen-
tence 2 (see Kimball, 1973):
(2)
Mrs. Vandel had an imposing appearance.
Knowledge of the components that make up POSS, LOC, and the
other statives enables us to represent the semantic similarities among
these statives and also offers us an analytical approach to the problem
of multiple senses of verbs.
Multiple Senses: Metaphorical Extension of POSS
A major difficulty in the representation of verbs is the fact that most
verbs have many meanings. For example, consider the verb "have"
l
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
213
in the following sentences:
(3A)
Sam has a large kettle.
(3B)
Sam has a nice apartment.
(3C)
The kettle has an enamel coating.
(3D)
Sam has good times.
One way of dealing with verb senses is to formulate a definition that
serves equally well for all uses of the verb. Bendix's approach is
essentially this one (Bendix, 1966). The disadvantage of such an
approach is that the resulting definitions are so general that they lose
their usefulness for specific instances. For example, a paraphrase of
"have" for sentences 313 and 3C would need to omit the notion of
ownership; yet ownership is important in the meaning of "have" in
sentence 3A.
A second way of handling multiple word senses is to choose one
sense as the meaning of the word. Fillmore's claim is that "have" is a
real verb when it means "possess" but serves a merely syntactic
function in its other senses (Fillmore, 1966). This approach avoids the
difficulties presented by an all-inclusive definition. However, it also
tends to obscure the semantic relations among the different senses of
the verb.
In this chapter the verbs are defined in their basic possessive
senses. In my view the other senses of these verbs are not a separate
class but are metaphorical extensions of the meaning of the basic
sense. In each of these extensions some, but not all, of the elements
that characterize POSS are preserved.
For example, in sentences 3A and 3B,
(3A)
Sam has a large kettle.
(3B)
Sam has a nice apartment.
the verb "has" conveys the idea that Sam has the right to use the
objecf as it is normally used: to live in the apartment, to cook with the
kettle. However, the right to transfer possession of the object is
present in sentence 3A but not in sentence :313. Sam can sell the
kettle if he wants to, but not the apartment. In sentence 3D,
(3D)
Sam has good times.
very few of the elements of POSS remain.

214
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
Moreover, notice that although we can speak of transfer of good
times, as in
(4)
Sam gave Chlorette a good ti me.
the transfer differs from the normal transfer of POSS in that Sam can
continue to have a good time himself after the transfer. Had he given
Chlorette a zircon the situation would be different. POSS conveys
exclusive possession; if Chlorette owns something, Sam does not. It
is understood, though, that the relation between Sam and good times
in sentence 3D is not the full POSS, but something more like "experi-
ences." The properties of the transfer (giving a good time) are inferred
from the properties of the state of having a good time.
The analysis of POSS into more primitive components should
allow us to describe the elements that take part in a given meta-
phorical extension. However, in the remainder of the chapter I will
be concerned only with the basic possessive senses of the verbs. In
this context POSS can be treated as simple ownership of concrete
objects.
Transfer of Possession: TRANSF
TRANSF is a higher-level component that stands for change of posses-
sion of an object from one person to another. The argument structure
of TRANSF is shown in Figure 9.2.' The TRANSF chunk is similar to
the
transfer-of-possession
that Schank and his co-workers call
ATRANS (Schank, 1973b). The chief difference is that ATRANS, like
the other primitive verbs in Schank's system, is defined as a unitary
action, whereas the TRANSF component used here consists of a
CHANGE component acting on a stative of possession (see Figure
9.2). I prefer the TRANSF analysis; first, because it makes apparent the
relation between stative verbs like "have" and verbs of change like
"give"; and second, because explicit representation of the stative
components of verbs helps clarify metaphorical extension.
TRANSF and Causality: The Abstract Act DO.
The TRANSF
chunk does not specify any causal agency for the change of posses-
sion. However, many verbs include a statement about the causal
agent as part of their meanings.
'In this (and later) figures in this chapter, shaded nodes indicate a repetition of a node
shown elsewhere in the figure, but duplicated for clarity.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VEIMS OF POSSESSION
215
X
Z
T
POSS
POSS
experiences
object
object
experiencer
to-time
to-time
from-time
from-time
(before T)
(after T)
FIGURE 9.2
Transfer of possession: Object Z passes from the possession of person X to the
possession of person Y at time T.
Consider the transfer of object Z from X to Y:
If X instigated the action, we can say X gave Z to Y.
If Y instigated the action, we can say Y took Z from X.
A few verbs of possession, such as "grab," "seize," and "hand,"
specify not only the agent of the transfer but also the action that was
performed to cause the transfer to occur. However, in general, the
possession verbs tend not to specify actional components. What is
specified is which transfers take place and who instigates them, and
sometimes why; rarely is it important to know exactly how the trans-
fers are accomplished. Thus, the abstract causal act DO is normally
used in this chapter to represent the event by which the agent caused
the change in possession to occur. This is in keeping with the analyses
presented in the other chapters of this book.
Using the components discussed to this point, it is possible to de-
fine such verbs as "give" and "take." The structural representations
for "give" and "take" are shown in Figure 9.3.

B
216
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
DO
time object
b
DO
FIGURE 9.3
Structural representations for "give" and "take":
A "X gives Y a Z at time T."
B "Y takes Z from X at time T."
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VEI1RS OF POSSESSION
217
TRANSF, Negation, and Presupposition
The meaning of TRANSF includes both the initial state and the final
state of possession, as well as the change front one to the other. The
sentence
I took some candy from the children (at time T).
(5)
communicates a number of different aspects of the event: the initial
state, the final state, the change to the final state, and the cause of the
change. Thus, the following ideas are all contained within (5):
(6A)
The children had some candy (before time T). [The initial state]
(6B)
I had some candy (for some time after T). [The final state]
(6C)
I got some candy (at time T). [The change to the final state]
(6ll)
I caused myself to get some candy (at time 'I'). [The causal
element]
All of these submeanings are normally communicated by "take."
A problem arises with negative sentences. As Fillmore points out,
the negation of sentence 5
(5)
I took some candy from the children.
affects only the change to the final state part of the transfer, not the
initial state; that is,
(7)
I didn't take any candy from the children.
normally conveys that the speaker did not get any candy but not that
the children did not have candy. Fillmore builds this difference into
his representation of "take." In his system, only sentence 6ll, which
contains the causal element and the change to the final state, makes
up the asserted meaning of the verb. The initial state that the children
had some candy is not directly communicated, but is a presupposition.
In other words, it is part of the necessary background information
(along with the fact that the children exist, and so on) that must be
true in order for the sentence to make sense. (A more complete dis-
cussion of presupposition is given in Chapter 4.)
Although Fillmore's representation captures the behavior of "take"
under negation, the omission of the initial state from the "'asserted
meaning" seems clearly wrong for positive sentences. The TRANSF

218
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
chunk has the advantage that it represents the full positive meaning,
including both the initial and final states. To this TRANSF represen-
tation we can add a conversational postulate that states that negating
a change-of-state verb such as "take" does not normally affect the
initial state, but affects only the change to the final state.
There is an independent motivation for this postulate. There are
indefinitely many negative sentences that could truthfully be uttered.
One could edify one's companions with remarks like
(8A)
I didn't take any diamonds from the children.
(8B)
Robespierre didn't take any animal crackers from Sophie Tucker.
and so on. People normally talk about what did not happen only when
it might well have happened. It is only plausible to utter a negative
sentence when some, but not all, of the chunks that would have
been conveyed by the positive sentence are iii fact valid. Sometimes
the speaker uses special stress to indicate which part of the meaning
should be negated, as in
(9A)
I didn't take any candy from the children.
(9B)
I didn't take any candy from the children.
In the absence of special information, one normally assumes only that
the change of state did not occur. With this postulate we can capture
the effect of negation on change-of-state verbs while still representing
the full positive meaning of the verb.
Obligation: OBLIG
The verbs "give" and "take" can be represented simply as actions on
the part of a person that result in transfer of possession, but many pos-
session verbs are more complex. Some notion of obligation is included
in the meanings of many of these verbs. Sometimes only one person
is obligated, as in the verb "owe." More often there is mutual obliga-
tion, as in verbs of exchange such as "buy" and "trade." A common
pattern is that two actions must be completed to fulfill the meaning
of the verb. For example, consider this story:
(10)
Ida and Sam decided to trade speakers since hers were too big for
her apartment. She delivered hers to him on Wednesday but by
Saturday he still hadn't brought his over.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SFNIAN'I'IC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
219
Here we can see several features of these verbs. First, there is an
initial agreement, either explicit or, as iii a store where the rules are
well known, implicit. Each party agrees to be obligated to perform
some action in return for the other party's performing his action. I
call the stative component of the verb that denotes this obligation
OBLIG.
Sometimes a final time by which both actions must be completed
is specified. But even if such a time is not made explicit, there is some
implicit feeling about the duration, such that the tardy person be-
comes increasingly in the wrong after some vaguely defined interval
following the completion of the other half of the bargain. In informal
situations, the completion of one person's action tends to ratify the
agreement, and thus confirms the other person's state of
OBLIG.
Words such as "buy" and "sell" normally imply that the transfers of
both the object being purchased and the money being paid take place
at the same time.-' Words such as "borrow" and "loan" imply that
there is a reasonably long interval between the initial transfer of the
object being loaned and the final transfer of the object back to the
loaner.
Notice that the notion of OBLIG
i s concerned with the acceptance
of a social or moral requirement. One would not use OBLIG in the case
of a man who was being robbed. The actions that are agreed upon are
most often transfer of possession, as in "trade," "buy," or "return."
But other sorts of actions are also possible, as in the verbs "hire,"
"work for," and "contract." Thus OBLIG
is a stative denoting the
social or moral necessity for performing a certain action. The struc-
tural format for OBLIG is shown in Figure 9.4.
T
z
from-time
to-time
experiencer
action
FIGURE 9.4
The argument structure of OBLIG: X has been in
a state of obligation since tine T1 to perform) the
action W by time T2.
'In this and later analysis, I use the term "money" to include all formal acts that
have become equivalent to the actual physical use of Inoucy, such
i ts presentation of a
check or a credit card to the seller.
1

220
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
Mutual Obligation or Contract: CONTR
Some verbs are concerned with a state of obligation that applies to one
person only. For example, "owe" and "pay" communicate a state of
OBLIG on the part of the owner or payer, but do not convey that the
other person is in a state of OBLIG. However, there are many verbs
that involve two co-agents who both agree to be obligated to perform
actions. I use the term CONTR to refer to the state of mutual obliga-
tion to perform stated actions. The structure of CONTR is shown in
Figure 9.5.
FIGURE 9.5
The structure of CONTR:
X and Y have contracted
(mutually agreed) to perform
actions WI and W2, respectively.
W1
W2
iswhen
arg
1
arg 2
experiencer
action
experiencer
action
BOX 9.1
A set of possession verbs.
The components discussed in this chapter are sufficient to define a
broad set of the verbs of possession. In this box are shown the represen-
tations of the verbs "give," "take," "pay," "trade," "buy," "sell," and
"spend money." These verbs are studied in experiments reported later
in this chapter. To simplify the diagrams the representation of time has
been omitted.
(Continued)
PSYCHOLOGICAL. III'EAI.l'I'Y OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VI?t1RS OF POSSESSION
221
I3OX 9.1 (continued)
I.
COMPONENTS USED IN THESE DIAGRAMS.
CAUSE
The causal connection between an event and its result.
DO
An unspecified action performed by some agent: the
abstract actional component of the verb.
CHANGE
A change from one state to another state.
POSS
The state of ownership by the experiencer of the speci-
fied object.
TRANSF
The change of possession (transfer) of an object from
one person to another.
OBLIG
The state of societal obligation to perform some act or
series of acts.
CONTR
The state of mutual societal obligation in which each of
two persons is obliged to perform an (in general, dif-
ferent) agreed-upon act.
AND
A general conjunction, all of whose arguments must be
fulfilled.
II.
RELATION NAMES USED IN THESE DIAGRAMS.
Name of the relation
Symbol normally
used for the
argument of the
relation
Description of the relation
Agent
X
human performer of an action
Experiencer
-
human who undergoes an
indicated state
Recipient
Y
human who is the
nonagentive participant in
an action (the indirect object)
Object
z
physical object
Source
-
initial possessor of an object
Goal
-
final possessor of an object
Argument (arg)
onc of the argununlt rolations
of the coujunetion AND
Action
W
action to be performed
(('oil I (ll Ned)

Box 9.1 (continued)
III.
STRUCTURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF A SET OF
POSSESSION VERBS.
FIGURE B9.2
X takes Z from Y.
Z
(continued)
PSYCIIOLOGICAI. REALITY OF SI{ML1N'I'IC CMIPONENTS: VERBS ()]-' POSSESSION
BOX 9.1 (continued)
z
event
experiencer
source
object
'rGUI(r; R l.3
pays Z to 1'.
(Cola f Il (4 ed)
223

224
BOX 9.1 (continued)
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
FIGURE 139.4
X trades Y a Z1 for a Z2.
(continued)
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
BOX 9.1 (continued)
FIGURE 139.5
X buys Zl from Y with Z2 (money).
225
(conlilnu'd)

226
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
BOX 9.1 (continued)
AND
agent
CONTR
DO
event
arg 2
resu It
action 1
action 2
TRANSF
FIGURI. 139.6
X sells Z1 to Y for Z2 (money).
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SENIAN'rIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
BOX 9.1 (continued)
spend money
agent
object
AND
227
FIGURE B9.7
X spends Z (money). [X gives some person (Y) some money (Z), and in return
Y performs some action (W).1
MEMORY FOR CHUNKS
To understand the meaning of a sentence, it is necessary to expand the
lexical items to their semantic components and to link these com-
ponents in the way specified by the sentence. 'To read out a sentence
from memory requires the production of a set of words that corre-
spond to the interrelated chunks. This process of going from the
semantic components to the surface words is akin to the linguistic
notions of predicate-raising (MeCawley, 196$a) and "conflation„
(Talmy, 1972). There are usually several ways to combine the chunks
into words. A set of chunks may be read out as "went by foot" or as
"walked," for example. Usually it is not possible to predict exactly
what lexicalization should result from a given structure. However,
(continued)
we can make some general predictions.

228
Confusions among Semantically Similar Verbs
If verbs are stored as interrelated sets of chunks, then recall for verbs
should depend on the recall for chunks. An immediate implication
is that verbs whose underlying structures overlap should be more
confusable than verbs whose structures are very different.
In an experiment designed to test for such confusions, I showed
subjects triads of sentences. The verbs in two of the sentences (types
S1 and S2) had chunks in common; the verb in the third sentence
(type D) had little or no semantic overlap with the other two verbs.
All three sentences had the same agent, as in the following triad:
(11A)
Ida received the backpack. (type S1: similar)
(11B)
Ida borrowed the tablecloth. (type S2: similar)
(11C)
Ida ruined the drafting set. (type D: different)
Figure 9.6 shows the structural networks for sentences 11A, B, and C.
The sections of the networks for "receive" and "borrow" that overlap
(the CHANGE of POSS sections) are shaded.
A
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
FIGURE 9.6
Comparison of structures for "receive,"
recipient
object
"borrow," and "ruin":
A
"Ida received a backpack."
B
"Ida borrowed a tablecloth."
C
"Ida ruined a drafting set."
(Ida)
(backpack)
B
Poss
DO
AND
arg
1
from-s a e to-state
OBLIG
POSS
object object
experiencer
ecl.ath j
from-state
C
agent
experiencer
A
; unknown;
clam
agent
object
borrow
event
to-state
(Ida)
iswhen
~LdUICG Ul I I/
result
(drafting set)
arg 2
DO
0
CONDITION
CONDITION
object
experiencer
(Ida)
action

230
STUDIES OF I.ANCUACF:
Consider a subject who has seen three sentences of the form shown
in (I IA, B, and C) and who has forgotten some of the underlying com-
ponents. In particular, consider the subject who has retained some of
the information shown in the shaded portions of Figures 9.6A and
9.6B, but who has lost the links with the rest of the network for the
verbs. Suppose we now test him by presenting one of the following
probes:
(12A)
Ida borrowed 
or
(12B)
Ida received 
Both probes contain substructures (the shaded areas in Figures 9.6A
and 9.6B) that are consistent with either of his partial networks: the
structure concerning possession of the backpack and the structure
concerning possession of the tablecloth. The subject who has lost the
connecting links for these substructures should be unable to tell
which fragment belongs with which probe. Since sentences of type D
have little or no overlap with the other sentences, a probe derived
from a sentence of type D
(13)
Ida ruined
should seldom lead to confusion. The theoretical prediction is that
because of the overlap in the structures, there should be more object
confusions between sentences of types S1 and S2 than between sen-
tences of types S1 and D or S2 and D.
Since the predictions for the experiment concern only errors, sub-
jects were deliberately overloaded in an effort to increase the number
of errors. Each subject heard 40 sentences. The stimuli were 8 S1-
S2-D triads (making 24 sentences) randomly interspersed with filler
sentences. The subjects were instructed to remember the sentences
for a recall task. In addition, they were told that they would have to
write a brief impression of each of the 4 people who were the agents
of the 40 sentences: Ida, Frederick, Sam, and Violet. (For each agent
there were 2 triads and 4 filler sentences.) The subjects were asked to
write the impressions in order to encourage them to comprehend the
sentences, not simply to memorize them. Within each triad the pairing
of verbs and objects was counterbalanced over 3 groups of subjects.
Under these conditions subjects made a large number of errors.
Only 31 percent of the responses were correct; another 55 percent
were omitted entirely. The errors of interest were the confusion errors,
in which an object that was presented with one verb was mistakenly
PSYCn 0I.OCICAI. REAI.rrY Or SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VEAMS OF POSSESSION
recalled with another verb. These constituted 8 percent of the re-
sponses. As predicted, confusions between objects of overlapping
verbs greatly outnumbered confusions between objects of nonover-
lapping verbs. Eighty-one percent of the confusion errors occurred
between Sl and S2 sentences, although by chance alone these errors
should have constituted only one-third of the total number of re-
sponses. Table 9.1 presents the proportions of confusion errors of each
type. The overlap between verbs S1 and S2 existed wholly at the
level of semantic representation. The high proportion of confusions
between them is strong support for a componential treatment of
meaning.
TABLE 9.1
Confusions in which the object presented with one uerb is mis•tokentil
recalled with another verb.
'F(2,60) = 6.66;
1) < 0.01.
Shifts between General and Specific Verbs
When parts of the structure for a verb are forgotten, the verb may be
recalled as a more general verb, one that lacks some o1 the chunks of
the verb actually heard. For example, the sentence
(14)
Ida bought a lawn mower.
might be recalled as
(15)
Ida got a lawn mower.
if the structural information necessary for the more specific verb
"bought" has been lost. Palmer (personal communication) obtained
this specific-to-general shift in noun recognition. In his experiment
231
Confusion type
Sentence used for
agent-verb cue
Sentence in which
p
recalled
object was actually resented
Proportion"
similar-similar
S1
S2
S2
S1
0.81
similar-different
S1
D
0.13
S2
D
different-similar
D
S1
0.06
D
S2

232
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
subjects were less likely to notice the substitution of a general noun
(such as "flowers'' in sentence 1613) for a specific noun (such as
"tulips" in sentence 16A) than the substitution of a specific noun for
a general noun.
(16A)
The boy noticed the tulips in the park.
(16B)
The boy noticed the flowers in the park.
It is also possible to produce general-to-specific errors. If chunks
are added by context to the network for a general verb, the resulting
structure may look identical to the one for a more specific verb. In this
case the extra chunk will sometimes be recalled as part of the verb,
producing a shift from a general verb to a specific verb.
For example, consider the pair of words "give" and "pay." The
meaning of "pay" is almost the same as that of "give" with the addi-
tion of the specification of the object as money and of the element of
owing (a state of OBLIG to TRANSF something). Suppose someone
hears a statement that combines "give" with a prior condition of owing
and with the notion that the object involved is money. He should con-
struct a structural representation that looks like the structure for "pay."
One would then expect him to use the word "pay" when he recalls
the passage.
In a simple demonstration of this phenomenon, I presented subjects
with one of two stories, each ending with the same final sentence:
(17)
Max finally gave Sam the ten dollars.
In one story, Max was described as owing money to Sam. In the
other story, Sam simply asked Max for some money. The two groups
of subjects were then asked to recall the story as accurately as pos-
sible. The results of their recall of the critical sentence, sentence 17,
are presented in Table 9.2. When sentence 17 was presented in the
story that involved owing, subjects used the phrases "paid" and "paid
back" considerably more often than they used the correct word "gave"
(47 percent compared with 30 percent). Subjects who had heard the
story that involved asking for money recalled sentence 17 quite dif-
ferently. No subjects used the words "paid" or "paid back." One-
third of the subjects used the word "loaned": the same fraction that
used the correct word "give."
Since no subjects heard the word "pay" in the experiment, the high
incidence of false recalls of "pay" and "paid back" in the "owing"
version is not the result of simple memory for lexical items. Further,
the fact that no subjects made the "pay" substitution in the "asking"
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
TABLE 9.2
Stlbsliheliun.s,lior the verb
alter a slorll ahotil Sa11i and Max.
Verbs recalled in sentence 17
When sentence appeared:
gave (the correct response)
paid
paid back
loaned
other
233
version rules out the possibility that "pay" simply fitted better in the
sentence. I conclude that subjects constructed a componential repre-
scrltatiorl that cnconllrasse(I not merely the inunc(liatc Verb presented
("give") but also its context. When they were asked to recall the story,
they had to partition their semantic structures into words, which often
yielded words that were different from those that they had originally
heard, These results, like the results of the semantic confusions ex-
periment, support a model of memory in which verbal material is
stored as sets of interrelated components.
SEMANTIC STRUCTURE AND THE ACQUISITION OF
MEANING: AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
If word meanings are embedded within structural networks composed
of interrelated semantic components, then acquisition of word
meaning should be largely explainable in terms of the acquisition of
components and the relations among them. There is considerable
evidence that the development of word meanings proceeds by
gradual addition of chunks to existing representations. The work of
E.
Clark and of Donaldson, Balfour, and Wales provides several
examples of the gradual accretion Of' the "semantic features"' associ-
ated with a given word (E. Clark, 1970, 1971, 1973; Donaldson and
Balfour, 1968; Donaldson and Wales, 1970). In the stages before all
the necessary features are added to the representation of "a word, the
child's use of the word indicates that its meaning for him lacks some
features of the adult meaning.
`For present purposes, E. Clark's "semantic features" can
be considered to be
roughly equivalent to what I have called chunks.
In a story containing
"owing" (percent)
In a story containing
"asking" (percent)
30
33
31
0
17
0
0
34
22
33

234
STUDII S Or LANGUAGE
A verb whose representation includes chunks that are acquired late
should be learned later than one whose chunks are acquired early.
Further, verbs with few chunks should be used correctly before verbs
with many chunks. More specifically, there should be a nested-chunks
effect. If the structure for one verb is entirely contained within the
structure for another, the former verb should be acquired first. Be-
cause a child's representation of a verb depends upon just how many
of the underlying components have been acquired, a child's mistakes
in interpreting complex verbs should in general reflect omission of
the chunks not yet acquired.' His interpretation of a complex verb may
be identical to his (correct) interpretation of a simple verb, at least
until he acquires the necessary additional verb components. The
order of acquisition of the underlying components of possession
verbs should determine both the relative ages at which children
can acquire the meanings of these verbs and the types of errors chil-
dren will make if they attempt to use a possession verb before they
have acquired all of its meaning components.
A weak order of acquisition among the chunks can be derived
directly from the nested relations among the chunks. CONTR contains
OBLIG as part of its meaning, and the composites CONTR-TO-TRANS
and OBLIG-TO-TRANSF cannot be understood until their components
(DO, CAUSE, and TRANSF) are present.
Additional ordering predictions can be inferred from the develop-
mental psychology literature. The work of Piaget suggests that
young children tend to rely very heavily on the notion of animism-
the tendency to attribute animate causes to events (Piaget, 1955,
1965). This attribution of cause requires (implicit) knowledge of
CAUSE and DO. TRANSF should also be learned relatively early,
because the notion of change of possession is both more concrete
than the notions of OBLIG and CONTR and more common in the ex-
perience of children.
The expectation, then, is that DO, CAUSE, and TRANSF should be
acquired early by children. The other components enter into the
child's representational system later.
To use OBLIG correctly as part of a verb, the child must understand
something about the notion of social obligation. CONTR, which in-
volves mutual social obligation, requires prior understanding of
OBLIG. Accordingly, it should be the last chunk to be acquired.
Thus, the predicted ordering of acquisition is roughly DO, CAUSE,
TRANSF, OBLIG, and finally CONTR. In addition to these conceptual
'This naturally applies only to verbs that the child has heard and that he attempts to
use prior to acquisition of all the necessary chunks. If a complex verb is only first en-
countered after all the necessary chunks have been acquired, the course of acquisition
may be quite different.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY oR SENAMI H: GOnirONl NI:ti: A'
1- lUSS or•
I'OSSI SSION
235
chunks, the function of money as an argument constraint must also be
learned in order for the child to use verbs such as "pay" or "buy."
In order to predict the order of acquisition of the verbs themselves,
it is necessary to consider not only the individual chunks, but also the
nested relations among the sets that comprise the verbs. There are two
nesting orders among the sets of subconcepts that make up the verbs
under consideration. Figure 9.7 shows these nesting orders and the
derived predictions for the order of acquisition of the verbs.
First come "give" and "take." Both these verbs should be acquired
early in the development of the child since they require only DO,
CAUSE, and TRANSF. The next two words to be acquired should be
"trade" and "pay." Both these words add OBLIG (as well as other
components) to the previous DO, CAUSE, TRANSF structures. Which
of these two words comes first depends upou whether the child first
learns about social contracts
(CONTR) or about the use of money.
There is no a priori reason to suspect the primacy of one of these con-
cepts over the other. One would suspect that the relative order of
acquisition of CONTR and of the notion of money varies from child to
child.
Finally, after both CONTR and money have been acquired, then the
child is ready to use properly terms such as "buy," "sell," and "spend
money." Of the words that are examined in this chapter, these three
should be the last to be acquired.
Confusions among the Verbs
At the stage when only DO, CAUSE, and TRANSF are understood,
only the verbs "give" and "take" can be represented correctly by the
child. More complex verbs such as "buy" and "sell" should be repre-
sented incompletely as some combination of DO, CAUSE, and
TRANSF. The child who has not yet acquired OBLIG, CONTR, or the
notion of money sees in an act of "buying" only a series of transfer,
of which only the object transfer makes sense. He has no way of
organizing the transaction as a whole. The most we can expect this
child to store as his representation of a complex verb is some sort of
object transfer.
Experimental Procedure
The details of the experimental study are reported in Gentner (1974).
Here an outline of the study is presented, along with reasonably com-
plete results. Children between the ages of' :3 an<I 8 were asked to

236
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE.
CONTR
TO
TRANSF
trade
give
take
OBLIG
TO
TRANSF
OBLIG
TO
TRANSF
MONEY
buy
sell
spend money
pay
CONTR
TO
TRANSF
1
FIGURE 9.7
The nested relationships among the concepts underlying the verbs "give," "take,"
"trade," "pay," "buy," "sell," and "spend money." Semantic components (chunks)
are represented by darkly shaded ovals. The states that permit full understanding of
the verbs are represented by lightly shaded ovals. Age of acquisition of the verbs
proceeds vertically, youngest age at the top.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMI ANTIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
manipulate two dolls to act out sentences containing possession verbs.
The experimenter observed and recorded the manipulation, taking
particular note of the types of errors made. Special care was taken to
ensure that the children fully understood the nature of the task, that
the dolls (and their names) were well learned by the children, and that
simple artifacts could not account for the results. In particular, care
was taken that the number, type, and arrangement of the objects that
were to be transferred could offer no clues as to the operations that
should be performed, and a control experiment was performed to en-
sure that the children were in fact using their semantic understanding
of the verbs that had been presented to them, and not simply respond-
ing to the surface ordering of the names of the dolls and objects used
in the sentences.
The subjects were 70 children ranging in age from 3/6 to 8/6 years . 5
There were 14 children at each of 5 age levels, approximately evenly
divided between males and females (see Table 9.3). Each child re-
ceived one dollar and some candies for his participation.
TABLE 9.3
Distribution of subjects used in the experiment.
The experimental arrangement is shown in Figure 9.8. The ex-
periment was performed with each child individually in the child's
home. The child was seated on the floor and presented with two
stuffed beanbag dolls. The dolls were known as "Ernie" and "Bert"
and were the conmrercially available models of' the dolls with those
names used in the television show "Sesame Street." Usually the
child was already familiar with the dolls and their names. If not, the
experimenter talked to him about the dolls until he was able to name
them easily.
'The age notation is that of years/months. Thus, age 3/6 means 3 years 6 months.
237
Age range (years/months)
Females
Males
Total per age
3/6-4/5
7
7
14
4/6-5/5
8
6
14
5/6-6/5
4
10
14
6/6-7/5
8
6
14
7/6-8/5
8
6
14
Totals
35
35
70

238
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
Experimenter
The experimenter spent considerable time with each child to en-
sure that he understood the names of the dolls, understood the seat-
ing arrangements, knew which table and which objects belonged to
each doll, and was able to manipulate each doll to make it "pick up a
toy," "move it over here," and "drop it down." The experiment
began once the child had mastered all of these concepts and manipu-
lations. Initially, each doll had the same set of toys: two each of cars,
boats, flags, and keys; one each of a spoon and a cup. In addition, the
experimenter placed some toys on the third "dining room table,"
saying, "Here are some things that Mother left on the dining room
table." At least one of each type of toy was placed on the third table.
This was done to allow confusions about the source and goal and the
objects to be visible to the experimenter. However, children almost
never used the objects on this third table.
The list of test sentences is shown in Table 9.4. At least two in-
stances of "take" and two of "give" were administered. Then the
experimenter said, "Now Mother comes in and says, `You've been
very good today, both of you, so you can both have some money."' The
child helped distribute play money to the dolls: two dimes and two
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS:
VERBS OF POSSESSION
239
TABLE 9.4
Sentences used. Nonindented sentences are the ones normally used.
Indented sentences are those used -when checking for the effects of surface
form. X and Y denote agent cool recipient, respectively. Z denotes object.
pennies to each doll. The experimenter continued with something
like "Now they can do lots of things. Can you make Ernie, buy a car
from Bert?"
After this, the experimenter progressed semirandomly through a
total of eight instances of each of the verbs "give," "take," "buy,"
"sell," and "spend money," and two each of "trade" and "pay." The
objects and the dolls used as agents (or subjects of the sentences)
were varied from sentence to sentence.
The experimenter avoided saying "good" and making other evalu-
ative remarks. Instead, to encourage the child, the experimenter
would often either comment on the action after the child had com-
pleted it (for example, "Now Ernie has lots of planes, huh?") or else
speak for one of the dolls ("Gee, thanks Bert. The car was just what I
wanted"). Remarks of this sort were made often, particularly when-
ever the child seemed to be flagging, and were independent of the
correctness of his response.
Scoring of Responses
The responses were recorded by the experimenter. For each re-
sponse the following information was recorded: object
( which object
was moved), source (from what place the object was moved), goal (to
what place the object was moved), and agent (who moved the object).
If there was more than one transfer, the information was recorded for
each of them, along with the time order of the transfers. If, in any
transfer, the' experimenter failed to see the source, goal, or object
used, that transaction was not recorded and another sentence of the
same type was asked later. However, if only the agent was not seen,
the transfer was recorded with the agent information missing. On
Verb
Sentences
Verb
Sentences
give
Make X give Y a Z.
take
Make X take a Z from Y.
Make X give a Z to Y.
Make X take from Y a Z.
sell
make X sell Y a Z..
hay
Make X buy a Z from Y.
Make X sell a Z to Y.
Make X buy from Y a Z.
Make X sell a Z.
Make X buy a Z.

240
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
some of the later transfers, children frequently failed to use an agent;
that is, they moved the objects themselves instead of causing the
dolls to move them.
Results and Discussion
Order of Acquisition.
The proportion of correct responses at each
age level is shown in Figure 9.9. From this it can be seen that the
order of acquisition of the verbs (where "acquisition" is arbitrarily
defined as the point at which the child scores 75 percent correct)
agrees quite well with the expected order. The verb group consisting
of "give" and "take" is acquired first; then the group consisting of
"pay" and "trade"; and finally the group consisting of "buy," "sell,"
and "spend."" The overall performance on a verb in any group is
significantly different from the performance on verbs in the other two
groups. Within the groupings the differences in performance are not
significant, with one exception: "Sell" differs significantly from both
"buy" and "spend." It is not clear whether the poorer performance
on "sell" reflects some added conceptual complexity over "buy" and
"spend" or whether "sell" is acquired later simply because the act of
selling and the term "to sell" are relatively infrequent in a child's
experience.
Another way to view the order of acquisition is shown in Table
9.5, which gives for each verb the conditional probability of achieving
a high score on that verb, given a high score on each of the other
verbs.' If a subject understands a verb belonging to one group, the
probability that he will also understand the verbs from a simpler
group is quite high, ranging from .91 to 1.0. The probability that he
will understand a given verb from a more complex group is much
lower, ranging from .33 to .76. For verbs in the same group, inter-
mediate and approximately symmetric conditional probabilities
appear." The probability of understanding "trade" given "pay," for
example, is about the same as that of understanding "pay" given
"trade" (.77 and .83, respectively).
"For "Make X trade Y a Z1 for a Z2," either of two responses was counted as correct:
either the transfer of Z1 front X to Y and of Z2 from Y to X, or the reverse transfer of Z2
front X to Y and Z I front Y to X. Both these interpretations exist among adult speakers;
3 out of 14 adults tested on this sentence performed the reverse transfer.
'A "high score" on a verb or "understanding" a verb means that the subject scored 6
or more correct responses out of 8, or, in the case of "trade" and "pay," 2 correct re-
sponses out of 2.
'There are two exceptions to the several patterns observed in Table 9.5: "Give" and
"take" have very high mutual probabilities, apparently because these verbs were well
learned even by the younger children; in addition, "sell" does not appear to behave
the same as "buy" and "spend." As noted before, "sell" appears to be acquired later
than the other verbs in its group.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY OF SEMANTIC COMPONENTS: VERBS OF POSSESSION
241
1.0
. 8
0
N
o
. 6
0
00
. 2
0
3/6-4/5
4/6-5/5
5/6-6/5
6/6-7/5
7/6-8/5
Age
FIGURE 9.9
sell
TABLE 9.5
Probability of a high score on the column verb, given a high
score on the row verb.
give
take
pay
-
. 83
1.0
. 97
. 91
trade
. 91
. 94
1.0
buy
. 8 l
. 9 l
spend
. 77
. 86
give; pay; take
spend; trade;
buy
sell
. 57
. 59
1.
A "high score'' is defined to he 6 correct responses out of 8 for -give,' "take,"
"buy,
spend," and sell" and 2 correct responses out oft for
..
trade
.
" and pay...
2.
The different shadings indicate the :3 different sets of probabilities: those below
the diagonal (p)-e(licted to be high); those above the diagonal (predicted to be
low); and those near the diagonal (predicted to be intermediate). All 3 differences
were significant.
give
-
. 96
take
. 99
-
pay
. 98
.92
trade
. 98
.94
buy
.97
.97
spend
1.0
. 97
sell
1.0
1.0
NOTES:

242
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
Children understand verbs that are conceptually simple before they
understand verbs that are complex. It is rare for a subject to perform
well on the verbs in a group unless he also performs well on the verbs
in groups that are less complex. There are only 2 instances out of a
possible 102 cases in which a subject achieves a high score on a verb
in one group without also achieving a high score on at least one verb
in every simpler group. More stringently, there are only 12 instances
out of a possible 102 in which a subject scores high on a verb without
also achieving a high score on every verb in every simpler group.
Errors.
Figure 9.10 shows the time course of acquisition both of
correct responses and of the most common incorrect responses for the
five complex verbs. For all of these verbs, the commonest incorrect
response was some form of one-way transfer. This is in accord with
the notion that TRANSF enters the semantic representations before
the more abstract obligational notions (OBLIG) are acquired.
It is noteworthy that for all five complex verbs the erroneous one-
way transfers are in the correct direction. Although the child's repre-
sentations of the meanings of these verbs are incomplete, he
nevertheless understands some components. For example, the young
child acting out "buy" and "sell" completely disregards the money
transfer that should be part of their meanings, yet performs the object
transfer in the correct direction. He reacts to "buy" as if it were "take."
He treats "sell" as if it were "give." The chunks that are present in
the representations-notably TRANSF-can be used correctly, even
though the complete representation is not present.
This pattern of correct one-way transfers shows up in the other
complex verbs as well. For "spend money," the commonest error
was simply to transfer money from the spender to the goal. As with
"buy" and "sell," the object, source, and goal of the one-way transfer
are all correct; only the other transfer is lacking. Notice that when
money is explicitly mentioned in the sentence ("Make X spend some
money"), even the young child performs a money transfer, though
without performing the object transfer necessary to complete the
CONTR. He can physically identify the objects called money, but he
does not understand the abstract function of money. He interprets
"spend money" as "give away money."
Another example of the young child's difficulty with the notion of
money can be seen in the responses to the verb "pay." Here, the
correct response is a simple one-way transfer of money. The com-
monest incorrect response is a transfer of the object to be paid for (a
return) from the payer to the other doll. The child performs the one-
0
.a
0a
N2
. 6
0
c
o
.4
0aa
.2
0
1.0
0
1.0
Age
Age
1.0
2
9
w
0
pay
pay
1.0
1.0
. 8
6
1
. 2
0
.8
0
trade
Age
trade
pooled one-way
transfers
\h
b\~
4 42
Age
give back object
Age
FIGURE 9.10
The proportion of correct responses and the proportion of the most frequent incorrect
responses to the complex verbs. The correct responses are shown by solid lines; the
incorrect responses are shown by dotted lines. (The verbs acted out for the incorrect
responses are written on the graphs.) Responses that were denoted as "give" and
"take" are transfers to or from the subject of the sentence, respectively.

244
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
way object transfer that is most appropriate and in the correct direc-
tion, again consistent with his lack of understanding of the money
argument involved in "pay."
The responses to "trade" show the lack of the CONTR chunk in the
younger children. One-way transfers outnumber the correct two-way
transfer at the outset. Notice that there are several likely one-way
transfers for the sentence form used in the experiment:
(19)
Make X trade Y the Z1 for the Z2.
Either Z1 or Z2 or both may be transferred, either in the direction
from X to Y or in the opposite direction.
A Check for the Use of Surface Cues. I have argued for a semantic
interpretation of the fact that young children perform the correct
one-way object transfer before they understand the rest of the mean-
ing of a complex verb. To justify this interpretation it is necessary to
rule out the possibility that the surface syntactic cues present in the
sentences determined the children's responses. The verbs "buy" and
"sell," in particular, occurred in sentence forms that could have been
matched, using surface cues, with the corresponding "take" and
"give" sentences. This would lead to the correct object transfer, but
for nonsemantic reasons. For the verbs "buy" and "sell," the sen-
tences normally used were of these forms:
(20)
Make X buy a Z from Y.
(21)
Make X sell Y a Z.
Notice the similarity of these sentences to the forms most commonly
used for "take" and "give," namely:
(22)
Make X take a Z from Y.
(23)
Make X give Y a Z.
There are two possible surface strategies:
1. The preposition ("from" or "to") could be used to deduce the
direction of transfer of the object with respect to the agent.
2. The order of the object and recipient (goal) in "buy" and "sell"
sentences could he matched with the order in "take" and "give"
sentences, respectively.
PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY DE SENIANTu: CON11'ONr:M:S: VERBS Or POSSESSION
245
To check for the use of one of these strategies, 38 of the subjects
were tested in a few examples of the verbs "buy" and "sell" presented
in alternative sentence forms (shown in Table 9.4). In some of these
forms, the words "from" or "to" and the nouns that followed them
were omitted; in others the order of goal and object was reversed from
the normal order in "take" and "give" sentences. Table 9.6 presents
the results of these manipulations, averaged across all ages.
None of the surface variations produced any lessening of the ten-
dency to perform the object transfer in the correct direction. This
TABLE 9.6
Effect Of surface forms of sentences used.
Proportion correct
Proportion of "take"
responses
Proportion of object
transfers in correct
direction (sum of
rows
1 and 2)
Number of responses
Proportion correct
Proportion of "give"
responses
Proportion of object
transfers in correct
direction (sum of
rows 1 and 2)
Number of responses
Buy
143
61
63
Sell
1 4:3
81
43
Order of object and
recipient same as
for normal "take"
"Make X buy a
Z from Y."
Order of object and
recipient reversed
from normal "take"
"Make X buy
from Y a Z."
Recipient
omitted
"Make X
buy a Z. -
. 57
. 48
. 76
. 25
3J
. 11
.82
. 87
.87
Order of object and
recipient Same as
for normal "give"
"Make X sell
(to) Y a Z."
Order of object and
recipient reversed
from normal "give"
"Make X sell
a Z to Y."
Recipient
omitted
"Make X
sell a Z."
. 43
. 38
.56
. 53
.59
. 44
.95
. 97
1.0

246
conclusion appears to hold when the data are analyzed by age. Un-
fortunately, since only four children from the youngest group-3/6
to 4/6-were tested with the altered sentence forms, there remains a
possibility that very young children use nonsemantic strategies in
their interpretation of "buy" and "sell" sentences. If this were true,
the semantic interpretation proposed would still be valid overall:
Children learn the complex possession verbs starting with the simple
notions of DO, CAUSE, and TRANSF, and add more abstract chunks
later.
SUMMARY
In this chapter I have presented an analysis of a set of possession
verbs. Verbs of possession were hypothesized to contain an under-
lying set of more basic semantic components or "chunks." When
these verbs are used in language, their differing underlying structures
convey different meanings. A person who hears a particular verb may
later make errors in recall of the verb, either because he had not
recovered all of the verb components that were originally there or
because, through confusions among the structures in his memory, he
has added other components to the structure for that verb. Further,
through loss of some of the chunks of a verb, a person may confuse the
proposition centered around that verb with another proposition cen-
tered around a verb whose underlying structure shares some com-
ponents with the original verb.
The proposed semantic structures allow predictions about the
order in which children should acquire the meanings of the verbs.
Accordingly, children ranging in age from 3 years to 8 years were
asked to demonstrate their understanding of this set of possession
verbs. They were found to understand verbs that contain relatively
few and simple chunks first, and verbs with larger numbers of chunks
later. The order of acquisition and the pattern of the errors were
explainable in terms of sequential acquisition of the semantic chunks
hypothesized in this chapter.
STUDIES OF LANGUAGE
CHAPTE
Experimental Analy
the Semantics of Move
ADELE A. ABRAHA.
Throughout this book we have argued that a model of cognitiv
linguistic processing must go deeper than the surface level o
guage, that the mind has its own special "language." Both ling
and nonlinguistic inputs are encoded into this common inforrr
format. The other chapters have argued that information at the u
lying conceptual level involves units smaller than words. One
may communicate several conceptual units or semantic den
Furthermore, a small number of semantic elements underlie a
number of words; they include basic concepts that recur in th
coding of our experiences. There is reason to believe that
semantic elements are universal, that all languages communicai
same elements in their various ways.
Examples readily come to mind: The concepts of change, of c
tion, of location, and of movement seem basic to much of h
communication. These concepts have already been discussed ii
'I thank Carlton James for his suggestions. Completion of the analyses a
writing of this chapter were aided by grant 07-2128 from the Rutgers Univers
search Council.

