CHAPTER VIII,
THE SECOND CENTUBY B.C.
137. THE materials for a history of Greek geometry after
Apollonius are both scanty in quantity and most unsatisfactory
in quality. We know the names of many geometers who lived
during the next three centuries, but very few indeed of their
works have come down to us, and we are compelled to rely for
the most part on such scraps of information as the later
scholiasts, Pappus, Proclus, Eutocius and the like, have inci-
dentally preserved. But this information, again, generally affords
little clue to the date of the geometer in question. Thus,
though we have abundant evidence that mathematics remained
a chief constituent of the Greek liberal curriculum, we cannot
tell with any accuracy what subjects were most in vogue or
what mathematicians were most generally regarded at any
particular time. It is certain, however, that during the whole
period between Apollonius and Ptolemy only two mathemati-
cians of real genius, Hipparchus and Heron, appeared, that both
of these lived about the same time (120 B.C.), and that neither
was interested in mathematics per se, for Hipparchus was
above all things an astronomer, Heron above all things a sur-
veyor and engineer. The result might have been different if
some new methods had been introduced. The force of nature
could go no further in the same direction than the ingenious
applications of exhaustion by Archimedes and the portentous
sentences in which Apollonius enunciates a proposition in
conies. A briefer symbolism, an analytical geometry, an infini-
tesimal calculus were wanted, but against these there stood the
tremendous authority of the.Platonic and Euclidean tradition,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26(5
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
and no discoveries were made in physics or astronomy which
rendered them imperatively necessary. It remained only for
mathematicians, as Cantor says, to descend from the height
which they had reached and " in the descent to pause here and
there and look around at details which had been passed by in
the hasty ascent1." The elements of planimetry were exhausted,
and the theory of conic sections. In stereometry something
still remained to be done, and new curves, suggested by the
spiral of Archimedes, could still be investigated. Finally, the
arithmetical determination of geometrical ratios, in the style of
the Measurement of the Circle, offered a considerable field of
research, and to these subjects mathematicians now devoted
themselves.
138. One of the first of the successors of Apollonius was
perhaps Nicomedes, who invented the curve called conchoid or
"mussel-like." At any rate the conchoid was known to Geminus
about B.C. 702, and Eutocius8 says that Nicomedes made sport
of Eratosthenes1 mesolabium, and boasted the superiority of his
own invention. It is not likely that Eratosthenes had been
long dead at this time.
The treatise on the conchoid which Nicomedes wrote is
known to us only from Eutocius' commentary on duplication,
from Pappus4, and two or three casual remarks of Proclus. It
is a curve such that the straight line joining any point on the
1 Cantor, p. 301, of. p. 233. 
* Proelus, p. 177. 
s Torelli, p. 146.
4 Book iv. (Hultsch) pp. 244—246.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
267
curve with a given point is cut by a given straight line so that
the segment between the curve and the given straight line is of
a given length. 
Nicomedes invented a little machine for
describing it, of the form here depicted. It will be seen that
the arm AB can move only horizontally along BE, to which it
is confined by a button G sliding in a groove. The length AG
therefore is constant. The- point E was called the pole (71-0X09).
The method of duplication, with the aid of the conchoid,
may be thus described.
Let aX and a/3 be the given straight lines between which it
is required to find two mean proportionals. Place these at right
angles to one another (as in the solution of Apollonius), and
complete the rectangle a/9yX.
Produce 7$ to rj, making /S17 = /Sy, and join r)\, bisecting ay3
in 8. Bisect /8y in e, and from e draw ef at right angle's to /9y,
so that yf = #8. Join t\% and through y draw yd parallel to i?£.
From f, as pole, with yd as fixed straight line and 08 as the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

268
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
length of the constant segment describe a conchoid, cutting
i?/3 produced in K. Join KX and produce it to meet /3a pro-
duced in fi. 
Then S/A and y/c are the two mean proportionals
required. 
By similar triangles *-— = — . \ ua. = 
:—~ . 
Now
^ 
J 
° 
aX 
yK 
^ 
yK
aX .Xy = 7jy . p"S, (since y x2ao — 2yx %), .'. ua = ^—— . But
7«
By the use of Euc. 11. 6 (precisely as in the solution of
Apollonius) it may be shewn that f/e2 = pV . icy + 7£2 and
/uS2 = Pp.pa 
+ aS2. 
.-. P* . icy + yt? = ftp . fia + aS2. 
But
7 ^ = aS2 .". y9/e . «7 = /8/i . /^a. 
.". jS/it : /3« = K7 : ^a. 
But
/3/i : )8K = yX : JK = afi : aX. 
.'. yX : JK = JK : a/A = a/i : aX.
The conchoid was also used to solve the trisection of an angle
in a way which closely resembles the 8th of the lemmas attri-
buted to Archimedes (supra, p. 233). Proclus says that Nicomedes
himself solved this problem, but Pappus claims the solution
which he gives as his own1.
Let ap*7 be the angle which it is required to trisect. 
From
a draw 0C7 perpendicular to p/y. Complete the parallelogram.
Now from /S as pole, with ay as fixed straight line and 2a/3 as
constant distance describe a conchoid which shall meet fa pro-
duced in e. The line /3e cuts 07 in 8. Bisect Se in 97 and join ar\.
It is then easy to see that ,a.t] = rje = a/3 and the triangles a/3^, anqe
are isosceles. Therefore the exterior angle aij/S = 2ae77 = 2rj^y,
and the angle a.r)(H = afir) = 2^/87.
139. 
Probably at the same time as Nicomedes, say 180 B.C.,
lived Diodes, the inventor of the cissoid or " ivy-like " curve.
His date can be approximately determined only by the two
1 Proclus, p. 272; Pappus iv. 38, p. 274 (Hultsoh).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
269
facts that Geminus knew the cissoid by this name, and that Diodes
lived after Archimedes, for he wrote a commentary on the un-
finished problem (n. 5, supra, p. 225n) of the Sphere and Cylin-
der. 
The work in which this occurs was called irepi irvpiwv or
irvpeicop1, whatever that may mean, and contained also a
solution of the duplication problem which Eutocius cites with
the rest2. 
This solution, which involves also the definition of
the cissoid, may be described as follows. 
Let a/3 and jB be
diameters of a circle at right angles to one another. 
On y8, at
equal distances on either side of the centre \, take the points
K and 7], and draw the ordinates /ee, T?£ Join eS, cutting TJ£
in 0. The point 0 (as also all other points similarly determined)
lies on the cissoid. Also 77?: rj£ = t)£ : TJ8 = 7)8 : rjd.
As rfc is perpendicular to the diameter 78, it is plain that
777: i?f = rj%: 7)8. For a similar reason3, 7/e: «e = «e : KS. And
by similar triangles K€ : K8 = TJ0 : 7)8. Therefore <yx : ice = T\Q : rj8
1 Eutooius in Torelli, p. 171. Tlvpeiov
(which may be the right reading),
Lat. igniaria, was an instrument for
making fire, by turning a pointed per-
pendicular stick (Tpfaravov) in a hole
made in a flat board (icrx^po-)- If this
was worked by strings, like a drill
(see the chapter on fire-drills in Tylor's
Early Hist, of Mankind), then Diodes'
book may have been a treatise on
some geometrical theorems suggested
by the machine.
2 Torelli, p. 138. Cantor, pp. 306, 307.
The solutions of Pappus and Sporus(an
otherwise unknown geometer), which
Eutocius gives next, are practically
identical with this, though the con-
structions are not obtained with a
cissoid.
3 A shorter proof would run: 'And
yv : vt = 8K : ice = 5ij: ifi. 
Therefore
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

270 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
and ice : icy=T)8 : 7)6. But «e = ijf, and KJ = TJS. 
Therefore
r)%: 7)8 = 7jS : 7)0. Thus T}£, T/8 are two mean proportionals
to yrj, t)0.
Now, in any circle, with diameters aft, y8, at right angles to
one another, draw the corresponding cissoid. On the diameter
a/8, take a point ir such that yK : \ir = a : 6, where a and 6 are
the two straight lines to which two mean proportionals are
required. Join yir and produce it to meet the cissoid in $.
Then 777 : 7)6 = a : b. It is now necessary only to alter the lines
T)£, 7)8 (which are known to be mean proportionals to 717, 7)6) in
the ratio of 7?/ : a, and the solution is obtained.
140. In the same century, again, perhaps about the year
150 B.C. Perseus, a geometer -who treated of the sections of the
aireipa1, seems td have lived. His date can be guessed only
from the facts that he is not included in the Eudemian summary,
that no notice is taken of him by the classical geometers, that
Heron describes the o-irelpa (110 B.C.), and that the work of
Perseus was well known to Geminus2. The aireipa is somewhat
imperfectly described by Heron8 as the solid " produced by the
revolution of a circle which has its centre on the circumference
of another circle and which is perpendicular to the plane of that
other circle. This is also called a tcpi/co? (ring)." This solid
varies in form according to the ratios between the radii of the
two circles. It may resemble an anchor-ring or a modern tea-
cake, with a dimple at the centre. Proclus describes three
kinds of sections, which were obtained from it and which were
the same as those described above (p. 185), d propos of the
Iinro7r£&r) of Eudoxus. Elsewhere (p. 356, 12) he seems to
suggest that Perseus had treated the spiral sections as Apollonius
had treated the conies. From this, perhaps, it may be inferred
that whereas one or two sections of the airelpa were known
before and were obtained from different forms of the solid,
Perseus investigated all the sections and shewed that they
1 Gteminus in Proclus, pp. Ill, 112. 
in this connexion, on the errors of
2 The dates of Perseus, Nicomedea, 
Montucla. Bretschneider is obviously
Diocles, Serenua end Hypsicles are all 
right on all the dates except that of
discussed by Bretschneider (Ankang, 
Serenns.
p. 175—end who is especially severe, 
8 Deff. 96, p. 27 of Hultsch's ed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
271
could be obtained from one airetpa1. But the work of Perseus
is wholly lost, and no extracts whatever from it are preserved by
any later writer2.
141. There is not so much reason for assigning Zenodorun
to the 2nd century B. c. as there is for the other writers above
mentioned. He is later than Archimedes, whom he names, and
is older than Quintilian (A.D. 35—95) who names him. He is
supposed to be an early successor of the former merely because
his style recalls the classical period. He was the author of a
geometrical treatise on Figures of Equal Periphery, fourteen
propositions of which are preserved both by Pappus and Theon8.
Both citations are almost verbally identical, but Theon does,
and Pappus does not, name Zenodorus as the author. Theon's
ascription is confirmed by Proclus, who says that Zenodorus
called a quadrilateral with re-entrant angle a tcotXoycopiov, which
word occurs in Theon's extract. Of these fourteen propositions
five, Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7 and 14, are worth quoting. Prop. 1 is " of
regular polygons with equal periphery, that is the greatest
which has most angles." Prop. 2 is " The circle has a greater
area than any polygon of equal periphery." Prop. 6 is " Two
similar isosceles triangles on unequal bases are together greater
than two dissimilar isosceles triangles which are upon the same
bases and have together the same periphery as the two similar
1 Bretschneider (pp. 179,180) makes 
"il serait interessant de voir leur
a great difficulty about this, owing to 
theorie ge"ometrique de ces spiriques,
the fact that he mistranslated ij TOW 
qui sont dea courbes du quatri&me
trmv iriSii as "horse's hoof" (p. 177) 
degre, dont l'etude semble exiger au-
instead of "horse-fetter." He con- 
jourd'hui des equations de surfaces et
oeived this apparently to be a curve of 
un oalcul analytique assez profond."
,. 
. 
/"^*\ 
. , 
, 
, _ _ 
3 Pappusv.pt.i.p.301sqq.(Hultsch).
the form 
I n 1 instead of O O 
m. 
n 
,, 
\ 
-n ,
\SU 
' w ^ ' 
Theon. Comm. Almag. ed. Halma,
and could not understand how it was 
p. 33 sqq. reprinted by Hultsch in
obtained from a trreipa at all. His 
Pappus, pp. 1190—1211, with a pre-
mistake is the more remarkable be- 
fatory note on the date of Zeno-
cause Proclus afterwards twice (pp. 
dorus. The fact that both Theon and
127, 128) refers to the curve as bnro- 
Pappus cite the same props, seems to
ridy, which no decent scholar ought 
Hultsch (Pappus, Vol. in. p. xv.) to
to render "horse-hoof." 
give colour to his theory that a large
2 Chasles (pp. 8, 9) speaking of the 
part of Theon's commentary was really
spirals of Perseus and Geminus, gays 
taken from Pappus.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

272 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
triangles." Prop. 7 is " Of polygons with equal periphery the
regular is the greatest." Prop. 14 is "Of segments of circles,
having equal arcs, the semicircle is the greatest." It is obvious
that investigations of this kind were closely connected with and
suggested by the work of Archimedes and Apollonius.
142. To the same century, again, Hypsicles is assigned.
To him the 14th and 15th Books added to Euclid's Elements
are attributed by many MSS., but recent critics are of opinion
that these are by different authors1, and that only the 14th is
by Hypsicles. This is certainly not Euclid's, for it has a preface
which cannot have been written by Euclid, and the Elements are
expressly stated by Marinus, in his prolegomena to the Data, to
consist of 13 books. The preface in question, which is addressed
to one Protarchus, is as follows: " Basilides of Tyre, coming to
Alexandria and making the acquaintance of my father through
their common love of mathematics, stayed with him during the
greater part of his visit. They were discussing at one time the
writings of Apollonius on the comparison of the dodecahedron
and the icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere8, shewing
what ratio these have to one another, and they came to the
conclusion that Apollonius was wrong. They therefore emended
the proof, as my father used to tell. But I afterwards came
across another book of Apollonius8 containing a sound proof on
the subject, and was greatly incited to the investigation of the
problem. The publication of Apollonius may be seen anywhere,
for it has a large circulation, but I send you my lucubrations,"
etc. From this it is inferred, not very cogently, that Hypsicles'
father died in the lifetime of Apollonius, or that, at any rate,
Hypsicles cannot have lived long after the latter. But a more
satisfactory determination of Hypsicles' date is obtained from
the fact that his astronomical work, 'Avafopiicos, does not use
the trigonometry which was certainly introduced by Hipparchus,
and would have been absurdly antiquated if written after
Hipparchus' time (B.C. 130)4.
1 See esp. Friedlein in Bulletino 
3 This in xiv. prop. 2 is referred to
Boncornpagni 1873, pp. 493—529. 
as "a second edition."
2 This is the only mention of such 
4 Bretschneider, p. 182, quoting Vos-
a treatise by Apollonius, 
sius and Delambre.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
273
The 14th Book of the Elements, or the book of Hypsicles on
'the Regular Solids1, consists of seven propositions, viz. 1. The
perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a side of the inscribed
regular pentagon is half the sum of the radius and the side of
an inscribed decagon. 
2. 
The same circle comprises the
pentagon of a dodecahedron and the triangle of an icosahedron
inscribed in the same sphere1. 3. If from the centre of a
circle there be drawn a perpendicular to the side of the in-
scribed regular pentagon, thirty times the rectangle under the
perpendicular and the side is equal to the superficies of the cor-
responding dodecahedron. 4. The surface of the dodecahedron
is to that of the icosahedron as the side of the cube to the side
of the icosahedron. 5. The side of the cube is to that of the
icosahedron as (w + yf + a? • (oo + yf + y*, where x is the greater,
and y the less, of the segments of a line cut in extreme and
mean ratio. 6. The volume of the dodecahedron is to that of
the icosahedron as the side of the cube to that of the icosahedron.
Prop. 7 is really a lemma to 6 and is that two straight lines cut
in extreme and mean ratio are to one another as their greater
segments.
The dva^opiKo'i, or treatise on 'Risings' (dvafopal), contains
only six propositions, of which the first three, dealing with
arithmetical progressions, have been already cited. The only
interesting proposition is the 4th, which is to the following
effect2. Divide the zodiac into 360 local degrees and the time
of its revolution into 360 chronic degrees. Then, given the
ratio, for any place on the earth, of the longest day to the
shortest, we can deduce the number of chronic degrees for each
number of local degrees3. Here, for the first time in any Greek
work, we find a circle divided in the Babylonian manner into
360 degrees. This division, perhaps, was used by Eratosthenes
who is said to have calculated the length of a degree, but it is
1 The proof of this is said to be 
of Aristaeus.
given by Aristaeus in his work on 
2 See Delambre Astr. Anc. I. pp.
"The Comparison of the Five figures" 246 sqq. The text was printed Paris,
[vlvre axn^Tb>v (riyKpuns). This is 
1657, ed. J. Mentel.
not mentioned by Pappus, who (vn. 
s Delambre loc. cit. pp. 248, 9 shews
pref.) alludes only to the arepeol T6TOI 
that the proof is faulty.
G. G. M. 
18
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

274 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
not necessary to suppose that Eratosthenes actually performed
this feat, though he undoubtedly shewed how it was to be
done1, and it is observable that Hypsicles introduces the division
as if it were a novelty. He does not, however, take the next
step, to trigonometry.
143. This was undoubtedly taken by Hipparchus, one of
the greatest geniuses of antiquity, the observer and thinker
upon whose work the whole system of Greek astronomy was
founded. He was a native of Nicaea in Bithynia and made
astronomical observations, certainly at Rhodes, possibly also
at Alexandria, between 161 and 127 B.C.S 
But though the
Almagest of Ptolemy is clearly derived almost entirely from
writings of Hipparchus, none of the works of the earlier
astronomer have survived, save a commentary in three books
on the Phenomena of Aratus, a poor poet who copied Eudoxus.
The criticisms of Hipparchus on his predecessors are founded
chiefly on his own more accurate observations and have no
mathematical interest. 
In the Second Book, however3, he
claims to have invented a method of solving spherical triangles
for the purpose of finding the exact eastern point of the
ecliptic. The treatise in which this was contained was called
r) TWV <rvvavaToXwv irpayparela, but is lost. Theon, in his
commentary on the Almagest, also states that Hipparchus
calculated a "table of chords" (i.e. practically of sines) in
1 Eratosthenes (Delambre, pp. 86— 
of Book in. of his commentary on
97) found that the distance between 
Aratus, Hipparchus gives, in time, the
the tropics was £J of the circumference, 
distances between stars, obtained by
This looks as if he had not, at that 
observing their meridian passages,
time, any division of the circle into 
He begins with 17 Canis, in his time on
degrees. Similarly, he found that the 
the solstitial colure, longitude 90°. In
distance between Alexandria and Syene 
1750, this star was long. 116° 4' 10".
(which he believed to be on the same 
The precession here is 93850". This, at
meridian) was ^th of the circumference 
50" per annum, would make the date
of the earth, from which it was easy 
of the book about 130 B.C. Delambre
to infer the length of a degree, though 
doubts whether Hipparchus was ever
perhaps Eratosthenes did not do this. 
at Alexandria, because Ptolemy doeB
a Delambre (1. p. 167, ef. p. 170) 
not distinguish observations made at
gives a very neat instance of the way 
Bhodes and Alexandria, which, he sup-
in which Hipparchus' date can be 
posed, were on the same meridian,
ascertained. In the concluding chapter 
3 Delambre 1. pp. 142, 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
275
twelve books. It is evident therefore that Hipparchus was the
founder of trigonotaetry, though we are obliged to look elsewhere
for information as to the progress of the Greeks in this depart-
ment of mathematics.
It is not intended, in these pages, to give a history of
Greek astronomy or to describe any astronomical theories,
which depend for their verification on observation and not
on deduction. But est modus in rebus and I do not like to
pass over Hipparchus with merely the customary eulogy. The
following little summary, taken from Delambre, will shew
what manner of man he was. 
It was he who determined
(very nearly but not with absolute accuracy) the precession of
the equinoxes, the inequality of the sun, and the place of its
apogee, as well as its mean motion: the mean motion of the
moon, its nodes and its apogee: the equation of the centre of
the moon and the inclination of its orbit. He had discovered
a second inequality of the moon (the evection), of which he
could not, for want of proper observations, find the period arid
the law. He had commenced a more regular course of observa-
tions for the purpose of supplying his successors with the
means of finding the theory of the planets. He had both a
spherical and a plane trigonometry. He had traced a plani-
sphere by stereographic projection : he knew how to calculate
eclipses of the moon and to use them for the improvement of
the tables: he had an approximate knowledge of parallaxes,
more correct than Ptolemy's. He invented the method of
describing the positions of places by reference to latitude and
longitude. 
What he wanted was only better instruments.
Yet in his determination of the equations of the centres of
the sun and moon and of the inclination of the moon, he
erred only by a few minutes. For 300 years after his time
astronomy was stationary. 
Ptolemy followed him with little
originality. 
Some 800 years later the Arabs added a few
more discoveries and more accurate determinations and then
the science is stationary again till Copernicus, Tycho and
Kepler1.
1 Delambre i. pp. 184—186. See 
—xxv, and De Morgan's article Ptolemy
also his preliminary discourse pp. xxi 
in Smith's Die. of Gr. and Rom. Biogr.
18—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

276 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
144. The same century which gave birth to all these
writers produced also the famous Heron of Alexandria1. 
He
was the pupil of Ctesibius of Alexandria, who, though originally
a barber, obtained great fame by his mechanical inventions,
especially a water-clock, a hydraulic organ and a catapult,
worked by compressed air. Ctesibius lived in the reign of
Ptolemy Euergetes II. (or Physcon, 'pot-belly'), that is, between
170 and 117 B.C. His pupil Heron, therefore, may be taken
to have flourished about 120—100 B.C.
A very considerable number of writings, now extant, and
others not extant, but mentioned by ancient writers, are
attributed to a Heron, but it happens that the extant writings
are in an extraordinary state of corruption and confusion and
also that a great many Herons are known to history. It is
only within recent years that any attempt has been made to
bring order into this chaos. First Theodore Henri Martin, in
a monograph2 which is a model of its kind, investigated all
the facts concerning the life of the great Heron of Alexandria
and ascertained what works were rightly attributed to him and
which of them are extant and where. His biographical results
have been stated, in effect, in the above few lines. But his
essay deserves a closer analysis. He finds (pp. 10—18) eighteen
undoubted Herons named in later Greek literature, mathemati-
cians, doctors and monks. Of these, three only belong to the
first class, viz. Heron of Alexandria our author, Heron the
teacher of Proclus (who was possibly the same as one Heronas,
who wrote a commentary on the Arithmetic of Nicomachus)
and Heron of Constantinople, who lived in the 10th century3.
Then, after commenting on the date of the first Heron (pp.
22—28), he passes (pp. 28—51) to the works which are rightly
1 This writer is usually called by the 
prSsentes etc. a Vacademie d'inscrip-
Latinized name Hero. 
Perhaps I 
tions etc., Paris, 1854.
ought to use this (like Plato), but 
3 Later writers, as Vincent, cited
there is a special advantage in retain- 
below and Cantor, p. 315, deny that
ing the form Heron, because the more 
there was such a person as Heron of
familiar Hero was a woman. 
Constantinople and doubt whether
3 Becherchessurlavieetlesouvrages 
Heron, the teacher of Proclus, was a
d'Heron d'Alexandrie, disciple de Cte- 
mathematician at all.
sibius, etc. in Vol. iv. of Memoires
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
277
assigned to him. 
These are (1) Mijxaviica or
elaaywyal, from which extracts are given by Pappus (ill. 5,
p. 63 and VIII. 31—end). The book obviously treated of
centres of gravity and of the theory of the five simple machines,
the lever (/AO^XO?), wedge (<r<j>rjv), screw (/eo^Xia?), pulley
(irdkvenracrTov), and wheel and axle or windlass (dl-av ip
ireptrpoxiq))- The work perhaps exists in MS. at the Escurial
or at Venice. (2) the Bapov\ico<;, in three books, which dealt
with the problem of Archimedes to move a given weight with a
given power, perhaps exhibited the practical uses of these
machines. The first chapter of this is appended, perhaps by
accident, to the treatise irepl SiowTpas and some extracts from
it are given by Pappus at the end of his Book VIII. It exists
at Leyden in a Latin MS. translation made by Golius from the
Arabic. It is perhaps in Greek at Rome. (3) The /caraireX-
ro/cd, fiekoiroLrfTiKa or jSekoTrotlica, is printed in the Mathematici
Veteres1. The solution of the duplication-problem here given
is quoted in Pappus HI. (4) ^eipo^aXlarpat 
K<naa-icevr} ical
avfifierpia, also in Math. Vett., but obviously an appendix to
(3). (5) Ka/xapiKa also in Math. Vett. but obviously an appen-
dix to (4). So is another fragment irepl /cap/3ecrrplcov. Both
exist in MS. at Vienna. (6) avro/iara and tyyia, on certain
toys. The former is in Math. Vett. The latter is lost. (7)
Hepl vBpieov wpoaicoireicov. This is mentioned in the Trvev/ia-
Ti/cd and also by Pappus and Proclus. 
It is lost now but
existed in the 10th century. (8) TrvevfiaTucd, in the Math. Vett.2
1 This is a collection of writers on 
some other matter. 
The date of
engines of war, edited by Thevenot 
Athenaeus seems to me to be wrongly
and De la Hire, Paris, 1693. It con- 
given (on the authority of Heron of
tains works of Heron and of Athenaeus, Constantinople). He himself speaks
Apollodorus (?both temp. Hadriani), 
of Ctesibius as a contemporary and
Philon (B.C. 330, ace. to Vitruvius VII. 
dedicates his book to one Marcellus,
pref.), Biton (probably soon after Alex- 
who may be the conqueror of Syra-
ander the Great), Sextus Julius Afri- 
cuse.
canus (Keffrol, about A.D. 220), and a 
2 An English translation of the
treatise on siege-works, which Martin 
Hvcv/MaTuca, with woodcuts, was pub-
ascribes to Heron of Constantinople. 
lished by J. G. Greenwood, London,
Of the named authors (other than 
1851. The book contains an account
Heron) all deal almost entirely with 
of 78 ingenious machines, some mere
catapults save Africanus, who has 
toys as whistling birds, drinking figures
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

278
THE SECOND CENTUEY B.C.
(9) on Hydraulics and the armillary Astrolabe, according
to an Arabic compilation, now in the Bodleian (Cod. Arab.
CMLIV.). The following also are probably Heron's, (10) KOTOTT-
rpiKa, cited by Damianus who was not much later than
Ptolemy. This is probably the same work as the KaroTTTpiKa
printed at Venice, 1518, and then ascribed to Ptolemy. (11)
Tlepl BioTrrpas, on a kind of theodolite. This is ascribed to
Heron by the MSS. and was certainly written at Alexandria.
It has been edited by M. A. H. Vincent1. (12) Scholia on
etc., but some more useful as a fire-
engine (27), a self-trimming lamp (38),
a new kind of cupping-glass (56), a
water-clock (63), two small organs (76
& 77). In most of these, the action
depends on a vacuum into which water
will flow. But no. 50 is a toy in which
a metal sphere, filled with steam, is
made to revolve by the action of the
steam as it issues from two bent spouts
fixed in the sphere. (Compare also no.
70). Heron does not claim all the
disooveries as his own, and it is curious
that Yitruvius (ix. 8 & x. 7) and Pliny
(VII. 38), describing similar inventions,
attribute them to Ctesibius and say
nothing of Heron. The preface shews
clearly that Heron did not understand
the pressure of the air as causing the
filling of the vacuum, but ascribed this
result to nature's abhorrence.
1 Text and translation in Notices et
Extmits de$ MSS. de la Biblioth.
Imper. Vol. xix. Pt. n. Paris, 1858,
p. 157 sqq. The book contains 33
props, of which the last is the first of
the /3o/)oC\«-os. The others are of the
following kind (1) to find the difference
of level between two points, (13) to
cut a straight tunnel through a hill
from one given point to another, (14)
and (15) to sink a vertical shaft to
meet a horizontal tunnel, (24) to
measure a field without entering it.
The dioptra was a straight plank, eight
or nine feet long, mounted on a stand
but capable of turning through a semi-
circle. It was adjusted by screws,
turning cogwheels. 
There was an
eyepiece at each end and a water-level
at the side. With the dioptra two
poles, bearing discs, were used, exactly
as by modern surveyors. Two append-
ed props. (34) and (35) describe a
hodometer, an arrangement of cog-
wheels attached to a carriage, so
that eight revolutions of the wheel
turn the first cogwheel once and the
motion is then slackened down through
a series of cogwheels of which the last
moves a pointer on a measured disc.
The proposition from the papovXicos
also describes a machine consisting of a
series of cogwheels, started by a screw.
The case supposed is that a power of
five talents is to move a weight of
1000. In Pappus vm. 10 (Hultsch
p. 1061) the power is four talents, the
weight 160, and the wheels are of a
less diameter. Vincent, who is later
than Martin, thinks that there was no
Heron of Constantinople at all, but
that some writer produced a geodesy,
founded on the Dioptra, which he
called "a Heron", as we might say
"an Ev£lid". He also remarks that
Heron (p. 163, n.) is not a Greek
name but in Egyptian "porte une
signification qui revient a celle d'in-
genieur ".
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
279
Euclid, mentioned by Proclus. It exists probably in Arabic at
Leyden. (13) Merptiea mentioned by Eutocius, at the end of
his commentary on the Measurement of the Circle, as an
authority on the extraction of square roots. Parts of this work
were (a) Ta trpb Trjs dpt,6fir)Ti,Kt)<; o-Tot^etcotreoi? (lost), (b) rd
nrpb rrj<; yecofierpiiciji; crTot^ettoffew?, which is also lost, but
portions of which have been preserved in the opoi, (c) el<raya>-
yal rcov yew/xeTpov/Mevav, parts of which are preserved in the
yeco/ierpovfieva, yewSaiaia, or yew/Merpia, irepl iieTpav or arepeo-
fierpiKa, and yerjiroviicbv j3i{3\lov, (d) elcraywyal rwv arepeo-
fierpovfievcov of which fragments are contained in a work of
the same title and also in the last two books mentioned under
(c). All these fragments are extant in MS. at Paris and most
of them contain tabular statements, made at different dates but
all later than our era, of weights and measures. These abridge-
ments and compilations seem to have passed through more
than one hand and were made at different dates. The yerprovi-
KOV seems to be as late as the 10th century and to have been
made at Constantinople.
All the works here mentioned which are of mathematical
importance were collected and edited in 1864 by Dr F. Hultsch,
the well-known authority on ancient metrology and mathe-
matics. Hultsch's volume contains the opoi, or Definitions of
geometrical names, with a table of measures appended, the
yewfierpla, which begins with similar definitions and measures,
the yeooBaicria, the ela-aycoyal rwv a-repeofierpovfiivav, Stereo-
metricorum collectio alter a, the /ier/ajjo-et? or irep\ fierpcov, the
yevjitoviicov, which again has similar definitions and measures,
and an extract from the Dioptra on the measurement of
triangles1. But no two MSS. contain exactly the same collec-
tion, and the contents of these works shew fully the grounds of
Martin's opinion upon them. 
The Heronic formula for the
area of triangles is given in the Dioptra and the Geodesy: the
Geodesy is practically the same as a large part of the Geometry:
the two books on Stereometry contain much repetition of one
1 He adds also Didymi Alexandrini 
Variae collectiones ex Euclide, Herone
Mensurae marmorum et lignorum and 
etc.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

280 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
another, and the Measurements reproduces all the preceding in
;i very confused manner. On the other hand, in the Geometry
the area of a pentagon is said to be the square of the side x ^,
and "elsewhere1" to be the same square x $ and there are
other similar discrepancies which point, at the very least, to
two editions of the original, if not to gross interpolations and
unauthentic additions. The probability is, as Martin suggests,
that all these fragments formed part of one comprehensive
work on all the knowledge necessary for land-surveying, from
which subsequent compilers took, correctly and incorrectly, such
matter as they required for their immediate purpose. These
extracts in passing from hand to hand, were annotated by many
generations of surveyors and thus contradictory statements and
extracts from such a late writer as Patricius and references to
Roman measures2 became incorporated in the text.
145. The character of the contents of the Heronic collec-
tion may be indicated in a very few lines. The '6pot contains
128 definitions of all manner of geometrical terms, followed
by a short table of measures. The Geometry begins with a
few definitions, followed by an account of the empirical origin
of the science, then more definitions, then measures, and passes
finally to the solution of problems to find the areas or some
linear measurements of triangles, circles, parallelograms and
polygons, of which the necessary linear measures or areas are
given3. The Geodesy, a short extract, begins in the same way
1 "Elsewhere" is Iv aXKy /3ijS\i<^ TOO 
(1) "Let there be a circle with circum-
"Upuvos, not named, Geom. c. 102, 
ferenoe 22, diameter 7 cxoivla. To
p. 134 (Hultsoh). A similar alternative find its area ((ii^aSov). Do as follows.
is given on the same page for the 
7 x 22=154 and Af± = 38 J. That is the
hexagon. So on p. 115 the value T = -2/ 
area." 
(2) An alternative method,
is attributed to Euclid, on p. 136 to 
( l x ^ ) is then added. Then (3) "If
Archimedes, and this value is generally 
you wish to find the area from the
used, but in the Measurements TT = 3 is 
circumference only, do as follows,
alone used. So, again, although Heron 
(22)2x 7 = 3388 and i||^=38 J." Then
is cited by Eutocius as an authority on 
(4) to find the area from the diameter
square-roots, in the extant works the 
only. (5) The same according to Euclid,
roughest approximations are contin- 
(6) To find the circumference from the
ually used. 
diameter etc. All these examples are
2 E.g. oiyyla-=uncia: 
so <povpvot= applied to circles of various given cir-
furnus is mentioned. 
cumferences, 
diameters, or areas.
3 E.g. chap. xv. §87 is He/>i KtxXuy. 
Heron then treats similarly of semi-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
281
but deals only with the areas of given triangles. The Stereo-
metry I. has no definitions but plunges at once into problems to
find the volume of given spheres, cubes, obelisks, pyramids and
similar figures and next the contents of cups, theatres, dining-
rooms, baths, etc. The Stereometry n. is chiefly concerned with
the same matter as the last part of the preceding book, but in
c. 31 (p. 180) suddenly the method of finding heights by
measuring shadows is inserted. The Measurements and Gee-
ponicus are a miscellaneous collection of problems similar to or
identical with those in the preceding books.
The reader will see at once that Heron is chiefly engaged in
arithmetical calculations which depend on geometrical formulae,
which for the most part he does not, and has no occasion to,
prove. Sometimes, however, he actually works out a geometri-
cal theorem. Thus, in the fiekoTrouicd1, he happens to suggest
a method of increasing threefold the power of a catapult. This
requires that a certain cylinder should be trebled and, as
cylinders are to one another as the cubes of their diameters, we
are face to face with a problem of triplication of the cube.
Upon this, Heron inserts a solution of the duplication-Tprohlem,
which is identical with that attributed above to Apollonius.
In the last chapter of the Geodesy (p. 151), he gives a general
formula for finding the area of a triangle. The sides being
a, b, c, he says the area is
a+b+c a+b—c 
a—b+c 
b+c—a
~2 
* 
2 
" 
2 
" 
2
But he works out the proof in the Dioptra*. It is as follows.
circles, and segments greater or less 
eltrayuryat as well as /3eXo7roii'/c<£.
than a semicircle. On p. 133 occurs 
2 Eeprinted by Hultsch (pp. 235—
the problem, "Given in one number 
237) who thinks it is interpolated in
the diameter and the circumference 
the Dioptra. 
The formula, together
and the area of a circle, to find each." 
with Heron's example of its application
This of course leads to a quadratic 
to a triangle whose sides are 13, 14, 15
equation, of which the solution was 
(and therefore its area 84), was stolen
given above p. 106. 
bodily by Brahmegupta. 
See Cole-
1 Vett. Math. p. 142. 
The same 
brooke pp. 295 sqq. and comments by
proof is given by Pappus (in. p. 63) 
Vincent op. cit. pp. 200—293, Chasles
and Eutocius (in Torelli, p. 136). The 
Aperqn, Note xn. pp. 429 sqq. Cantor
latter says it occurs in the nyxannai 
pp. 550 sqq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

282
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
' Let a0y be the given triangle. 
Inscribe in it the circle Sef,
having its centre 17. Join 17a, ijft, rjy, rjS, rje, i)£. (Comp. Eucl
IV. 4). The rectangle 0y. »?e is double of the triangle 0Tjy, and
a@.t)8 of ar)0, and ay.i?£" of ayrj. Therefore the rectangle
under ye and the perimeter of a/Sy is double the area of a0y.
Produce y/3 to 0. Make 00 = aS. Then 0y is half the peri-
meter. 
Therefore the rectangle 0y. erj is equal to the area of
the triangle a0y.
Draw r)X at right angles to try, and yS\ to /?y and join y\.
Then, the angles 717X, 7/SX being two right angles, the quadri-
lateral 7?7/3\ is in a circle. Therefore the angles yrjfi, yX/S are
equal to two right angles and also equal to the angles 7??/3, arjS,
which also =» two right angles (since the angles at TJ were
bisected by atj, firf, 717). 
Therefore the angle OLTJS = angle
yXyS, and the triangles arjS, y/3\ are similar. 
Therefore
/3y : j8\ :: &S : 817 :: 6/3 : ije, and perrnutando 
(ivaWdtj)
ySy : 00 :: /3\ : rje :: 0K : ice, and componendo (<rvv6ivTi)
yd : 00 :: 0e : e«, and y6*:y0.00 
:: 0e.ey : ey.etc (or jje2).
Therefore y#* x ije2 = y6. 00 x 0e. ey. 
But y#. 17c, which is
equal to the area of the triangle, is the square-root (ir'Kevpd) of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
283
yd1 x j/eY Therefore the area of the triangle is the square-root
of yd. Ofi. x /3e. ey. Each of these factors is given, for y0 = half
the periphery : 0/3 is half the periphery minus /8y, 7c the same
half minus afl, e/3 the same half minus ay. Therefore the area
of the triangle is given." A triangle with sides 13, 14,15 is
selected as an illustration. Its area VV x 6 x 7 x 8 = 84.
But, though Heron's ability is sufficiently indicated by these
proofs, as a general rule he confines himself merely to giving
directions and formulae. From these also it is easy to perceive
how readily he availed himself of the highest mathematics of
his time2. Thus in the Dioptra, two chapters treat of the mode
of drawing a plan of an irregular field and of restoring, from a
plan, the boundaries of a field in which only a few landmarks
remain. The method, in the former case is to draw a rectangle,
three corners of which lie on three sides of the field. In the
remaining spaces perpendicular co-ordinates are drawn to the
sides of the rectangle and are measured off. The method is
closely similar to the use of latitude and longitude introduced
by Hipparchus. So, again, in three different places3 Heron.
gives, for finding the ajrea of a regular polygon from the square
of its side, formulae which imply a knowledge of trigono-
metry. 
Suppose Fn to be the area of a regular polygon of
which aK is a side, and let ctt be the coefficient by which are
2 is
to be multiplied in, order to produce the equation Fn = cna^,
then it is easy to see that e_ = 7 cot 
. If we reckon the
" 4 
n
consecutive values of c to six decimal places, and give the
1 This sentence ia introduced earlier 
time.
in the original. It will be seen that, 
2 The following remarks are taken
though the expressions are geometrical, 
from Chaps. 18 and 19, pp. 313—343,
they are intended to indicate the alge- 
of Cantor, who has made the ancient
braical rule that xy ia ijatpy2. No 
surveyors and Heron in particular a
classical Greek geometer would have 
favourite study. Much more will be
dared to multiply a square by a square. 
found in his pages than can be here
In his view this would have produced 
given. See also his RSmische Agri-
a figure of four dimensions, which 
mensoren, Leipzig, 1875.
would have been absurd. 
Pappus 
8 Geom. 102, Mens. 51—53, GeSpon.
(p. 680 of Hultsoh's ed.) expressly 
75—77. Hultsch pp. 134, 206, 218,
protests against the practice, which, 
229. This repetition shews the au-
he says, had come into use before his 
thenticity of the formulae.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

284 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
Heronic formula first in its original form and then in decimals,
we find according to Heron,
cs = £§ = o 433,333 for the correct 0-433,012.
c4 = 1 =1000,000 
1-000,000.
c5 = y = 1-714,285 (or | = 1-666,666) 1720,477.
ca = 1/ =2600,000 
2-598,176.
c9 = {i = 6-375,000 (or %8 = 6-333,333) 6-181,824.
C]2=45 =11-250,000 
11-196,152.
This table shews that his approximations are generally near
enough. We need not be surprised that Heron could perform
such calculations. We know that Hipparchus made a table of
chords, that is to say, that the coefficients ka were known,
with the aid of which an = knr, where r is the radius. Then
C" = 4 V Fl!~^' 
an<^ Heron was competent to extract such
square roots. But Heron does not use the sexagesimal fractions,
and it is clear, from this as from all other evidence, that sexa-
gesimal fractions were always, as they were afterwards called,
astronomical fractions; indeed, save by Heron, trigonometry
was generally conceived to be a chapter of astronomy and was
not used for the calculation of terrestrial triangles1.
Some passages of Heron contain noticeable errors. Thus
in Geeponicus (146—164, pp. 225—228) he gives a rule that
the side of a polygon inscribed in a circle is equal to three
diameters divided by the number of sides, which is true only of
the hexagon, and in Stereometrica I. (35, p. 163) where he
proposes to find the volume of a truncated pyramid on a tri-
angular base, he gives dimensions for the upper and lower
triangles which could not be found in similar triangles at all2.
146. Enough perhaps has been said to shew that Heron
was by no means a geometer of the Euclidean School. He is a
practical man who will use any means to attain his end and is
altogether untrammelled by the classical restrictions. He is
also a mechanician who, unlike Archimedes, is clearly proud of
1 Cantor pp. 335, 336 abridged. 
2 Cantor pp. 337, 338 shews that
There is, in truth, no evidence to shew 
the first error is probably not Heron's,
how Heron came by his formulae. 
The second is a mere slip.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 
285
his own ingenuity. He adds nothing, or almost nothing, to the
geometry of his time but he is learned in the ordinary book-
work. On the other hand, as was mentioned above (p. 106) he
is the first Greek writer who uses a geometrical nomenclature
and symbolism, without the geometrical limitations, for algebrai-
cal purposes, who adds lines to areas and multiplies squares by
squares and finds numerical roots for quadratic equations.
Hence, for a similar reason to that which led Prof, de Morgan
to suspect that Diophantus was not a Greek, it is now commonly
believed that Heron was an Egyptian. His name, if it is Greek
at all, is found only at a late era and belongs to persons of
Egyptian or Oriental birth. Further, the whole style of his
work recalls the book of Ahmes which has been described
earlier in these pages. His directions are introduced by the
same form of words, iroUi OVTCOS, "DO as follows". Like Ahmes,
he gives few general rules, but a large collection of similar
examples. As Ahmes called the top-line of a figure Merit, so
Heron calls it Kopv<f>r], vertex1. The isosceles parallel-trapezium
was a favorite figure of Ahmes: so it is of Heron2. Heron's
method of drawing a plan seems to have had its forerunner in
the method of Ahmes3. Ahmes gives tables of measures, so
does Heron. Lastly Heron treats equations in precisely the
style of Ahmes. " It will be remembered that the Acra-problem
of Ahmes, no. 28, was literally ' f added, -J deducted, remainder
10', which was explained as meaning (x +§ x) — -J (x + § x) = 10.
Compare with this the problem of Heron. ' Given a segment
of a circle, with base 40 feet, height 10 feet: to find its circum-
ference. Do as follows. Add base and height together. The
total is 50 feet. Take away a quarter. It is 12J. Remainder
37J. Add a quarter. It is 9J £. The total is 46 £ \ \. 
This
is the measure of the circumference. We added \ and sub-
tracted \, because the height is \ of the base4.'" The style
here and the form of the fractions recall exactly the old
1 Geomeiria 3 (p. 44). Other similari- 
3 The examples of Ahmes are muti-
ties of nomenclature in Cantor, p. 331. 
lated. See above p. 127.
5 Nine chapters of the Geometry are 
* Heron, pp. 199, 200, Cantor p.
devoted to it (pp. 103—108). 
332.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

286 
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.
Egyptian. Such evidence as this goes a long way to confirm
the suspicion not only that Heron was an Egyptian, but also
that algebra was an Egyptian art and that the symbolism of
Diophantus was of Egyptian origin. But it is obvious also that,
if Heron was not a Greek, he relied almost entirely on Greek
learning and did not resort to the stores of priestly tradition of
which the contemporary Edfu inscriptions shew the miserable
character. He ia a man who writes in Greek upon Greek
subjects, but who thinks in Egyptian1.
1 Let it be remembered that the 
probably are Egyptian. Both Heron
segt-calculation of Ahmes leads to tri- 
and Diophantus were Alexandrians.
gonometry:hisJwm-calculationtoalge- 
This is all the evidence that trigono-
bra. Almost the first sign of both ap- 
metry and algebra were of Egyptian
pears in Heron, whom there are other 
origin, but does it not raise a shrewd
reasons for thinking to have been an 
suspicion? Proolus (p. 429) speaks of
Egyptian. 
An algebraic symbolism 
ol irepl "Hpwva, as if Heron founded a
first appears in Diophantus, but the 
school,
symbols are probably not Greek and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

