School Chair 
Search
School of Modern Languages
Change the conversation.
For more information about the School of Modern 
Languages, please visit modlangs.gatech.edu. 
For more information about the search process, please 
email modlangschairsearch@gatech.edu.

 
Page 1 of 6 
 
 
Job Description 
 
The School of Modern Languages within the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts at Georgia Institute of 
Technology seeks a Chair to support the research and educational missions of the School. The School hosts a 
dynamic and interdisciplinary faculty dedicated to redefining the study of language and culture for the 21st 
century. The School is united around a vision of applied modern language studies and intercultural proficiency 
as crucial for careers in the global workplace. The School draws on its unique setting as part of a premier 
technological university to produce research and cutting-edge programs that focus on preparing students to 
participate in the global workforce through advanced communication skills, critical and creative thinking, 
intercultural understanding, and professional competency in eight languages: Arabic, Chinese, French, 
German, Japanese, Korean, Russian and Spanish. Oversight of our academic programs requires a strong 
commitment to research, progressive education, international programs, and multi-disciplinary collaboration 
across the College and Institute. 
  
The ideal candidate will have demonstrated: 
• 
Extensive record of intellectual leadership;  
• 
Success in teaching and mentoring in a multicultural environment;  
• 
Commitment to promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion;  
• 
Ability to manage a complex organization, with proven aptitude for effective financial, academic, and 
personnel management; and 
• 
Experience in strategic planning and development.  
 
The successful candidate will be charged with: 
• 
Supporting an expansive vision that builds upon the School’s strengths; 
• 
Envisioning, articulating, and advancing the School’s unique mission aligned with the strategic plan of 
Georgia Tech and Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts;   
• 
Maintaining an inclusive, ethical, and collaborative environment within the School;  
• 
Enhancing the School’s robust scholarly environment, including faculty research, entrepreneurship, 
and bolstering of the undergraduate and graduate curricula;  
• 
Advocating on behalf of the School and promoting effective collaborations with external stakeholders 
at Georgia Tech and beyond;  
• 
Cultivating shared governance and promoting open and transparent communication; and, 
• 
Managing and augmenting the School’s financial resources, including through philanthropic 
fundraising and sponsored grants. 
 
The School of Modern Languages offers an innovative Bachelor of Science degree in Applied Languages and 
Intercultural Studies (ALIS) as well as joint degrees in Global Economics and Modern Languages (GEML) 
and International Affairs and Modern Languages (IAML). The School also offers two Master of Science 
degrees in Applied Languages and Intercultural Studies (MS-ALIS) and in Global Media and Cultures (MS-
GMC), the latter jointly with the School of Literature, Media, and Communication. All Bachelor of Science 
degrees and the MS-GMC degree are offered in seven languages: Chinese, French, German, Japanese, Korean, 
Russian, and Spanish. The MS-ALIS degree is available in French, German, and Spanish. The School also 
offers thirteen minors to nearly 500 students. Minors are available in seven modern languages, in linguistics, 
and in the following area studies disciplines: African Studies; East Asian Studies; International Business, 
Language, and Culture; Latin American and LatinX Studies; Middle Eastern and North African Studies.  
 

 
Page 2 of 6 
The School of Modern Languages community believes diversity is foundational to creating the most 
intellectually vibrant and successful academic communities. Therefore, we are especially interested in 
applicants who will work effectively with students, faculty, and staff from diverse backgrounds, including 
women, those who are Black, Indigenous, People of Color, from minority ethnic groups, identify with 
LGBTQIA+ communities, have disabilities, from lower income backgrounds, and/or first-generation college 
graduates. Women and members of underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged to apply. 
 
The successful candidate must possess a Ph.D. or other appropriate terminal degree in a relevant field and a 
scholarly record that merits a tenured appointment at the rank of full professor. For additional information 
about the School of Modern Languages as well as expected leadership and administrative management 
responsibilities for the position, please consult the detailed job profile on the search website. To apply, 
candidates should submit the following through Georgia Tech’s Careers website 
(https://hr.gatech.edu/employment/careers) – Job ID 252860: 
 
1. A letter of application addressing how their background and experience can advance the School of 
Modern Languages’ existing strengths, speaking to the responsibilities in the bullet points above;  
2. A curriculum vitae;  
3. The names, positions, and contact information of three to five references who will be contacted only 
with the candidate’s approval. Please include a brief statement of your relationship to each reference.  
 
Inquiries and nominations may be directed to the search committee chair, Dr. Cassidy R. Sugimoto, Tom and 
Marie Patton School Chair and Professor, School of Public Policy (sugimoto@gatech.edu). Questions about 
the application process should be directed to William Jimerson, College Administrative Officer 
(wjimerson3@gatech.edu). Candidates are encouraged to apply by January 31, 2023 for optimal consideration; 
however, the search will continue until the position is filled.  
 
Georgia Tech is a top-ranked public research university situated in the heart of Atlanta, a diverse and vibrant 
city with great economic and cultural strengths. The Institute is a member of the University System of Georgia, 
the Georgia Research Alliance, and the Association of American Universities.  
 
A background check must be completed prior to employment. Georgia Tech provides equal opportunity to all 
faculty, staff, students, and all other members of the Georgia Tech community, including applicants for 
admission and/or employment, contractors, volunteers, and participants in institutional programs, activities, or 
services. Georgia Tech complies with all applicable laws and regulations governing equal opportunity in the 
workplace and in educational activities. Georgia Tech prohibits discrimination, including discriminatory 
harassment, on the basis of race, ethnicity, ancestry, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual 
orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability, genetics, or veteran status in its programs, 
activities, employment, and admissions. This prohibition applies to faculty, staff, students, and all other 
members of the Georgia Tech community, including affiliates, invitees, and guests. 
 
 
 

 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
School Profile 
 
The School of Modern Languages (ML) is a national leader in the study of cultures, languages, linguistics, and 
media. Our faculty are consistently recognized for their cutting-edge and interdisciplinary research, artistic 
creation, innovations in curriculum development, expertise in study abroad, and close collaboration with 
industry professionals. The expertise of our faculty spans more than five continents and fifteen languages, with 
a focus on contemporary cultures in Latin America, Europe, East Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. 
Scholarship includes groundbreaking works across a range of fields in the arts, humanities, and social sciences, 
funded by numerous domestic and international grants and fellowships. Our faculty produce monographs, 
chapters, journal articles, textbooks, and edited volumes published by leading academic presses. The research 
profile of the faculty spans language and literature studies, cultural studies, pedagogy, linguistics, film studies, 
digital humanities, sustainability studies, environmental humanities, urban studies, gender studies, and 
performance studies. The School’s rich and interdisciplinary research profile makes it a vital contributor to the 
Institute’s research mission, as it aligns with key elements of Georgia Tech’s strategic and research interests, 
such as to connect globally and to amplify the impact of our research to address the pressing issues of our time. 
Our mission and vision statements serve as a strong signal of our goals and contributions: 
 
Mission Statement  
The School of Modern Languages prepares Georgia Tech students to compete in their chosen fields 
through cross cultural understanding and proficiency in modern languages. Our students live, work, 
and thrive personally and professionally in today’s global society.  
 
Vision Statement  
Through our degree programs, minors, certificates, and study-abroad programs, we seek to advance 
the integration of technology and language to address global challenges.  
 
The School of Modern Languages was created in 2003 when the joint Bachelor of Science degree programs in 
Global Economics and Modern Languages (GEML) and International Affairs and Modern Language (IAML) 
were launched. Prior to this, modern language courses were offered through the Department of Modern 
Languages, originally established in 1905, when French and German were first offered to the Institute’s 
students. In 2011, the School began offering its stand-alone major, Applied Languages and Intercultural 
Studies (ALIS) with 36 credit hours of coursework. In 2016, the School launched two new graduate programs: 
an MS in ALIS, and an MS in Global Media Cultures (GMC), jointly offered with the School of Literature, 
Media, and Communication.  
 
Modern Languages contributes in significant ways to the internationalization of the Georgia Tech curriculum 
on and off-campus. Many students use School of Modern Languages courses to complete Board of Regents 
requirements in the Humanities; in fact, the School of Modern Languages courses make up approximately 60% 
of the approved Humanities courses offered at the Institute. Coursework both facilitates students’ achievement 
of professional language and cultural competency skills and provides them with a deep and multifaceted 
understanding of the specific cultural contexts they study. Through addressing not only culture, but also 
scientific, technical, sustainability, and social issues and practices in cultures outside of the U.S., the Modern 
Languages curriculum complements the major foci of study at the Institute, aiding students to become 
competitive in myriad careers throughout our interconnected 21st-century world. The School’s curriculum is 
designed to develop advanced communication skills, highlight interdisciplinary connections, promote creative 
and analytical thinking, open access to intercultural understanding, and develop professional competencies 
pertinent to today's world. 
 

 
Page 4 of 6 
In addition, the School of Modern Languages provides a foundation for coursework that gives students 
entrance to Georgia Tech’s Heiskell-award-winning International Plan, a degree designator encompassing 25 
of the Institute’s 35 undergraduate degree majors that requires 26 weeks of study or work abroad and an 
ACTFL-certified foreign language proficiency rating of at least Intermediate High. In addition to our signature 
“Language for Business and Technology” programs, the School has developed several faculty-led study abroad 
(FLSA) programs which have a broader focus on language and cultural immersion in several countries. These 
programs are available to all Georgia Tech students who are enrolled in one of our language programs. These 
programs develop students’ language and intercultural communication skills via in-country study in courses 
related to business practices, uses of technology, and social practices and conventions. The curricular 
principles of linguistic and cultural immersion, place-based instruction, cultural excursions, and professional 
site visits prepare students for global interactions in their future careers. 
 
Beyond the classroom, the School of Modern Languages faculty promote cultural understanding and 
opportunities for language development at Georgia Tech by teaching in the Georgia Tech Honors program, 
hosting guest speakers and performers, organizing cultural events and movie series, participating in service-
learning projects, fostering informational programming such as “German Day” and “French Table,” and 
encouraging students to serve as “conversation partners” with foreign students studying at the Georgia Tech 
Language Institute. In addition, the faculty-run Global Media Festival brings acclaimed directors, artists, and 
media creators from around the world to our school and engages them in conversation on themes connected to 
the UN Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
Throughout our programs, one can see connections between our research and teaching and the engineering and 
technology focus at Georgia Tech. We integrate into our courses and programs the kind of professional and 
social language skills one would expect to use after entering the international workforce. At the same time, we 
offer opportunities to develop both a broad and deep understanding of culture, literature, the arts, and daily life 
in the countries whose languages we teach. Our study-abroad programs in China, France, Germany, Korea, 
Japan, Latvia, Latin America, and Spain include language immersion, as well as study in business and 
technology-oriented fields (engineering, computer science, marketing, etc.), and are designed to lead to future 
internship and work experiences abroad.  
 
Via its offerings of language and culture instruction directed towards the professional goals of the Georgia 
Tech student body, the School of Modern Languages plays a significant role for Georgia Tech and its local, 
regional, national, and international communities. We have an important impact broadening students’ 
intercultural understanding, while at the same time promoting intellectual depth and breadth relating society, 
culture, and technology with the students’ long-term personal and career growth opportunities. An integral 
participant in the Institute’s educational mission, the School of Modern Languages faculty and its programs 
serve as essential parts of the current Institute Strategic Plan (https://strategicplan.gatech.edu/). As scholars and 
educators, we are proud of our established strengths in equipping the next generation of global leaders with the 
essential knowledge, skills, and professional opportunities necessary to foster meaningful communicative and 
cultural interactions. Our cross-disciplinary partnerships enable the exchange of diverse perspectives and the 
School's programs support the pursuit of purposeful and innovative scholarship, education, and careers that 
generate lasting and positive social change. 
 
 

 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
College Profile 
 
The liberal arts have been a part of Georgia Tech since the university first opened its doors in Atlanta in 1888, with 
English as one of the original six subjects offered. The Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts, established in 1990, 
consists of six schools, three ROTC units and several research centers, and exemplifies strengths in humanities and 
social sciences. The six schools are: Economics; History and Sociology; Literature, Media, and Communication; 
Modern Languages; Public Policy; and the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs.   
 
The College provides innovative, human-centered perspectives at the intersections of humanities, social sciences, 
arts and STEM, developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. 
Ivan Allen College has twelve areas where curriculum and research bridge across two or more schools in the 
college: computational social science; digital humanities; energy, environmental & sustainability; ethics and 
emerging technologies; gender studies; global development; global languages and cultures; health analytics and 
policy; media studies; security (cyber, economic, health, food & international); science and technology policy and 
governance; and social justice. We enrich knowledge-making enterprises dynamically, encourage ethical principles 
in our engagements with a broad variety of communities.  
 
Ivan Allen College has more than 150 tenured, tenure-track and permanent research faculty, who prepare students to 
be leaders capable of balancing a richly defined base of expertise with a well-grounded sense of responsibility. The 
roster includes seven fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), one of only a 
handful of academics to hold appointments to both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of 
Engineering, a fellow of the National Academy of Public Administration, a Fulbright Scholar, and a National Book 
Award finalist, to name but a few. 
 
Our programs encompass traditional fields as well as unique and professional disciplines. Many of our faculty 
members engage in ground-breaking, interdisciplinary research to solve complex issues of the world. Enterprising 
activities in our college include the School of Economics’ health analytics lab and groundbreaking work on poverty; 
the School of History and Sociology’s focus on social justice and technology, and the nexus of sports, society and 
technology; the School of Literature, Media, and Communication’s digital media labs and creative arts and film 
showcases; the School of Modern Language’s Atlanta Global Studies Center’s work to enhance access to advanced 
language learning and deepen knowledge of global and intercultural issues; the School of Public Policy’s 
collaboration with computing and engineering on cybersecurity policy, and degrees in sustainability management; 
the Nunn School’s work to address issues in international security related to emerging technology and global 
development, and being home to eight Distinguished Professors of Practice, including its namesake, the Honorable 
Sam Nunn; and four of our ROTC officers being the first students from Georgia Tech to be directly commissioned 
into the U.S. Space Force. 
 
The College currently has 837 undergraduate students and 617 graduate students; however, we instruct, serve, and 
support almost every Georgia Tech student. Students can choose from 16 undergraduate degrees, including six five-
year bachelor/master’s programs; 14 master’s programs; six doctoral programs; 34 minors; and 24 undergraduate 
and graduate certificate programs.  
 
We have more than 4,500 living alumni worldwide, with largest densities in the following locations: GA, CA, VA, 
DC, NY TX, FL, and NC. Alumni of Ivan Allen College programs can be found in a wide variety of organizations 
and sectors, including: Georgia Tech and other academic institutions; consulting firms (e.g., Booz Allen Hamilton, 
Deloitte Consulting, Accenture); Fortune 500 and industry-leading companies (e.g., Google, Facebook, Coca-Cola, 
Home Depot, IBM, Delta Air Lines, Microsoft, Mailchimp, Cartoon Network); government agencies (e.g., mayor’s 
office, governor’s office, Georgia Department of Economic Development, U.S. Department of State, NASA, other 
state and federal agencies); and non-profit institutions (e.g., Atlanta Regional Commission, Boys and Girls Club, 
Teach for America).   

 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leadership and Administrative Management Expectations for School Chairs 
 
Leadership 
1. Convey a vision for the school that aligns well with the Georgia Tech Strategic Plan and the priorities 
of the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts. 
2. Facilitates the setting and implementation of strategic goals and measures by: 
a. Individuals 
b. Programs 
c. The school as a unit 
3. Actively pursues opportunities to support and advance the school’s mission and priorities. 
4. Uses school resources effectively, efficiently, and equitably. 
5. Creates effective working relationships with constituencies within and outside of Georgia Tech. 
6. Encourages collaborations and connections beyond the school with: 
a. Other IAC units 
b. Other GT colleges 
c. Other institutions/organizations locally 
d. Other institutions/organizations nationally 
e. Other institutions/organizations internationally 
7. Maintains open communications with all constituencies of the school. 
8. Establishes a working environment conducive to high performance for faculty, staff, and students, 
including the balancing and reconciling of diverse interests, the identification of issues, and the 
resolution of conflicts that may affect the achieving of positive results. 
9. Offers a model for professional excellence in research, education, leadership, and service.  
 
Administrative Management 
10. Provides leadership for: 
a. Faculty hiring and retention 
b. Staff hiring and retention 
c. Student recruitment and development 
d. Alumni relations 
11. Responsive to the needs and concerns of: 
a. Faculty 
b. Staff 
c. Graduate students 
d. Undergraduate students 
12. Coordinates and manages effectively, efficiently, and equitably: 
a. Fiscal Processes and Procedures 
b. Undergraduate and graduate programs 
c. Curricular and cross-curricular processes 
d. Communications and Marketing 
e. Community building 
f. 
Performance evaluation process 

